{"id": "64235", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64235", "title": "Pit bull", "text": "Type of dog\nPit bull is an umbrella term for several types of dog believed to have descended from bull and terriers. In the United States, the term is usually considered to include the American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, American Bully, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and sometimes the American Bulldog, along with any crossbred dog that shares certain physical characteristics with these breeds. In other countries, including the United Kingdom, the term is used specifically for the American Pit Bull Terrier, excluding the Staffordshire Bull Terrier. Most pit bull\u2013type dogs descend from the British bull and terrier, a 19th-century dog-fighting type developed from crosses between the Old English Bulldog and the Old English Terrier.\nPit bull\u2013type dogs have a controversial reputation as pets internationally, due to their history in dog fighting, the number of high-profile attacks documented in the media over decades, and their proclivity to latch on while biting. Proponents of the type and advocates of regulation have engaged in a highly contentious nature-versus-nurture debate over whether aggressive tendencies in pit bulls may be appropriately attributed to owners' poor care for and competency to handle the dog or inherent qualities owing to their breeding for fighting purposes. While some studies have argued that pit bull\u2013type dogs are not disproportionately dangerous, offering competing interpretations on dog bite statistics, independent North American organizations have published statistics from hospital records showing pit bulls are responsible for more than half of dog bite incidents among all breeds, despite comprising only 6% of pet dogs. Some insurance companies will not cover pit bulls (along with Rottweilers and wolf hybrids) because these particular dogs cause a disproportionate rate of bite incidents. Dog bite severity varies by the breed of dog, and studies have found that pit bull\u2013type dogs have both a high rate of reported bites and a high rate of severe injuries, compared to other non\u2013pit bull\u2013type dogs.\nPit bull\u2013type dogs are extensively used in the United States for dog fighting, a practice that has continued despite becoming illegal. Several nations and jurisdictions restrict the ownership of pit bull\u2013type dogs through breed-specific legislation. A pro\u2013pit bull lobby exists that promotes pit bulls as family pets, advocates for and funds pit bull research, and opposes laws that regulate their ownership.\nHistory.\nThe term has been used since at least the early 20th century. It is believed all dogs that are now classified as pit bulls descend from the British bull-and-terrier, which were first imported into North America in the 1870s. The bull-and-terrier was a breed of dog developed in the United Kingdom in the early 19th century for the blood sports of dog fighting and rat baiting. It was created by crossing the ferocious, thickly muscled Old English Bulldog with the agile, lithe, feisty Black and Tan Terrier. The aggressive Old English Bulldog, which was bred for bear and bull baiting, was often also pitted against its own kind in organized dog fights, but it was found that lighter, faster dogs were better suited to dogfighting than the heavier Bulldog. To produce a lighter, faster, more agile dog that retained the courage and tenacity of the Bulldog, outcrosses from local terriers were tried, and ultimately found to be successful.\nAs it was in the UK, dog fighting became a popular pastime in 19th century America and bull-and-terriers were imported to the New World to pursue the blood sport. In the United States, organized dog fights have been progressively outlawed in various states since 1874, culminating in federal legislation criminalizing animal fighting in 2007.\nIn the 1890s breeders of American pit bull\u2013type dogs attempted to have their dogs recognized by the American Kennel Club, but because of the type's association with dogfighting, the club rejected these entreaties. Following this rejection, in 1898 breeders of American Pit Bull Terriers established a rival kennel club, the United Kennel Club. In addition to being a breed registry, the United Kennel Club also regulated dogfights. In the 1930s the American Kennel Club was faced with a dilemma: whilst not wishing to condone dogfighting, there was a desire to recognize a uniquely American dog breed for which over 30 years of breed records existed. The solution was to recognize Pit Bull Terriers under a different name and prohibit these dogs from being used in organized fights, and in 1935 the American Kennel Club recognized Pit Bull Terriers as Staffordshire Terriers.\nThe name \"Staffordshire Bull Terrier\" was first used in Britain in 1930 in advertisements for bull-and-terrier-type dogs. Organized dog fighting had been effectively eliminated in the United Kingdom by the Protection of Animals Act 1911, but devotees of the bull-and-terrier type continued to breed these dogs, predominantly in England's Black Country. Throughout the early 1930s attempts were made in England to gain recognition for these dogs with The Kennel Club; these efforts were successful in 1935. In order to avoid confusion with the British breed, in 1972 the American Kennel Club changed the name of their American breed to the American Staffordshire Terrier.\nDespite criminalisation, illegal fights using pit bull\u2013type dogs have continued to be widespread in the United States. In the 1990s in that country it was estimated 1,500 dogs died annually in organized fights, and by the mid-2000s it was estimated over 40,000 people were involved in the illegal blood sport. Pit bull\u2013type dogs are also used by criminal organizations to guard illegal narcotics, and to intimidate and attack civilians, other criminals and police, the type becoming a status symbol in American gang culture. On the other side of the law, pit bull\u2013type dogs have been used by U.S. Customs and Border Protection as drug detection dogs.\nThere is a lobby of animal rights groups that are spending millions of dollars to try to rebrand pit bulls as family dogs. In efforts to counter negative perceptions about pit bull\u2013type dogs, both the San Francisco Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the New York City Center for Animal Care and Control have unsuccessfully attempted to rename the type.\nIdentification.\nDetermining whether an individual dog is of a pit bull breed can be necessary for health or legal reasons. Pit bull breeds and their mixes can be prone to certain health issues and proactive care can prevent or mitigate certain issues. Pit bull breeds, pit bull type dogs, and their mixes are legally regulated or banned in many countries. The burden of proof can lie with the dog owner or with the authorities. In Denmark, the police can request that a dog owner provides proof that the dog is not prohibited under the Danish Dog Act. Danish authorities recommend that dog owners make sure they have documentation of their dog's origin and breed, especially if their dog has characteristics similar to those prohibited: \"Possessors of a dog, which in appearance have some features in common with one or more of the prohibited breeds, are recommended to ensure that they possess documentation of their dog's breed.\"\nIn the United Kingdom it is also a dog owner's responsibility to prove that the dog is not one of the prohibited types (dog types bred for fighting) under the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 or that the dog has a Certificate of Exemption (grandfather clause). The UK uses Dog Legislation Officers (DLO) which have special training and experience in dog identification. Those officers also provide expert evidence for authorities.\nMethods\nThere are various ways to identify a pit bull's specific breed. It can be proven through registration papers (pedigree) and through testing a dog's DNA to validate parentage or it can be determined through testing DNA-based ancestry, through examining a dog's traits or the use of artificial intelligence. Which method is suitable depends on the purpose of the identification. While some methods might be good enough to satisfy a dog owner's curiosity, not all methods are accepted for legal reasons. For example, France banned pit bull type dogs (category 1) in 1999, but purebred registered American Staffordshire Terriers (category 2) are only restricted, not banned. Therefore, only American Staffordshire Terriers registered with Central Canine Society (fr. Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 centrale canine) are legally allowed to be in or to re-enter the country. Parental DNA testing of a not-registered purebred dog would not be sufficient under French law to legally transfer such a dog into or through France.\nPure breed identification\nTwo pit bull breeds, the American Staffordshire Terrier and the Staffordshire Bull Terrier, can be registered at internationally recognized Kennel Clubs, such as the American Kennel Club (AKC), through their respective breed clubs to receive registration papers. Both breeds are also recognized by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Cynalogique Internationale (FCI), which maintains and publicizes their breed standards. In contrast, the American Pit Bull Terrier, the American Bulldog and the American Bully are not recognized by international Kennel Clubs, though they can be registered at other Kennel Clubs, such as the United Kennel Club (UKC).\nThrough selective breeding, pit bull breeds have developed characteristics that distinguish them from one another, as well as from other dog types in terms of form and function: \"[...] the name \"Pit Bull\" is actually a generic term that applies to the various breeds that share the same ancestry or have a similar appearance. This includes the APBT, the American Staffordshire Terrier, and the Staffordshire Terrier. Sometimes people even refer to the Bull Terrier, the Miniature Bull Terrier, or the American Bulldog as Pit Bulls. Although enthusiasts of these different breeds can easily tell them apart, to those who are unfamiliar with them many of the breeds appear quite similar.\"\nAn example of distinct traits that a Labrador Retriever and an American Pit Bull Terrier have. This list considers characteristics of a dog's form as well as function and typical behavior:\nDog type identification\nBreed assessors look at a suspected pit bull's physical characteristics like the shape of the head, ears, flews, jowls, teeth, eyes, chest, legs and tail, as well as the characteristics of the dog's coat (color, hair length, growth and texture), skin, weight, height and body length to determine if a dog categorizes as a pit bull type dog or not. \"Pit bull-type dogs are defined as any dog displaying a majority of physical traits of any one or more of the specific breeds mentioned above [American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, or Staffordshire Bull Terrier], or any dog exhibiting those distinguishing (physical) characteristics that substantially conform to the standards established by American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club\".\nWhether the dog type pit bull can be sufficiently defined has been the subject of legal disputes. For example, the claim that the legal phrase \"commonly known as a pit bull dog\" is unconstitutionally vague has been dismissed by judicial decisions: \"...the ownership of a dog 'commonly known as a pit bull dog' is prima facie evidence of the ownership of a vicious dog, is not unconstitutionally void for vagueness since dogs commonly known as pit bulls possess unique and readily identifiable physical and behavioral traits which are capable of recognition both by dog owners of ordinary intelligence and by enforcement personnel.\" The court also found that specific behavioral features distinguish pit bulls from other dogs and therefore can be taken into account when identifying a pit bull: \"Furthermore, the dog owner of ordinary intelligence, when determining whether he or she owns a pit bull dog, need not rely solely on the dog's physical traits. Rather, the pit bull possesses certain distinctive behavioral features which differentiate it from other dog breeds.\"\nChallenges of mixed or cross breed identification\nMixed or cross breed identification can be more challenging than pure breed identification and can be supported by testing for genetic markers. However, DNA-based ancestry testing that works with owner-reported databases can be unreliable and the American Kennel Club does not recommend using those. For example, the Manawat\u016b District Council does not accept DNA heritage testing for pit bulls, instead they look at a dog's certain physical traits.\nStudies have found that when people involved in dog rescue, adoption, and regulation identify the breed of a dog of mixed parentage, this identification did not always correlate with the DNA analysis of that dog. Mixed-breed dogs are often labeled as pit bulls if they have certain physical characteristics, such as a square-shaped head or bulky body type.\nDeliberate mislabeling of pit bulls\nIn Australia some dog owners give false information regarding the breed of their dog to local authorities, despite this being an offence under the Crimes Act. Inquests after fatal or serious dog attacks showed that pit bull owners registered their dogs under a wide range of other breeds, like the Australian Terrier, to evade their local laws and regulations.\nIn France, investigations following the dog attack death of Elisa Pilarski led to the discovery that her partner and dog's owner had deliberately passed off a purebred American Pit Bull Terrier as a mix of a Whippet and a Patterdale Terrier and imported it into the country illegally. American Pit Bull Terriers are not recognized as a breed in France and are considered a pit bull type, which has been banned in the country since 1999.\nDog attack and death risk.\nA 2000 joint review project between researchers in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) and American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) found the data indicated that Rottweilers and pit bull\u2013type dogs accounted for 67% of human dog bite-related fatalities in the United States between 1997 and 1998, and followed with \"It is extremely unlikely that they accounted for anywhere near 60% of dogs in the United States during that same period and, thus, there appears to be a breed-specific problem with fatalities.\" Pit bull\u2013type dogs were identified in approximately one-third of dog bite-related fatalities in the United States between 1981 and 1992. The review notes that studies on dog bite-related fatalities which collect information by surveying news reports are subject to potential errors, as some fatal attacks may not have been reported, a study might not find all relevant news reports, and the dog breed might be misidentified. However, after 2000 the CDC stopped tracking dog bites, and in 2001, Julie Gilchrist, a CDC pediatrician and epidemiologist, stated that part of the reason the CDC stopped collecting dog bite data was because \"making meaningful analysis [of the data][was] nearly impossible\".\nIn a 2021 review of 19 retrospective dog bite studies from U.S. Level I trauma centers, pit bulls were found to inflict a higher prevalence and severity of injuries compared with other breeds. A 2020 literature review in \"Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery\" found that from 1971 to 2018 of all pure breed dogs in the United States, pit bull\u2013type breeds were second, behind the German Shepherd, and ahead of Labradors, Chow Chows, and Rottweilers (in that order) for the most bites severe enough to require hospital treatment. The study found that the proportion of bites caused by German Shepherds decreased by 0.63 percent per year over that time interval while the proportion caused by pit bulls increased by 1.17 percent per year. The pit bull proportion of dog bites increased more slowly in Denver, Colorado, where breed-specific legislation had been in place.\nIn a 2014 literature review of dog bite studies, the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) argues that breed is a poor sole predictor of dog bites. According to the AVMA, controlled studies have not identified pit bulls as disproportionately dangerous, but other studies have found that, compared with other dog breeds, pit bulls were more likely to inflict complex injuries, are more likely to attack unprovoked, and are more likely to go off property to do so. Pit bull\u2013type dogs are more frequently identified with cases involving very severe injuries or fatalities than other breeds, but a 2007 study suggested this may relate to the popularity of the breed, noting that sled dogs, such as Siberian Huskies, were involved in a majority of fatal dog attacks in some areas of Canada. Bite statistics by breed are no longer tracked by the CDC, and are discouraged by the AVMA and the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA).\nPit bulls were originally developed from dogs that were bred for bull baiting and dog fighting. Pit bull attacks are often perceived as taking place \"without warning\", possibly due to the type's fighting heritage, as fighting dogs that do not signal aggression may do better in the ring. However, recent research suggests that this perception may reflect a lack of knowledge of dog body-language, and owners' over-confidence in their ability to interpret those signs. In fighting with dogs of other breeds, pit bulls, German Shepherds, Great Danes and Rottweilers were often the aggressor, and more than twenty percent of studied Akitas, Jack Russell Terriers and pit bulls displayed serious aggression towards other dogs. Although there may be a connection between breed of dog and aggression towards humans, the difficulty of classifying dog attacks by specific breed after the fact has made this point controversial and debated. Violent interactions between humans and canines have been studied by the U.S. government, notably the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as well as academic veterinary researchers. The interpretation of these studies, breed identification and relevance issues, and variable circumstances have given rise to intense controversy. Additionally, researchers on both sides of the pit bull debate rarely disclose when they are being funded by lobbyists, leading to a risk that the scientific literature on pit bulls has been influenced by money.\nPit bulls are known for their tenacity and refusal to release a bite, even in the face of great pain. A popular myth mischaracterized pit bulls as having \"locking jaws\". The refusal to let go is a behavioral, not physiological trait, and there is no locking mechanism in a pit bull's jaws. Pit bull\u2013type dogs, like other terriers, hunting and bull-baiting breeds, can exhibit a bite, hold, and shake behavior and at times refuse to release. Pit bulls also have wide skulls, well-developed facial muscles, and strong jaws, and some research suggests that pit bull bites are particularly serious because they tend to bite deeply and grind their molars into tissue. Breaking an ammonia ampule and holding it up to the dog's nose can cause the dog to release its hold.\nIn animal shelters.\nMany people consider pit bulls undesirable, making it harder for animal shelters to adopt them out. Surveys have found that animal shelter workers intentionally misidentify pit bulls to improve their adoption rates, or to avoid euthanizing them in jurisdictions where they are banned. Animal advocates recommend that shelters stop labeling breeds to improve pit bull adoption rates. Pit bulls also have higher rates of unsuccessful adoptions, and are more likely than other kinds of dogs to be returned to a shelter multiple times and eventually euthanized. Whether pit bull adoptions fail more often than other types of dog due to breed behavioral traits, or due to public stigma, is not known, but in general the most common reasons why shelter dog adoptions fail are behavioral problems or incompatibility with the adopter's existing pets.\nBreed-specific legislation (pit bull bans).\nWidely reported pit bull attacks have resulted in the enactment of breed-specific legislation (BSL) in many cities and countries. For example, in the United States as of 2018, there was some level of breed-specific legislation in 37 states and over 1,000 cities.\nMany of the jurisdictions that restrict pit bulls apply their restriction to the modern American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and any other dog that has the substantial physical characteristics and appearance of those breeds, such as the Canadian province of Ontario. A few jurisdictions, such as Singapore, also classify the modern American Bulldog as a \"pit bull\u2013type dog\".\nBreed-specific legislation has been largely found to be ineffective at reducing the number of dog attacks. Debates often center on whether apparent aggressive tendencies are the result of poor dog ownership or natural behaviors of the breed.\nSome municipalities take the opposite approach, and have passed anti-BSL laws. Anti-BSL laws have been passed in 21 of the 50 states in the United States, prohibiting or restricting the ability of jurisdictions within those states to enact or enforce breed-specific legislation.\nSome municipalities started with BSL laws, then repealed them, such as Denver, Colorado.\nCommercial restrictions.\nLiability insurance.\nDog owners in the United States can be held legally liable for injuries inflicted or caused by their dogs. In general, owners are considered liable if they were unreasonably careless in handling or restraining the dog, or if they knew beforehand that the dog had a tendency to cause injury (e.g., bite); however, dog owners are automatically considered liable if local laws hold an owner strictly liable for all damage caused by their dog, regardless of carelessness or foreknowledge of a dog's tendencies. Homeowners and renters insurance policies typically provide liability coverage from US$100,000\u2013300,000 for injuries inflicted by dogs; however, some insurance companies limit their exposure to dog bite liability claims by putting restrictions on dog owners that they insure. These restrictions include refusing to cover dog bites under the insurance policy, increasing insurance rates for homeowners with specific breeds, requiring owners of specific breeds to take special training or have their dogs pass the American Kennel Club Canine Good Citizen test, requiring owners to restrict their dogs with muzzles, chains, or enclosures, and refusing to write policies for homeowners or renters who have specific breeds of dogs.\nOwners of rental properties may also be held liable if they knew an aggressive dog was living on their property and they did nothing to ensure the safety of other tenants at the property; as a result, many rental properties forbid pit bull\u2013type dogs and any other breeds if the rental property's insurance will not cover damage inflicted by that type of dog. The dog breeds most often not covered by insurance companies include pit bull\u2013type dogs, Rottweilers, German Shepherd Dogs, Doberman Pinschers, Akitas (Akita Inu and American Akitas), and Chow Chows.\nIn 2013, Farmers Insurance notified policyholders in California that it would no longer cover bites by pit bulls, Rottweilers and wolf-dog hybrids. A spokeswoman for Farmers said that those groups account for more than a quarter of the agency's dog bite claims.\nAir carrier restrictions.\nThe following table has a sampling of air carrier embargoes on pit bulls.\nAs a symbol.\nOwning dogs like pit bulls and Rottweilers can be seen as a symbol of power or status symbol. Pit bulls have been cultural symbols in \"urban ghettos\" and a part of hip hop culture. According to the Anti-Defamation League, pit bulls have been adopted as a hate symbol by racist skinheads. The White supremacist group Keystone State Skinheads have used a specific graphic of a pit bull as their logo.\nPit bulls have appeared in American World War I propaganda.\nPit bulls have appeared in the logos of Brown Shoe Company and Lagunitas Brewing Company. The above-mentioned Nipper appeared in a number of logos, including the RCA, the British His Master's Voice record label, and the HMV retail chain.\nIn 2005, two American lawyers used a pit bull logo and the phone number 1-800-PIT-BULL in a television advertisement to convey that they were \"especially fierce litigators\". The Supreme Court of Florida ruled that this use was in breach of Florida Bar advertising rules.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64237", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64237", "title": "Portmeirion", "text": "Village in Wales\nPortmeirion (; ) is a folly tourist village in Gwynedd, North Wales. It lies on the estuary of the River Dwyryd in the community of Penrhyndeudraeth, from Porthmadog and from Minffordd railway station. Portmeirion was designed and built by Sir Clough Williams-Ellis between 1925 and 1975 in the Baroque style and is now owned by a charitable trust. It has served as the location for numerous films and television shows, most famously as \"the Village\" in the 1960s television show \"The Prisoner\".\nMany of the buildings within the village are listed by Cadw, the Welsh historic environment service, for their architectural and historical importance, and the gardens are listed, at Grade II*, on the Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSir Clough Williams-Ellis, Portmeirion's architect, denied repeated claims that the design was based on the fishing village of Portofino on the Italian Riviera. He stated only that he wanted to pay tribute to the atmosphere of the Mediterranean. He did, however, draw on a love of the Italian village stating, \"How should I not have fallen for Portofino? Indeed, its image remained with me as an almost perfect example of the man-made adornment and use of an exquisite site.\" Williams-Ellis designed and constructed the village between 1925 and 1975. He incorporated fragments of demolished buildings, including works by a number of other architects. Portmeirion's architectural bricolage and deliberately fanciful nostalgia have been noted as an influence on the development of postmodernism in architecture in the late 20th century.\nThe main building of the hotel and the cottages \"White Horses\", \"Mermaid\", and \"Salutation\" had been a private estate called \"Aber I\u00e2\" (), developed in the 1850s on the site of a late 18th-century foundry and boatyard. Williams-Ellis changed the name (which he had interpreted as \"frozen mouth\") to \"Portmeirion\": \"Port-\" from its place on the coast; \"-meirion\" from the county of Merioneth (Meirionydd) in which it was sited. The very minor remains of a mediaeval castle (known variously as Castell Deudraeth, Castell Gwaun Goch and Castell Aber I\u00e2) are in the woods just outside the village, recorded by Gerald of Wales in 1188.\nIn 1931 Williams-Ellis bought from the estate of his uncle, Sir Osmond Williams, Bt (1849-1927), the Victorian crenellated mansion Castell Deudraeth with the intention of incorporating it into the Portmeirion hotel complex, but the intervention of the war and other problems prevented this. Williams-Ellis had always considered the Castell to be \u201cthe largest and most imposing single building on the Portmeirion Estate\" and sought ways to incorporate it. Eventually, with support from the Heritage Lottery Fund and the European Regional Development Fund as well as the Wales Tourist Board, his original aims were achieved and Castell Deudraeth was opened by the Welsh opera singer Bryn Terfel as an 11 bedroom hotel and restaurant on 20 August 2001, 23 years after Williams-Ellis's death.\nThe village of Portmeirion has been a source of inspiration for writers and television producers. No\u00ebl Coward wrote \"Blithe Spirit\" while staying in the \"Fountain 2\" (\"Upper Fountain\") suite at Portmeirion, though Clough Williams-Ellis, in a television interview, said: \"...the Watch House...where Noel Coward wrote that delightful thing of his, Blithe Spirit\". George Bernard Shaw and H. G. Wells were also early visitors. In 1956 the architect Frank Lloyd Wright came, and other famous guests included Gregory Peck and Ingrid Bergman. In the late 1950s, Stanley Long, a former RAF photographer, came to create a collectible stereoview series through VistaScreen. The village has many connections to the Beatles. Their manager Brian Epstein was a frequent visitor, along with Paul McCartney, and George Harrison spent his 50th birthday there in 1993. It was while Harrison was in Portmeirion that he filmed interviews for The Beatles Anthology documentary. Musician Jools Holland visited whilst filming for the TV music show \"The Tube\", and was so impressed that he had his studio and other buildings at his home in Blackheath built to a design inspired by Portmeirion.\nPortmeirion is now owned by a charitable trust, and has always been run as a hotel, which uses most of the buildings as hotel rooms or self-catering cottages, together with shops, a cafe, tea-room, and restaurant. Portmeirion is today a major tourist attraction in North Wales and day visits can be made on payment of an admission charge.\nThe village was the setting of the inaugural Festival N\u00b06, which took place in September 2012 and featured headline acts Spiritualized, Primal Scream and New Order. The festival then ran each year in September at Portmeirion until 2018, when the festival organisers announced that the festival would be taking an indefinite break.\nArchitecture.\nArchitecture critic Lewis Mumford devoted a large part of a chapter of his 1963 book \"The Highway and the City\" to Portmeirion, which he called an artful and playful little modern village, designed as a whole and all of a piece\u00a0... a fantastic collection of architectural relics and impish modern fantasies. ... As an architect, [Williams-Ellis] is equally at home in the ancient, traditional world of the stark Welsh countryside and the once brave new world of \"modern architecture.\" But he realized earlier than most of his architectural contemporaries how constricted and desiccated modern forms can become when the architect pays more attention to the mechanical formula or the exploitation of some newly fabricated material than to the visible human results. In a sense, Portmeirion is a gay, deliberately irresponsible reaction against the dull sterilities of so much that passes as modern architecture today. ...\u00a0[I]t is prompted by [the] impulse\u00a0... to reclaim for architecture the freedom of invention\u00a0\u2014 and the possibility of pleasurable fantasy\u00a0\u2014 it had too abjectly surrendered to the cult of the machine.\nMumford referred to the architecture as both romantic and picturesque in Baroque form, \"with tongue in cheek.\" He described the total effect as \"relaxing and often enchanting\" with \"playful absurdities\" that are \"delicate and human in touch\", making the village a \"happy relief\" from the \"rigid irrationalities and the calculated follies\" of the modern world.\nThe houses Anchor, Arches, the hotel building, Lady's Lodge, the inside of the Pantheon and the vaulted ceiling of Gate House are decorated with murals and frescoes by the Frankfurt-born artist and friend of Clough Williams-Ellis Hans Feibusch.\nPortmeirion Town Hall is a grade I listed building, incorporating stonework and the Hercules Hall from the demolished Emral Hall in Flintshire. Many other buildings and structures within the village have their own listings.\nY Gwyllt (gardens).\nThe grounds (\"Y Gwyllt\", meaning 'The Wild place') contain a collection of rhododendrons and other exotic plants in a wild-garden setting, which was begun before Williams-Ellis's time by the previous owner George Henry Caton Haigh and has continued to be developed since Williams-Ellis's death.\nY Gwyllt forms an approximately triangular shaped area on the peninsula to the north of the Hotel (the area was formerly the pleasure gardens of Aber I\u00e2 mansion) and stretches down to the coast and the Dwyryd estuary. Its location by the sea means it is frost-free, making it possible to grow rare plants such as camellias and \"an outstanding rhododendron collection of the early twentieth century\". The area also contains a Dog Cemetery.\nThe gardens are designated, at Grade II*, on the Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales.\nFilming location.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision series and films have shot exterior scenes at Portmeirion, often depicting the village as an exotic European location. These include the 1960 \"Danger Man\" episode \"View from the Villa\" starring Patrick McGoohan and the 1976 four-episode \"Doctor Who\" story titled \"The Masque of Mandragora\" set in Renaissance Italy. The last episode of \"Citizen Smith\", the Christmas 1980 episode \"Buon Natale\", was filmed partly in Portmeirion. In 2002, some scenes were filmed there for the final episode (at the time) of the TV series \"Cold Feet\". Both the CBeebies series \"Gigglebiz\" and its spin-off series \"Captain Adorable\" were shot in Portmeirion. The village of Llan-ar-goll-en, which appeared in the Welsh preschool show of the same name on S4C, was also shot there.\nPortmeirion has been the location for music videos and concerts. The 1980s Scottish band Altered Images used Portmeirion in their video \"See Those Eyes\". Siouxsie and the Banshees used Portmeirion as a setting in their 1987 recording of \"The Passenger\" for the \"Laughing Prisoner\" spoof. This video included various scenes from \"The Prisoner\".\n\"The Prisoner\".\nIn 1966\u20131967, Patrick McGoohan returned to Portmeirion to film exteriors for \"The Prisoner\", a surreal spy drama in which Portmeirion played a starring role as \"The Village\", in which McGoohan's retired intelligence agent, known only as \"Number 6\", was incarcerated and interrogated, albeit in pleasant surroundings. At Williams-Ellis' request, Portmeirion was not identified on screen as the filming location until the credits of the final episode of the series, and indeed, Williams-Ellis stated that the levy of an entrance fee was a deliberate ploy to prevent the Village from being spoilt by overcrowding. The show, broadcast on ITV in the UK during the winter of 1967-68 and CBS in the US in the summer of 1968, became a cult classic, and fans continue to visit Portmeirion, which hosts annual \"Prisoner\" fan conventions.\nThe building that was used as the lead character's home in the series was used as a \"Prisoner\"-themed souvenir shop. Many of the locations used in \"The Prisoner\" are virtually unchanged after more than 50 years. A large outdoor chess board was installed in 2016 in homage to its appearance in the series.\nBecause of its \"Prisoner\" connection, Portmeirion has been used as the filming location for a number of homages to the series, ranging from comedy skits to an episode of the BBC documentary series \"The Celts\", which recreated scenes from \"The Prisoner\". Other instances have included:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64240", "revid": "50579983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64240", "title": "Mobutu Sese Seko", "text": "President of DR Congo and Zaire from 1965 to 1997\nMobutu Sese Seko Nkuku Ngbendu wa za Banga ( ; born Joseph-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Mobutu; 14 October 1930 \u2013 7 September 1997), often shortened to Mobutu Sese Seko or Mobutu and also known by his initials MSS, was a Congolese politician and military officer who was the first and only president of Zaire from 1971 to 1997. Previously, Mobutu served as the second president of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from 1965 to 1971. He also served as the fifth chairperson of the Organisation of African Unity from 1967 to 1968. During the Congo Crisis in 1960, Mobutu, then serving as Chief of Staff of the Congolese Army, deposed the nation's democratically elected government of Patrice Lumumba with the support of the U.S. and Belgium. Mobutu installed a government that arranged for Lumumba's execution in 1961, and continued to lead the country's armed forces until he took power directly in a second coup in 1965.\nTo consolidate his power, he established the Popular Movement of the Revolution as the sole legal political party in 1967, changed the Congo's name to \"Zaire\" in 1971, and his own name to Mobutu Sese Seko in 1972. Mobutu protected his rule through an intensely autocratic regime and came to preside over a period of widespread human rights violations. He attempted to purge the country of all colonial cultural influence through his program of \"national authenticity\". Mobutu was the object of a pervasive cult of personality.\nMobutu claimed that his political ideology was \"neither left nor right, nor even centre\", but was primarily recognized for his opposition to communism within the region and received strong support (military, diplomatic and economic) from the United States, France, and Belgium as a result. He also built close ties with the governments of apartheid South Africa, Israel, and the Greek junta.\nMobutu was notorious for corruption and nepotism: estimates of his personal wealth range from $50 million to $5 billion, amassed through economic exploitation and corruption as president. His rule has been called a kleptocracy for allowing this personal fortune even as the economy of Zaire suffered from uncontrolled inflation, a large debt, and massive currency devaluations. Mobutu was further known for extravagances such as shopping trips to Paris via the supersonic Concorde aircraft.\nBy 1990, economic deterioration and unrest forced Mobutu Sese Seko into a coalition with political opponents and to allow a multiparty system. Although he used his troops to thwart change, his antics did not last long. In May 1997, rebel forces led by Laurent-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Kabila overran the country and forced him into exile. Already suffering from advanced prostate cancer, he died three months later in Morocco.\nBiography.\nEarly years and education.\nMobutu, a member of the Ngbandi ethnic group, was born in 1930 in Lisala, Belgian Congo. Mobutu's mother, Marie Madeleine Yemo, was a hotel maid who fled to Lisala to escape the harem of a local village chief. There she met and married Alb\u00e9ric Gbemani, a cook for a Belgian judge. Shortly afterward she gave birth to Mobutu. The name \"Mobutu\" was selected by an uncle.\nGbemani died when Mobutu was eight. Thereafter, he was raised by an uncle and a grandfather.\nThe Belgian judge's wife took a liking to Mobutu and taught him to speak, read, and write fluently in French, the official language of the colony. His widowed mother Yemo relied on the help of relatives to support her four children, and the family moved often. Mobutu's earliest education took place in the capital L\u00e9opoldville (now Kinshasa). His mother eventually sent him to an uncle in Coquilhatville (present-day Mbandaka), where he attended the Christian Brothers School, a Catholic-mission boarding school. He excelled in academic subjects and ran the class newspaper. He was also known for his pranks and impish sense of humor.\nA classmate recalled that when the Belgian priests, whose first language was Dutch, made an error in French, Mobutu would leap to his feet in class and point out the mistake. In 1949 Mobutu stowed away aboard a boat, traveling downriver to L\u00e9opoldville, where he met a girl. The priests found him several weeks later. At the end of the school year, in lieu of being sent to prison, he was ordered to serve seven years in the colonial army, the Force Publique (FP). This was a usual punishment for rebellious students.\nArmy service.\nMobutu found discipline in army life, as well as a father figure in Sergeant Louis Bobozo. Mobutu kept up his studies by borrowing European newspapers from the Belgian officers and books from wherever he could find them, reading them on sentry duty and whenever he had a spare moment. His favorites were the writings of French president Charles de Gaulle, British prime minister Winston Churchill, and Italian Renaissance philosopher Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli. After passing a course in accounting, Mobutu began to dabble professionally in journalism. Still angry after his clashes with the school priests, he did not marry in a church. His contribution to the wedding festivities was a crate of beer, all his army salary could afford.\nEarly political involvement.\nAs a soldier, Mobutu wrote in pseudonym on contemporary politics for \"Actualit\u00e9s Africaines\" (African News), a magazine set up by a Belgian colonial. In 1956, he quit the army and became a full-time journalist, writing for the L\u00e9opoldville daily \"L'Avenir\".\nTwo years later, he went to Belgium to cover the 1958 World Exposition and stayed to receive training in journalism. By this time, Mobutu had met many of the young Congolese intellectuals who were challenging colonial rule. He became friendly with Patrice Lumumba and joined Lumumba's Congolese National Movement (MNC). Mobutu eventually became Lumumba's personal aide. Several contemporaries indicate that Belgian intelligence had recruited Mobutu to be an informer to the government.\nDuring the 1960 talks in Brussels on Congolese independence, the US embassy held a reception for the Congolese delegation. Embassy staff were each assigned a list of delegation members to meet, and discussed their impressions afterward. The ambassador noted, \"One name kept coming up. But it wasn't on anyone's list because he wasn't an official delegation member, he was Lumumba's secretary. But everyone agreed that this was an extremely intelligent man, very young, perhaps immature, but a man with great potential.\"\nFollowing the general election, Lumumba was tasked with creating a government. He gave Mobutu the office of Secretary of State to the Presidency. Mobutu held much influence in the final determination of the rest of the government. He lost private access to Lumumba following independence, as the new prime minister grew busy and surrounded by aides and colleagues, leading the two to drift apart.\nCongo Crisis.\nOn 5 July 1960, soldiers of the Force Publique stationed at Camp L\u00e9opold II in L\u00e9opoldville, dissatisfied with their all-white leadership and working conditions, mutinied. The revolt spread across the region in the following days. Mobutu assisted other officials in negotiating with the mutineers to secure the release of the officers and their families. On 8 July the full Council of Ministers convened in an extraordinary session under the chairmanship of President Joseph Kasa-Vubu at Camp L\u00e9opold II to address the task of Africanising the garrison.\nThe ministers debated over who would make a suitable army chief of staff. The two main candidates for the post were Minister of Youth and Sports Maurice Mpolo and Mobutu. The former had shown some influence over the mutinying troops, but Kasa-Vubu and the Bakongo ministers feared that he would enact a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" if he were given power. The latter was perceived as calmer and more thoughtful. Lumumba saw Mpolo as courageous, but favored Mobutu's prudence. As the discussions continued, the cabinet began to divide according to who they preferred to serve as chief of staff. Lumumba wanted to keep both men in his government and wished to avoid upsetting one of their camps of supporters. In the end Mobutu was given the role and awarded the rank of colonel. The following day government delegations left the capital to oversee the Africanisation of the army; Mobutu was sent to \u00c9quateur. While he was there Mpolo acted as ANC Chief of Staff. Mobutu was affronted by this development, and upon his return to the capital he confronted Lumumba in a cabinet meeting, saying, \"Either I was unworthy, and you have to dismiss me, or I faithfully accomplished my mission and so I keep my rank and functions.\"\nThe British diplomat Brian Urquhart serving with the United Nations wrote: \"When I first met Mobutu in July 1960, he was Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba's chief military assistant and had just promoted himself from sergeant to lieutenant-colonel. By comparison with his boss, Mobutu was a pillar of pragmatism and common sense. It was to him that we appealed when our people were arrested by Lumumba's hashish-stimulated guards. It was he who would bring up, in a disarmingly casual way, Lumumba's most outrageous requests \u2013 that the UN should, for example, meet the pay roll of the potentially mutinous Congolese army. In those early days, Mobutu seemed a comparatively sensible young man, one who might even, at least now and then, have the best interests of his newly independent country at heart.\"\nEncouraged by a Belgian government intent on maintaining its access to rich Congolese mines, secessionist violence erupted in the south. Concerned that the United Nations force sent to help restore order was not helping to crush the secessionists, Lumumba turned to the Soviet Union for assistance. He received massive military aid and about a thousand Soviet technical advisers within six weeks. As this was during the Cold War, the US government feared that the Soviet activity was a maneuver to spread communist influence in Central Africa. Kasa-Vubu was encouraged by the US and Belgium to dismiss Lumumba, which he did on 5 September. An outraged Lumumba declared Kasa-Vubu deposed. Parliament refused to recognise the dismissals and urged reconciliation, but no agreement was reached.\nLumumba and Kasa-Vubu each ordered Mobutu to arrest the other. As Army Chief of Staff, Mobutu came under great pressure from multiple sources. The embassies of Western nations, which helped pay the soldiers' salaries, as well as Kasa-Vubu and Mobutu's subordinates, all favored getting rid of the Soviet presence. On 14 September Mobutu launched a bloodless coup, declaring both Kasa-Vubu and Lumumba to be \"neutralised\" and establishing a new government of university graduates, the College of Commissioners-General. Lumumba rejected this action but was forced to retire to his residence, where UN peacekeepers prevented Mobutu's soldiers from arresting him. Urquhart recalled that on the day of the coup, Mobutu showed up unannounced at the UN headquarters in L\u00e9opoldville and refused to leave, until the radio announced the coup, leading Mobutu to say over and over again \"C'est moi!\" (\"This is me!\"). Recognizing that Mobutu had only gone to the UN headquarters in case the coup should fail, Urquhart ordered him out.\nLosing confidence that the international community would support his reinstatement, Lumumba fled in late November to join his supporters in Stanleyville to establish a new government. He was captured by Mobutu's troops in early December, and incarcerated at his headquarters in Thysville. However, Mobutu still considered him a threat, and transferred him to the rebelling State of Katanga on 17 January 1961. Lumumba disappeared from public view. It was later discovered that he was executed the same day by the secessionist forces of Moise Tshombe, after Mobutu's government turned him over.\nOn 23 January 1961, Kasa-Vubu promoted Mobutu to major-general. Historian De Witte argues that this was a political action, \"aimed to strengthen the army, the president's sole support, and Mobutu's position within the army\".\nIn 1964, Pierre Mulele led partisans in another rebellion. They quickly occupied two-thirds of the Congo. In response, the Congolese army, led by Mobutu, reconquered the entire territory through 1965.\nSecond \"coup\" and consolidation of power.\nPrime Minister Moise Tshombe's Congolese National Convention had won a large majority in the March 1965 elections, but Kasa-Vubu appointed an anti-Tshombe leader, \u00c9variste Kimba, as prime minister-designate. However, Parliament twice refused to confirm him. With the government in near-paralysis, Mobutu seized power in a bloodless coup on 24 November. He had turned 35 a month earlier.\nUnder the auspices of a state of exception (\"regime d'exception\"), Mobutu assumed sweeping\u2014almost absolute\u2014powers for five years. In his first speech upon taking power, Mobutu told a large crowd at L\u00e9opoldville's main stadium that, since politicians had brought the Congo to ruin in five years, it would take him at least that long to set things right again, and therefore there would be no more political party activity for five years. On 30 November 1965 Parliament approved a measure which turned over most legislative powers to Mobutu and his cabinet, though it retained the right to review his decrees. In early March 1966 he opened a new session of Parliament by declaring that he was revoking their right of review, and two weeks later his government permanently suspended the body and assumed all of its remaining functions.\nInitially, Mobutu's government presented itself as apolitical or even anti-political. The word \"politician\" carried negative connotations, and became almost synonymous with someone who was wicked or corrupt. In 1966 the Corps of Volunteers of the Republic was established, a vanguard movement designed to mobilize popular support behind Mobutu, who was proclaimed the nation's \"Second National Hero\" after Lumumba. Despite the role he played in Lumumba's ousting, Mobutu worked to present himself as a successor to Lumumba's legacy. One of his key tenets early in his rule was \"authentic Congolese nationalism\". In 1966, Mobutu started renaming cities that had European names with more \"authentic\" African names, and in this way L\u00e9opoldville became Kinshasa, Stanleyville became Kisangani and \u00c9lisabethville became Lubumbashi.\n1967 marked the debut of the Popular Movement of the Revolution (MPR), which until 1990 was the nation's only legal political party. Among the themes advanced by the MPR in its doctrine, the Manifesto of N'Sele, were nationalism, revolution, and \"authenticity\". Revolution was described as a \"truly national revolution, essentially pragmatic\", which called for \"the repudiation of both capitalism and communism\". One of the MPR's slogans was \"Neither left nor right\", to which would be added \"nor even center\" in later years.\nThat same year, all trade unions were consolidated into a single union, the National Union of Zairian Workers, and brought under government control. Mobutu intended for the union to serve as an instrument of support for government policy, rather than as an independent group. Independent trade unions were illegal until 1991.\nFacing many challenges early in his rule, Mobutu converted much opposition into submission through patronage; those he could not co-opt, he dealt with forcefully. In 1966, four cabinet members were arrested on charges of complicity in an attempted coup, tried by a military tribunal, and publicly executed in an open-air spectacle witnessed by over 50,000 people. Uprisings by former Katangan gendarmeries were crushed, as were the Stanleyville mutinies of 1967 led by white mercenaries. By 1970, nearly all potential threats to his authority had been smashed, and for the most part, law and order was brought to nearly all parts of the country. That year marked the pinnacle of Mobutu's legitimacy and power.\nIn 1970 King Baudouin of Belgium made a highly successful state visit to Kinshasa. That same year presidential and legislative elections were held. Although the constitution allowed for the existence of two parties, the MPR was the only party allowed to nominate candidates. For the presidential election, Mobutu was the only candidate. Voting was not secret; voters chose a green paper if they supported Mobutu's candidacy, and a red paper if they opposed his candidacy. Casting a green ballot was deemed a vote for hope, while a red ballot was deemed a vote for chaos. Under the circumstances, the result was inevitable\u2013according to official figures, Mobutu was confirmed in office with near-unanimous support, garnering 10,131,669 votes to only 157 \"no\" votes. It later emerged that almost 30,500 more votes were cast than the actual number of registered voters. The legislative elections were held in a similar fashion. Voters were presented with a single list from the MPR; according to official figures, an implausible 98.33% of voters voted in favor of the MPR list.\nAs he consolidated power, Mobutu set up several military forces whose sole purpose was to protect him. These included the Special Presidential Division, Civil Guard and Service for Action, and Military Intelligence (SNIP).\nAuthenticity campaign.\nEmbarking on a campaign of pro-Africa cultural awareness, called \"authenticit\u00e9\", Mobutu began renaming cities that reflected the colonial past, starting on 1 June 1966: L\u00e9opoldville became Kinshasa, Elisabethville became Lubumbashi, and Stanleyville became Kisangani. In October 1971, he renamed the country as the Republic of Zaire. He ordered the people to change their European names to African ones, and priests were warned that they would face five years' imprisonment if they were caught baptizing a Zairian child with a European name. Western attire and ties were banned, and men were forced to wear a Mao-style tunic known as an \"abacost\" (shorthand for \"\u00e0 bas le costume\", or \"down with the suit\"). Christmas was moved from December to June because it was more of an \"authentic\" date.\nIn 1972, in accordance with his own decree of a year earlier, Mobutu renamed himself \"Mobutu Sese Seko Nkuku Ngbendu Wa Za Banga\" (meaning \"The all-powerful warrior who, because of his endurance and inflexible will to win, goes from conquest to conquest, leaving fire in his wake.\"). Around this time, he eschewed his military uniform in favor of what would become his classic image\u2014the tall, imposing man carrying a walking stick while wearing an abacost, thick-framed glasses, and a leopard-skin toque made in Paris.\nIn 1974, a new constitution consolidated Mobutu's grip on the country. It defined the MPR as the \"single institution\" in the country. It was officially defined as \"the nation politically organized\"\u2014in essence, the state was a transmission belt for the party. All citizens automatically became members of the MPR from birth. The constitution stated that the MPR was embodied by the party's president, who was elected every seven years at its national convention. At the same time, the party president was automatically nominated as the sole candidate for a seven-year term as president of the republic; he was confirmed in office by a referendum. The document codified the emergency powers Mobutu had exercised since 1965; it vested Mobutu with \"plenitude of power exercise\", effectively concentrating all governing power in his hands. Mobutu was reelected three times under this system, each time by implausibly high margins of 98 percent or more. A single list of MPR candidates was returned to the legislature every five years with equally implausible margins; official figures gave the MPR list unanimous or near-unanimous support. At one of those elections, in 1975, formal voting was dispensed with altogether. Instead, the election took place by acclaim; candidates were presented at public locations around the country where they would be applauded into parliament.\nOne-man rule.\nEarly in his rule, Mobutu consolidated power by publicly executing political rivals, secessionists, coup plotters, and other threats to his rule. To set an example, many were hanged before large audiences. Such victims included former Prime Minister \u00c9variste Kimba, who, with three cabinet members\u2014J\u00e9r\u00f4me Anany (Defense Minister), Emmanuel Bamba (Finance Minister), and Alexandre Mahamba (Minister of Mines and Energy)\u2014was tried in May 1966, and sent to the gallows on 30 May, before an audience of 50,000 spectators. The men were executed on charges of being in contact with Colonel Alphonse Bangala and Major Pierre Efomi, for the purpose of planning a coup. Mobutu explained the executions as follows: \"One had to strike through a spectacular example, and create the conditions of regime discipline. When a chief takes a decision, he decides \u2013 period.\"\nIn 1968, Pierre Mulele, Lumumba's Minister of Education and a rebel leader during the 1964 Simba rebellion, was lured out of exile in Brazzaville on the belief that he would receive amnesty. Instead, he was tortured and killed by Mobutu's forces. While Mulele was still alive, his eyes were gouged out, his genitals were ripped off, and his limbs were amputated one by one.\nMobutu later switched to a new tactic, buying off political rivals. He used the slogan \"Keep your friends close, but your enemies closer still\" to describe his tactic of co-opting political opponents through bribery. A favorite Mobutu tactic was to play \"musical chairs\", rotating members of his government, switching the cabinet roster constantly to ensure that no one would pose a threat to his rule. Between November 1965 and April 1997, Mobutu reshuffled his cabinet 60 times. The frequent cabinet reshuffles as intended encouraged insecurity in his ministers, who knew that the mercurial Mobutu would reshuffle his cabinet with no regard for efficiency and competence on the part of his ministers. The frequency that men entered and left the cabinet also encouraged gross corruption because ministers never knew how long they might be in office, thus encouraging them to steal as much as possible while they were in the cabinet. Another tactic was to arrest and sometimes torture dissident members of the government, only to later pardon them and reward them with high office. The Congolese historian Emizet F. Kisangani wrote: \"Most public officials knew that regardless of their inefficiency and degree of corruption, they could reenter the government. To hold a government position required neither a sense of management nor a good conscience. On most occasions, effectiveness and a good conscience were major obstacles to political advancement. Mobutu demanded absolute personal allegiance in return for the opportunity to accumulate wealth\". As early as 1970, it was estimated that Mobutu had stolen 60% of the national budget that year, marking him as one of the most corrupt leaders in Africa and the world. Kisangani wrote that Mobutu created a system of institutional corruption that greatly debased public morality by rewarding venality and greed.\nIn 1972, Mobutu tried unsuccessfully to have himself named president for life. In June 1983, he raised himself to the rank of Marshal; the order was signed by General Likulia Bolongo. Victor Nendaka Bika, in his capacity as Vice-President of the Bureau of the Central Committee, second authority in the land, addressed a speech filled with praise for President Mobutu.\nTo gain the revenues of Congolese resources, Mobutu initially nationalized foreign-owned firms and forced European investors out of the country. But in many cases he handed the management of these firms to relatives and close associates, who quickly exercised their own corruption and stole the companies' assets. In 1973\u20131974, Mobutu launched his \"Zairianization\" campaign, nationalising foreign owned businesses that were handed over to Zairians. In October 1973, the Arab oil shock ended the \"long summer\" of prosperity in the West that had begun in 1945, and sent the world economy into its sharpest contraction since the Great Depression. One consequence of the oil shock and the resulting global recession was that the price of copper dropped by 50% over the course of 1974, which proved to be a disaster for Zaire as copper was its most important export. The American historian Thomas Odom wrote because of the collapse in copper prices Zaire went from \"prosperity to bankruptcy almost overnight\" in 1974. The economic collapse forced Zaire to turn towards the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to help it manage its debts which could no longer be serviced. Seeking an alternative source of support as the auditors for the IMF discovered major corruption within the Zairian finances, Mobutu visited China in 1974 and returned wearing a Mao jacket and the new title of \"Citoyen Mobutu\" (\"Citizen Mobutu\"). Influenced by the Cultural Revolution, Mobutu shifted to the left and announced his intention to \"radicalize the Zairian revolution\". The businesses that Mobutu had just handed over to Zairians were in turn nationalized and placed under state control. At the same time, Mobutu imposed a 50% salary cut to state employees, which led a failed coup attempt against him in June 1975.\nBy 1977, Mobutu's nationalizations had precipitated such an economic slump that Mobutu was forced to try to woo foreign investors back. Katangan rebels based in Angola invaded Zaire that year, in retaliation for Mobutu's support for anti-MPLA rebels. France airlifted 1,500 Moroccan paratroopers into the country and repulsed the rebels, ending Shaba I. The rebels attacked Zaire again, in greater numbers, in the Shaba II invasion of 1978. The governments of Belgium and France deployed troops with logistical support from the United States and defeated the rebels again. The poor performance of the Zairian Army during both Shaba invasions, which humiliated Mobutu by forcing him to ask for foreign troops, did not lead to military reforms. However, Mobutu reduced the size of the Army from 51,000 troops in 1978 down to 23,000 troops in 1980. By 1980, it was estimated that about 90% of the Zairian Army were Ngbandi as Mobutu did not trust the other peoples of Zaire to serve in the Army. The most loyal and best of Mobutu's units were his bodyguards, the Israeli-trained Special Presidential Division (\"Division Sp\u00e9ciale Pr\u00e9sidentielle\") that was made up exclusively of Ngbandi and was always commanded by one of Mobutu's relatives.\nMobutu was re-elected in single-candidate elections in 1977 and 1984. He spent most of his time increasing his personal fortune, which in 1988 was estimated to amount to no less than US$50\u00a0million. He held most of it out of the country in Swiss banks (however, a comparatively small $3.4\u00a0million was declared found in Swiss banks after he was ousted.). This was almost equivalent to the amount of the country's foreign debt at the time. In a speech that he delivered on 20 May 1976 in a football stadium in Kinshasa that was filled with some 70,000 people, Mobutu openly accepted petty corruption, stating: \"If you want to steal, steal a little in a nice way, but if you steal too much to become rich overnight, you will be caught\". By 1989, the government was forced to default on international loans from Belgium.\nMobutu owned a fleet of Mercedes-Benz vehicles that he used to travel between his numerous palaces, while the nation's roads deteriorated and many of his people starved. The infrastructure virtually collapsed, and many public service workers went months without being paid. Most of the money was siphoned off to Mobutu, his family, and top political and military leaders. Only the Special Presidential Division \u2013 on whom his physical safety depended \u2013 was paid adequately or regularly. A popular saying that \"the civil servants pretended to work while the state pretended to pay them\" expressed this grim reality. The \"Forces Arm\u00e9es Za\u00efroises\" (FAZ) suffered from low morale made worse by irregular salaries, dismal living conditions, shortages of supplies and a venal officer corps. The soldiers of the FAZ behaved very much like a brutal occupying force who supported themselves by robbing the civilian population of Zaire. A recurring feature of Mobutu's rule were the seemingly endless number of roadblocks put by the FAZ who extorted money from the drivers of any passing automobile or lorries.\nAnother feature of Mobutu's economic mismanagement, directly linked to the way he and his friends siphoned off so much of the country's wealth, was rampant inflation. The rapid decline in the real value of salaries strongly encouraged a culture of corruption and dishonesty among public servants of all kinds.\nMobutu was known for his opulent lifestyle. He cruised on the Congo on his yacht \"Kamanyola\". In Gbadolite, he erected a palace, the \"Versailles of the jungle\". For shopping trips to Paris, he would charter a Concorde from Air France; he had the Gbadolite Airport constructed with a runway long enough to accommodate the Concorde's extended take-off and landing requirements. In 1989, Mobutu chartered Concorde aircraft F-BTSD for a 26 June \u2013 5 July trip to give a speech at the United Nations in New York City, then again on 16 July for French bicentennial celebrations in Paris (where he was a guest of President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand), and on 19 September for a flight from Paris to Gbadolite, and another nonstop flight from Gbadolite to Marseille with the youth choir of Zaire. Mobutu owned a villa on the French Riviera, Villa del Mere.\nMobutu's rule earned a reputation as one of the world's foremost examples of kleptocracy and nepotism. Close relatives and fellow members of the Ngbandi tribe were awarded high positions in the military and government, and he groomed his eldest son, Nyiwa, to succeed him as president; however, Nyiwa died from AIDS in 1994.\nMobutu led one of the most enduring autocracies in Africa and amassed a personal fortune estimated to be over US$50\u00a0million by selling his nation's rich natural resources while the people lived in poverty. While in office, he formed a totalitarian regime responsible for numerous human rights violations, attempted to purge the country of all Belgian cultural influences, and maintained an anti-communist stance to gain positive international support.\nMobutu was the subject of one of the most pervasive personality cults of the twentieth century. The evening newscast opened with an image of him descending through clouds like a god. His portraits were hung in many public places, and government officials wore lapel pins bearing his portrait. He held such titles as \"Father of the Nation\", \"Messiah\", \"Guide of the Revolution\", \"Helmsman\", \"Founder\", \"Savior of the People\", and \"Supreme Combatant\". In the 1996 documentary of the 1974 Foreman\u2013Ali fight in Zaire, dancers receiving the fighters can be heard chanting \"Sese Seko, Sese Seko\". At one point, in early 1975, the media were forbidden to refer to anyone other than Mobutu by name; others were referred to only by the positions they held.\nMobutu successfully capitalized on Cold War tensions among European nations and the United States. He gained significant support from the West and its international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund.\nSpace program.\nIn the late 1970s, the West Germany company OTRAG was developing a program to send peaceful satellites into space at lower costs, but a 1954 amendment to the Treaty of Brussels prevented them from developing and launching missiles in Germany. As a result, they paid Mobutu $130 million to develop their program in Zaire. In a 1978 agreement with OTRAG, Mobutu gave the company a 25-year rented plot of land in Zaire. The first rocket, OTRAG-1, was launched on 18 May 1977, while Mobutu watched from a distance. The rocket took off successfully, but shortly afterwards fell and crashed back down to the ground.\nBy 6 June 1978, two more rockets had been launched and crashed in Zaire. Nevertheless, Mobutu continued to promote the program, stating that 200 Zairians were employed by the project and the country would receive royalties from future rocket sales. Two years after the launch of the first rocket, the Soviet Union alleged that former Nazi scientists were involved with OTRAG, and became convinced that the company was secretly gathering military intelligence. Mobutu succumbed to Soviet pressure, ended the program, and cut ties with OTRAG.\nForeign policy.\nRelations with Belgium.\nRelations between Zaire and Belgium wavered between close ties and open hostility during the Mobutu years. More often than not, Belgian decision-makers responded indifferently when Mobutu acted against the interests of Belgium, partly explained by the highly divided Belgian political class. Relations soured early in Mobutu's rule over disputes involving the substantial Belgian commercial and industrial holdings in the country, but they warmed soon afterwards. Mobutu and his family were received as personal guests of the Belgian monarch in 1968, and a convention for scientific and technical cooperation was signed that same year. During King Baudouin's highly successful visit to Kinshasa in 1970, a treaty of friendship and cooperation between the two countries was signed. However, Mobutu tore up the treaty in 1974 in protest at Belgium's refusal to ban an anti-Mobutu book written by left-wing lawyer Jules Chom\u00e9. Mobutu's \"Zairianisation\" policy, which expropriated foreign-held businesses and transferred their ownership to Zairians, added to the strain. Mobutu maintained several personal contacts with prominent Belgians. Edmond Leburton, Belgian prime minister between 1973 and 1974, was someone greatly admired by the President. Alfred Cahen, career diplomat and \"chef de cabinet\" of minister Henri Simonet, became a personal friend of Mobutu when he was a student at the Universit\u00e9 Libre de Bruxelles. Relations with King Baudouin were mostly cordial, until Mobutu released a bold statement about the Belgian royal family. Prime Minister Wilfried Martens recalled in his memoirs that the palace gates closed completely after Mobutu published a handwritten letter of the King. Because of that, Mobutu was one of only two heads of state who did not receive an invitation to the funeral of Baudouin, the other being Saddam Hussein of Iraq. Next to friendly ties with Belgians residing in Belgium, Mobutu had a number of Belgian advisors at his disposal. Some of them, such as Hugues Leclercq and Colonel Willy Mallants, were interviewed in Thierry Michel's documentary \"Mobutu, King of Zaire\".\nRelations with France.\nAs then the second most populous French-speaking country in the world (it has subsequently come to have a larger population than France) and the most populous one in sub-Saharan Africa, Zaire was of great strategic interest to France. During the First Republic era, France tended to side with the conservative and federalist forces, as opposed to unitarists such as Lumumba. Shortly after the Katangan secession was successfully crushed, Zaire (then called the Republic of the Congo) signed a treaty of technical and cultural cooperation with France. During the presidency of Charles de Gaulle, diplomatic relations between the two countries gradually grew stronger and closer due to their many shared geopolitical interests. In 1971, Finance Minister Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing paid a visit to Zaire; later, after becoming France's president, he would develop a close personal relationship with President Mobutu, and under his leadership, France became one of the Mobutu regime's closest and most important foreign allies. During the Shaba invasions, France sided firmly with Mobutu: during the first Shaba invasion, France airlifted 1,500 Moroccan troops to Zaire, and the rebels were repulsed; a year later, during the second Shaba invasion, France itself (along with Belgium) would send French Foreign Legion paratroopers (2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment) to aid Mobutu.\nRelations with the People's Republic of China.\nInitially, Zaire's relationship with the People's Republic of China was no better than its relationship with the Soviet Union. Memories of Chinese aid to Mulele and other Maoist rebels in Kwilu province during the ill-fated Simba Rebellion remained fresh on Mobutu's mind. He also opposed seating the PRC at the United Nations. However, by 1972, he began to see the Chinese in a different light, as a counterbalance to both the Soviet Union as well as his intimate ties with the United States, Israel, and South Africa. In November 1972, Mobutu extended diplomatic recognition to the Chinese (as well as East Germany and North Korea). The following year, Mobutu paid a visit to Beijing, where he met with chairman Mao Zedong and received promises of $100\u00a0million in technical aid. In 1983, Chinese Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang announced on a trip to Zaire that the money would not have to be repaid.\nIn 1974, Mobutu made a surprise visit to both China and North Korea, during the time he was originally scheduled to visit the Soviet Union. Upon returning home, both his politics and rhetoric became markedly more radical; it was around this time that Mobutu began criticizing Belgium and the United States (the latter for not doing enough, in Mobutu's opinion, to combat white minority rule in South Africa and Rhodesia), introduced the \"obligatory civic work\" program called \"salongo\", and initiated \"radicalization\" (an extension of 1973's \"Zairianization\" policy). Mobutu even borrowed a title \u2013 the Helmsman \u2013 from Mao. Incidentally, late 1974 to early 1975 was when his personality cult reached its peak.\nChina and Zaire shared a common goal in central Africa, namely doing everything in their power to halt Soviet gains in the area. Accordingly, both Zaire and China covertly funneled aid to the National Liberation Front of Angola (and later, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) in order to prevent their former allies, the People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola, who were supported and augmented by Cuban forces, from coming to power. The Cubans, who exercised considerable influence in Africa in support of leftist and anti-imperialist forces, were heavily sponsored by the Soviet Union during the period. In addition to inviting Holden Roberto, the leader of the National Liberation Front of Angola, and his guerrillas to Beijing for training, China provided weapons and money to the rebels. Zaire itself launched an ill-fated, pre-emptive invasion of Angola in a bid to install a pro-Kinshasa government, but was repulsed by Cuban troops. The expedition was a fiasco with far-reaching repercussions, most notably the Shaba I and Shaba II invasions, both of which China opposed. China sent military aid to Zaire during both invasions, and accused the Soviet Union and Cuba (who were alleged to have supported the Shaban rebels, although this was and remains speculation) of working to de-stabilize central Africa.\nRelations with the Soviet Union.\nMobutu's relationship with the Soviet Union was frosty and tense. A staunch anti-communist, he was not anxious to recognize the Soviets; the USSR had supported\u2014though mostly in words\u2014both Patrice Lumumba, Mobutu's democratically elected predecessor, and the Simba rebellion. However, to project a non-aligned image, he did renew ties in 1967; the first Soviet ambassador arrived and presented his credentials in 1968. Mobutu did, however, join the United States in condemning the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia that year. Mobutu viewed the Soviet presence as advantageous for two reasons: it allowed him to maintain an image of non-alignment, and it provided a convenient scapegoat for problems at home. For example, in 1970, he expelled four Soviet diplomats for carrying out \"subversive activities\", and in 1971, twenty Soviet officials were declared \"persona non grata\" for allegedly instigating student demonstrations at Lovanium University.\nMoscow was the only major world capital Mobutu never visited, although he did accept an invitation to do so in 1974. For reasons unknown, he cancelled the visit at the last minute, and toured the People's Republic of China and North Korea instead.\nRelations cooled further in 1975, when the two countries found themselves on opposing sides in the Angolan Civil War. This had a dramatic effect on Zairian foreign policy for the next decade; bereft of his claim to African leadership (Mobutu was one of the few leaders who refused to recognize the Marxist government of Angola), Mobutu turned increasingly to the US and its allies, adopting pro-American stances on such issues as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and Israel's position in international organizations.\nRelations with the United States.\nFor the most part, Zaire enjoyed warm relations with the United States. The United States was the third largest donor of aid to Zaire (after Belgium and France), and Mobutu befriended several US presidents, including Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, and George H. W. Bush. Relations did cool significantly in 1974\u20131975 over Mobutu's increasingly radical rhetoric (which included his scathing denunciations of American foreign policy), and plummeted to an all-time low in the summer of 1975, when Mobutu accused the Central Intelligence Agency of plotting his overthrow and arrested eleven senior Zairian generals and several civilians, and condemned (\"in absentia\") a former head of the Central Bank (Albert Ndele). However, many people viewed these charges with skepticism; in fact, one of Mobutu's staunchest critics, Nzongola-Ntalaja, speculated that Mobutu invented the plot as an excuse to purge the military of talented officers who might otherwise pose a threat to his rule. In spite of these hindrances, the chilly relationship quickly thawed when both countries found each other supporting the same side during the Angolan Civil War.\nBecause of Mobutu's poor human rights record, the Carter Administration put some distance between itself and the Kinshasa government; even so, Zaire received nearly half the foreign aid Carter allocated to sub-Saharan Africa. During the first Shaba invasion, the United States played a relatively inconsequential role; its belated intervention consisted of little more than the delivery of non-lethal supplies. But during the second Shaba invasion, the US played a much more active and decisive role by providing transportation and logistical support to the French and Belgian paratroopers that were deployed to aid Mobutu against the rebels. Carter echoed Mobutu's (unsubstantiated) charges of Soviet and Cuban aid to the rebels, until it was apparent that no hard evidence existed to verify his claims. In 1980, the US House of Representatives voted to terminate military aid to Zaire, but the US Senate reinstated the funds, in response to pressure from Carter and American business interests in Zaire.\nMobutu enjoyed a very warm relationship with the Reagan Administration, through financial donations. During Reagan's presidency, Mobutu visited the White House three times, and criticism of Zaire's human rights record by the US was effectively muted. During a state visit by Mobutu in 1983, Reagan praised the Zairian strongman as \"a voice of good sense and goodwill\".\nMobutu also had a cordial relationship with Reagan's successor, George H. W. Bush; he was the first African head of state to visit Bush at the White House. Even so, Mobutu's relationship with the US radically changed shortly afterward with the end of the Cold War. With the end of the Soviet Union's status as a world superpower, there was no longer any reason to support Mobutu as a bulwark against communism. Accordingly, the US and other Western powers began pressuring Mobutu to democratize the regime. Regarding the change in US attitude to his regime, Mobutu bitterly remarked: \"I am the latest victim of the cold war, no longer needed by the US. The lesson is that my support for American policy counts for nothing.\" In 1993, Mobutu was denied a visa by the US State Department after he sought to visit Washington, D.C.\nMobutu also had friends in America outside Washington. Mobutu was befriended by televangelist Pat Robertson, who promised to try to get the State Department to lift its ban on the African leader.\nCoalition government.\nIn May 1990, due to the ending of the Cold War and a change in the international political climate, as well as economic problems and domestic unrest, Mobutu agreed to give up the MPR's monopoly of power. In early May 1990, students studying at the Lubumbashi campus of the National University of Zaire protested against Mobutu's regime, demanding his resignation. On the night of 11 May 1990, electricity was cut off to the campus while a special military unit called \"Les Hiboux\" (\"The Owls\") were sent in, armed with machetes and bayonets. By the dawn of 12 May 1990, at least 290 students had been killed. The massacre led to the nations of the European Economic Community (now the European Union), the United States, and Canada to end all non-humanitarian aid to Zaire, which marked the beginning of the end of Western support for Mobutu.\nMobutu appointed a transitional government that would lead to promised elections but he retained substantial powers. Following the 1991 riots in Kinshasa by unpaid soldiers, Mobutu brought opposition figures into a coalition government, but still connived to retain control of the security services and important ministries. Factional divisions led to the creation of two governments in 1993, one pro- and one anti-Mobutu. The anti-Mobutu government was headed by Laurent Monsengwo and \u00c9tienne Tshisekedi of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS).\nThe economic situation was still dismal, and in 1994 the two groups merged into the High Council of Republic \u2013 Parliament of Transition (HCR-PT). Mobutu appointed Kengo Wa Dondo, an advocate of austerity and free-market reforms, as prime minister. During this period, Mobutu was becoming increasingly physically frail and during one of his trips to Europe for medical treatment, ethnic Tutsis captured much of eastern Zaire.\nOverthrow.\nThe seeds of Mobutu's downfall were sown in the Rwandan genocide, when about 800,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus were massacred by about 200,000 Hutu extremists aided by the Rwandan government in 1994. The genocide ended when the Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front seized the whole country, leading hundreds of thousands of Hutus, including many of the g\u00e9nocidaires, to flee into refugee camps in eastern Zaire. Mobutu welcomed the Hutu extremists as personal guests and allowed them to establish military and political bases in the eastern territories, from where they attacked and killed ethnic Tutsis across the border in Rwanda and in Zaire itself, ostensibly to prepare for a renewed offensive back into Rwanda. The new Rwandan government began sending military aid to the Zairian Tutsis in response. The resulting conflict began to destabilize eastern Zaire as a whole.\nWhen Mobutu's government issued an order in November 1996 forcing Tutsis to leave Zaire on penalty of death, the ethnic Tutsis in Zaire, known as Banyamulenge, were the focal point of a rebellion. From eastern Zaire, the rebels, aided by foreign government forces under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and Rwandan Minister of Defense Paul Kagame launched an offensive to overthrow Mobutu, joining forces with locals opposed to him under Laurent-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Kabila as they marched west toward Kinshasa. Burundi and Angola also supported the growing rebellion, which mushroomed into the First Congo War.\nAiling with cancer, Mobutu was in Switzerland for treatment, and he was unable to coordinate the resistance which crumbled in front of the march. The rebel forces would have completely overrun the country far sooner than it ultimately did if not for the country's decrepit infrastructure. In most areas, no paved roads existed; the only vehicle paths were irregularly used dirt roads.\nBy mid-1997, Kabila's forces resumed their advance, and the remains of Mobutu's army offered almost no resistance. On 16 May 1997, failed peace talks were held in Pointe-Noire on board the South African Navy ship SAS \"Outeniqua\" with Kabila and President of South Africa Nelson Mandela acting as the chair of the talks. However the talks stalled as Kabila was reluctant to negotiate and deplete the momentum of his forces, potentially seeing it as giving Mobutu the advantage to regroup his forces. Kabila was also anxious about meeting Mobutu face to face on a personal basis, as the United Nations High Special Commission to the Great Lakes Region Spokesperson Timothy Montague Hamilton Douglas later stated: \"In all the years I spent in contact with President Mobutu, this was the first time I ever saw him outshone in superstition...Although they sat together in the same room for hours, Kabila refused to look into the president's eyes during the meeting and instead stared at the ceiling; after some conferring with the Zairian and AFDL aides, I was able to discern that the prevailing rationale was that he [Kabila] was afraid that the \"Old Leopard\" still had enough magical power left to curse him with his stare and prevent him from reaching his prize, which he felt was now so close.\" Douglas went on to comment on the terse atmosphere at the talks: \"It was very strange. It was the only time that the two rivals met; and after fighting him for 32 years and being catapulted to the national stage in only a few months, Kabila had remarkably little to say to his foe. As far as I remember, he said, hand over power, and step down without any conditions, Mobutu, insulted by this treatment as one would imagine, limped off the boat, refusing to strike a deal. I remember President Mandela, 78- years old himself at this time, had to prop him up as he walked to his car...It was really dreadful, on May 15th they were to meet again, Mobutu made the journey-Kabila hadn't bothered to attend.\" Kabila's forces, known as the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire (AFDL), proclaimed victory the next day. On 23 May 1997, Zaire was renamed the Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nExile and death.\nMobutu went into temporary exile in Togo, until President Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma insisted that Mobutu leave the country a few days later. From 23 May 1997, he lived mostly in Rabat, Morocco. He died there on 7 September 1997 from prostate cancer at the age of 66. He is interred in an above ground mausoleum at Rabat, in the Christian cemetery known as Cimeti\u00e8re Europ\u00e9en.\nIn December 2007, the National Assembly of the Democratic Republic of the Congo recommended returning his remains, and interring them in a mausoleum in the DRC, which has not yet taken place. Mobutu remains interred in Morocco.\nFamily.\nMobutu was married twice in his lifetime. He married his first wife, Marie-Antoinette Gbiatibwa Gogbe Yetene, in 1955. They had nine children. She died of heart failure on 22 October 1977 in Genolier, Switzerland, at the age of 36. On 1 May 1980, he married his mistress, Bobi Ladawa, on the eve of a visit by Pope John Paul II, thus legitimizing his relationship in the eyes of the Church. Two of his sons from his first marriage died during his lifetime, Nyiwa (d. 16 September 1994) and Konga (d. 1992). Three more died in the years following his death: Kongulu (d. 24 September 1998), Manda (d. 27 November 2004), and Ndokula (d. 4 November 2011). His elder son from his second marriage, Nzanga Mobutu, now the head of the family, finished fourth in the 2006 presidential elections and later served in the government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as Minister of State and Deputy Prime Minister of the day government. Another son of his, Giala, has also served in the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo as both a member of the National Assembly and the Senate. A daughter, Yakpwa (nicknamed Yaki), was briefly married to a Belgian, Pierre Janssen, who later wrote a book that described Mobutu's lifestyle in vivid detail.\nAltogether, Mobutu had sixteen children.\nWith Marie-Antoinette (first wife): Nyiwa, Ngombo, Manda, Konga, Ngawali, Yango, Yakpwa, Kongulu, Ndagbia (9)\nWith Bobi Ladawa (second wife): Nzanga, Giala, Toku, Ndokula (4)\nWith Kosia Ngama (mistress and twin sister of his second wife): Yalitho, Tende, Ayessa (3)\nIn art and literature.\nMobutu was the subject of the three-part 1999 Belgian documentary \"Mobutu, King of Zaire\" by Thierry Michel. Mobutu was also featured in the 2000 feature film \"Lumumba\", directed by Raoul Peck, which detailed the pre-coup and coup years from the perspective of Lumumba. Mobutu also featured in the 1996 American documentary \"When We Were Kings\", which centred on the famed Rumble in the Jungle boxing bout between George Foreman and Muhammad Ali for the 1974 heavyweight championship of the world which took place in Kinshasa during Mobutu's rule. In the 1978 war adventure film \"The Wild Geese\", the villain, General Ndofa, described in the film as an extremely corrupt leader of a copper-rich nation in central Africa, was a thinly disguised version of Mobutu.\nMobutu also might be considered as the inspiration behind some of the characters in the works of the poetry of Wole Soyinka, the novel \"A Bend in the River\" by V. S. Naipaul, and \"Anthills of the Savannah\" by Chinua Achebe. William Close, father of actress Glenn Close, was once a personal physician to Mobutu and wrote a book focusing on his service in Zaire. Barbara Kingsolver's 1998 historical novel \"The Poisonwood Bible\" depicts the events of the Congo Crisis from a fictional standpoint, featuring the role of Mobutu in the crisis. Mobutu was played by the Belgian actor Marc Zinga in the 2011 film \"Mister Bob\". The French critic Isabelle Hanne praised Zinga's performance as Mobutu, writing he \"brilliantly embodies this Shakespearian and bloodthirsty figure.\"\nMobutu was included as an additional promotional card in the card-driven strategy game \"Twilight Struggle\". His card, when played, increases the stability of the country then known as Zaire and increases the influence of the United States over the African nation. The 2015 song \"Fran\u00e7afrique\" by Swedish hardcore punk band Refused (from the album \"Freedom\") directly references Mobutu in its lyrics \u2014 the song contains the lines: \"Mobutu, Congo; pimp and whore / As Paris' puppets guard the door\".\nLegacy.\nAccording to Mobutu's \"New York Times\" obituary: \"He built his political longevity on three pillars: violence, cunning, and the use of state funds to buy off enemies. His systematic looting of the national treasury and major industries gave birth to the term 'kleptocracy' to describe a rule of official corruption that reputedly made him one of the world's wealthiest heads of state.\"\nIn 2011, \"Time\" magazine described him as the \"archetypal African dictator\".\nMobutu was infamous for amassing the equivalent of millions of US dollars from his country. According to the most conservative estimates, he stole US$50\u2013125\u00a0million from his country, and some sources put the figure as high as US$150\u00a0million. According to Pierre Janssen, the ex-husband of Mobutu's daughter Yaki, Mobutu had no concern for the cost of the expensive gifts he gave away to his cronies. Janssen married Yaki in a lavish ceremony that included three orchestras, a US$65,000 wedding cake, and a giant fireworks display. Yaki wore a US$70,000 wedding gown and US$3\u00a0million worth of jewels. Janssen wrote a book describing Mobutu's daily routine, which included several daily bottles of wine, retainers flown in from overseas, and lavish meals.\nAccording to Washington Post, Mobutu amassed between US$50\u2013125\u00a0million from his country, ranking him as the third-most corrupt leader since 1984 and the most corrupt African leader during the same period. Philip Gourevitch, in \"We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed with Our Families\" (1998), wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mobutu had really staged a funeral for a generation of African leadership of which he\u2014the Dinosaur, as he had long been known\u2014was the paragon: the client dictator of Cold War neocolonialism, monomaniacal, perfectly corrupt, and absolutely ruinous to his nation.\nMobutu was instrumental in bringing the Rumble in the Jungle boxing match between Muhammad Ali and George Foreman to Zaire on 30 October 1974. According to the documentary \"When We Were Kings\", promoter Don King promised each fighter five million dollars (U.S.) for the fight. To this end, King offered the bout to any African country that put up the money to host it, in exchange for recognition. Mobutu was willing to fund the ten million dollar purse and host the bout, in order to gain international recognition and legitimacy in the process. Mobutu gained Zaire and its people considerable publicity in the weeks even before the televised bout, as worldwide attention focused on his country. According to a quote in the film, Ali supposedly said: \"Some countries go to war to get their names out there, and wars cost a lot more than ten million (dollars).\" On 22 September 1974, Mobutu presented the rebuilt 20 May Stadium, a multi-million-dollar sports project constructed to host the Ali-Foreman boxing card, to the Zaire Ministry of Youth and Sport, and to the people of Zaire.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64241", "revid": "16980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64241", "title": "Joseph Mobutu", "text": ""}
{"id": "64242", "revid": "49781917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64242", "title": "Litchfield", "text": "Litchfield may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64243", "revid": "33416498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64243", "title": "Aquatic ape hypothesis", "text": "Proposal that humans evolved certain features due to filling a semi-aquatic niche\nThe aquatic ape hypothesis (AAH), also referred to as aquatic ape theory (AAT) or the waterside hypothesis of human evolution, postulates that the ancestors of modern humans took a divergent evolutionary pathway from the other great apes by becoming adapted to a more aquatic habitat. While the hypothesis has some popularity with the lay public, it is generally ignored or classified as pseudoscience by anthropologists.\nThe theory developed before major discoveries of ancient hominin fossils in East Africa. The hypothesis was initially proposed by the English marine biologist Alister Hardy in 1960, who argued that a branch of apes was forced by competition over terrestrial habitats to hunt for food such as shellfish on the coast and seabed, leading to adaptations that explained distinctive characteristics of modern humans such as functional hairlessness and bipedalism. The popular science writer Elaine Morgan supported this hypothesis in her 1972 book \"The Descent of Woman\". In it, she contrasted the theory with zoologist and ethologist Desmond Morris's theories of sexuality, which she believed to be rooted in sexism.\nAnthropologists do not take the hypothesis seriously: John Langdon characterized it as an \"umbrella hypothesis\" (a hypothesis that tries to explain many separate traits of humans as a result of a single adaptive pressure) that was not consistent with the fossil record, and said that its claim that it was simpler and therefore more likely to be true than traditional explanations of human evolution was not true. According to anthropologist John Hawkes, the AAH is not consistent with the fossil record. Traits that the hypothesis tries to explain evolved at vastly different times, and distributions of soft tissue the hypothesis alleges are unique to humans are common among other primates.\nHistory.\nIn 1942 the German pathologist Max Westenh\u00f6fer (1871\u20131957) discussed various human characteristics (hairlessness, subcutaneous fat, the regression of the olfactory organ, webbed fingers, direction of the body hair etc.) that could have derived from an aquatic past, quoting several other authors who had made similar speculations. As he did not believe human beings were apes, he believed this might have been during the Cretaceous, contrary to what is possible given the geologic and evolutionary biology evidence available at the time. He stated: \"The postulation of an aquatic mode of life during an early stage of human evolution is a tenable hypothesis, for which further inquiry may produce additional supporting evidence.\" He later abandoned the concept.\nIndependently of Westenh\u00f6fer's writings, the marine biologist Alister Hardy had since 1930 also hypothesized that humans may have had ancestors more aquatic than previously imagined, although his work, unlike Westenh\u00f6fer's, was rooted in the Darwinian consensus. On the advice of his colleagues, Hardy delayed presenting the hypothesis for approximately thirty years. After he had become a respected academic and knighted for contributions to marine biology, Hardy finally voiced his thoughts in a speech to the British Sub-Aqua Club in Brighton on 5 March 1960. Several national newspapers reported sensational presentations of Hardy's ideas, which he countered by explaining them more fully in an article in \"New Scientist\" on 17 March 1960: \"My thesis is that a branch of this primitive ape-stock was forced by competition from life in the trees to feed on the sea-shores and to hunt for food, shellfish, sea-urchins etc., in the shallow waters off the coast.\"\nThe idea was generally ignored by the scientific community after the article was published. Some interest was received, notably from the geographer Carl Sauer whose views on the role of the seashore in human evolution \"stimulated tremendous progress in the study of coastal and aquatic adaptations\" inside marine archaeology. In 1967, the hypothesis was mentioned in \"The Naked Ape\", a popular book by the zoologist Desmond Morris, who reduced Hardy's phrase \"more aquatic ape-like ancestors\" to the bare \"aquatic ape\", commenting that \"despite its most appealing indirect evidence, the aquatic theory lacks solid support\".\nWhile traditional descriptions of 'savage' existence identified three common sources of sustenance: gathering of fruit and nuts, fishing, and hunting, in the 1950s, the anthropologist Raymond Dart focused on hunting and gathering as the likely organizing concept of human society in prehistory, and hunting was the focus of the screenwriter Robert Ardrey's 1961 best-seller \"African Genesis\". Another screenwriter, Elaine Morgan, responded to this focus in her 1972 \"Descent of Woman\", which parodied the conventional picture of \"the Tarzanlike figure of the prehominid who came down from the trees, saw a grassland teeming with game, picked up a weapon and became a Mighty Hunter,\" and pictured a more peaceful scene of humans by the seashore. She took her lead from a section in Morris's 1967 book which referred to the possibility of an \"Aquatic Ape\" period in evolution, his name for the speculation by the biologist Alister Hardy in 1960. When it aroused no reaction in the academic community, she dropped the feminist criticism and wrote a series of books\u2013\"The Aquatic Ape\" (1982), \"The Scars of Evolution\" (1990), \"The Descent of the Child\" (1994), \"The Aquatic Ape Hypothesis\" (1997) and \"The Naked Darwinist\" (2008)\u2013which explored the issues in more detail. Books published on the topic since then have avoided the contentious term \"aquatic\" and used \"waterside\" instead.\nThe Hardy/Morgan hypothesis.\nHardy's hypothesis as outlined in \"New Scientist\" was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHardy argued a number of features of modern humans are characteristic of aquatic adaptations. He pointed to humans' lack of body hair as being analogous to the same lack seen in whales and hippopotamuses, and noted the layer of subcutaneous fat humans have that Hardy believed other apes lacked, although it has been shown that captive apes with ample access to food have levels of subcutaneous fat similar to humans. Additional features cited by Hardy include the location of the trachea in the throat rather than the nasal cavity, the human propensity for front-facing copulation, tears and eccrine sweating, though these claimed pieces of evidence have alternative evolutionary adaptationist explanations that do not invoke an aquatic context.\nThe diving reflex is sometimes cited as evidence. This is exhibited strongly in aquatic mammals, such as seals, otters and dolphins. It also exists as a lesser response in other animals, including human babies up to 6 months old (see infant swimming). However adult humans generally exhibit a mild response.\nHardy additionally posited that bipedalism evolved first as an aid to wading before becoming the usual means of human locomotion, and tool use evolved out of the use of rocks to crack open shellfish. These last arguments were cited by later proponents of AAH as an inspiration for their research programs.\nMorgan summed up her take on the hypothesis in 2011:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Waterside hypotheses of human evolution assert that selection from wading, swimming and diving and procurement of food from aquatic habitats have significantly affected the evolution of the lineage leading to \"Homo sapiens\" as distinct from that leading to \"Pan\".\nReactions.\nThe AAH is generally ignored by anthropologists, although it has a following outside academia and conferences on the topic have received celebrity endorsement, for example from David Attenborough. Despite being debunked, it returns periodically, being promoted as recently as 2019.\nAcademics who have commented on the aquatic ape hypothesis include categorical opponents (generally members of the community of academic anthropology) who reject almost all of the claims related to the hypothesis. Other academics have argued that the rejection of Hardy and Morgan is partially unfair given that other explanations which suffer from similar problems are not so strongly opposed. A conference devoted to the subject was held at Valkenburg, Netherlands, in 1987. Its 22 participants included academic proponents and opponents of the hypothesis and several neutral observers headed by the anthropologist Vernon Reynolds of the University of Oxford. His summary at the end was:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Overall, it will be clear that I do not think it would be correct to designate our early hominid ancestors as 'aquatic'. But at the same time there does seem to be evidence that not only did they take to water from time to time but that the water (and by this I mean inland lakes and rivers) was a habitat that provided enough extra food to count as an agency for selection.\nCritiques.\nThe AAH is considered to be a classic example of pseudoscience among the scholarly community, and has been met with significant skepticism. The \"Nature\" editor and paleontologist Henry Gee has argued that the hypothesis has equivalent merit to creationism, and should be similarly dismissed.\nIn a 1997 critique, anthropologist John Langdon considered the AAH under the heading of an \"umbrella hypothesis\" and argued that the difficulty of ever disproving such a thing meant that although the idea has the appearance of being a parsimonious explanation, it actually was no more powerful an explanation than the null hypothesis that human evolution is not particularly guided by interaction with bodies of water. Langdon argued that however popular the idea was with the public, the \"umbrella\" nature of the idea means that it cannot serve as a proper scientific hypothesis. Langdon also objected to Morgan's blanket opposition to the \"savannah hypothesis\" which he took to be the \"collective discipline of paleoanthropology\". He observed that some anthropologists had regarded the idea as not worth the trouble of a rebuttal. In addition, the evidence cited by AAH proponents mostly concerned developments in soft tissue anatomy and physiology, whilst paleoanthropologists rarely speculated on evolutionary development of anatomy beyond the musculoskeletal system and brain size as revealed in fossils. After a brief description of the issues under 26 different headings, he produced a summary critique of these with mainly negative judgments. His main conclusion was that the AAH was unlikely ever to be disproved on the basis of comparative anatomy, and that the one body of data that could potentially disprove it was the fossil record.\nIn a blog post originally published in 2005 and continually updated since, anthropologist John D. Hawks said that anthropologists don't accept the AAH for several reasons. Hardy and Morgan situated the alleged aquatic period of human nature in a period of the fossil record that is now known not to contain any aquatic ancestors. The traits the AAH tries to explain actually evolved at wildly different time periods. The AAH claims that the alleged aquatic nature of humanity is responsible for human patterns of hair, fat, and sweat, but actually all of these things are similar in humans to other primates. To the extent they are exceptional in any primate relative to other primates, or in primates relative to other mammals, they are exceptional for well-understood thermodynamic reasons.\nPalaeontologist Riley Black concurred with the pseudoscience label, and described the AAH as a \"classic case of picking evidence that fits a preconceived conclusion and ignoring everything else\". Physical anthropologist Eugenie Scott has described the aquatic ape hypothesis as an instance of \"crank anthropology\" akin to other pseudoscientific ideas in anthropology such as alien-human interbreeding and Bigfoot.\nIn \"The Accidental Species: Misunderstandings of Human Evolution\" (2013), Henry Gee remarked on how a seafood diet can aid in the development of the human brain. He nevertheless criticized the AAH because \"it's always a problem identifying features [such as body fat and hairlessness] that humans have now and inferring that they must have had some adaptive value in the past.\" Also \"it's notoriously hard to infer habits [such as swimming] from anatomical structures\".\nPopular support for the AAH has become an embarrassment to some anthropologists, who want to explore the effects of water on human evolution without engaging with the AAH, which they consider \"emphasizes adaptations to deep water (or at least underwater) conditions\". Foley and Lahr suggest that \"to flirt with anything watery in paleoanthropology can be misinterpreted\", but argue \"there is little doubt that throughout our evolution we have made extensive use of terrestrial habitats adjacent to fresh water, since we are, like many other terrestrial mammals, a heavily water-dependent species.\" But they allege that \"under pressure from the mainstream, AAH supporters tended to flee from the core arguments of Hardy and Morgan towards a more generalized emphasis on fishy things.\"\nIn \"The Waterside Ape\", a pair of 2016 BBC Radio documentaries, David Attenborough discussed what he thought was a \"move towards mainstream acceptance\" for the AAH in the light of new research findings. He interviewed scientists supportive of the idea, including Kathlyn Stewart and Michael Crawford who had published papers in a special issue of the \"Journal of Human Evolution\" on \"The Role of Freshwater and Marine Resources in the Evolution of the Human Diet, Brain and Behavior\". Responding to the documentaries in a newspaper article, paleoanthropologist Alice Roberts criticized Attenborough's promotion of AAH and dismissed the idea as a distraction \"from the emerging story of human evolution that is more interesting and complex\". She argued that AAH had become \"a theory of everything\" that is simultaneously \"too extravagant and too simple\".\nPhilosopher Daniel Dennett, in his discussion of evolutionary philosophy, commented \"During the last few years, when I have found myself in the company of distinguished biologists, evolutionary theorists, paleoanthropologists and other experts, I have often asked them to tell me, please, exactly why Elaine Morgan must be wrong about the aquatic theory. I haven't yet had a reply worth mentioning, aside from those who admit, with a twinkle in their eyes, that they have also wondered the same thing.\" He challenged both Elaine Morgan and the scientific establishment in that \"Both sides are indulging in adapt[at]ionist Just So stories\". Along the same lines, historian Erika Lorraine Milam noted that independent of Morgan's work, certain standard explanations of human development in paleoanthropology have been roundly criticized for lacking evidence, while being based on sexist assumptions. Anatomy lecturer Bruce Charlton gave Morgan's book \"Scars of Evolution\" an enthusiastic review in the British Medical Journal in 1991, calling it \"exceptionally well written\" and \"a good piece of science\".\nIn 1995, paleoanthropologist Phillip Tobias declared that the savannah hypothesis was dead, because the open conditions did not exist when humanity's precursors stood upright and that therefore the conclusions of the Valkenburg conference were no longer valid. Tobias praised Morgan's book \"Scars of Evolution\" as a \"remarkable book\", though he said that he did not agree with all of it. Tobias and his student further criticised the orthodox hypothesis by arguing that the coming out of the forest of man's precursors had been an unexamined assumption of evolution since the days of Lamarck, and followed by Darwin, Wallace and Haeckel, well before Raymond Dart used it.\nReactions of Hardy and Morgan.\nAlister Hardy was astonished and mortified in 1960 when the national Sunday papers carried banner headlines \"Oxford professor says man a sea ape\", causing problems with his Oxford colleagues. As he later said to his ex-pupil Desmond Morris, \"Of course I then had to write an article to refute this saying no this is just a guess, a rough hypothesis, this isn't a proven fact. And of course we're not related to dolphins.\"\nElaine Morgan's 1972 book \"Descent of Woman\" became an international best-seller, a Book of the Month selection in the United States and was translated into ten languages. The book was praised for its feminism but paleoanthropologists were disappointed with its promotions of the AAH. Morgan removed the feminist critique and left her AAH ideas intact, publishing the book as \"The Aquatic Ape\" 10 years later, but it did not garner any more positive reaction from scientists.\nRelated academic and independent research.\nWading and bipedalism.\nAAH proponent Algis Kuliukas, performed experiments to measure the comparative energy used when lacking orthograde posture with using fully upright posture. Although it is harder to walk upright with bent knees on land, this difference gradually diminishes as the depth of water increases and is still practical in thigh-high water.\nIn a critique of the AAH, Henry Gee questioned any link between bipedalism and diet. Gee writes that early humans have been bipedal for 5 million years, but our ancestors' \"fondness for seafood\" emerged a mere 200,000 years ago.\nDiet.\nEvidence supports aquatic food consumption in \"Homo\" as early as the Pliocene, but its linkage to brain evolution remains controversial. Further, there is no evidence that humans ate fish in significant amounts earlier than tens to hundreds of thousands of years ago. Supporters argue that the avoidance of taphonomic bias is the problem, as most hominin fossils occur in lake-side environments, and the presence of fish remains is therefore not proof of fish consumption. They also claim that the archaeological record of human fishing and coastal settlement is fundamentally deficient due to postglacial sea level rise.\nIn their 1989 book \"The Driving Force: Food, Evolution and The Future\", Michael Crawford and David Marsh claimed that omega-3 fatty acids were vital for the development of the brain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A branch of the line of primitive ancestral apes was forced by competition to leave the trees and feed on the seashore. Searching for oysters, mussels, crabs, crayfish and so on they would have spent much of their time in the water and an upright position would have come naturally. Crawford and Marsh opined that the brain size in aquatic mammals is similar to humans, and that other primates and carnivores lost relative brain capacity. Cunnane, Stewart, Crawford, and colleagues published works arguing a correlation between aquatic diet and human brain evolution in their \"shore-based diet scenario\", acknowledging the Hardy/Morgan's thesis as a foundation work of their model. As evidence, they describe health problems in landlocked communities, such as cretinism in the Alps and goitre in parts of Africa due to salt-derived iodine deficiency, and state that inland habitats cannot naturally meet human iodide requirements.\nBiologists Caroline Pond and Dick Colby were highly critical, saying that the work provided \"no significant new information that would be of interest to biologists\" and that its style was \"speculative, theoretical and in many places so imprecise as to be misleading.\" British palaeontologist Henry Gee, who remarked on how a seafood diet can aid in the development of the human brain, nevertheless criticized AAH because inferring aquatic behavior from body fat and hairlessness patterns is an unjustifiable leap.\nDiving behavior and performance.\nProfessor of animal physiology and experienced scuba and freediver Erika Schagatay researches human diving abilities and oxygen stress. She suggests that such abilities are consistent with selective pressure for underwater foraging during human evolution, and discussed other anatomical traits speculated as diving adaptations by Hardy/Morgan. John Langdon suggested that such traits could be enabled by a human developmental plasticity.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64244", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64244", "title": "Macon", "text": "Macon may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64245", "revid": "13560851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64245", "title": "Martinsville", "text": "Martinsville is the name of several places:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64246", "revid": "33959159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64246", "title": "R'lyeh", "text": "Fictional lost city in \"The Call of Cthulhu\"\nR'lyeh is a fictional lost city that was first mentioned in the H. P. Lovecraft short story \"The Call of Cthulhu\", first published in \"Weird Tales\" in February 1928. R'lyeh is a sunken city in the South Pacific and the prison of the entity called Cthulhu.\nDescription.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh...was built in measureless eons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults.\u2014\u200a\nNorwegian sailor Gustaf Johansen, the narrator of one of the tales in the short story, describes the accidental discovery of the city: \"a coast-line of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth's supreme terror\u2014the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh...loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours\". The short story also asserts the premise that while currently trapped in R'lyeh, Cthulhu will eventually return, with worshipers often repeating the phrase \"Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn\": \"In his house at R'lyeh, dead Cthulhu waits dreaming\".\nLovecraft claims R'lyeh is located at in the southern Pacific Ocean. Writer August Derleth, a contemporary correspondent of Lovecraft, placed R'lyeh at about . The latter coordinates place the city approximately from the actual island of Pohnpei (Ponape), the location of the fictional \"Ponape Scripture\". Both locations are close to the Pacific pole of inaccessibility (), the point in the ocean farthest from any land mass.\nSignificance and criticism.\nR'lyeh is characterized by bizarre architecture likened to non-Euclidean geometry that hampers exploration and escape. At one point, a crew member \"climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding\u00a0\u2013 that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal\u00a0\u2013 and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast\" and at another, a sailor \"was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse\". Mathematician Benjamin K. Tippett demonstrates that these observations are consistent with \"exploring a bubble of curved spacetime\". Non-Euclidean geometry and Einstein's theories feature in several of Lovecraft's stories as Weird elements. Critics Paul Halpern and Michael C. Labossiere note that Rather than having science expand its boundaries to include genuine supernatural phenomena through brand new theories, the alleged supernatural phenomena are instead accounted for in scientific terms through existing models of nature. Thus, science is not so much embracing the supernatural as reducing it to a manifestation of the natural. Lovecraft's fascinating approach to science and the supernatural is further illustrated by the fact that he reverses the usual technique for ghostly fright. Rather than breaking the laws of science with supernatural means and thus generating fear, he creates a feeling of horror by showing that the common sense views of physics and nature (that is, the old Newtonian views) are the comforting fantasy. In contrast, the counterintuitive \"new physics\", the true scientific reality, provides the source of horror.\nOther interpretations.\nIn Alan Moore's Lovecraft-derived comic book mini-series \"Neonomicon\" and \"Providence\" it is implied, in a fashion suiting a non-Euclidean entity such as Cthulhu, that R'lyeh and subsequently Cthulhu himself do not yet exist in a physical sense. R'lyeh and Cthulhu's \"dead dreaming\" are instead a metaphor for the fetal development of Cthulhu in the womb of a female human detective-turned-cultist, impregnated by a male Deep One while held prisoner by his followers. Similarly to the Antichrist, it is stated that Cthulhu's inevitable \"return\" to destroy civilization and liberate mankind from rule of law will begin with his physical birth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64247", "revid": "43237577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64247", "title": "New London", "text": "New London may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64248", "revid": "33959159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64248", "title": "Cthulhu", "text": "Fictional cosmic entity\nCthulhu is a fictional cosmic entity created by writer H. P. Lovecraft. It was introduced in his short story \"The Call of Cthulhu\", published by the American pulp magazine \"Weird Tales\" in 1928. Considered a Great Old One within the pantheon of Lovecraftian cosmic entities, this creature has since been featured in numerous pop culture references. Lovecraft depicts it as a gigantic entity worshipped by cultists, in the shape of a green octopus, dragon, and a caricature of human form. It is the namesake of the Lovecraft-inspired Cthulhu Mythos.\nEtymology, spelling, and pronunciation.\nInvented by Lovecraft in 1928, the name Cthulhu was probably chosen to echo the word \"chthonic\" (Ancient Greek \"of the earth\"), as apparently suggested by Lovecraft himself at the end of his 1923 tale \"The Rats in the Walls\". The chthonic, or earth-dwelling, spirit has precedents in numerous ancient and medieval mythologies, often guarding mines and precious underground treasures, notably in the Germanic dwarfs and the Greek Chalybes, Telchines, or Dactyls.\nLovecraft transcribed the pronunciation of \"Cthulhu\" as \"Khl\u00fbl\u2032-hloo\", and said, \"the first syllable pronounced gutturally and very thickly. The 'u' is about like that in 'full', and the first syllable is not unlike 'klul' in sound, hence the 'h' represents the guttural thickness\" yielding something akin to . S. T. Joshi points out, however, that Lovecraft gave different pronunciations on different occasions. According to Lovecraft, this is merely the closest that the human vocal apparatus can come to reproducing the syllables of an alien language. Cthulhu has also been spelled in many other ways, including Tulu, Katulu, and Kutulu.\nLong after Lovecraft's death, Chaosium stated in the \"Call of Cthulhu\" role-playing game: \"we say it kuh-THOOL-hu\" (), even while noting that Lovecraft said it differently. Others use the pronunciation .\nDescription.\nIn \"The Call of Cthulhu\", H. P. Lovecraft describes a statue of Cthulhu as: \"A monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind.\" A carving of Cthulhu is described thus: \"It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings.\" \nJohansen in The Call of Cthulhu states that \"The Thing cannot be described\u2014there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled.\" Cthulhu is described again shortly thereafter as a \"mountainous monstrosity\". His age is described to be at least \"vigintillions of years\". He is also said to have cast spells which preserved the Great Old Ones until their reawakening.\nCthulhu is said to resemble a green octopus, dragon, and a human caricature, hundreds of meters tall, with webbed, human-looking arms and legs and a pair of rudimentary wings on its back. Its head is depicted as similar to the entirety of a gigantic octopus, with an unknown number of tentacles surrounding its supposed mouth.\nPublication history.\nThe short story that first mentions Cthulhu, \"The Call of Cthulhu\", was published in \"Weird Tales\" in 1928, and established the character as a malevolent entity, hibernating within R'lyeh, an underwater city in the South Pacific. The imprisoned Cthulhu is apparently the source of constant subconscious anxiety for all mankind, and is also the object of worship, both by many human cults (including some within New Zealand, Greenland, Louisiana, and the Chinese mountains) and by other Lovecraftian monsters (called Deep Ones and Mi-Go). The short story asserts the premise that, while currently trapped, Cthulhu will eventually return. His worshippers chant \"\"Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn\"\" (\"In his house at \"R'lyeh\", dead Cthulhu waits dreaming\").\nLovecraft conceived a detailed genealogy for Cthulhu (published as \"Letter 617\" in \"Selected Letters\") and made the character a central reference in his works. The short story \"The Dunwich Horror\" (1928) refers to Cthulhu, while \"The Whisperer in Darkness\" (1930) hints that one of his characters knows the creature's origins (\"I learned whence Cthulhu first came, and why half the great temporary stars of history had flared forth.\") The 1931 novella \"At the Mountains of Madness\" refers to the \"star-spawn of Cthulhu\", who warred with another race called the Elder Things before the dawn of man.\nAugust Derleth, a correspondent of Lovecraft's, used the creature's name to identify the system of lore employed by Lovecraft and his literary successors, the Cthulhu Mythos. In 1937, Derleth wrote the short story \"The Return of Hastur\", and proposed two groups of opposed cosmic entities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; the Old or Ancient Ones, the \"Elder Gods\", of \"cosmic good\", and those of \"cosmic evil\", bearing many names, and themselves of different groups, as if associated with the elements and yet transcending them: for there are the Water Beings, hidden in the depths; those of Air that are the primal lurkers beyond time; those of Earth, horrible animate survivors of distant eons.\nAccording to Derleth's scheme, \"Great Cthulhu is one of the Water Elementals\" and was engaged in an age-old arch-rivalry with a designated air elemental, Hastur the Unspeakable, described as Cthulhu's \"half-brother.\" Based on this framework, Derleth wrote a series of short stories published in \"Weird Tales\" (1944\u20131952) and collected as \"The Trail of Cthulhu\", depicting the struggle of a Dr. Laban Shrewsbury and his associates against Cthulhu and his minions. In addition, Cthulhu is referenced in Derleth's 1945 novel \"The Lurker at the Threshold\" published by Arkham House. The novel can also be found in \"The Watchers Out of Time and Others\", a collection of stories from Derleth's interpretations of Lovecraftian Mythos published by Arkham House in 1974.\nDerleth's interpretations have been criticized by Lovecraft enthusiast Michel Houellebecq, among others. Houellebecq's \"\" (2005) decries Derleth for attempting to reshape Lovecraft's strictly amoral continuity into a stereotypical conflict between forces of objective good and evil.\nIn John Glasby's \"A Shadow from the Aeons\", Cthulhu is seen by the narrator roaming the riverbank near Dominic Waldron's castle, and roaring.\nThe character's influence also extended into gaming literature; games company TSR included an entire chapter on the Cthulhu mythos (including character statistics) in the first printing of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" sourcebook \"Deities &amp; Demigods\" (1980). TSR, however, were unaware that Arkham House, which asserted copyright on almost all Lovecraft literature, had already licensed the Cthulhu property to game company Chaosium. Although Chaosium stipulated that TSR could continue to use the material if each future edition featured a published credit to Chaosium, TSR refused and the material was removed from all subsequent editions.\nInfluence.\nPolitics.\nCthulhu has appeared as a parody candidate in several elections, including the 2010 Polish presidential election and the 2012 and 2016 US presidential elections. The faux campaigns usually satirize voters who claim to vote for the \"lesser evil\". \"Cthulhu for America\" ran during the 2016 American presidential election, drawing comparisons with other satirical presidential candidates such as Vermin Supreme. The organization had a platform that included the legalization of human sacrifice, driving all Americans insane, and an end to peace.\nScience.\nSeveral organisms have been named after Cthulhu, including the California spider \"Pimoa cthulhu\", the New Guinea moth \"Speiredonia cthulhui\", and \"Sollasina cthulhu\", a fossil echinoderm. Two microorganisms that assist in the digestion of wood by termites have been named after Cthulhu and Cthulhu's \"daughter\" Cthylla: \"Cthulhu macrofasciculumque\" and \"Cthylla microfasciculumque\".\nIn 2014, science and technology scholar Donna Haraway gave a talk entitled \"Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene: Staying with the Trouble\", in which she proposed the term \"Chthulucene\" as an alternative for the concept of the Anthropocene era, due to the entangling interconnectedness of all supposedly individual beings. Haraway has denied any indebtedness to Lovecraft's Cthulhu, claiming that her \"chthulu\" is derived from Greek \"khthonios\", \"of the earth\". However, the Lovecraft character is much closer to her coined term than the Greek root, and her description of its meaning coincides with Lovecraft's idea of the apocalyptic, multitentacled threat of Cthulhu to collapse civilization into an endless dark horror: \"Chthulucene does not close in on itself; it does not round off; its contact zones are ubiquitous and continuously spin out loopy tendrils.\"\nIn July 2015, an elongated, dark region along the equator of Pluto, initially referred to as \"the Whale\", was proposed to be named \"Cthulhu Regio\", by the NASA team responsible for the \"New Horizons\" mission. The team changed the informal name to \"Cthulhu Macula\" later that year, as they considered it to be a macula. The International Astronomical Union did not follow the proposal, and the feature was officially named \"Belton Regio\" in 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64249", "revid": "19839598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64249", "title": "Newtown", "text": "Newtown may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64250", "revid": "11009441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64250", "title": "Oak Ridge", "text": "Oak Ridge or Oakridge may refer to numerous locations in English-speaking countries - the most well-known being Oak Ridge, Tennessee, due to its part in the Manhattan Project. These and other meanings include: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64251", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64251", "title": "Sting (Middle-earth)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64252", "revid": "8373762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64252", "title": "Cadillac", "text": "Luxury car manufacturing division of General Motors\nCadillac Motor Car Division, or simply Cadillac (), is the luxury vehicle division of the American automobile manufacturer General Motors (GM). Its major markets are the United States, Canada and China; Cadillac models are distributed in 34 additional markets worldwide. Historically, Cadillac automobiles were at the top of the luxury field within the United States, but have been outsold by European luxury brands including BMW and Mercedes since the 2000s. In 2019, Cadillac sold 390,458 vehicles worldwide, a record for the brand.\nCadillac, founded in 1902, is among the first automotive brands in the world, fourth in the United States only to Autocar Company (1897) and fellow GM marques Oldsmobile (1897) and Buick (1899). It was named after Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac (1658\u20131730), the French explorer who founded Detroit, Michigan. The Cadillac crest is based on his coat of arms.\nBy the time General Motors purchased the company in 1909, Cadillac had already established itself as one of America's premier luxury car makers. The complete interchangeability of its precision parts had allowed it to lay the foundation for the modern mass production of automobiles. It was at the forefront of technological advances, introducing full electrical systems, the clashless manual transmission and the steel roof. The brand developed three engines, with its V8 setting the standard for the American automotive industry.\nCadillac had the first U.S. car to win the Royal Automobile Club of the United Kingdom's Dewar Trophy by successfully demonstrating the interchangeability of its component parts during a reliability test in 1908; this spawned the firm's slogan \"Standard of the World\". It won the trophy again in 1912 for incorporating electric starting and lighting in a production automobile.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nCadillac was formed from the remnants of the Henry Ford Company. After a dispute between Henry Ford and his investors, Ford left the company along with several of his key partners in March 1902. Ford's financial backers William Murphy and Lemuel Bowen called in engineer Henry M. Leland of Leland &amp; Faulconer Manufacturing Company to appraise the plant and equipment in preparation for liquidating the company's assets. Instead, Leland persuaded the pair to continue manufacturing automobiles using Leland's proven single-cylinder engine. A new company called the Cadillac Automobile Company was established on August 22, 1902, converting the Henry Ford Company factory at Cass Street and Amsterdam Avenue. It was named after French explorer Antoine Laumet de La Mothe, sieur de Cadillac, who had founded Detroit in 1701.\nFirst automobiles.\nCadillac's first automobiles, the Runabout and Tonneau, were completed in October 1902. They were two-seat horseless carriages powered by a single-cylinder engine. They were practically identical to the 1903 Ford Model A. Many sources say the first car rolled out of the factory on October 17; in the book \"Henry Leland\u2014Master of Precision\", the date is October 20; another reliable source shows car number three to have been built on October 16. Cadillac displayed the new vehicles at the New York Auto Show in January 1903, where the vehicles impressed the crowds enough to gather over 2,000 firm orders. Cadillac's biggest selling point was precision manufacturing, and therefore, reliability; a Cadillac was simply a better-made vehicle than its competitors.\nNotable events: 1906\u20131912.\nThe Cadillac Automobile Company merged with Leland &amp; Faulconer Manufacturing, forming The Cadillac Motor Company in 1905. From its earliest years, Cadillac aimed for precision engineering and stylish luxury finishes, causing its cars to be ranked amongst the finest in the United States. Cadillac was the first volume manufacturer of a fully enclosed car, in 1906. Cadillac participated in the 1908 interchangeability test in the United Kingdom, and was awarded the Dewar Trophy for the most important advancement of the year in the automobile industry.\nOn July 29, 1909, Cadillac was purchased by the General Motors (GM) conglomerate. Cadillac became General Motors' prestige division, devoted to the production of large luxury vehicles. The Cadillac line was also GM's default marque for \"commercial chassis\" institutional vehicles, such as limousines, ambulances, hearses and funeral home flower cars, the last three of which were custom-built by aftermarket manufacturers. It became positioned at the top of GM's vehicle hierarchy, above Buick, Oldsmobile, Oakland, and later, Chevrolet.\nIn 1912, Cadillac was the first automobile manufacturer to incorporate an electrical system enabling starting, ignition, and lighting.\nBecoming the \"Standard of the World\" and the Great Depression: 1915\u20131941.\nIn 1915, Cadillac introduced a 90-degree flathead V8 engine with at 2400 rpm and of torque, allowing its cars to attain . This was faster than most roads could accommodate at the time. Cadillac pioneered the dual-plane V8 crankshaft in 1918. In 1928, Cadillac introduced the first clashless Synchro-Mesh manual transmission, utilizing constant mesh gears. In 1930, Cadillac implemented the first V-16 engine, with a 45-degree overhead valve, , and , one of the most powerful and quietest engines in the United States. The development and introduction of the V8, V16 and V12 helped to make Cadillac the \"Standard of the World\". A later model of the V8 engine, with overhead valves, set the standard for the entire American automotive industry in 1949.\nIn July 1917, the United States Army needed a dependable staff car and chose the Cadillac Type 55 Touring Model after exhaustive tests on the Mexican border; 2,350 of the cars were supplied for use in France by officers of the American Expeditionary Force in World War I.\nGeneral Motors of Canada had built Cadillacs from 1923 until 1936 and LaSalles from 1927 until 1935.\nPre\u2013World War II Cadillacs were well-built, powerful, mass-produced luxury cars aimed at an upper-class market. In the 1930s, Cadillac added cars with V12 and V16 engines to their range, many of which were fitted with custom coach-built bodies.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, Cadillac and Buick vehicles were popular with longer-distance passenger service operators, e.g., the Nairn Transport Company in the Middle East (Baghdad\u2013Damascus) and Newmans Coach Lines in New Zealand.\nIn 1926, Cadillac recruited automobile stylist Harley Earl in a one-time consulting capacity, but his employment lasted considerably longer: by 1928, Earl was the head of the new Art and Color division and he would ultimately work for GM until he retired, over 30 years later. The first car he designed was the LaSalle, a new, smaller \"companion marque\" car, named after another French explorer and founder of Detroit, Ren\u00e9 Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. That marque remained in production until 1940.\nCadillac introduced designer-styled bodywork (as opposed to auto-engineered) in 1927. It installed shatter-resistant glass in 1926. Cadillac also introduced the \"turret top\", the first all-steel roof on a passenger car. Previously, car roofs had been made out of fabric-covered wood.\nThe Great Depression sapped the auto industry generally, with the luxury market declining more steeply; between 1928 and 1933, Cadillac sales declined by 84% to 6,736 vehicles. Exacerbating sales performance for the Cadillac brand was a policy, reflective of the times, which discouraged sales to African Americans. Nick Dreystadt, mechanic and national head of Cadillac service, urged a committee\u2014set up to decide whether the Cadillac brand would live on\u2014to revoke that policy. After the policy was eliminated, brand sales increased by 70% in 1934, and Dreystadt was promoted to lead the entire Cadillac Division.\nBy 1940, Cadillac sales had risen tenfold compared to 1934. In 1936, Dreystadt released the Series 60 as Cadillac's entry into the mid-priced vehicle market. It was replaced by the Series 61 in 1939, but a popular model that was derived from it, the Sixty Special, continued through 1993. Another factor helped boost Cadillac growth over the next few years: a revolution in assembly-line technology. In 1934, Henry F. Phillips introduced the Phillips screw and screwdriver to the market. He entered into talks with General Motors and convinced the Cadillac group his new screws would speed assembly times and therefore increase profits. Cadillac was the first automaker to use the Phillips technology, in 1937, which was widely adopted in 1940. In 1941, for the first time in many years, all cars built by the company shared the same basic engine and drivetrain. The same year also saw the introduction of optional Hydra-Matic, the first mass-produced fully automatic transmission, offered the previous year on the Oldsmobile.\nAfter World War II and the Great Depression: 1945\u20131959.\nPostwar Cadillac vehicles innovated many of the styling features that came to be synonymous with the late 1940s and 1950s American automobile. Incorporating many of the ideas of then General Motors styling chief Harley J. Earl, these included tailfins, wraparound windshields, and extensive use of chrome. Tailfins were first added in 1948 and reached their pinnacle in 1959. From 1960 to 1964 they decreased each year until they disappeared in the 1965 model year (remaining vestigially only on the limited production 1965 Series 75 chassis, a carry-over from 1964). Cadillac's other distinctive styling attribute was its front-bumper. What had started out after the war as a pair of artillery shell-shaped bumper guards moved higher on the front-end design as the 1950s wore on. Becoming known as Dagmar bumpers for their similarity to the buxom 1950s television personality, they were toned down in 1958 and gone the next year.\n1956 saw the introduction of the pillarless four-door hardtop sedan, marketed as the \"Sedan de Ville\"; a year later the feature appeared in all standard Cadillacs. The fledgling automotive magazine \"Motor Trend\" awarded its first \"\"Motor Trend\" Car of the Year\" to Cadillac in 1949 for its innovative overhead valve V8 engine. While the company initially snubbed the honor, it now proudly references its \"Car of the Year\" wins in publicity material. On November 25, 1949, Cadillac produced its one-millionth car, a 1950 Coupe de Ville. It also set a new sales mark of 100,000 cars, matched in 1950 and 1951. 1949 also saw the introduction with Buick of the first mass-produced hardtop coupe, a closed-body style without a \"B\" pillar. Marketed as the Coupe de Ville, it would become one of Cadillac's most popular models for many years.\nIn 1951, Cadillac began production of the M41 Walker Bulldog army tank, which saw service in the Korean War and Vietnam War.\nIn 1953, the \"Autronic Eye\" was introduced. This feature would automatically dim high-beam headlamps for the safety of oncoming motorists. In 1957, Cadillac attempted to move further upmarket, creating the hand-built Series 70 Eldorado Brougham. It featured self-levelling suspension, \"memory seat\" function, and an all-transistor signal-seeking car radio that was produced by GM's Delco Radio and which was available as standard equipment for the 1957 Eldorado Brougham models. While the car showed Cadillac's technological prowess, it sold only 904 units.\nPinnacles in luxury and dimension: 1960\u20131976.\nThe dual-reservoir brake master cylinder, with separate front and rear hydraulic systems, was introduced in 1962, six years ahead of the federal requirement. The first fully automatic heater\u2013air conditioning system also appeared, as did the three-speed Turbo-Hydramatic automatic transmission; it would become the GM standard model for several decades. Starting in the late 1960s, Cadillac offered a fiber-optic warning system to alert the driver to failed light bulbs. The use of extensive bright-work on the exterior and interior also decreased each year after 1959. By the 1966 model year, even the rear bumpers ceased to be all chrome\u2014large portions were painted, including the headlight bezels.\nIn 1966, Cadillac had its best annual sales to that point, over 192,000 units (142,190 of them de Villes), an increase of more than 60%. This was exceeded in 1968, when Cadillac topped 200,000 units for the first time. The years 1967 and 1968 saw the introduction of a host of federally mandated safety features, including energy-absorbing steering columns and wheels, soft interior and instrument panel knobs and surfaces, front shoulder belts, and side marker lights.\nThe front-wheel drive Eldorado was launched in 1967, setting a new standard for a personal luxury car. Its simple, elegant design was a far cry from the tailfin and chrome of the 1950s. Cadillac's success grew against rivals Lincoln and Imperial, which had division sales topping all of Chrysler for the first time in 1970. The new engine that debuted in the 1968 model year, designed for an ultimate capacity potential of , was increased to for the 1970 Eldorado. It was adopted across the model range beginning in 1975. Driver and front passenger airbags (\"Air Cushion Restraint System\") began to be offered on some Cadillac, as well as other Buick and Oldsmobile luxury models, in 1974, however this option was unpopular and was discontinued after the 1976 model year. The pillarless Coupe deVille ended with the 1973 model, while the Sedan deVille remained pillarless through 1976.\nThe 1970s saw new extremes in vehicle luxury and dimension. The 1972 Fleetwood was some longer in wheelbase and overall, compared to the 1960 Series 75 Fleetwood; the entry-level 1972 Calais was longer than the equivalent 1960 Series 62, on the same wheelbase. Models gained a smoother ride while vehicle weight, standard equipment and engine displacement were all increased. Cadillac experienced record sales in 1973 and again in the late 1970s. In May 1975, the Seville was introduced as a competitor to the growing import luxury car market and was marketed as \"international size\".\nDownsizings and new technology-assisted luxury features: 1977\u20131988.\nIn 1977, Cadillac's D-bodies experienced the same \"downsizing\" as the rest of GM's \"B\" and \"C\" bodied cars. In 1977, GM significantly downsized their full-sized cars. The Fleetwood Brougham lost its exclusive longer wheelbase and now rode on the same new shorter 121.5\" wheelbase as the de Ville. Both Fleetwood and de Ville models were powered by the V8s. This engine was basically a de-bored version of the 472/500 (7.9\u00a0L/8.2\u00a0L) V8 of previous years.\n1977 was Cadillac's 75th anniversary and saw the introduction of the downsized de Ville coupes and sedans. The redesigned Fleetwood Brougham was now similar in appearance to the lesser Sedan de Ville. Other than the name, there were only subtle exterior differences between a Fleetwood Brougham and Sedan de Ville. The interior of the Fleetwood was plusher and offered more features as standard. These new cars featured a higher roofline, resulting in a vehicle that was more than nine inches shorter, four inches narrower, and half a ton lighter than the previous year, but with a larger trunk and more headroom and legroom. These were also the first de Villes to be marketed without fender skirts over the rear wheels. The 500 in3 V8 (which produced 190 horsepower) was replaced for 1977 by a 180-horsepower 425 in3 V8 variant of similar design. The reduction in size and weight was implemented to improve fuel economy and emissions as a result of the United States Federal Government passage of Corporate Average Fuel Economy regulations.\nFor 1977, the lineup included the two-door Coupe de Ville ($9,654) and the four-door Sedan de Ville ($9,864). The $650 d'Elegance package, an interior dress-up option carried over from the previous generation of de Villes, continued for both models. Three-sided, wrap-around tail lamps were a 1977 feature only (although they would re-appear in 1987). Coupe de Ville's popular \"Cabriolet\" option, priced at $348, included a rear-half padded vinyl roof covering and opera lamps. An optional electronic fuel-injected version of the standard 7.0-liter powerplant, adding , was available for an additional $647. Sales figures were 138,750 Coupe de Villes and 95,421 Sedan de Villes for an all-time sales record of 234,171 de Villes sold.\nWith these downsizings, fuel economy and handling improved. In 1979, Cadillac's flagship Eldorado coupe would downsize. The 1980s saw further downsizing of many models including the de Ville, Fleetwood, Eldorado and Seville. Cadillac brought out a dramatic redesign for the Seville in 1980 featuring a bustle-back rear-end styling theme and a move to the same front-wheel-drive chassis as the Eldorado. In 1982, the Cimarron was introduced as the brand's first compact car. The Cimarron's market failure is one in a series of events throughout the 1980s and 1990s which sullied Cadillac's reputation and caused the division's share of the US market to fall from 3.8% in 1979 to 2.2% in 1997; it is routinely cited as the nadir of GM's product planning. Automotive journalist Dan Neil included the Cimarron in his 2007 list of the \"Worst cars of all time\", saying \"everything that was wrong, venal, lazy, and mendacious about GM in the 1980s was crystallized in this flagrant insult to the good name and fine customers of Cadillac.\" He added that the Cimarron \"nearly killed Cadillac and remains its biggest shame\".\nFor the 1981 model year, the long-running \"Standard of the World\" slogan was changed to \"An American Standard of the World\". For the 1982 model year, the slogan was changed to \"Best of All\u00a0... It's A Cadillac\", which was used until 1986.\nDue to a delay in the production of the new front-drive de Villes (which were now scheduled for release as 1985 models), 1984 was a re-run for the rear-wheel-drive Coupe de Ville ($17,140) and its four-door companion, the popular Sedan de Ville ($17,625). It was also the last time de Ville used the \"V\" emblem below the Cadillac crest, as 1985 models and on would use the crest and wreath emblem\u2014formerly a Fleetwood and Eldorado exclusive. For 1984, sales figures show a total four-door production of 107,920 units, and an additional 50,840 two-door units (figures include de Ville and Fleetwood models). The new front-drive 1985 Coupe de Ville and Sedan de Ville arrived in Cadillac showrooms during the spring of 1984, about six months earlier than most new-car introductions, so both the 1984 rear-drive and 1985 front-drive models were selling and being produced (due to separate assembly plants) at the same time for nearly half a year.\n1985 saw the new front-wheel-drive de Ville and Fleetwood models released after quality delays prevented a planned 1984 model year introduction. 1986 saw new downsized Eldorado and Seville models. In 1987, the all-new Pininfarina-bodied Allant\u00e9 roadster came to market featuring the HT-4100 V8 engine. The Sixty Special returned in 1987 as the top owner-driven Cadillac in the front-wheel-drive GM C-body lineup, with a planned production run of just 2,000 cars. The 1987 and 1988 Sixty Specials were unique, custom-crafted automobiles, which featured a five-inch (127\u00a0mm) longer wheelbase over the de Ville/Fleetwood on which they were based. Also in 1987, Detroit Assembly on Clark Street in Detroit, where Cadillacs had been made since 1921, was closed.\nThe 1980s also saw the introduction of new, technology-assisted luxury features. Among these was the return of the memory seat option, not available since the 1958 Eldorado Brougham. 1981 brought standard digital heating and air conditioning controls to all models. In 1982, the High Technology engine was introduced. It was originally scheduled for a 1983 release, later delayed to 1985, with its intended applications being the downsized front-wheel-drive models Cadillac would introduce that year. 1983 saw the introduction of the Delco/Bose stereo system option, a US$895 cassette stereo system available only on the Eldorado and Seville. This Bose system would eventually become available on the de Ville and Fleetwood models on their 1985 FWD editions. The trip computer, available for Eldorado in 1979 and Seville in 1978 and 1979, was replaced in 1981 with the availability of digital instrumentation with some Trip Computer functions being replaced by the new digital heating and air conditioning control panel. Digital instrumentation would become available for the new FWD de Ville and Fleetwood series in 1985.\nNew introductions: 1989\u20131999.\nIn 1991, Cadillac introduced the Northstar engine, which was a family of high-performance 90\u00b0 V engines produced by General Motors from 1991 to 2010. Regarded as GM's most technically complex engine, the original double overhead cam, four valve per cylinder, aluminum block/aluminum head V8 design was developed by Oldsmobile's R&amp;D, but is most associated with Cadillac's Northstar series. The related Northstar System was Cadillac's trademarked name for a package of performance features introduced in mid-1992 that coupled variable valve timing, road sensing suspension, variable power steering and four-wheel disc brakes to the Division's high-output and high-torque Northstar engines.\nFor 1992, the Seville was redesigned to better compete with luxury performance sedans from Europe and had adopted some styling cues from the 1988 Cadillac Voyage concept car. It also made \"Car and Driver\" magazine's Ten Best list that year. A year later, the Brougham was discontinued and replaced by the all-new rear-wheel-drive 1993 Fleetwood. The previous front-wheel drive Fleetwood was renamed Sixty Special for 1993. That same year, the Coupe de Ville was discontinued due to the declining popularity of full-size coupes.\nFor 1994, the de Ville was redesigned to share the K-body platform with the Seville. The body was redesigned, although the wheelbase remained 113.8 inches\u2014rather than the 111 inches used on the Seville. Production moved to Hamtramck, Michigan. Also for 1994, all de Ville models included a standard SRS driver-side front airbag, as well as fully digital instrumentation with an integrated message center, which provided important vehicle information and status, current speed, outside temperature and more, with controls mounted to the left of the instrument cluster. Also standard was a dual-zone front HVAC system, with controls located to the right of the instrument cluster, and remote controls on the front passenger door panel. An SRS passenger's-side front airbag became standard equipment after a restyling in 1996, which also brought revised exterior styling and new audio systems with TheftLock coded anti-theft technology. In 1995, the high technology engine that had been used in Cadillacs since 1982 was discontinued.\nFor 1997, the Catera mid-size sedan was introduced as Cadillac's new entry-level model. The Catera was a rebadged variant of the Opel Omega B and was manufactured by Opel in R\u00fcsselsheim, Germany. The de Ville was also redesigned that year. The late 1990s saw Cadillac field its first-ever entry in the growing SUV segment. The Escalade, introduced in 1999, was marketed to compete with the Lincoln Navigator and luxury SUVs from various import brands.\nThe \"Art and Science\" era: 2000\u2013present.\nIn 2000, Cadillac introduced a new design philosophy for the 21st century called \"Art and Science\", which it states \"incorporates sharp, sheer forms and crisp edges\u2014a form vocabulary that expresses bold, high-technology design and invokes the technology used to design it.\" This new design language spread from the original CTS and to the Cadillac XLR roadster. Cadillac's model lineup mostly included rear- and all-wheel-drive sedans, roadsters, crossovers and SUVs. The only exceptions were the front-wheel drive compact executive Cadillac BLS (which was not sold in North America) and the Cadillac DTS, neither of which is still in production. The Cadillac BLS was developed by Saab in Trollh\u00e4ttan, Sweden. The BLS was a rebadged variant of the Saab 9-3 and was offered in both sedan and station wagon configurations. In 2005, the Cadillac STS was introduced as the successor to the Cadillac Seville, which beginning in 1988 was available as an upscale performance-oriented \"STS\" (for Seville touring sedan) version, and comfort-oriented \"SLS\" (for Seville luxury sedan). The following year, STS received Cadillac's then-new Northstar System, including the aluminium DOHC \"L37\" Northstar V8 engine.\nThe STS was Cadillac's highest-priced sedan, falling in size between the mid-size CTS and full-size DTS. In 2006, the DeVille nameplate was replaced by Cadillac DTS, an abbreviation dating back to 1986, when a \"DeVille Touring Sedan\" package was first available. The new name brought the DeVille into line with Cadillac's Art and Science-era nomenclature, which saw the Seville renamed the STS and the Catera replacement called the CTS. The last DeVille rolled off the Detroit/Hamtramck Assembly line on June 23, 2005.\nThe new second-generation CTS-V performance sedan was introduced in 2009 as a direct competitor to the BMW M5. Powered by a supercharged OHV 6.2 L LSA V8 engine, an automatic version of the CTS-V lapped the N\u00fcrburgring in 7:59.32, at the time a record for production sedans. The last DTS rolled off the assembly line at 11:51\u00a0a.m. on May 27, 2011. It was replaced by the Cadillac XTS which debuted in 2012 as a 2013 model. The Cadillac ATS compact sedan also debuted in 2012 as a 2013 model and a coupe version of the ATS was added two years later.\nIn 2016, the Cadillac CT6 was introduced and was the brand's first full-size rear-wheel-drive sedan since the discontinuation of the Fleetwood in 1996. In early 2017, Cadillac launched Book By Cadillac, a vehicle subscription service which was initially available in New York City. In November 2017, it was announced that Book by Cadillac would be expanding to Dallas and Los Angeles.\nThe Cadillac XT6, a new seven-seat luxury mid-size crossover SUV, was introduced on January 12, 2019, at the North American International Auto Show. It went on sale in the third quarter of 2019 as a 2020 model. Other additions to the Cadillac lineup for the 2020 model year included the CT5 mid-size luxury sedan, replacing the CTS, and the CT4 compact sedan which replaced the ATS. Performance \"V\" versions of the CT4 and CT5 were also added for 2020.\nAwards.\nCadillac has won the \"Motor Trend\" Car of the Year award five times:\n 1949 Cadillac Motor Division\u2014for innovations in overhead valve V8 engine design\n 1952 Cadillac Motor Division\n 1992 Cadillac Seville Touring Sedan\n 2008 Cadillac CTS\n 2014 Cadillac CTS\nMotorsports.\nBefore the outbreak of World War II, Cadillac (like most manufacturers) participated in various motorsports. Many Allard automobiles used Cadillac engines.\nIn the 1950s, Cadillac (like all American manufacturers at the time) participated in the NASCAR Grand National Series, but stopped taking part by the 1960s.\nCadillac powered the Cadillac Northstar LMP, a Le Mans Prototype, in the early years of the American Le Mans Series from 2000 to 2002, but withdrew when it proved unsuccessful. Cadillac's most successful venture into motorsports in the 21st century has been its use of the CTS-V in the SCCA World Challenge Grand Touring class. Cadillac returned to prototype racing in 2017 with the Cadillac DPi-V.R in the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship, with considerable success.\nIn 2023, Cadillac entered its Cadillac V-Series.R into the FIA World Endurance Championship and IMSA SportsCar Championship. An official manufacturer entry was entered with Chip Ganassi Racing in both FIA World Endurance Championship and IMSA SportsCar Championship as full season entries. Cadillac also provided customer cars to Action Express Racing. It will also enter in 2024.\nFormula One.\nOn January 5, 2023, Cadillac's parent company General Motors announced their intention to enter the Cadillac brand into the Formula One World Championship in conjunction with Andretti Global. After initial rejection by FIA, Cadillac was allowed to enter from the season, using a Ferrari engine until their own engine was ready for 2029.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64253", "revid": "19839598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64253", "title": "Rockland", "text": "Rockland may refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64255", "revid": "43610519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64255", "title": "Rockport", "text": "Rockport may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOthers.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64257", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64257", "title": "Rolla (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64258", "revid": "40144701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64258", "title": "Jacques Villeneuve", "text": "Canadian racing driver (born 1971)\n Jacques Joseph Charles Villeneuve (; born 9 April 1971) is a Canadian former racing driver who competed in IndyCar from 1994 to 1995, and Formula One from to . Villeneuve won the Formula One World Drivers' Championship in with Williams, and won 11 Grands Prix across 11 seasons. In American open-wheel racing, Villeneuve won the IndyCar World Series and the Indianapolis 500 in 1995 with Team Green.\nBorn in Quebec and raised in Monaco, Villeneuve is the son of Formula One driver Gilles Villeneuve and the nephew of racing driver Jacques-Joseph. Aged 17, he began racing under an Andorran license in Italy, progressing to Italian Formula Three a year later. He then moved to the higher-tier Toyota Atlantic Championship, participating in one race during the 1992 season and finishing third overall in the 1993 championship. He began competing in Championship Auto Racing Teams with the Forsythe/Green Racing team in the 1994 season, finishing sixth in the Drivers' Championship with one victory and earning Rookie of the Year and Indianapolis 500 Rookie of the Year honours. In the following year with the renamed Team Green, Villeneuve won four races (including the Indianapolis 500) and the Drivers' Championship.\nVilleneuve moved to Williams in Formula One for the 1996 season, claiming four Grand Prix victories, and becoming the first rookie runner-up in the World Drivers' Championship (WDC) after a season-long duel with teammate Damon Hill. His main title challenge for the following season came from Ferrari's Michael Schumacher, and Villeneuve beat the latter following a controversial collision at the season-ending European Grand Prix, becoming the first Canadian World Drivers' Champion, achieving seven Grand Prix victories. He finished fifth in the 1998 season achieving two podiums and helped Williams finish third in the World Constructors' Championship behind Ferrari and McLaren. After an unsuccessful with British American Racing (BAR), Villeneuve finished seventh in the WDC in both and with BAR, achieving two podiums in 2001, outscoring his teammates Ricardo Zonta and Olivier Panis. Villeneuve raced in Formula One from to 2006, driving for BAR, Renault, Sauber, and BMW Sauber, but he did not achieve any further success.\nVilleneuve left Formula One mid-way through the 2006 season and began competing in various forms of motor racing such as sports car racing, NASCAR, and touring car racing. Though not as successful in these forms of racing, he won the 2008 1000 km of Spa driving for Peugeot. Villeneuve was appointed Officer of the National Order of Quebec in 1998. He was voted the winner of both the Lou Marsh Trophy and the Lionel Conacher Award in each of 1995 and 1997. Villeneuve is an inductee of the Canadian Motor Sports Hall of Fame, Canada's Sports Hall of Fame, and the FIA Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nOn 9 April 1971, Villeneuve was born in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, a small town outside of Montreal in the Canadian province of Quebec. He is the son of snowmobile and future Ferrari racer Gilles Villeneuve and his wife Joann Barthe. Villeneuve has a sister, Melanie, and a half sister Jessica. His uncle, Jacques Sr., whom he was named after also competed in motor racing. Villeneuve spent most of his formative years travelling with the racing fraternity with his parents.\nAged seven in 1978, Villeneuve and his family relocated from Berthierville, Quebec, to the small principality of Monaco on the French Riviera in France's south-east coast close to the border with Italy to be nearer to Ferrari's headquarters. On the advice of driver Patrick Tambay, Villeneuve was sent to the French-speaking Swiss private boarding Coll\u00e8ge Alpin International Beau Soleil by his mother, which he attended from the ages of twelve (1983) to seventeen (1988). He excelled in skiing and experimented with BASE jumping, ice hockey, motocross and water skiing. Villeneuve left the school by mutual consent between his mother and the school owners.\nEarly racing career.\nVilleneuve's mother was aware from when he was five that he wanted to race, and he went go-karting with his uncle several times in Canada. In May 1982, his father died in an accident with Jochen Mass during qualifying for the 1982 Belgian Grand Prix at Circuit Zolder. Jacques became less interested in motor racing after that, fearing the sport's dangers. In 1984, he asked his mother if he could do motor racing like his father. Villeneuve's mother agreed to let him race on the condition he improved his academic performance in one of his weakest subjects, mathematics. Though his mother preferred him to do a course in aerodynamic or mechanical engineering, she did not discourage her son from pursuing racing. In early September 1985, Villeneuve was invited by a SAGIS employee to race in 100 cc go-kart at Italy's Imola Circuit. He impressed the track owners so much that they let him test a 135 cc kart and then a Formula 4 car. In July 1986, his uncle enrolled him in the Jim Russell Racing Driver School in Mont Tremblant, where he passed a three-day course driving a Formula Ford 1600 car from Van Diemen.\nIn mid-1987, Villeneuve left his family to attend the Spenard-David Racing School in Shannonville, Ontario to hone his abilities under Richard Spenard. Villeneuve did not have the money to pay for the course and his mother would not fund it because she thought Jacques finishing his education was more important. He worked in a mechanics' training programme allowing students to learn racing in return for garage painting. Aged seventeen, Villeneuve was invited to make his car racing debut in the Italian Touring Car Championship, driving a Salerno Course-entered Group N Alfa Romeo 33 car for three rounds of the 1988 season. The Canadian and Italian authorities would not grant him a licence since he was a year younger than their minimum age requirement, so he obtained an international racing licence in Andorra with Canadian Automobile Sport Clubs aid. Villeneuve performed poorly in each of the three rounds.\nVilleneuve went on to sign a three-year contract to drive a Reynard-Alfa Romeo car for Prema in the Italian Formula Three Championship, a deal that was aided by the squad obtaining sponsorship from the Camel cigarette company. Initially struggling to drive a Formula 3 car, he enrolled at the Magione Driving School. Under Henry Morrogh's direction, he gradually developed his character and driving technique. Villeneuve did not qualify five times, failed to finish three of the eleven races, and scored no points. In the 1990 season, he qualified for each of the twelve rounds and scored ten points for 14th in the Drivers' Championship. Villeneuve was considered a title favourite for the 1991 championship. A late-season switch to the Ralt RT35 chassis failed to improve his performance, but he still finished sixth overall with twenty points and three podiums. In late 1991, Villeneuve finished eighth in both the Macau Grand Prix and the Formula 3 Fuji Cup.\nDissatisfied with his management in 1991, Villeneuve asked former Beausoleil sports administrator and motor racing promoter Craig Pollock to take over his management three times. For the 1992 season, he wanted to compete in Formula 3000 in Europe with Prema, but did not have the funding to compete with the top teams. Villeneuve accepted an offer to relocate to Japan and drive a Toyota 032F car for the TOM'S squad in the Japanese Formula 3 Championship in 1992 following advice from Tambay. He felt the Japanese series was almost as good as the Italian one, and he did not want to remain in Europe. Villeneuve was the only driver to receive works support from TOM'S, and he got driver training. He won three races and finished no lower than sixth nine times, earning second in the Drivers' Championship and 45 points. People in the racing world observed that ten years after his father's death, Villeneuve was becoming a well-known racer. In August, Pollock negotiated a contract for Villeneuve to enter the Formula Atlantic street event at Trois-Rivi\u00e8res in the 1992 Atlantic Championship. He finished third in the No. 49 Swift DB4-Toyota car lent by the ComPred team. In addition, he also tested a Group C Toyota that year and was mentored by driver Roland Ratzenberger.\nFour months later, Villeneuve accepted an invite to share a TOM'S-entered Toyota TS010 car with Eddie Irvine and Tom Kristensen at the final round of the 1992 All Japan Sports Prototype Car Endurance Championship at Mine Circuit, finishing fourth. He was fourth at the Macau Grand Prix for TOM'S. In Trois-Rivi\u00e8res, Villeneuve met crew chief Barry Green who wanted a driver for his new Forsythe-Green Racing squad. He accepted a three-year contract from Green with personal sponsorship from sports marketing arm Player's November 1992. He raced the lower-tier 1993 Atlantic Championship which featured more powerful cars with more grip and downforce to become better acquainted with American open-wheel racing before progressing to Championship Auto Racing Teams (CART) in 1994. Villeneuve built a close working relationship with aerodynamicist Tony Cicale. Driving the No. 10 Ralt RT40-Toyota car, Villeneuve won five races and finished in the top three four times for third overall and 185 points after a season-long duel with David Empringham and teammate Claude Bourbonnais. He was named the series' Rookie of the Year, and ended 1993 retiring from the Macau Grand Prix driving a March Racing Ralt 93C-Fiat car.\nCART (1994\u20131995).\nVilleneuve began participating in CART in the 1994 season for Forsythe-Green Racing, driving the No. 12 Reynard 94I-Ford XB vehicle after Green obtained sponsorship. He debuted at the season-opening Australian FAI Indycar Grand Prix at Surfers Paradise Street Circuit, starting eighth and finishing 17th after colliding with Stefan Johansson. In the season's next round, the Slick 50 200 at Phoenix International Raceway, he was involved in a five-car accident which saw him sustain a side collision with Hiro Matsushita before being struck by Dominic Dobson. Qualifying fourth for his first Indianapolis 500, Villeneuve finished second, earning Indianapolis 500 Rookie of the Year honors as the highest-finishing rookie. Villeneuve finished ninth or higher in six of the next nine rounds, before beating Al Unser Jr. and Emerson Fittipaldi in the close finish to the Texaco/Havoline 200 at Road America road course in his first CART victory. He placed seventh and third in the final two rounds ending the year with Rookie of the Year honors and was sixth in the Drivers' Championship with 94 points.\nBefore the 1995 season, Villeneuve rejected offers from fellow CART teams and some Formula One (F1) squads and remained at the renamed Team Green driving the renumbered No. 27 Reynard 95I-Ford XB. Before the season, Villeneuve and his team were concerned, as their car had been unreliable and under-performed in pre-season testing. He won the season-opening Marlboro Grand Prix of Miami after starting eighth, but he only finished two of the next four races. His season highlight was the Indianapolis 500. Though Villeneuve was penalised two laps for overtaking the pace car, he re-took the lead after fellow Canadian Scott Goodyear failed to serve a ten-second stop-and-go penalty for also passing the pace car. Winning just his second Indianapolis 500 start, Villeneuve took the Drivers' Championship lead. Villeneuve went on to win both the Texaco/Havoline 200 at Road America and the Grand Prix of Cleveland, also scoring points in all but one of the remaining rounds to clinch the title at the final race in Laguna Seca. He won the championship with 172 points, four victories and six pole positions.\nFormula One career.\nWilliams (1996\u20131998).\nIn early 1995, the Williams F1 team and engine supplier Renault became interested in Villeneuve replacing the outgoing David Coulthard. Bernie Ecclestone, F1's commercial rights holder, saw this as an opportunity to lure Villeneuve from CART even though Team Green wanted him to remain in America. Technical director Patrick Head and team principal Frank Williams gave Villeneuve a test in a FW17 car at Britain's Silverstone Circuit in August 1995. He lapped two seconds slower than driver Damon Hill. Negotiations between Villeneuve's representatives in mid-1995 led to Villeneuve signing a contract for 1996 and 1997 with the option for the 1998 season. He was sent by Frank Williams to cover in testing during the six-month pre-season period testing on permanent European racing circuits, and he also prepared by learning the circuits on a simulation computer game.\n1996.\nVilleneuve drove the docile FW18 car equipped with a powerful, reliable Renault engine and a better gearbox. Villeneuve built up a rapport with his race engineer Jock Clear and learnt from his teammate Hill. Although not considered a title favourite by the media, he contended for the World Drivers' Championship with Hill but never led the standings. Villeneuve's debut at the season-opening Australian Grand Prix saw him become the third driver ever to claim pole position on his first start, and despite an oil leak, he finished second. He beat Ferrari's Michael Schumacher in the European Grand Prix three races later for his maiden F1 victory. Villeneuve scored points in eight of the next eleven events and won the British Grand Prix, the Hungarian Grand Prix and the Portuguese Grand Prix. Entering the season-ending Japanese Grand Prix, he had nine fewer points than Hill, requiring him to win the event and for Hill to score no points to claim the title; however, Villeneuve's right-rear tyre came off his car, forcing him to retire from the race. He finished runner-up to Hill in the drivers' standings with 78 points in his maiden season. Villeneuve was the first rookie to achieve four Grand Prix victories in his debut year and the first to finish runner-up overall.\n1997: World Champion.\nBefore the 1997 season, Williams did not re-sign Hill who moved to the Arrows team, resulting in Villeneuve's promotion to lead driver. He was paired with Heinz-Harald Frentzen. He and Schumacher vied for that year's World Drivers' Championship and variously shared the title lead. Villeneuve trained extensively and drove an aerodynamically efficient and powerful FW19 car designed around him. He won seven Grands Prix and qualified on pole position eight times in the first 14 races. At the season's penultimate race, the Japanese Grand Prix, he had a chance to win the championship but was banned for overtaking under yellow flag conditions twice during practice. He was allowed to race under appeal but was disqualified from fifth when the appeal was rejected. Before the season-ending European Grand Prix, Villeneuve had 77 points, one fewer than Schumacher, requiring him to finish in the top six and ahead of Schumacher to win the championship. During qualifying, Villeneuve, Schumacher and Frentzen all set the exact same lap time, but Villeneuve started from pole position per F1 regulations because he was the first driver to set the time. Villeneuve and Schumacher were involved in a collision that saw Schumacher careen into a gravel trap, giving the title to Villeneuve. Villeneuve became the second driver (after Mario Andretti) to win the F1 World Championship, the CART title, and the Indianapolis 500. He was also Canada's first F1 World Champion.\n1998.\nVilleneuve threatened to leave F1 and return to CART if F1 introduced grooved tyres and narrower cars for the 1998 season. Though these changes were adopted, he remained at Williams with Frentzen. Villeneuve's FW20 car had one-year old Mecachrome-branded engines after Renault's withdrawal from F1 after the 1997 season, which transpired to be noncompetitive. He scored points at nine Grands Prix with season-high third-place finishes at the German Grand Prix and the Hungarian Grand Prix. During practice for the Belgian Grand Prix, he lost control of his car in Eau Rouge corner and crashed backwards into the barrier at approximately . Villeneuve was unhurt. With 21 points, he finished fifth in the Drivers' Championship.\nBritish American Racing (1999\u20132003).\nVilleneuve left Williams following the 1998 season. McLaren technical director Adrian Newey, who liked Villeneuve's performance and who Villeneuve respected, offered him employment for the 1999 season, but Villeneuve rejected it. He instead signed a contract to drive with the new British American Racing (BAR) team founded by Pollock and British American Tobacco following their late 1997 purchase of the financially struggling Tyrrell team. Villeneuve joined the team because he sought to emulate Schumacher's style of basing a team around him and employing highly skilled people to get from the bottom of the running order to the top.\n1999\u20132000.\nVilleneuve was joined at BAR by former McLaren test driver Ricardo Zonta for most of the season and then by Mika Salo for three Grands Prix. His BAR 01 car was efficient and fast but chronically unreliable. He failed to finish each of the first eleven races due to either mechanical trouble or crashing. Villeneuve was only able to finish four Grands Prix with a best finish of eighth at the Italian Grand Prix. Villeneuve qualified a season-high fifth at the San Marino Grand Prix and was briefly third in the Spanish Grand Prix two events later before retiring. During qualifying for the Belgian Grand Prix, he suffered a high-speed crash through Eau Rouge corner, which destroyed his car but left him uninjured. He tallied no points towards the Drivers' Championship.\nFor the 2000 season, his BAR 002 car had a more reliable and powerful works Honda engine, and Zonta was again his teammate. Villeneuve finished fourth at the season-opening Australian Grand Prix and scored two more points by placing fifth at the San Marino Grand Prix two races later. He also finished fourth at the French Grand Prix, the Austrian Grand Prix and the United States Grand Prix. Villeneuve scored points in the final two races by finishing sixth at the Japanese Grand Prix and fifth at the Malaysian Grand Prix. Overall, his performances had improved from 1999 due to a better built and more reliable car. Villeneuve finished the season seventh in the Drivers' Championship with seventeen points.\n2001\u20132003.\nThere were rumours of Villeneuve leaving the BAR team after 2000. He talked to Benetton, Ferrari and McLaren about racing with them in the 2001 championship. Villeneuve later admitted McLaren was not an option since his management team got accused of conducting early season publicity and he disliked McLaren's corporate methodology. Villeneuve also considered taking a sabbatical, but he ultimately signed a three-year contract extension with BAR in July 2000. He obtained a get-out clause enabling him to leave BAR should they under-perform.\nVilleneuve was joined by Olivier Panis, and the 003 car he drove was approximately lighter than the 002 chassis. Villeneuve was cordial with his teammate since they could talk to each other in French, and set himself the goal of winning a race and finishing third in the Drivers' Championship. His car was fairly reliable but lacked rear grip and straight-line speed due to an underpowered Honda engine. At the season-opening Australian Grand Prix, Villeneuve struck the rear of Ralf Schumacher's car, launching him into the air. One of Villeneuve's car's wheels struck marshal Graham Beveridge, killing him. Villeneuve achieved BAR's first two podium results, finishing third at both the Spanish Grand Prix and the German Grand Prix. He finished the season seventh in the Drivers' Championship with 12 points. Although he scored five fewer points than the year before, Villeneuve qualified higher than Panis eleven times in 2001.\nBefore the 2002 season Villeneuve remained at BAR. He talked to team principal Flavio Briatore, who offered him a seat at Renault in lieu of Jenson Button but Villeneuve rejected it. Villeneuve ultimately opted to remain at BAR due to pressure from Honda, and he again partnered with Panis. He became uncomfortable when new BAR team principal David Richards publicly mentioned that money spent on Villeneuve's high salary could be better used for research and development. The BAR 004 chassis proved to be more unreliable than the year before and slower due to an under-powered Honda engine. He scored four points for 12th in the Drivers' Championship with a fourth place at the British Grand Prix being his season's best result. Villeneuve regretted remaining at BAR due to the lack of results, and he was offered a contract to join Team Player's in CART for the 2003 championship before returning to BAR for the 2004 and 2005 F1 seasons. The deal was pushed by Richards but not agreed upon because Villeneuve's and Pollock's financial settlements were too great for team owner Gerald Forsythe to be willing to take on.\nVilleneuve decided to remain at BAR for the 2003 season, and was partnered with Button. Villeneuve's BAR 005 car had a more powerful but bulky Honda engine. He initially had a poor relationship with Button, not speaking to him and saying that Button \"should be in a boy band\". Their relationship did not improve after the season-opening Australian Grand Prix when Villeneuve was due to make a pit stop but drove an additional lap when Button was due to make his, leaving Button stationary behind Villeneuve. Although he blamed it on \"radio problems\", Button and Richards hinted their disbelief in his execution. Villeneuve was outperformed by his teammate and retired eight times due to mechanical faults. He finished sixth at both the Brazilian Grand Prix and the Italian Grand Prix. Before the season-ending Japanese Grand Prix, Villeneuve was informed by Richards he was no longer needed. He was replaced by test driver Takuma Sato. He was 16th in the Drivers' Championship with 6 points.\nRenault and Sauber (2004\u20132006).\nVilleneuve took a sabbatical after BAR released him. He thought of taking up NASCAR as a new challenge, but no teams approached him. After speaking to senior officials from BAR and Williams, Villeneuve believed that they would want to resign him to their respective teams, but neither move occurred. When he realised no competitive team would employ him, he and Pollock met Sauber team owner Peter Sauber in Hinwil in mid-2004. Impressed with Sauber's professionalism, he signed a two-year contract the next month to drive for Sauber from the 2005 season and help them attract new sponsors and partners.\nBefore his tenure at Sauber began, Villeneuve was employed by Briatore to help Renault claim second from BAR in the World Constructors' Championship by scoring the maximum number of points in the 2004 season's final three races following the dismissal of Jarno Trulli for performing poorly. Sauber was comfortable in letting Villeneuve drive for Renault because both teams used Michelin tyres. Driving the R24 car, he finished all three events but under-performed and was lapped each time. Villeneuve scored no points and was unclassified in the Drivers' Championship.\nAt Sauber, Villeneuve used a C24 chassis and was teammates with Felipe Massa. A lack of both pre-season testing and money for car development caused Villeneuve to have a difficult handling car. He did not have a good relationship with the team because he was not allowed to give feedback on car setup due to Willy Rampf's influence. Villeneuve finished a season-high fourth at the San Marino Grand Prix and scored more points in eighth at the French Grand Prix and sixth at the Belgian Grand Prix. He was 14th in the Drivers' Championship with 9 points.\nFor the 2006 championship, Villeneuve stayed at the renamed BMW Sauber after BMW purchased the team. Nick Heidfeld was his teammate. The atmosphere within the team made Villeneuve content, and he was happy with BMW's involvement. He found the less electronically dependent and less refined aerodynamically F1.06 car more driveable. Team principal Mario Theissen criticised Villeneuve for not achieving decent results, thus failing to please BMW's board of directors. Despite retiring three times, he accumulated seven points from the first eleven races, ranking him fifteenth in the Drivers' Championship. At the German Grand Prix, Villeneuve sustained muscle pains in an accident exiting a corner. Shortly afterward, Theissen terminated his contract and replaced him with Robert Kubica. He did not want to be part of a shootout between himself and Kubica, and saw his release as a precursor to his future, saying \"Screw this, It's time to get on with the rest of my life.\" Villeneuve twice failed to return to F1, first with Stefan Grand Prix in the 2010 season, then with his team in partnership with Durango for the following year.\nPost Formula One career.\n2007\u20132010.\nVilleneuve explored NASCAR after exiting F1, talking to Roush Racing owner Jack Roush who agreed to help Villeneuve obtain Truck Series experience before progressing to the Busch Series in 2007 on the condition of a sponsorship agreement. Before that, he made his 24 Hours of Le Mans debut with Peugeot in the 2007 edition informing team manager Serge Saulnier that he wanted to complete the Triple Crown of Motorsport. Sharing the Le Mans Prototype 1 (LMP1)-class No. 7 Peugeot 908 HDi FAP car with Marc Gen\u00e9 and Nicolas Minassian, Villeneuve retired after 338 laps with engine injection trouble. He entered into a partnership with Bill Davis Racing (BDR) to enter the 2007 NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series' last seven events in its No. 27 Toyota Tundra in anticipation of racing full-time in 2008. Villeneuve finished outside the top ten in all seven events for 42nd overall with 615 points. That same year, he drove two races in the Nextel Cup Series (the UAW-Ford 500 at Talladega Superspeedway and the Checker Auto Parts 500 at Phoenix) in BDR's No. 27 Toyota, finishing 21st and 41st respectively.\nVilleneuve and Pollock agreed to end their working relationship in early 2008, and Barry Green began managing him. That February, BDR released Villeneuve, who failed to qualify for the Daytona 500 of the renamed Sprint Cup Series after causing a multi-car accident in the Gatorade Duels. Two months later, he raced the final two rounds of the inaugural season of the Middle East and Southeast Asian-based stock car Speedcar Series at the Bahrain International Circuit and the Dubai Autodrome. Villeneuve then won the 2008 1000 km of Spa (part of the Le Mans Series) for Peugeot with Gen\u00e9 and Minassian in his first race victory in eleven years. Although he finished second in the 24 Hours of Le Mans, sharing Peugeot's No. 7 LMP1 entry with Gen\u00e9 and Minassian, he was released a month later because Peugeot wanted a French driver. In August, Villeneuve signed a contract to make his Nationwide Series debut driving Braun Racing's No. 32 Toyota Camry in the NAPA Auto Parts 200 at Montreal's Circuit Gilles Villeneuve, finishing sixteenth. He also came 16th at the Aut\u00f3dromo Oscar y Juan G\u00e1lvez round of Top Race V6 Argentina aboard Oro Racing Team's No. 27 Volkswagen Passat TRV6.\nVilleneuve returned to the Speedcar Series in the 2008\u201309 season driving for Durango. Competing in five races, he finished in the top ten three times, scoring seven points for eleventh in the Drivers' Championship. In mid-2009, Villeneuve partook in the Tide 250 at Autodrome Saint-Eustache and the GP3R 100 at Circuit Trois-Rivi\u00e8res of the NASCAR Canadian Tire Series for the Jacombs Racing Team in its No. 7 Ford Fusion, finishing fourth at Trois-Rivieres. For the first and only time, Villeneuve entered the Spa 24 Hours in 2009. He shared Gravity Racing International's G2 category No. 118 Mosler MT900R GT3 with Vincent Radermecker, Loris de Sordi and Ho-Pin Tung. The trio failed to finish. He drove the No. 27 Mercedes TRV6 at the Interlagos Circuit and Aut\u00f3dromo Oscar y Juan G\u00e1lvez rounds of Top Race V6 Argentina, achieving a best finish of thirteenth in Buenos Aires. He made one appearance in the 2009 Nationwide Series, finishing fourth at the NAPA Auto Parts 200 in Braun Racing's No. 32 car.\nIn 2010, Villeneuve ran the Nationwide Series road courses at Road America, Watkins Glen and Montreal in Braun Racing's No. 32 vehicle. He finished eighth at Watkins Glen before claiming third at Montreal, where he started second. In mid-season, Villeneuve entered the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis Motor Speedway finishing 29th in Braun Racing's No. 32 car. Villeneuve joined Rod Nash Racing as Paul Dumbrell's international co-driver in its No. 55 Ford FG Falcon for the Gold Coast 600 double header in October 2010 and sought advice from driver Marcos Ambrose on touring car racing. He finished 22nd in the first race and fifth in the second. Ford motorsport manager Chris Styring considered Villeneuve for the Bathurst 1000, the L&amp;H 500 and the Gold Coast 600 in the 2011 International V8 Supercars Championship, but Villeneuve's financial demands were too great for Ford.\n2011\u2013present.\nVilleneuve drove the Road America and Montreal road course races of the 2011 NASCAR Nationwide Series for Penske Racing in its No. 22 Dodge Challenger in lieu of Brad Keselowski. He finished the Road America race third and qualified on pole position for the Montreal event but finished 27th despite leading 29 laps. In August 2011, he joined Shell V-Power Racing for the Stock Car Corrida do Milh\u00e3o for the 2011 championship of Stock Car Brasil despite concerns about adapting to his car. Driving the No. 27 Peugeot 408, Villeneuve qualified 27th and finished eighteenth. He was employed by Penske to drive its No. 22 car at the Road America and Montreal road course races in the 2012 NASCAR Nationwide Series. Villeneuve finished sixth at Road America and third at Montreal. During the 2012 International V8 Supercars Championship, he filled in for the injured Greg Murphy for three rounds in Kelly Racing's No. 51 Holden Commodore, finishing no higher than 24th. He finished seventh sharing Vita4One's No. 34 BMW Z4 GT3 with Jos Verstappen at the City Challenge Baku GT event in October.\nWhen Villeneuve expressed interest in the International V8 Supercars Championship, he was considered for a full-time seat at Kelly Racing in the 2013, but no agreement was reached. For the first and only time, he partook in the Le Mans double header counting towards the 2013 season of the FFSA GT Championship, sharing the No. 27 Sport Garage-entered Ferrari 458 Italia GT3 with \u00c9ric Cayrolle. The duo finished 11th in the first race and retired from the next. Midway through the season, Villeneuve was hired by car owner James Finch to drive the Toyota/Save Mart 350 at Sonoma Raceway in the Sprint Cup Series for Phoenix Racing in its No. 51 Chevrolet SS, finishing 41st due to mechanical trouble after nineteen laps. Later that year, he finished fifth in the Grand Prix de Trois Rivieres (part of the Canadian Tire Series) in 22 Racing's Dodge Challenger.\nIn 2014, Villeneuve signed to drive an Albatec Racing-prepared Peugeot 208 Supercar part-time in the FIA World Rallycross Championship's inaugural season. He chose to do rallycross because he felt it was exciting for both drivers and spectators. In seven races, Villeneuve scored eight points for 37th in the Drivers' Championship. He was released before the season ended due to non-supportive statements he made concerning his team and rallycross. Villeneuve entered the Indianapolis 500 for the first time in 19 years, driving Schmidt Peterson Hamilton Motorsports' No. 5 Dallara DW12-Honda third car entry. Though he had not planned to return to American open-wheel racing, he changed his mind after the 2012 introduction of a new car and engine formula. He qualified 27th and finished fourteenth. In August, Villeneuve finished 24th in Jacombs' No. 7 Dodge at Canadian Tire Series' Grand Prix de Trois Rivieres.\nVilleneuve accepted an invitation to enter 2015 Stock Car Brasil's season-opening Aut\u00f3dromo Internacional Ayrton Senna round alongside Zonta in Shell Racing's No. 10 Chevrolet Sonic, placing 21st. He signed a contract to replace Heidfeld and partner with St\u00e9phane Sarrazin at Venturi Grand Prix in the 2015\u201316 season of the all-electric Formula E series. Villeneuve had observed Formula E intently throughout 2014, admiring its bumpy city tracks. Guido Pastor called him to test a car, after which he got selected to drive. Villeneuve finished outside the top ten in the first two races and failed to start the Punta del Este ePrix due to an accident during qualifying. His relationship with Venturi cooled thereafter and they agreed to terminate their working relationship early in January 2016. Villeneuve signed a one-race agreement to return to rallycross in the 2018 season. He drove a Subaru Rally Team USA-entered WRX STi Supercar at the World RX of Canada (part of the Americas Rallycross Championship). He failed to qualify for the final following two accidents sustained during the second semi-final.\nFor the 2019 season, Villeneuve shared Scuderia Baldini 27's GT3 Pro-class No. 27 Ferrari 488 GT3 Evo with Giancarlo Fisichella and Stefano Gai in the Italian GT Championship, finishing fourth at the 3 Hours of Misano and second at the 3 Hours of Vallelunga. He raced as a guest driver at the Ring Knutstorp and Karlskoga Motorstadion rounds of the Porsche Carrera Cup Scandinavia in a MTech Competition-entered Porsche 911 GT3 Cup car, placing in the top ten in the second race of both rounds. That year, he made his debut in NASCAR Whelen Euro Series in the Elite 1 Division. Villeneuve drove the No. 32 Go Fas Racing Chevrolet, finishing the season eighth in points with 431 scored, two pole positions and seven top-tens. For the 2020 season, he entered that year's Whelen Euro Series with FEED Vict Racing, a team owned by him and Patrick Lemari\u00e9. Driving four rounds in the No. 5 car, he achieved two top fives for 104 points (21st overall) in the Elite 1 Division. He drove Academy Motorsport's No. 5 car in the 2021 Whelen Euro Series, achieving his first two series victories in both races of the season's final round at Vallelunga, and scoring 331 points for ninth in the points standings with two wins and four top-ten finishes. He left the series after the season was over to focus on his F1 commentary commitments.\nFor 2022, Villeneuve returned to the NASCAR Cup Series as a part-time driver of the non-chartered No. 27 Team Hezeberg Ford. He aimed to assist Team Hezeberg in the launch of its Cup Series programme and he consented to assist with their effort in the Daytona 500. Villeneuve qualified for the race as of the fastest of the open non-charter teams; starting from fortieth, he finished the race in 22nd after an early-race half-spin and a subsequent collision with Tyler Reddick. In August, he failed to start the NASCAR Pinty's Series' Grand Prix de Trois-Rivi\u00e8res in the No. 7 Dumoulin Competition-prepared Dodge after accepting an offer by Festidrag D\u00e9veloppement president Martin D'Anjou to enter the race.\nFor 2023, Villeneuve entered the first three rounds of the 2023 FIA World Endurance Championship alongside Tom Dillmann and Esteban Guerrieri in the Floyd Vanwall Racing Team's No. 4 non-hybrid Vanwall Vandervell 680-Gibson in the LMH category, although he was noncompetitive and was replaced by Tristan Vautier for the 24 Hours of Le Mans. He subsequently withdrew from the team for the rest of the season.\nNon-racing ventures and personal life.\nVilleneuve began writing lyrics while he was driving in Japan, and purchased a guitar in 1996. When he became uncertain whether he would remain at Sauber for the 2006 F1 season in November 2005, he elected to rent a professional recording studio in Paris in order to better hear his music. Travelling to England to record with the Tenebrae Choir, Villeneuve recorded nearly every day for a month before stopping to prioritise motor racing. That same year, he released his debut French single, \"Accepterais-tu\", and an acoustic rock album \"Private Paradise\" with 13 songs (nine in French and four in English) in 2007. Six songs each were written by Villeneuve and his friends; he also performed a cover of \"Women Come, Women Go\" by Gazebo. Villeneuve collaborated with vocalists Steve Smith and Am\u00e9lie Veille. The album debuted at No. 49 on the Quebec pop charts and received negative media reviews. It sold 233 copies in Quebec and 836 in North America.\nVilleneuve was a guest on 6 June 1995 and 2 June 1998 episodes of the \"Late Show with David Letterman\". Villeneuve made a cameo appearance as a racing driver in the 2001 film \"Driven\". He carried the Olympic torch in Old Montreal during the 2010 Winter Olympics torch relay in December 2009. Villeneuve also carried the Olympic flag at the opening ceremony. Villeneuve was employed by Disney France in late 2010, spending two days recording the French voice of David Hobbscap for the 2011 Pixar animated film \"Cars 2\". The character was also renamed after him in the French dub. He analysed the 2012 Canadian Grand Prix and the 2024 Canadian Grand Prix for the British television channel Sky Sports F1. Since 2013, Villeneuve has commentated for the pay-TV services Sky Sport in Italy and Canal+ in France, and for Sky Sports in Britain at the 2025 Japanese Grand Prix. He co-designed the Area 27 racing track in Okanagan, British Columbia. Villeneuve became an ambassador of the Williams Formula One team for the season.\nVilleneuve was engaged firstly to a Montreal college student named Sandrine Gros D'Aillon, then to Australian pop singer Dannii Minogue and later American ballerina Ellen Green. Villeneuve's first marriage was to Parisian Johanna Martinez in May 2006. They had two children before divorcing in June 2009. In June 2012, he married Brazilian Camila Andrea L\u00f3pez Lillo, with whom he has two children. Villeneuve married his third wife Giulia Marra, with whom he has a son and a daughter, at the 2023 Las Vegas Grand Prix .\nTax evasion scandal.\nSince January 2017, Revenu Qu\u00e9bec has pursued Villeneuve for $1.7\u00a0million in unpaid taxes after doing an audit of his business activities from 2010 to 2012. The October 2021 release of the Pandora Papers revealed that he had set up offshore companies in the tax-free jurisdictions of The Bahamas and the British Virgin Islands in the 1990s and early 2000s to receive endorsement and income and to avoid paying Canadian income tax. In the fiscal year of 2010, Villeneuve declared $6,431 of personal income, and even claimed a tax-credit for low-income families.\nPublic image and personality.\nJournalist Gerald Donaldson describes Villeneuve as \"engagingly eccentric, opinionated and outspoken\" and one who \"defied convention and challenged authority, saying exactly what he thought in an era when drivers were expected to express only sweet-talking platitudes.\" He was popular with the European press for his willingness to speak his mind in a time of political correctness. He publicly bemoaned F1's commercialised and commodified image, the sport's structure, focus on cheaper, younger, corporate groomed drivers, and the manufacturing of driver personalities by corporations so as not to impugn their reputation by drivers voicing their thoughts and opinions through the media. Villeneuve frequently dyed his hair in various colours and sported grunge street wear. His behaviour earned him multiple cautions from F1's governing body, the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), for bringing the series into disrepute. Max Mosley, the association's president, commented that Villeneuve's controversies would benefit him when he was no longer successful.\nVilleneuve's decision to be independent as much as possible from media relations to avoid over promotion was endorsed by Pollock. He refused to conduct substantial public relations duties for teams even after BAR attempted to purchase more public relations appearances for him, and he limited his commitments communicating to the press. Journalist Matt Bishop observed that Villeneuve was frequently criticised for refusing to do sponsorship functions and for his self-imposed limiting interactions with the press at Grands Prix, but Bishop noted others appreciated Villeneuve's focus on racing and instead of \"extraneous commitments\". Villeneuve resisted to join the Grand Prix Drivers' Association (GPDA), which he believed would serve only the interests of drivers and not F1's. He finally joined in late 2000, feeling his views were being ignored. Villeneuve decided to resign in mid-2006 after the GPDA decided that Schumacher did not have to apologize nor face sanctions for purposely stopping during qualifying for the 2006 Monaco Grand Prix, despite Villeneuve's protests, and Schumacher remained president of the GPDA.\nVilleneuve was voted the winner of the Lorenzo Bandini Trophy in 1996, and both the Lou Marsh Trophy and the Lionel Conacher Award in 1995 and 1997. Villeneuve received the Hawthorn Memorial Trophy for 1997 as the most successful British or Commonwealth driver over the course of a season. In April 1998, he was appointed Officer of the National Order of Quebec but collected the honour at the following year's ceremony due to his racing commitments. He was added to Canada's Walk of Fame two months later. In December 2010, Villeneuve was inducted into the athlete category of Canada's Sports Hall of Fame. He was added to both the FIA Hall of Fame and the Canadian Motorsport Hall of Fame seven and eight years later respectively.\nDriving ability and racing helmet.\nJournalist Mark Hughes describes Villeneuve's driving as \"spectacular\" and \"hard-charging\". Villeneuve frequently went past the edge of the available track to increase his momentum as much as possible. He provided his engineers with suggestions that Maurice Hamilton wrote were \"so far from the norm to the point of diametrically opposed to standard practice, sometimes giving the impression of being pursued just for the hell of it.\" Villeneuve prefers driving on slick tyres and with no electronic driver aids. He found driver aids difficult and thus ran with less traction control than his teammates since he could not deal with either the anti-lock system on the rear brakes or heavy traction control. This required Villeneuve to modify his driving style and take fewer risks until his exit from F1 in 2006. He switched from wearing spectacles in his helmet to contact lenses in 1994 after his spectacles vibrated slightly on minor bumps in Indianapolis.\nVilleneuve based the design of his racing helmet on his father's, reportedly drawing it on a doodling pad. He looked at a photograph of his mother wearing a pink, yellow, green and blue V-shaped striped polo shirt at a motor race her husband was competing at, and he used her pencils to produce the design. Villeneuve incorporated an inverted V-style swoosh with varying thickness of colours around the shape on the helmet's two sides. He retained a single black line from his first design in the centre to divide the colours without difficulty.\nRacing results.\nFormula One.\n\u2020 Did not finish, but was classified as he had completed more than 90% of the race distance.\nOther stock cars.\nStock Car Brasil.\n\u2020 Ineligible for championship points.\nTouring cars.\nV8 Supercars.\n\u2020 Not Eligible for points\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64259", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64259", "title": "Saint Albans", "text": ""}
{"id": "64261", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64261", "title": "Saint Charles", "text": "Saint Charles may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64262", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64262", "title": "Saint Johns", "text": ""}
{"id": "64263", "revid": "50595509", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64263", "title": "St. Albans, Queens", "text": "Neighborhood in New York City\nSt. Albans is a residential neighborhood in the southeastern portion of the New York City borough of Queens. It is bordered by Jamaica to the northwest, Hollis to the north, Queens Village to the northeast, Cambria Heights to the east, Laurelton to the southeast, Springfield Gardens to the south, and South Jamaica to the southwest. St. Albans is centered on the intersection of Linden Boulevard and Farmers Boulevard, about two miles north of John F. Kennedy International Airport.\nThe small western enclave of Addisleigh Park is a U.S. historic district where many notable African Americans have lived, including Jackie Robinson, W. E. B. Du Bois, Lena Horne, and many jazz musicians such as Fats Waller, Ella Fitzgerald and Count Basie.\nSt. Albans is located in Queens Community District 12 and its ZIP Code is 11412. It is patrolled by the New York City Police Department's 113th Precinct. Politically, St. Albans is represented by the New York City Council's 27th and 28th Districts.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nPart of a land grant to Dutch settlers from New Netherland Governor Peter Stuyvesant in 1655, the area, like much of Queens, remained farmland and forest for most of the next two centuries.\nBy the 1800s, the lands of four families\u2014the Remsens, Everitts, Ludlums, and Hendricksons\u2014formed the nucleus of this sprawling farm community in the eastern portion of the Town of Jamaica. In 1814, when the Village of Jamaica (the first village on Long Island) was incorporated, its (the village's) boundaries extended eastward to Freeman's Path (now Farmers Boulevard), and south to Lazy Lane (called Central Avenue in 1900, then Foch Boulevard in the 1920s, thus including parts of present-day St. Albans.\nIn 1852, the old mill pond that is now at the center of Baisley Pond Park was acquired by the Brooklyn waterworks for use as a reservoir.\nLater development.\nIn 1872, the Long Island Rail Road's Cedarhurst Cut-off was built through the area, but no stop appears on the first timetables. In 1892, an area called Francis Farm was surveyed and developed for housing. There were numerous Francis families farming in the eastern portion of the Town of Jamaica in the 1880s.\nFrancis Lewis Boulevard (named for a signer of the Declaration of Independence, from Queens), which does not yet appear on maps from 1909, nor in 1910, is now the eastern boundary of St. Albans.\nSoon, the first street lights illuminated the crossroads that is now Linden Boulevard and Farmers Boulevard. New shops clustered around August Everitt's lone store. By July 1, 1898, the St. Albans Long Island Rail Road station opened where the tracks crossed Locust Avenue (now Baisley Boulevard). The station was razed and replaced with the current, grade separated station on October 15, 1935.\nIn 1899, a year after Queens became part of New York City (and with the Town of Jamaica and the Village of Jamaica thereby dissolved), the new post office for the 600 residents\nwas named St. Albans, after St Albans in Hertfordshire, England, which itself was named after a Saint Alban, thought to be the first Christian martyred in England. The name had been in use for the area since at least 1894 for the name of the school district,\nand the LIRR station was named St. Albans when it opened in 1898. A 1909 map also shows a St Albans Avenue and a St Albans Place in the area.\nThe site was originally occupied by the St. Albans Golf Course and Country Club, which was completed in 1915. The club brought rich and famous golfers, including baseball star Babe Ruth, and hosted the 1930 Metropolitan Amateur. The Depression forced the golf course owners to try to sell, but plans for private development fell through. The land was seized by the federal government in 1942,\nand construction soon began on the St. Albans Naval Hospital, which opened in 1943.\nAfter construction was completed in 1950, the hospital had 3000 beds and contained a network of 76 wards. The hospital was turned over to the Veterans Administration in 1974, reopening as a VA hospital two years later, and more recently evolved into the Veterans Administration St. Albans Primary and Extended Care Facility. A portion of the hospital site became Roy Wilkins Park in the 1980s.\nAddisleigh Park subsection.\nWithin St. Albans is the small western enclave of Addisleigh Park, a U.S. historic district that consists of single-family homes built in a variety of styles between the 1910s and 1930s. Though originally intended as a segregated community for white people only, from the late 1930s many notable African Americans have lived there. Today, it remains a predominantly African American and Jamaican enclave that is more upscale than surrounding areas in southeast Queens.\nBetween 1900 and 1940, the village of Addisleigh Park was developed by a handful of eminent white entrepreneurs including Edwin H. Brown, Gerald C. English, and Alexander Rodman. Restrictive covenants were established to prohibit the sale of any of its properties to blacks. A 1926 \"New York Times\" article insists, \"Addisleigh, together with the St. Albans Golf Club, was laid out under the personal direction of Edwin H. Brown, and carries a land and house restriction of the highest type.\" Two lawsuits were filed successfully by white residents who accused their neighbors of breaking the contractual segregation imposed on the neighborhood by its developers. Simeon Bankoff, executive director of the New York Historic Districts Council, says about this backlash, \"It was unpleasant, as it was a case of a number of narrow-minded neighbors trying to fight what they saw as an invasion of unwanted people in their area.\" Affluent white New York City-based public figures moved into Addisleigh Park to experience the privacy of suburban seclusion. Addisleigh Park boasted well-kept rows of Tudor and Colonial homes. The neighborhood's close proximity to Manhattan allowed for quick and frequent commuting. During the Swing Era, Manhattan's 52nd Street served as the epicenter of Swing Era live entertainment and musical innovation. For this reason, many successful African American jazz musicians began to recognize Addisleigh Park as the newest suburban haven for wealthy, influential artists.\nIn 1948, in \"Shelley v. Kraemer,\" the United States Supreme Court ruled that racially restrictive covenants violated the equal-protection clause of the 14th Amendment, though by that year, Addisleigh Park had already become a haven for world-famous African Americans in jazz and sports. The neighborhood was declared a historic district by the NYC Landmarks Preservation Commission in 2011.\nDemographics.\nBased on data from the 2010 United States census, the population of St. Albans was 48,593, a change of \u22121,453 (\u22123%) from the 50,046 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of .\nThe racial makeup of the neighborhood was 1% (469) White, 88.6% (43,073) African American, 0.3% (129) Native American, 0.9% (417) Asian, 0% (16) Pacific Islander, 0.5% (258) from other races, and 2.2% (1,085) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.5% (3,146) of the population.\nThe entirety of Community Board 12, which mainly comprises Jamaica but also includes St. Albans and Hollis, had 232,911 inhabitants as of NYC Health's 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 80.5 years. This is slightly lower than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. Most inhabitants are youth and middle-aged adults: 22% are between the ages of between 0\u201317, 27% between 25 and 44, and 27% between 45 and 64. The ratio of college-aged and elderly residents was lower, at 10% and 14% respectively.\nAs of 2017, the median household income in Community Board 12 was $61,670. In 2018, an estimated 20% of St. Albans and Jamaica residents lived in poverty, compared to 19% in all of Queens and 20% in all of New York City. One in eight residents (12%) were unemployed, compared to 8% in Queens and 9% in New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 56% in St. Albans and Jamaica, higher than the boroughwide and citywide rates of 53% and 51% respectively. Based on this calculation, as of 2018[ [update]], St. Albans and Jamaica are considered to be high-income relative to the rest of the city and not gentrifying.\nHousing.\nSt. Albans housing consists mostly of detached, one and two-family homes. Linden Boulevard is the major shopping street. In 2011 \"The New York Times\" reported that many foreclosures were occurring and there was a high level of unemployment. At that time, many black people were moving from St. Albans to the Southern United States.\nPolice and crime.\nSouth Jamaica and St. Albans are patrolled by the NYPD's 113th Precinct, located at 167-02 Baisley Boulevard. The 113th Precinct ranked 55th safest out of 69 patrol areas for per-capita crime in 2010. But the precinct crime rate is much lower than in 1990, all categories having decreased by 86.1% between 1990 and 2018. The precinct reported 5 murders, 28 rapes, 156 robberies, 383 felony assaults, 153 burglaries, 414 grand larcenies, and 138 grand larcenies auto in 2018.\nFire safety.\nSt. Albans is served by two New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire stations:\nHealth.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], preterm births and births to teenage mothers are more common in St. Albans and Jamaica than in other places citywide. In St. Albans and Jamaica, there were 10 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 21.4 births to teenage mothers per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide). St. Albans and Jamaica have a low population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 5%, lower than the citywide rate of 12%.\nThe concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in St. Albans and Jamaica is , less than the city average. Eight percent of St. Albans and Jamaica residents are smokers, which is lower than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In St. Albans and Jamaica, 30% of residents are obese, 16% are diabetic, and 37% have high blood pressure\u2014compared to the citywide averages of 22%, 8%, and 23% respectively. In addition, 23% of children are obese, compared to the citywide average of 20%.\nEighty-six percent of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is slightly less than the city's average of 87%. In 2018, 82% of residents described their health as \"good\", \"very good\", or \"excellent\", higher than the city's average of 78%. For every supermarket in St. Albans and Jamaica, there are 20 bodegas.\nThe nearest major hospitals are Jamaica Hospital and Queens Hospital Center, both located in Jamaica.\nPost offices and ZIP Code.\nSt. Albans is covered by the ZIP Code 11412. The United States Post Office operates two post offices nearby: the Saint Albans Station at 195-04 Linden Boulevard and the Rochdale Village Station at 165-100 Baisley Boulevard.\nParks and recreation.\nThere are several public parks in St. Albans, operated by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.\nSt. Albans Park is bounded by Merrick Boulevard, Sayres Avenue, and Marne Place. It includes facilities for cricket, handball, and tennis, as well as fitness equipment, playground, and spray showers. The land was acquired by the city for use as a park in 1914, and it was slightly expanded in 1968.\nRoy Wilkins Park is located between 115th Avenue and Merrick and Baisley Boulevards. It contains facilities for baseball, basketball, cricket, handball, swimming, tennis, and track-and-field, as well as a recreation center, fitness equipment, playground, and spray showers. The land, formerly a naval hospital, was given to the city in 1977. It is named for civil rights activist Roy Wilkins.\nRailroad Park, a nature area, is located on a triangular plot bounded by 129th Avenue, 176th Street, and the Long Island Rail Road's Atlantic Branch. The land for this park was acquired in 1962\u20131963.\nDaniel M. O'Connell Playground is located between Murdock Avenue, 112th Road, and 197th and 198th Street. It contains basketball and handball courts, fitness equipment, a play area, and spray showers. The playground is named for World War I veteran Daniel M. O'Connell.\nLiberty Rock is a boulder in Liberty Triangle park at the intersection of Farmers Blvd. and Liberty Ave.\nThe Liberty Rock is a symbol of the history and culture of the African American community in St. Albans. The painting of the rock in red, black, and green, the colors of the Pan-African flag, represents the community's commitment to civil rights, group identity, and fostering ties between all people of African descent. The location of the rock, at the intersection of St. Albans and Hollis neighborhoods in Jamaica, highlights its significance as a shared symbol for the entire community. The Liberty Rock serves as a symbol of resistance and resilience, reminding the community of its rich cultural heritage and ongoing struggle for equality and justice.\nEducation.\nSt. Albans and Jamaica generally have a lower rate of college-educated residents than the rest of the city as of 2018[ [update]]. While 29% of residents age 25 and older have a college education or higher, 19% have less than a high school education and 51% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 39% of Queens residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of St. Albans and Jamaica students excelling in math rose from 36% in 2000 to 55% in 2011, and reading achievement increased slightly from 44% to 45% during the same time period.\nSt. Albans and Jamaica's rate of elementary school student absenteeism is more than the rest of New York City. In St. Albans and Jamaica, 22% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, higher than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 74% of high school students in St. Albans and Jamaica graduate on time, about the same as the citywide average of 75%.\nSchools.\nPublic.\nPublic schools are operated by the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE). St. Albans contains the following public elementary schools which serve grades PK-5 unless otherwise indicated:\nThe following public middle schools serve grades 6\u20138:\nEagle Academy for Young Men III, a combined public middle and high school, serves grades 6\u201312.\nPrivate and charter.\nThere are three charter schools:\nPrivate schools include:\nLibrary.\nThe Queens Public Library operates the St.Albans branch at 191-05 Linden Boulevard.\nTransportation.\nNumerous MTA bus lines run through the neighborhood, including the , and all of which connect to the New York City Subway and the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) at Jamaica Center and Jamaica, respectively. The LIRR's St. Albans station serves the neighborhood.\nNotable people.\nSt. Albans was home to many artists of the jazz, hip hop, and rap music genres. The following notable people are known to have lived in the area:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJazz legacy.\nFamous stride pianist Fats Waller was the first well-known musician to move into Addisleigh Park at the peak of his career in the late 1930s. Waller had grown up in the Church (his father was a pastor). He subsequently had his home in Addisleigh Park fashioned with a built-in Hammond organ. He died in 1943 from bronchial pneumonia.\nIn 1937, jazz pianist and bandleader Count Basie moved his orchestra from Kansas City to New York. Count Basie's orchestra performed at world-famous Manhattan venues including the Roseland Ballroom, the Savoy Ballroom, and the Woodside Hotel. In 1946, Basie and his wife, Katy, bought a home in Addisleigh Park, where the couple lived until 1973 when it was sold to bandleader/singer/pianist, Robert (Bubber) Johnson.\nSinger, film actress, and Civil Rights Activist Lena Horne also moved into the Addisleigh Park neighborhood in the year 1946.\nSoon after Horne, jazz trumpeter and bandleader Mercer Ellington, son of jazz great Duke Ellington, moved into Addisleigh Park in 1948. Eight years earlier, he had worked for renowned jazz trumpeter Cootie Williams as his road manager. Cootie Williams bought a home in Addisleigh Park in 1947. While residing in Addisleigh Park, Mercer Ellington employed Dizzy Gillespie, Kenny Dorham, and Charles Mingus. Throughout the 1940s, Mercer and his father, Duke Ellington, frequently borrowed musicians from one another's ensembles.\nSaxophonist Earl Bostic moved to Addisleigh Park in 1948, the same year Bostic's sextet hit success with their first single \"Temptation\". Bostic was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma. In the early 1930s, he played with Midwestern territory bands before moving to New York City in 1938 to play with Don Redman. Bostic's second hit, \"Flamingo\", was produced in 1951, while he was still living in Addisleigh Park. In 1956, Bostic and his wife left Addisleigh Park to settle in Los Angeles. Earl Bostic died onstage from a heart attack in Rochester, New York, in 1965.\nBostic's neighbors on Murdock Avenue were Ella Fitzgerald and her then-husband, famous bassist and cellist Ray Brown. Fitzgerald owned her Addisleigh Park home from 1949 until 1956. During the late 1930s and early 1940s, Fitzgerald had become one of the most recognizable names of wide-release swing music in the United States. She met Brown in 1946 while on tour with Dizzy Gillespie's band. The couple divorced in 1952. Between the years 1949 and 1956, Fitzgerald sang scat with various bebop bands. She was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George H. W. Bush in 1992.\nVicksburg, Mississippi, native and famous jazz bassist Milt Hinton moved into Addisleigh Park in 1950. In his younger years, he had lived and worked in Chicago alongside celebrated jazz musicians Art Tatum and Eddie South. He moved to New York City for a job in Cab Calloway's orchestra in 1936. Hinton bought a home on 113th Avenue in Addisleigh Park in 1950. He lived in the neighborhood until his death in 2000.\nSaxophonist John Coltrane bought a home on Mexico Street in Addisleigh Park in the year 1959. Coltrane had just met tremendous critical success after his collaborations with Thelonious Monk and Miles Davis. In January 1960, Coltrane released \"Giant Steps\", his first album with Atlantic Records. \"Giant Steps\" is considered to be the album that catapulted Coltrane into jazz legend.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64264", "revid": "117878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64264", "title": "Sanford", "text": "Sanford may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64265", "revid": "32589078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64265", "title": "Saratoga", "text": "Saratoga may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64266", "revid": "1181129404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64266", "title": "Seabrook", "text": "Seabrook may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople with the surname Seabrook.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64267", "revid": "6675779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64267", "title": "Shirley", "text": "Shirley may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64269", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64269", "title": "Bristol Aeroplane Company", "text": "1910\u20131959 UK aerospace manufacturer\nThe Bristol Aeroplane Company, originally the British and Colonial Aeroplane Company, was both one of the first and one of the most important British aviation companies, designing and manufacturing both airframes and aircraft engines. Notable aircraft produced by the company include the 'Boxkite', the Bristol Fighter, the Bulldog, the Blenheim, the Beaufighter, and the Britannia, and much of the preliminary work which led to Concorde was carried out by the company. In 1956 its major operations were split into Bristol Aircraft and Bristol Aero Engines. In 1959, Bristol Aircraft merged with several major British aircraft companies to form the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC) and Bristol Aero Engines merged with Armstrong Siddeley to form Bristol Siddeley.\nBAC went on to become a founding component of the nationalised British Aerospace, now BAE Systems. Bristol Siddeley was purchased by Rolls-Royce in 1966, who continued to develop and market Bristol-designed engines. The BAC works were in Filton, about north of Bristol city centre. BAE Systems, Airbus, Rolls-Royce, MBDA and GKN still have a presence at the Filton site where the Bristol Aeroplane Company was located.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nThe British and Colonial Aeroplane Company, Ltd was founded in February 1910 by Sir George White, chairman of the Bristol Tramways and Carriage Company, along with his son Stanley and his brother Samuel, to commercially exploit the fast-growing aviation sector. Sir George met with the American aviation pioneer Wilbur Wright in France in 1909 by chance, during which he became aware of aviation's business potential.\nUnlike many aviation companies of the era, which were started by enthusiasts with little financial backing, British and Colonial was well funded from its outset. Sir George chose to establish a separate company from the Bristol Tramway Company, as the venture might be seen as too risky by many shareholders, and the new company's working capital of \u00a325,000 was subscribed entirely by Sir George, his brother, and his son. The affairs of the two companies were closely connected, and the company's first premises were a pair of former tram sheds used for aircraft manufacture at Filton leased from the Bristol Tramway Company. Additionally, key personnel for the new business were recruited from the Bristol Tramway Company, including the chief engineer and works manager, George Challenger.\nFlying schools were established at Brooklands, Surrey, which was then the centre of activity for British aviation, where Bristol rented a hangar; and at Larkhill on Salisbury Plain where, in June 1910, a school was established on of land leased from the War Office. By 1914 308 of the 664 Royal Aero Club certificates issued had been earned at the company's schools.\nThe Bristol Boxkite.\nThe company's initial manufacturing venture was to be a licensed and improved version of an aircraft manufactured in France by soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Zodiac, a biplane designed by Gabriel Voisin. This aircraft had been exhibited at the Paris Aero Salon in 1909 and Sir George had been impressed by the quality of its construction. Accordingly, a single example was purchased and shipped to England to be shown at the Aero Show at Olympia in March 1910, and construction of five more begun at the company's Filton works. It was then transported to Brooklands for flight trials, where it immediately became apparent that the type had an unsatisfactory wing-section and lacked sufficient power; even though Bristol fitted the aircraft with a new set of wings, it only achieved a single brief hop on 28 May 1910, after which work on the type was abandoned. Since the machine had been sold with a 'guarantee to fly', Sir George succeeded in getting 15,000 francs compensation from Zodiac.\nAfter this failure, the company decided to embark upon designing its own aircraft to serve as a successor. Drawings were prepared by George Challenger for an aircraft based on a successful design by Henri Farman whose dimensions had been published in the aeronautical press. These drawings were produced in little over a week, and Sir George promptly authorised the construction of twenty examples. The first aircraft to be completed was taken to Larkhill for flight trials, where it performed its first flight on 20 July 1910, piloted by Maurice Edmonds. The aircraft proved entirely satisfactory during flight tests.\nThe first batch equipped the two training schools, as well as serving as demonstration machines; the aircraft, which gained the nickname of the Boxkite, went on to become a commercial success, a total of 76 being constructed. Many served in the company's flying schools and examples were sold to the War Office as well as a number of foreign governments.\n1911\u20131914.\nAlthough satisfactory by the standards of the day, the Boxkite was not capable of much further development and work soon was started on two new designs, a small tractor configuration biplane and a monoplane. Both of these were exhibited at the 1911 Aero Show at Olympia but neither was flown successfully. At this time, both Challenger and Low left the company to join the newly established aircraft division of the armament firm Vickers. Their place was taken by Pierre Prier, the former chief instructor at the Bl\u00e9riot flying school at Hendon: he was later joined by Gordon England. In January 1912 Romanian aircraft engineer Henri Coand\u0103 was appointed as the company's chief designer.\nDuring early 1912 a highly secret separate design office, known as the \"X-Department\", was set up to work on Dennistoun Burney's ideas for naval aircraft. Frank Barnwell was taken on as the design engineer for this project, and took over as Bristol's chief designer when Coand\u0103 left the company in October 1914. Barnwell went on to become one of the world's foremost aeronautical engineers, and worked for the company until his death in 1938.\nThe company expanded rapidly, establishing a second factory at the Brislington tramway works; the firm employed a total of 200 people by the outbreak of the First World War.\nFirst World War.\nAt the outbreak of war in August 1914, Britain's military forces possessed just over a hundred aircraft and the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) consisted of only seven squadrons equipped with a miscellany of aircraft types, none of them armed. Official War Office policy was to purchase only aircraft designed by the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), and Bristol had already built a number of their B.E.2 two-seater reconnaissance aircraft. However, pressure from the pilots of the RFC and Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) led to orders being placed for a new aircraft manufactured by Bristol, known as the Scout.\nIn 1915, Barnwell returned from France, his skills as pilot being considered to be of much less value than his ability as a designer. At this time Leslie Frise, newly graduated from Bristol University's engineering department, was recruited by Barnwell. In 1916, the company's founder Sir George died; he was succeeded in managing the company by his son Stanley.\nThe first project that was worked on by Barnwell after his return, the Bristol T.T.A., was designed in response to a War Office requirement for a two-seat fighter intended to conduct home defence operations against Zeppelin raids. This was not successful but, in 1916, work was started on the Bristol F.2A, which was developed into the highly successful F.2B Fighter, one of the outstanding aircraft of the 1914\u201318 war and a mainstay of the RAF during the 1920s. More than 5,300 of the type were produced and the Fighter remained in service until 1931.\nAnother aircraft designed at this time was the Bristol Monoplane Scout. Although popular with pilots, the success of this aircraft was limited by War Office prejudice against monoplanes and only 130 were built. It was considered that its relatively high landing speed of 50\u00a0mph made it unsuitable for use under the field conditions of the Western Front, and the type's active service was limited to the Near East.\nInter-war years.\nBy the end of the war, the company employed over 3,000 at its production works, which were split between Filton and Brislington. Its products had always been referred to by the name 'Bristol' and this was formalized in 1920, when British and Colonial was liquidated and its assets transferred to the Bristol Aeroplane Company, Ltd. During this time the company, acting under pressure from the Air Ministry, bought the aero-engine division of the bankrupt Cosmos Engineering Company, based in the Bristol suburb of Fishponds, to form the nucleus of a new aero-engine operation.\nThere was already a good working relationship between Bristol Aircraft and Cosmos, the Cosmos Jupiter having been first flown in a prototype Bristol Badger in May 1919. For \u00a315,000 Bristol got the Cosmos design team, headed by Roy Fedden, along with a small number of completed engines and tooling. Although it was to be several years before Bristol showed any profit from the aero engine division, the Jupiter engine eventually proved enormously successful; indeed, during the inter-war period, the aero-engine division was more successful than the parent company and Bristol came to dominate the market for air-cooled radial engines. Apart from providing engines for almost all Bristol's aircraft designs, the Jupiter and its successors powered an enormous number of aircraft built by other manufacturers.\nBristol's most successful aircraft during this period was the Bristol Bulldog fighter, which formed the mainstay of Royal Air Force (RAF) fighter force between 1930 and 1937, when the Bulldog was retired from front line service. Since the Bulldog had started life as a private venture rather than an Air Ministry-sponsored prototype it could be sold to other countries, and Bulldogs were exported to, among others, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, and Australia.\nDuring this time, Bristol was noted for its preference for steel airframes, using members built up from high-tensile steel strip rolled into flanged sections rather than the light alloys more generally used in aircraft construction. On 15 June 1935, the Bristol Aeroplane Company became a public limited company. By this time, the company had a payroll of 4,200, mostly in the engine factory, and was well positioned to take advantage of the huge re-armament ordered by the British Government in May of that year. Bristol's most important contribution to the expansion of the RAF at this time was the Blenheim light bomber.\nIn August 1938, Frank Barnwell was killed flying a light aircraft of his own design; Barnwell was succeeded as Bristol's Chief Designer by Leslie Frise. By the time war broke out in 1939, the Bristol works at Filton were the largest single aircraft manufacturing unit in the world, with a floor area of nearly 25 hectares (2,691,000 square feet).\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, Bristol's most important aircraft was the Beaufighter heavy two-seat multirole aircraft, a long-range fighter, night fighter, ground attack aircraft and torpedo bomber. The type was used extensively by the RAF, other Empire air forces and by the USAAF. The Beaufighter was derived from the Beaufort torpedo bomber, itself a derivative of the Blenheim.\nIn 1940, shadow factories were set up at Weston-super-Mare for the production of Beaufighters, and underground at Hawthorn, near Corsham, Wiltshire, for engine manufacture. Construction in the former stone quarry at Hawthorn took longer than expected and little production was achieved before the site closed in 1945. The company's war-time headquarters was located in the Royal West of England Academy, Clifton, Bristol.\nPost-war.\nWhen the war ended, Bristol set up a separate helicopter division in the Weston-super-Mare factory, under helicopter pioneer Raoul Hafner. This facility was taken over by Westland in 1960.\nOther post-war projects included Bristol Cars, which used pre-war BMW designs as the basis for the Bristol 400. Vehicle production was conducted at Patchway, Bristol.\nThe engine developed for the Bristol 400 found its way into many successful motor cars manufactured by other companies, such as Cooper, Frazer Nash and AC and, in 1954 and 1955, powered the Bristol 450 sports prototype to class victories in the 24 Hours of Le Mans race. In 1953, S.H. Arnolt, a US car dealer who sold British sports cars, commissioned the Bristol Car Division to build a sports car for the US market, called the Arnolt-Bristol. It is estimated that about 177 were built before production ceased in 1958.\nIn 1960, Sir George White was instrumental in preventing the car division being lost during the wider company's merger with BAC. Accordingly, Bristol Cars Limited was formed, and remained within the Filton complex. Sir George retired in 1973 and Tony Crook purchased his share, becoming sole proprietor and managing director. Pre-fabricated buildings, marine craft and plastic and composite materials were also amongst the company's early post-war activities; these side-ventures were independently sold off.\nBristol was involved in the post-war renaissance of British civilian aircraft, which was largely inspired by the Brabazon Committee report of 1943\u20135. In 1949, the Brabazon airliner prototype, at the time one of the largest aircraft in the world, first flew. This project was deemed to be a step in the wrong direction, gaining little interest from military or civilian operators, resulting in the Brabazon being ultimately cancelled in 1953. At the same time as the termination, Bristol decided to focus on development of a large turboprop-powered airliner, known as the Britannia. Capable of traversing transatlantic routes, it proved a commercial success; both it and the Freighter were produced in quantity during the 1950s. However, sales of the Britannia were poor and only 82 were built, primarily due to its protracted development; having been ordered by BOAC on 28 July 1949 and first flown on 16 August 1952, it did not enter service until 1 February 1957. Bristol was also involved in helicopter development, with the Belvedere and Sycamore going into quantity production.\nAnother post-war activity was missile development, culminating in the production of the Bloodhound anti-aircraft missile. Upon introduction, the Bloodhound was the RAF's only long range transportable surface-to-air missile. Bristol Aero Engines produced a range of rocket motors and ramjets for missile propulsion. The guided weapons division eventually became part of MBDA.\nIn the late 1950s, the company undertook supersonic transport (SST) project studies, the Type 223, which were later to contribute to Concorde. A research aircraft, the Type 188, was constructed in the 1950s to test the feasibility of stainless steel as a material in a Mach 2.0 airframe. By the time the aircraft flew in 1962, the company was already part of BAC.\nIn parallel with these supersonic studies, several subsonic designs were schemed in this period, including the Type 200 (a competitor of the Hawker Siddeley Trident) and its derivatives, the Type 201 and Type 205. None of these designs were built.\nMerger into BAC.\nIn 1959, Bristol was forced by Government policy to merge its aircraft interests with English Electric, Hunting Aircraft, and Vickers-Armstrongs to form the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC). Bristol formed a holding company which held a 20 per cent share of BAC, while English Electric and Vickers held 40 per cent each.\nIn 1966, the Bristol holding company which held 20 per cent of BAC and 50 per cent of Bristol Siddeley engines was acquired by Rolls-Royce. Bristol also had the following holdings and subsidiary companies at this time:- Bristol Aerojet (50 per cent) \u2013 Bristol Aeroplane Co Australia \u2013 Bristol DE Mexico SA (78 per cent) \u2013 Motores Bristol De Cuba SA \u2013 Bristol Aeroplane Co of Canada \u2013 Bristol Aero Industries Ltd \u2013 Bristol Aeroplane Co USA \u2013 Spartan Air Services Ltd (46.5 per cent) \u2013 Bristol Aeroplane Co New Zealand \u2013 Bristol Aircraft Services Ltd \u2013 Bristol Aeroplane Plastics Ltd \u2013 SECA (30 per cent) \u2013 Short Bros &amp; Harland (15.25 per cent) \u2013 SVENSK-ENGELSK Aero Service AB \u2013 TABSA (25 per cent) \u2013 Westland Aircraft Ltd (10 per cent).\nThe Bristol Aeroplane Company of Canada.\nThe Canadian Bristol group of companies was the largest of the overseas subsidiaries. The group undertook aircraft handling and servicing at Dorval Airport, Montreal. Vancouver Airport was the base for Bristol Aero Engines (Western), Ltd., one of the Canadian company's four operating subsidiaries. Work at Vancouver included the overhaul of Pratt and Whitney and Wright engines for the R.C.A.F. and commercial operators. Bristol Aircraft (Western), Ltd (Stevenson Field, Winnipeg) was formerly MacDonald Brothers Aircraft, and was the largest of the subsidiaries and the group's only airframe plant. Bristol de Mexico, S.A. de CV. (Central Airport, Mexico City), overhauled piston engines for South American operators. Bristol de Mexico S.A. obtained a license to manufacture Alfred Herbert Ltd machine tools in 1963 and commenced assembling their centre lathes in 1963. They also commenced building their own design of small engine lathes for the Mexican Government to be installed in training schools throughout Mexico. Malcolm Roebuck was hired from Alfred Herbert Ltd along with William Walford Webb Woodward to supervise this project.\nNationalisation.\nIn 1977, BAC was nationalised, along with Scottish Aviation and Hawker Siddeley, to form British Aerospace (BAe), which later became part of the now-privatised BAE Systems. The Canadian unit was acquired by Rolls-Royce Holdings and sold in 1997 to current owner Magellan Aerospace.\nArchives.\nA small number of records from the early history of this company are held within the papers of Sir George White at Bristol Archives (Ref. 35810/GW/T) (http://). Other records at Bristol Record Office include the papers of Lionel Harris, an engineer at the Bristol Aeroplane Company in the 1940s (Ref. 42794) (http://)\nBristol Engine Company.\nThe Bristol Engine Company was originally a separate entity, Cosmos Engineering, formed from the pre-First World War automobile company Brazil-Straker. In 1917, Cosmos was asked to investigate air-cooled radial engines and, under Roy Fedden, produced what became the Cosmos Mercury, a 14-cylinder two-row (helical) radial, which they launched in 1918. This engine saw little use but the simpler nine-cylinder version known as the Bristol Jupiter was clearly a winning design.\nWith the post-war rapid contraction of military orders, Cosmos Engineering went bankrupt and the Air Ministry let it be known that it would be a good idea if the Bristol Aeroplane Company purchased it. The Jupiter competed with the Armstrong Siddeley Jaguar through the 1920s but Bristol put more effort into their design and, by 1929, the Jupiter was clearly superior. In the 1930s, and led by Roy Fedden, the company developed the new Bristol Perseus line of radials based on the sleeve valve principle, which developed into some of the most powerful piston engines in the world and continued to be sold into the 1960s.\nIn 1956, the division was renamed Bristol Aero Engines and then merged with Armstrong Siddeley in 1958 to form Bristol Siddeley as a counterpart of the airframe-producing company mergers that formed BAC. Bristol retained a 50% share of the new company, with Hawker Siddeley group holding the other 50%. In 1966, Bristol Siddeley was purchased by Rolls-Royce, leaving the latter as the only major aero-engine company in Britain. From 1967, Bristol Siddeley's operations became the \"Bristol Engine Division\" and the \"Small Engine Division\" of Rolls-Royce, identified separately from Rolls-Royce's existing \"Aero Engine Division\". A number of Bristol Siddeley engines continued to be developed under Rolls-Royce including the Olympus turbojet \u2013 including the joint development Bristol started with Snecma for Concorde \u2013 and the Pegasus. The astronomical names favoured by Bristol indicated their heritage in a Rolls-Royce lineup named after British rivers.\nHelicopter Division.\nThe Bristol Aeroplane Company's Helicopter Division had its roots in 1944, when the helicopter designer Raoul Hafner, released from the Airborne Forces Experimental Establishment (AFEE), came to Bristol along with some members of his team. Under Hafner's direction, the division produced two successful designs that were sold in quantity. The first, designated the Type 171, had a shaky start after the wooden rotor blades of the second prototype failed on its first flight in 1949. Nevertheless, the Type 171, called Sycamore in military service, was sold to air forces around the world and 178 were built in total.\nAfter the Type 171, the Bristol Helicopter Division started work on a tandem rotor civil helicopter. The result was the 13-seat Type 173, which made its first flight in Filton in 1952. Five examples were built for evaluation purposes. Although no airlines ordered the Type 173, it led to military designs, of which the Type 192 went into service with the RAF as the Belvedere. First flying in 1958, 26 were built in total.\nPursuing the idea of a civil tandem rotor helicopter, Hafner and his team developed a much larger design, the Type 194. This was in an advanced state of design when the Bristol Helicopter Division was merged, as a result of government influence, with the helicopter interests of other British aircraft manufacturers (Westland, Fairey and Saunders-Roe) to form Westland Helicopters in 1960. When the competing Westland Westminster was cancelled, the management of the combined company allowed development of the Type 194 to continue, but it too failed to find a market.\nThe Helicopter Division started out at the main Bristol Aeroplane Company site in Filton, but from 1955 it was moved to the Oldmixon factory in Weston-Super-Mare, which had built Blenheims during the War. The factory is now the site of The Helicopter Museum.\nProducts.\nBristol did not systematically assign project type numbers until 1923, starting with the Type 90 Berkeley. In that year, they also retrospectively assigned type numbers in chronological order to all projects, built or not, from August 1914 onwards. Thus the Scouts A and B did not get a type number but the Scout C did and was the Type 1. The final Bristol project, numbered Type 225, was an unbuilt 1962 STOL transport. Of these 225 Types, 117 were built. This list does not include the unbuilt \"paper aeroplanes\"; it does include the pre-August 1914 aircraft.\nAircraft.\nInter-war.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEngines.\nBristol Engine designs include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Ramjet types:\"\nMissiles and rockets.\nBristol missile designs include:\nAircraft turrets.\nBristol began producing gun turrets with its Bristol Type 120 submission for an Air Ministry specification. The turret was a glazed cupola over a Scarff ring mounted Lewis light machine gun. Although it had to be rotated manually, it provided protection from the slipstream for the air gunner. and similar turrets were fitted to the Bristol Bombay.\nThe first powered turrets by Bristol used hydraulics. In the B.II nose turret and B.III tail turret, a Vickers K machine gun mounted in a narrow horizontal strip was linked to gunsight. A ram rotated the strip and hence the gun horizontally, the glazing remaining stationary.\nThe Bristol Type B.1 was more typical of later gun turret designs; the gun elevating through a slot in the glazing which rotated. The Type B.1 had two distinct features; the cupola could be lowered reducing drag and, though the single gun was centrally aligned, the gun cradle could be pivoted independently of the turret. The latter meant that the turret could be turned with sufficient offset that the gunner could fire along the side of the rudder and engage targets directly astern. The Type B.1 was fitted to Bristol Blenheim and Beaufort, and to the Avro Anson and Fairey Battle (with two Browning machine guns) when they were used as gunnery trainers.\nThe Type B.IV was a lightweight (66 kg) turret designed specifically for the Beaufort mid-upper position with one (B.IV Mk 1) or two (B.IV Mk 1E) Vickers K machine guns\nType X was a two 0.303-in Browning machine gun turret for the Blenheim Mk V.to replace the earlier design.\nThe Type B.11 was a four gun turret developed in 1940. It was intended for a dorsal position on a Beaufighter but the design was not put into position though it was also considered for the Douglas Boston and de Havilland Mosquito too.\nThe Type B.12 was another four gun dorsal turret, this time designed for the Bristol Buckingham. A particular requirement was that when not in use, crew could pass through the turret space to reach the bombardier position. It was successfully tested then redesigned to take two 0.5-inch Browning heavy machine guns as the Mark II variant. The Mark IV had two 0.303 guns. \nThe B.12 \"Mark III\" was a test of using electrical rather than hydraulic system to operate the turret; the system proved effective was adopted on the later B.16, B.17, B.18 and B.30 turrets.\nA second turret was developed for the Buckingham to cover the rear below the aircraft. It was mounted at the back of the gondola type bomb aimer position under the fuselage and fitted with two Browning machine guns.\nThe \"B.14\" designation was used for a four gun remote controlled nose mounting rather than a turret. Another design intended for the Buckingham it was included on the pre-production mockup but not developed further.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64270", "revid": "48593038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64270", "title": "Rally", "text": "Rally or rallye may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64271", "revid": "29750937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64271", "title": "Union City", "text": "Union City may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64272", "revid": "1246266721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64272", "title": "Welch", "text": "Welch, Welch's, Welchs or Welches may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64273", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64273", "title": "Sparks", "text": "Sparks may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64276", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64276", "title": "Maggie Simpson", "text": "Fictional character from The Simpsons franchise\nMargaret Lenny \"Maggie\" Simpson\nis a character in the animated television series \"The Simpsons\" and the youngest member of the Simpson family. She first appeared on television in the \"Tracey Ullman Show\" short \"Good Night\" on April 19, 1987. Maggie was created and designed by cartoonist Matt Groening while he was waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks' office. She is also known as the \u201cbaby\u201d of the Simpson family. She received her first name from Groening's youngest sister. After appearing on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" for three years, the Simpson family was given their own series on the Fox Broadcasting Company, which debuted on December 17, 1989.\nMaggie is the youngest child of Homer and Marge, and the younger sister to Bart and Lisa. She is often seen sucking on her red pacifier and, when she walks, she trips over her clothing and falls on her face (this running gag is used much more in earlier seasons). Being an infant, she has not yet learned how to talk. However, she did appear to talk in the first \"Tracey Ullman Show\" short.\nThough she rarely talks, she frequently makes a characteristic sucking noise with her pacifier, which has become synonymous with the character. Her pacifier sucking noises are provided by the show's creator, Matt Groening, and early producer G\u00e1bor Csup\u00f3. Maggie's occasional speaking parts and other vocalizations are currently provided by Nancy Cartwright, but she has also been voiced by guest stars Carol Kane, James Earl Jones, Elizabeth Taylor and Jodie Foster, and by series regulars Yeardley Smith and Harry Shearer. Maggie has appeared in various media relating to \"The Simpsons,\" including video games, \"The Simpsons Movie\", \"The Simpsons\" Ride, commercials and comic books.\nRole in \"The Simpsons\".\n\"The Simpsons\" uses a floating timeline in which the characters do not physically age (or if they do, then very slowly), and as such the show is assumed to be set in the current year. In several episodes, events have been linked to specific times, though sometimes this timeline has been contradicted in subsequent episodes. Maggie is the youngest child of Marge and Homer, and younger sister to Bart and Lisa. When Marge became pregnant with Bart, she and Homer got married at a chapel in Las Vegas. To support his impending family, Homer all but demanded a job at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant, impressing its owner, Mr. Burns with his aggressive submissiveness. When Marge became pregnant with Lisa, two years later, she and Homer bought their first house. Another six years later, Homer felt financially secure enough to finally quit his job at the Power Plant and take his dream job at Barney's Bowlarama. However, Marge became pregnant with Maggie, so Homer, once again unable to support his family, was forced to reapply for his old job. By the time Maggie was born, Homer had shown great signs of distress, but he managed to find motivation in the form of his newborn baby girl.\nDuring the earlier seasons of the show, Maggie's equivalent of a hallmark was to trip over her clothing and fall on her face while trying to walk, causing a loud thud on the floor, but this was toned down in the later seasons. She has a penchant for her pacifier, on which she is always seen sucking.\nMaggie has performed a number of feats that for her age suggest she is highly intelligent, akin to her sister, and possibly a genius. She has spelled out E=MC\u00b2 with her baby blocks, driven Homer's car, escaped from the Springfield daycare center, written her name on an Etch A Sketch, played Internet poker, spelled words with her baby blocks, shot Mr. Burns, played Lisa's saxophone, and treated her pacifier like a cigarette. However, the rest of the Simpsons family are unaware of Maggie's maturity and Marge carries Maggie wherever they go rather than letting her walk by herself. Maggie is keenly aware of her surroundings, and can usually be seen imitating the flow of action around her. She shows a high degree of dexterity, and she once hit Homer on the head with a mallet and shot a dart at a photograph of him in imitation of \"Itchy and Scratchy\". Despite her age, Maggie is a formidable marksman, as seen in \"Who Shot Mr. Burns?\" where she shoots Mr. Burns with a handgun that falls into her hands, though whether or not it was intentional is not clear, and in a deliberate manner during \"Poppa's Got a Brand New Badge\" where she is able to non-fatally shoot a group of mobsters in rapid succession with a rifle that she apparently hides in her crib.\nMaggie is usually frightened and exasperated by Homer's attempts to bond with her, but has on several occasions stepped in to save Homer's life: once from drowning, once from being shot by mobsters, once from being kidnapped by a tow truck driver, and once from being shot by Russ Cargill, head of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.\nHistory.\nCharacter.\nCreation.\nMatt Groening conceived Maggie and the rest of the Simpson family in 1986 in the lobby of James L. Brooks's office. Groening had been called in to pitch a series of animated shorts for \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", and had intended to present an adaptation of his \"Life in Hell\" comic strip. When he realized that animating \"Life in Hell\" would require him to rescind publication rights for his life's work, Groening decided to go in another direction, and hurriedly sketched out his version of a dysfunctional family and named the characters after members of his own family. The baby of the family was named Maggie after Groening's youngest sister. Maggie then made her debut with the rest of the Simpsons family on April 19, 1987, in the short \"Good Night\". In 1989, the shorts were adapted into \"The Simpsons\", a half-hour series that would air on the Fox Broadcasting Company. Maggie and the rest of the family remained the main characters on this new show.\nThe entire Simpson family was designed so that they would be recognizable in silhouette. The family was crudely drawn, because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators, assuming they would clean them up; instead, they just traced over his drawings. Maggie's physical features are generally not used in other characters; for example, in the later seasons, no character other than Lisa shares her hairline. While designing Maggie and Lisa, Groening \"couldn't be bothered to even think about girls' hair styles\". At the time, Groening was primarily drawing in black and white and when designing Lisa and Maggie, he \"just gave them this kind of spiky starfish hair style, not thinking that they would eventually be drawn in color\".\nGroening thought that it would be funny to have a baby character that did not talk and never grew up, but was scripted to show any emotions that the scene required. Maggie's comedic hallmarks include her tendency to stumble and land on her face while attempting to walk, and a penchant for sucking on her pacifier, the sound of which has become the equivalent of her catchphrase and was originally created by Groening during the Tracey Ullman period. In the early seasons of the show, Maggie would suck her pacifier over other characters' dialogue, but this was discontinued because the producers found it too distracting.\nVoice.\nWith few exceptions, Maggie never speaks but participates in the events around her, emoting with subtle gestures and facial expressions. Maggie's first lines were spoken in \"Good Night\", the first short to air on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", after the family falls asleep. On this occasion, Liz Georges provided the voice of Maggie.\nRather than talking, Maggie is well known for producing a characteristic \"sucking\" sound from her pacifier. This sound effect was originally provided by the show's creator Matt Groening, for early episodes of \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", and also by Gabor Csupo (who was also the animation executive producer, for the first 60 episodes). The sucking noise is heard in all of Maggie's appearances to date, and is usually archive audio from either of Groening or Csupo's initial recordings (from the show's early episodes). Other than her sucking noise, Maggie has been known to make other noises, such as occasional squeals and babbling. In most instances, these vocalisations are provided by either Nancy Cartwright or Yeardley Smith.\nAlthough she had previously spoken in fantasies and dream sequences, such as in \"Bart vs. Thanksgiving\", in which she was voiced by an uncredited Carol Kane, Maggie's first word spoken in the normal continuity of the series occurred in \"Lisa's First Word\", when she was voiced by Elizabeth Taylor. Although it was only one word (\"Daddy\"), Taylor had to record the part numerous times before the producers were satisfied. James Earl Jones voiced Maggie in \"Treehouse of Horror V\". Maggie would later have brief dialogue in \"Treehouse of Horror IX\", voiced by Harry Shearer, who used his Kang voice. In earlier episodes, Yeardley Smith did many of Maggie's squeaks, cries, laughs and occasional speaking parts, although in the later seasons her parts are done by Nancy Cartwright (including a single word spoken during the end credits of \"The Simpsons Movie\"). Jodie Foster voiced a Howard Roark-inspired Maggie in the season 20 episode \"Four Great Women and a Manicure\". Amy Sedaris voiced Maggie in the season 36 episode \"Bart's Birthday\", voicing a line that was originally done by Cartwright before being re-cast and re-recorded at the last minute.\nReception.\nMaggie has received both popular and critical acclaim. Nancy Basile at About.com said her favorite Maggie scenes on \"The Simpsons\" are the ones that show her acting more like an adult than a one-year-old. Some of her favorite Maggie scenes include scenes from \"Sweet Seymour Skinner's Baadasssss Song\" and \"Lady Bouvier's Lover\" where Maggie meets her unibrowed archenemy, Baby Gerald, and the one scene from \"\" in which Bart is supposed to babysit Maggie, but she escapes and takes Homer's car for a ride. Basile also added that \"whether watching 'The Happy Elves' or falling down, Maggie is the cutest baby in the Simpson family\". Comedian Ricky Gervais named \"And Maggie Makes Three\" his second favorite episode of the show and said that the scene in the end where Homer puts up pictures of Maggie over his desk gave him \"a lump in the throat thinking about it\". Todd Everett at \"Variety\" called the scene in \"Lisa's First Word\" where Maggie speaks her first word \"quite a heart-melter\".\nIn 2006, Elizabeth Taylor was named thirteenth on \"IGN\"'s \"Top 25 Simpsons Guest Appearances\" list for her performance as Maggie in \"Lisa's First Word\". James Earl Jones, voice of Maggie in \"Treehouse of Horror V\", was named the seventh greatest guest star on the show in the same list. In 2000, Maggie and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.\nMerchandising.\nFour children's books, written by Maggie Groening (after whom Maggie was named) and illustrated by Matt Groening, entitled \"Maggie Simpson's Book of Animals\", \"Maggie Simpson's Counting Book\", \"Maggie Simpson's Book of Colors and Shapes\" and \"Maggie Simpson's Alphabet Book\" were released on September 12, 1991. Other merchandise includes dolls, posters, figurines, jigsaw puzzles, and T-shirts. Maggie was made into an action figure as part of the \"World of Springfield\" toy line, and was released in the wave one playset \"Living Room\", featuring her and Marge in the living room of the Simpsons house. Maggie has appeared in commercials for Burger King, Butterfinger, C.C. Lemon, Domino's Pizza, Ramada Inn and Subway.\nMaggie has appeared in other media relating to \"The Simpsons\". She is a character in every one of \"The Simpsons\" video games, including the most recent, \"The Simpsons Game\". Alongside the television series, Maggie regularly appeared in issues of Simpsons comics, which were published from 1993 until 2018. Maggie also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride, launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood. On April 9, 2009, the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44-cent stamps featuring Maggie and the four other members of the Simpson family. They are the first characters from a television series to receive this recognition while the show is still in production. The stamps, designed by Matt Groening, were made available for purchase on May 7, 2009. In a USPS poll, Maggie's stamp was voted the most popular of the five.\n\"Maggie Simpson in\u2026\".\n\"Maggie Simpson in\u2026\" is a series of animated short-films. It currently consists of four films. The movies put Maggie at the center of the story, unlike most episodes of the show itself. All the films retain the theme of the first film \u2013 Maggie's journey to day care (or in the case of \"Playdate with Destiny\", the playground).\nMaggie starred in the 3D short-film \"The Longest Daycare\", which was shown in theaters before \"\" in 2012.\nMaggie also starred in the 3D short-film \"Playdate with Destiny\", which was shown in theaters before \"Onward\" in 2020.\nIn 2021, a short film called \"The Force Awakens from Its Nap\" was released to celebrate \"Star Wars\" Day.\nTwo years later (in 2023), another short film celebrating \"Star Wars\" was released, titled \"Rogue Not Quite One.\" And again later in 2024 with \"May the 12th Be with You.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64277", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64277", "title": "Lisa Simpson", "text": "Fictional character from The Simpsons franchise\nLisa Marie Simpson is one of the main characters in the animated television sitcom series \"The Simpsons\". She is the middle child of the Simpson family. Voiced by Yeardley Smith, Lisa was born as a character in \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" short \"Good Night\" on April 19, 1987. Cartoonist Matt Groening created and designed her while waiting to meet James L. Brooks. Groening had been invited to pitch a series of shorts based on his comic \"Life in Hell\", but instead decided to create a new set of characters. He named the older Simpson daughter after his younger sister Lisa Groening Bartlett. After appearing on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" for three years, the Simpson family were moved to their own series on Fox, which debuted on December 17, 1989. Lisa has appeared in every episode of \"The Simpsons\" except for \"Carl Carlson Rides Again\".\nIntelligent, kind, and passionate about the planet and all living things, Lisa Simpson is the second child of Homer and Marge. She is the younger sister of Bart, and the older sister of Maggie. At age 8, Lisa's high intellect and left-wing political stance creates a barrier between her and other children her age. She is a loner and a social outcast. Lisa is a vegan, a bibliophile, a strong environmentalist, a feminist, and a Buddhist. Lisa's character develops many times over the course of the show: she becomes a vegetarian in season 7, converts to Buddhism in season 13, and becomes a vegan in season 32. A strong liberal and activist for peace, equality, and the environment, Lisa advocates for a variety of political causes (e.g. standing against apartheid in South Africa and supporting the Tibetan independence movement) which sets her against most of the people in Springfield. However, she can also be somewhat intolerant of opinions that differ from her own, often refusing to consider alternative perspectives and showing a feeling of self-righteousness. In her free time, Lisa enjoys many hobbies such as reading and playing the baritone saxophone. She has appeared in other media relating to \"The Simpsons\"\u2014including video games, \"The Simpsons Movie\", The Simpsons Ride, commercials and comic books\u2014and inspired a line of merchandise.\nYeardley Smith originally tried out for the role of Bart, while Nancy Cartwright (who was later cast as the voice for Bart) tried out for Lisa. Producers considered Smith's voice too high for a boy, so she was given the role of Lisa. In the \"Tracey Ullman Show\" shorts, Lisa was something of a \"female Bart\" who mirrored her brother's mischief, but as the series progressed she became a liberal voice of reason which has drawn both praise and criticism from fans of the show. Because of her unusual pointed hairstyle, many animators consider Lisa the most difficult \"Simpsons\" character to draw.\n\"TV Guide\" ranked her 11th (tied with Bart) on their list of the \"Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time\". Her environmentalism has been especially well-received; several episodes featuring her have won Genesis and Environmental Media Awards, including a special \"board of directors Ongoing Commitment Award\" in 2001. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals included Lisa on their list of the \"Most Animal-Friendly TV Characters of All Time\". Yeardley Smith won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance in 1992 and Lisa and her family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2000.\nRole in \"The Simpsons\".\n\"The Simpsons\" uses a floating timeline in which the characters do not physically age. The show itself is perpetually set in the year of broadcast (except for occasional flashbacks and flashforwards). In several episodes, events have been linked to specific time periods, although this timeline has been contradicted in subsequent episodes. Lisa's year of birth is given in \"Lisa's First Word\" (season 4, 1992) as 1984, during the Summer Olympics. The episode \"That '90s Show\" (season 19, 2008), however, contradicts much of the established backstory; for example, it presents Homer and Marge as being childless in the late 1990s. Despite this, Lisa is portrayed as being 8 years old. Lisa is a lover of music, with jazz as her favorite genre; she specifically singles out Miles Davis's 1957 album \"Birth of the Cool\" as her favorite album. She enjoys and excels at playing the saxophone and became friends with jazz musician Bleeding Gums Murphy, whom she regards as an idol. Murphy helps pull Lisa out of her depression in \"Moaning Lisa\" (season 1, 1990). She is later deeply saddened by Murphy's death in \"'Round Springfield\" (season 6, 1995).\nAt age 8, Lisa's high intellect and left-wing political stance creates a barrier between her and other children her age. She is a loner and a social outcast. Lisa is a vegan, a bibliophile, a strong environmentalist, a feminist, and a Buddhist. Lisa's character develops many times over the course of the show: she becomes a vegetarian in season 7, converts to Buddhism in season 13, and becomes a vegan in season 32. A strong liberal and activist for peace, equality, and the environment, Lisa advocates for a variety of political causes (e.g. standing against apartheid in South Africa and supporting the Tibetan independence movement) which sets her against most of the people in Springfield. However, she can also be somewhat intolerant of opinions that differ from her own, often refusing to consider alternative perspectives and showing a feeling of self-righteousness. In her free time, Lisa enjoys many hobbies such as reading and playing the baritone saxophone.\nLisa has had a few brief relationships with boys, including Ralph Wiggum in \"I Love Lisa\" (season 4, 1993), Nelson Muntz in \"Lisa's Date with Density\" (season 8, 1996) and Colin in \"The Simpsons Movie\" (2007). Bart's best friend Milhouse Van Houten has a crush on her, but despite dropping unsubtle hints about his feelings, he has been unsuccessful in winning her affection. Her voice actor Yeardley Smith said Muntz would make a good match for Lisa. In 2019, \"Simpsons\" showrunner Al Jean said he saw Lisa as being \"possibly polyamorous\" in the future. In the Season 23 episode \"Holidays of Future Passed\" Lisa is shown holding hands with an unnamed dark-haired woman in a photo, and then shown in a second photo where she is holding hands with two different women at once, suggesting polyamory; she later ends up with Milhouse. However, this episode is non-canon.\nAt age 8, Lisa's high intellect and left-wing political stance creates a barrier between her and other children her age. She is a loner and a social outcast. Lisa is a vegan, a bibliophile, a strong environmentalist, a feminist, and a Buddhist.\nLisa is the most intellectual member of the Simpson family (she has an IQ of 159), and many episodes of the series focus on her fighting for various causes. Lisa is often the focus of episodes with \"a real moral or philosophical point\", which according to former writer David S. Cohen is because \"you really buy her as caring about it.\" Lisa's political convictions are generally left-wing and liberal and she often contests other's views. She is a vegetarian, feminist, environmentalist and a supporter of gay rights, universal healthcare, and the Free Tibet movement. In a special Christmas message for the UK in 2004 Lisa showed her support for Cornish nationalism, even speaking the Cornish language to get her message across. While supportive of the general ideals of the Christian church in which she was raised, Lisa became a practicing Buddhist in the episode \"She of Little Faith\" (season 13, 2001) after she learned about the Noble Eightfold Path.\nCharacter.\nCreation.\nMatt Groening conceived Lisa and the rest of the Simpson family in 1986 in the lobby of producer James L. Brooks's office. Groening had been called in to pitch a series of animated shorts for \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" and had intended to present an adaptation of his \"Life in Hell\" comic strip. When he realized that animating \"Life in Hell\" would require him to rescind publication rights, Groening went in another direction, hurriedly sketching his version of a dysfunctional family, named after members of his own family. Lisa was named after Groening's younger sister, but little else was based on her. In \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" shorts, Lisa displayed none of the intelligence for which she later became known. She was more of a \"female Bart\" and was originally described as simply the \"middle child\", without much personality.\nLisa made her brief debut with the rest of the Simpson family on April 19, 1987, in \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" short \"Good Night\". On December 17, 1989, the shorts were adapted into \"The Simpsons\", a half-hour series on the Fox Broadcasting Company.\nDesign.\nThe entire Simpson family was designed to be easily recognized in silhouette. The family was crudely drawn, because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators, assuming they would clean them up; instead, they just traced over his drawings. Lisa's physical features are generally unique. In some early episodes, minor background characters occasionally had a similar hairline. However, in the later seasons, no character other than Maggie shares her hairline. While designing Lisa, Groening \"couldn't be bothered to even think about girls' hairstyles\". At the time, Groening was primarily drawing in black and white; when designing Lisa and Maggie, he \"just gave them this kind of spiky starfish hair style, not thinking that they would eventually be drawn in color\".\nTo draw Lisa's head and hair, most of the show's animators use what they call the \"three-three-two arrangement\". It begins with a circle, with two curving lines (one vertical, one horizontal) intersecting in the middle to indicate her eyeline. The vertical line continues outside of the circle to create one hair point, with two more added towards the back of her head. Three more points are then added in front (in the direction Lisa is facing), with two more behind it. Several \"Simpsons\" animators, including Pete Michels and David Silverman, consider Lisa the most difficult \"Simpsons\" character to draw. Silverman explains that \"her head is so abstract\" due to her hairstyle.\nVoice.\nWhile the roles of Homer and Marge were given to Dan Castellaneta and Julie Kavner because they were already a part of the \"Tracey Ullman Show\" cast, the producers decided to hold casting for the roles of Bart and Lisa. Nancy Cartwright intended to audition for the role of Lisa, but disliked the character's bland description\u2014Lisa was described simply as the \"middle child\"\u2014and read for the role of Bart instead. Casting director Bonita Pietila brought Yeardley Smith in for an audition after seeing her performing in the play \"Living on Salvation Street\". Smith was hesitant to audition for an animated series, but her agent had persuaded her to give it a try. Smith originally auditioned for the role of Bart but Pietila believed her voice was too high. Smith later recalled: \"I always sounded too much like a girl, I read two lines as Bart and they said, 'Thanks for coming!'\" Pietila offered Smith the role of Lisa instead.\nSmith and the show's writers worked to give Lisa a more defined personality, and she has developed greatly during the series. In her 2000 memoir \"My Life as a 10-Year-Old Boy\", Cartwright wrote: \"with the brilliant wit of the writers and the wry, in-your-eye, honest-to-a-fault interpretation, Yeardley Smith has made Lisa a bright light of leadership, full of compassion and competence beyond her years. Lisa Simpson is the kind of child we not only want our children to be but also the kind of child we want \"all\" children to be. But, at the time, on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", she was just an animated eight-year-old kid who had no personality.\"\nLisa is the only regular character voiced by Smith, who raises the pitch of her voice slightly for the role. In some earlier episodes she provided some of Maggie's squeaks and occasional speaking parts, and has voiced other characters on very rare occasions. Usually they are derivative of Lisa, such as Lisa Bella in \"Last Tap Dance in Springfield\" (season 11, 2000) and Lisa, Jr. in \". (season 11, 2000)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt's a happy fluke. When she was cast back in 1987, I just liked the sound of her voice. She's also a great actress. In general, people who make their living doing voices on cartoons aren't always great for us. Most cartoons want things peppy and cartoony. Yeardley can go through moments of great emotion and wring it for all she's worth.\n\u2014Matt Groening on Smith's vocal style\nDespite Lisa's fame, Smith is rarely recognized in public, which she does not mind. She said, \"it's wonderful to be in the midst of all this hype about the show, and people enjoying the show so much, and to be totally a fly on the wall; people never recognize me solely from my voice.\" In a 2009 interview with \"The Guardian\" she commented that \"It's the best job ever. I have nothing but gratitude for the amount of freedom \"The Simpsons\" has bought me in my life.\" Although Smith received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance in 1992, she considers it unimportant, saying \"there's part of me that feels it wasn't even a real Emmy.\" The award is a Creative Arts prize not awarded during the primetime telecast and, at the time, a juried award without nominations. Still, Smith considers her work on the show a success. \"If I had to be associated with one character in fiction,\" she said, \"I will always be thrilled that it was Lisa Simpson.\" Matt Groening has described Smith as being very similar to Lisa: \"Yeardley has strong moral views about her character. Some lines are written for Lisa that Yeardley reads and says, 'No, I wouldn't say that.'\" Former \"Simpsons\" writer Jay Kogen praised her performance on the show, particularly in the episode \"Lisa's Substitute\", as able \"to move past comedy to something really strong and serious and dramatic.\"\nUntil 1998, Smith was paid $30,000 per episode. A pay dispute erupted in 1998, during which Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors, going as far as preparing for casting of new voices. The dispute was soon resolved, and Smith received $125,000 per episode until 2004 when the voice actors sought an increase to $360,000 per episode. The issue was resolved a month later, and Smith earned $250,000 per episode. New salary negotiations took place in 2008, and the voice actors currently receive approximately $400,000 per episode. Three years later, with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut, Smith and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut, down to just over $300,000 per episode.\nDevelopment.\nIn \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" shorts, Lisa was something of a \"female Bart\": equally mischievous but lacking unique traits. As the series progressed, Lisa began to develop into a more intelligent and more emotional character. She demonstrates her intellect in the 1990 episode \"Krusty Gets Busted\" (season one), by helping Bart reveal Sideshow Bob's plot to frame Krusty the Clown for armed robbery. Many episodes focusing on Lisa have an emotional nature, such as \"Moaning Lisa\" (season one, 1990). The idea for the episode was pitched by James L. Brooks, who wanted to do an emotional episode involving Lisa's sadness, to complement the many \"jokey episodes\" in the first season.\nIn the seventh-season episode \"Lisa the Vegetarian\" (1995), Lisa permanently becomes a vegetarian, distinguishing her as one of the first primetime television characters to make such a choice. The episode was written by David S. Cohen (in his first solo writing credit), who jotted down the idea one day while eating lunch. Then-executive producer David Mirkin, who had recently become a vegetarian himself, quickly approved the idea. Several of Lisa's experiences in the episode are based on Mirkin's own experiences. The episode guest stars musician Paul McCartney, a committed vegetarian and animal rights activist. McCartney's condition for appearing was that Lisa would remain a vegetarian and would not revert the next week (as is common on situation comedies). The trait stayed and is one of the few permanent character changes made in the show. In the season 13 episode \"She of Little Faith\" (2001), Lisa underwent another permanent character change when she converted to Buddhism.\nLisa plays the baritone saxophone, and some episodes use that as a plot device. According to Matt Groening, the baritone saxophone was chosen because he found the thought of an eight-year-old girl playing it amusing. He added, \"But she doesn't always play a baritone sax because the animators don't know what it looks like, so it changes shape and color from show to show.\" One of the hallmarks of the show's opening sequence is a brief solo Lisa plays on her saxophone after being thrown out of music class. \"The Simpsons\" composer Alf Clausen said that the session musicians who perform her solos do not try to play at the second-grade level and instead \"think of Lisa as a really good player.\" Lisa is also a skilled multi-instrumentalist. In addition to the saxophone, she can also play guitar (as shown in \"Last Exit to Springfield\"), bass guitar (as shown in \"Whacking Day\"), and piano (as shown in \"Miracle on Evergreen Terrace\").\nPersonality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[Lisa is] a good soul. I love that she is so compassionate. She is wise beyond her years. She has remarkable optimism, despite the fact that she's disappointed so often.\n\u2014Yeardley Smith\nLisa, despite being a child prodigy, often sees herself as a misfit within the Simpson family and other children due to possessing an unusually high level of intelligence. She shows characteristics rarely seen in Springfield, including spirituality and commitment to peaceful ways, and is notably more concerned with world affairs than her life in Springfield, with her rebellion against social norms being depicted as constructive and heroic, yet she can be self-righteous at times. In \"Lisa the Vegetarian\", an increasing sense of moral righteousness leads her to disrupt her father's roast-pig barbecue, an act for which she later apologizes. Like most children her age, she thinks in images rather than words. Episodes often take shots at Lisa's idealism. In \"Bart Star\" (season nine, 1997), Lisa, who is departing from her typically more genuine nature and apparently looking for a new cause to crusade over, defiantly declares that she, a girl, would like to join the football team. In the 1990s, it was considered odd to allow a girl to play football. However, when coach Ned Flanders reveals that several girls already play for the team, she hesitates and claims football is \"not really [her] thing\". She then expresses distaste about a ball made of pig's skin, but one of the girls informs her that their footballs are synthetic and that proceeds are donated to Amnesty International. Upset by being unable to gain moral superiority, Lisa runs off.\nLisa is said to have an IQ of 159, and in \"They Saved Lisa's Brain\" (season ten, 1999) she becomes a member of the Springfield chapter of Mensa. Even prior to becoming a Buddhist, Lisa at times is seen meditating. When unable to attend school due to a teachers' strike in \"The PTA Disbands\" (season six, 1995), she suffers withdrawal symptoms because of the sudden lack of praise. She even demands that her mother grade her for no obvious reason. In \"Planet Simpson\", Chris Turner writes that these traits make Lisa more realistic because \"No character can aspire to realism without a few all-too-human flaws.\"\nAlthough she is wise beyond her years, Lisa has typical childhood issues, sometimes requiring adult intervention. One episode to show this is \"See Homer Run\" (season seventeen, 2005) where she goes through a developmental condition which causes her to get into trouble at school. In \"Lost Our Lisa\" (season nine, 1998), she tricks Homer into allowing her to ride the bus alone, only to become hopelessly lost and in need of aid from her father. Chris Turner writes in \"Planet Simpson\" that incidents like this illustrate that \"Even when Lisa's lecturing like a college professor or mounting yet another protest, she never becomes a full-grown adult trapped in a child's body.\" In \"\", Aeon J. Skoble states that although Lisa is an intellectual, she is still portrayed as a character who enjoys normal childhood and girl activities, plays with Malibu Stacy dolls, loves ponies, obsesses over teenage heartthrobs such as Corey, and watches \"The Itchy &amp; Scratchy Show\" along with Bart. He writes, \"One might argue that this is typical childhood behavior, but since in so many cases Lisa is presented not simply as a prodigy but as preternaturally wise, the fondness for \"Itchy &amp; Scratchy\" and Corey seem to be highlighted, taking on greater significance. Lisa is portrayed as the avatar of logic and wisdom, but then she also worships Corey so she's 'no better [than the rest of us]'.\" Lisa occasionally worries that her family's dull habits will rub off on her, such as in \"Lisa the Simpson\" (season nine, 1998) she worries that the \"Simpson gene\" will make her a dimwit later finding out the gene only goes through the male side.\nShe is also concerned that Maggie may grow up to be like the rest of the family and tries to teach her complex ideas. Chris Turner writes in \"Planet Simpson\" that \"Lisa embarks on quests to find solace for her yearning spirit ... but the most reliable source of truth she finds is the one she always believed in: her family. It is from the other Simpsons that Lisa draws stability, meaning, contentment.\" Her loyalty to her family is most clearly seen in the flashforward \"Lisa's Wedding\" (season six, 1995), in which she must reconcile her love for them with the distaste of her cultured fianc\u00e9. In the episode \"Mother Simpson\" (season seven, 1995) she meets her paternal grandmother Mona Simpson for the first time. Mona is also well-read and articulate, and the writers used the character as a way to explain the origins of Lisa's intelligence.\nSexuality.\nLisa's sexuality has become the subject of speculation amongst viewers of the show. Lisa is shown to have heterosexual crushes on Nelson Muntz and Langdon Alger in \"Lisa's Date with Density\" and \"Bart on the Road\" respectively. In some episodes Lisa is shown to have a boyfriend, such as Edmund Dracula in \"Treehouse of Horror XXI\" or Colin in \"The Simpsons Movie\". Lisa becomes engaged to, and later almost marries, Hugh Parkfield in \"Lisa's Wedding\" and the episode \"Holidays of Future Passed\" suggests that Lisa will go on to marry Milhouse Van Houten. However, \"Holidays of Future Passed\" also show Lisa being in both a monogamous, and later polyamorous, lesbian relationships.\nAlthough Lisa's sexuality has never been confirmed on screen, showrunner Al Jean said in a 2019 interview with \"The Metro\" that he had always envisaged for Lisa to grow up to become polyamorous. In a 2020 interview with the \"Stryker &amp; Klein show\" on KROQ Radio, Yeardley Smith said that she believed that Lisa was \"still exploring her sexuality\". Smith also asked fans to stop speculating on Lisa's sexuality, as she was \"ultimately an eight-year old girl\".\nReception.\nCommendations.\nLisa has been a popular character since the show's inception. She was listed at number 11 (tied with Bart) in \"TV Guide's\" \"Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time.\" She appeared in Comcast's list of TV's Most Intriguing Characters and was also included in AfterEllen.com's Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters. On a less positive note, she was ranked third in AskMen's top 10 of the most irritating '90s cartoon characters. Yeardley Smith has won several awards for voicing Lisa, including a Primetime Emmy Award for \"Outstanding Voice-Over Performance\" in 1992 for \"Lisa the Greek\". Various episodes in which Lisa stars have won Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program, including \"Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment\" in 1991, \"Lisa's Wedding\" in 1995 and \"HOMR\" in 2001. In 2000, Lisa and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.\nLisa's environmentalism has been especially well received. In 2001, Lisa received a special \"board of directors Ongoing Commitment Award\" at the Environmental Media Awards. \"Lisa the Vegetarian\" won both an Environmental Media Award for \"Best Television Episodic Comedy\" and a Genesis Award for \"Best Television Comedy Series, Ongoing Commitment\". Several other episodes that feature Lisa speaking out in favor of animal rights have won Genesis Awards, including \"Whacking Day\" in 1994, \"Bart Gets an Elephant\" in 1995, \"Million Dollar Abie\" in 2007 and \"Apocalypse Cow\" in 2009.\nCultural influence.\nJonathan Gray, author of the book \"Watching The Simpsons\", feels that Lisa \"is probably the best and certainly longest-running feminist character that television has had. She's the heart of the show and she quite often questions gender politics.\" Christopher Borrelli of \"The Toledo Blade\" wrote, \"Has there ever been a female TV character as complex, intelligent, and, ahem, as emotionally well-drawn as Lisa Simpson? Meet her once and she comes off priggish and one-note\u00a0\u2013 a know-it-all. Get to know her and Lisa is as well-rounded as anyone you may ever meet in the real world.\"\nAccording to PETA, Lisa was one of the first vegetarian characters on primetime television. In 2004 the organization included Lisa on its list of the \"Most Animal-Friendly TV Characters of All Time\". In 2008, environmentalist website The Daily Green honored Lisa's role in \"The Simpsons Movie\" with one of its inaugural \"Heart of Green\" awards, which \"recognize those who have helped green go mainstream.\" They wrote \"young Lisa Simpson has inspired a generation to wear their hearts on their sleeves and get educated, and involved, about global issues, from justice to feminism and the environment.\" Japanese broadcasters reversed viewer dislike of the series by focusing marketing of the show on Lisa. Lisa's well-intended but ill-fated struggles to be a voice of reason and a force of good in her family and community struck a chord with Japanese audiences. Mario D'Amato, a specialist in Buddhist studies at Rollins College in Florida, described Lisa as \"open-minded, reflective, ethical, and interested in improving herself in various ways, while still preserving a childlike sense of innocence. These are all excellent qualities, ones which are espoused by many Buddhist traditions.\"\nLisa and the rest of the Simpsons have had a significant influence on English-language idioms. The dismissive term \"meh\"\u2014used by Lisa and popularized by the show\u2014 entered the \"Collins English Dictionary\" in 2008. In 1996, \"The New York Times\" published an article saying that Lisa was inspiring children, especially young girls, to learn to play the saxophone.\nLisa Simpson was mentioned at the 2018 Conservative Political Action Conference when Senator Ted Cruz called the Democratic Party \"The Party of Lisa Simpson\", as opposed to the Republican Party being the party of several other family members.\nMerchandising.\nLisa has been included in many \"The Simpsons\" publications, toys, and other merchandise. \"The Lisa Book\", describing Lisa's personality and attributes, was released in 2006. Other merchandise includes dolls, posters, figurines, bobblehead dolls, mugs, and clothing such as slippers, T-shirts, baseball caps, and boxer shorts. Lisa has appeared in commercials for Burger King, C.C. Lemon, Church's Chicken, Domino's Pizza, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Ramada Inn, Ritz Crackers, Subway and Butterfinger.\nOn April 9, 2009, the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44-cent stamps featuring Lisa and the four other members of the nuclear Simpson family. They are the first characters from a television series to receive this recognition while still in production. The stamps, designed by Matt Groening, went on sale in May 2009.\nLisa has also appeared in other media relating to \"The Simpsons\". She has appeared in each \"Simpsons\" video game, including \"The Simpsons Game\", released in 2007. In addition to the television series, Lisa regularly appeared in issues of \"Simpsons Comics\", which were published from 1993 until 2018. The comics focus on the sweeter, more na\u00efve incarnation from the early seasons. Lisa also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride, launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "64279", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64279", "title": "Mona (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64280", "revid": "44612220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64280", "title": "Redding", "text": "Redding may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople.\nSee: Redding (surname)\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64282", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64282", "title": "Carl (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64283", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64283", "title": "New Castle", "text": ""}
{"id": "64284", "revid": "7007500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64284", "title": "Snowball (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64285", "revid": "7057734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64285", "title": "Snowball II", "text": ""}
{"id": "64286", "revid": "1272355307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64286", "title": "Jasper (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64290", "revid": "255060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64290", "title": "National League (baseball)", "text": "League within Major League Baseball\nThe National League of Professional Baseball Clubs, known simply as the National League (NL), is the older of two leagues constituting Major League Baseball (MLB) in the United States and Canada, and the world's oldest extant professional team sports league. Founded on February 2, 1876, to replace the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (NAPBBP) of 1871\u20131875 (often called simply the \"National Association\"), the NL is sometimes called the Senior Circuit, in contrast to MLB's other league, the American League, which was founded 25 years later and is called the \"Junior Circuit\". Each league has 15 teams.\nThe National League survived competition from various other professional baseball leagues during the late 19th century. Most did not last for more than a few seasons, with a handful of teams joining the NL once their leagues folded. The American League declared itself a second major league in 1901, and the AL and NL engaged in a \"baseball war\" during 1901 and 1902 before agreeing to a \"peace pact\" that recognized each other as legitimate \"major leagues\". As part of this agreement, the leagues agreed to respect player contracts, establish rules about relationships with minor league clubs, and allow their champions to meet in a \"World Series\" to decide the overall professional baseball championship. National League teams have won 53 of the 121 World Series championships contested from 1903 to 2025.\nFor decades, Major League baseball clubs only played teams from their own league during the regular season and most of the playoffs, with only their champions facing off in the World Series. This separation gradually caused the leagues to develop slightly different strategies and styles of play. The National League was long considered the more \"traditional\" league, a reputation most exemplified by the NL's more prevalent use of \"smallball\" tactics and lack of a designated hitter rule, which the AL implemented in 1973. However, with the advent of free agency in the 1970s allowing for more player movement between leagues, and the introduction of regular season interleague play in 1997, the difference in play between the two major leagues has diminished considerably. The NL's adoption of the designated hitter rule in , and the expansion of interleague play to 46 games beginning in , has further blurred the lines between leagues.\nThough both leagues agreed to be jointly governed by a commissioner in 1920, they remained separate legal and business entities with their own president and management. This was the case until after the 1999 season, when the National League legally merged with the American League under the auspices of Major League Baseball, which has since operated much like other North American professional sports leagues, albeit with two \"leagues\" instead of \"conferences\".\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nBy 1875, the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (NAPBBP, often referred to as the \"National Association\"), founded four years earlier, was suffering from a lack of strong authority over clubs, unsupervised scheduling, unstable membership of cities, dominance by one team (the Boston Red Stockings), and an extremely low entry fee ($10) that gave clubs no incentive to abide by league rules when it was inconvenient to them.\nWilliam A. Hulbert (1832\u20131882), a Chicago businessman and an officer of the Chicago White Stockings of 1870\u20131889, approached several NA clubs with the plans for a professional league for the sport of baseball with a stronger central authority and exclusive territories in larger cities only. Additionally, Hulbert had a problem: five of his star players were threatened with expulsion from the NAPBBP because Hulbert had signed them to his club using what were considered questionable means. Hulbert had a great vested interest in creating his own league, and after recruiting St. Louis privately, four western clubs met in Louisville, Kentucky, in January 1876. With Hulbert speaking for the five later in New York City on February 2, 1876, the National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs was established with eight charter members, as follows:\nThe National League's formation meant the end of the old National Association after only five seasons, as its remaining clubs shut down or reverted to amateur or minor league status. The only strong club from 1875 excluded in 1876 was a second one in Philadelphia, often called the White Stockings or later Phillies.\nThe first game in National League history was played on April 22, 1876, at Philadelphia's Jefferson Street Grounds, at 25th &amp; Jefferson Streets, between the Philadelphia Athletics and the Boston baseball club. Boston won the game 6\u20135.\nThe new league's authority was soon tested after the first season. The Athletic and Mutual clubs fell behind in the standings and refused to make western road trips late in the season, preferring to play games against local non-league competition to recoup some of their financial losses rather than travel extensively incurring more costs. Hulbert reacted to the clubs' defiance by expelling them, an act which not only shocked baseball followers and the sports world (since New York and Philadelphia were the two most populous cities in the league), but made it clear to clubs that league scheduling commitments, a cornerstone of competitive integrity, were not to be ignored.\nThe National League operated with only six clubs during 1877 and 1878. Over the next several years, various teams joined and left the struggling league. By 1880, six of the eight charter members had folded. The two remaining original NL franchises, Boston and Chicago, remain still in operation today as the Atlanta Braves and the Chicago Cubs. When all eight participants for 1881 returned for 1882\u2014the first off-season without turnover in membership\u2014the \"circuit\" consisted of a zig-zag line connecting the eight cities: Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, Troy (near the state capital of Albany, New York), Worcester (Massachusetts), Boston, and Providence.\nIn 1883, new New York and Philadelphia clubs began National League play. Both teams remain in the NL today, the Phillies in their original city and the New York franchise (later named Giants) now in San Francisco since 1958.\nCompetition with other leagues.\nThe NL encountered its first strong rival organization when the American Association began play in 1882. The AA played in cities where the NL did not have teams, offered Sunday games and alcoholic beverages in locales where permitted, and sold cheaper tickets everywhere (25 cents versus the NL's standard 50 cents, a hefty sum for many in 1882). The NL struck back by establishing new clubs in 1883 in AA cities Philadelphia (later called \"Phillies\") and New York (the team that would become the Giants).\nThe National League and the American Association participated in a version of the World Series seven times during their ten-year coexistence. These contests were less organized than the modern Series, lasting as few as three games and as many as fifteen, with two Series (1885 and 1890) ending in disputed ties. The NL won four times and the AA only once, in 1886.\nStarting with the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1887, the National League began to raid the American Association for franchises to replace NL teams that folded. This undercut the stability of the AA.\nOther new leagues that rose to compete with the National League were the Union Association and the Players' League. The Union Association was established in 1884 and folded after playing only one season, its league champion St. Louis Maroons joining the NL. The Players' League was established in 1890 by the Brotherhood of Professional Base-Ball Players, the sport's first players' union, which had failed to persuade the NL to modify its labor practices, including a salary cap and a reserve clause that bound players to their teams indefinitely. The NL suffered many defections of star players to the Players' League, but the P.L. collapsed after one season. The Brooklyn, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and New York franchises of the NL absorbed their Players' League counterparts.\nExpansion (1887\u20131899).\nThe labor strike of 1890 hastened the downfall of the American Association. After the 1891 season, the AA disbanded and merged with the NL, which became known legally for the next decade as the \"National League and American Association\". The teams now known as the Cincinnati Reds, Los Angeles Dodgers (originally Brooklyn) and Pittsburgh Pirates (as well as the now-defunct Cleveland Spiders) had already switched from the AA to the NL prior to 1892. With the merger, the NL absorbed the St. Louis Browns (now known as the St. Louis Cardinals), along with three other teams that did not survive into the 20th century\u2014the Baltimore Orioles (not the current MLB team), Louisville Colonels, and Washington Statesmen.\nWhile four teams that moved from the AA remain in the NL today (Pittsburgh [1887], Cincinnati [1890], Los Angeles [originally Brooklyn; 1890], and St. Louis [1892]), only two original NL franchises (1876) remain in the league: the Chicago Cubs and the Atlanta Braves (originally in Boston, and later Milwaukee). The Cubs are the only charter member to play continuously in the same city. The other two pre-1892 teams still in the league are the Philadelphia Phillies and the San Francisco Giants (originally New York), both of which joined in 1883.\nThe National League became a 12-team circuit with monopoly status for the rest of the decade. The league became embroiled in numerous internal conflicts, not the least of which was a plan supported by some owners (and bitterly opposed by others) to form a \"trust\", wherein there would be one common ownership of all twelve teams. The NL used its monopsony power to force a $2,400 ($ today) limit on annual player wages in 1894.\nAs the 20th century dawned, the NL was in trouble. Conduct among players was poor, and fistfights were a common sight at games. In addition to fighting each other, they fought with the umpires and often filled the air at games with foul language and obscenities. A game between the Orioles and Boston Beaneaters (a precursor to today's Atlanta Braves) in 1894 ended up having tragic consequences when players became engaged in a brawl and several boys in the stands of the South End Grounds started a fire. The blaze quickly got out of hand and swept through downtown Boston, destroying or damaging 100 buildings. Team owners argued with each other, and players hated the NL's $2,400 salary cap. Many teams also ran into trouble with city governments that forbade recreational activities on Sunday.\nBilly Sunday, a prominent outfielder in the 1880s, became so disgusted with the behavior of teammates that he quit playing in 1891 to become one of America's most famous evangelical Christian preachers. Most fans appear to have felt the same way, because attendance at games was plummeting by 1900.\nPartnership with the American League.\nAfter eight seasons as a 12-team league, the NL contracted back to eight teams for the 1900 season, eliminating its teams in Baltimore, Cleveland, Louisville (which has never had another major league team since), and Washington. This provided an opportunity for competition. Three of those cities received franchises in the newly christened American League (AL) when the minor Western League changed its name to the AL in 1900, with the approval of the NL, which regarded the AL as a lesser league since they were a party to the National Agreement. The AL declined to renew its National Agreement membership when it expired the next year, and on January 28, 1901, the AL officially declared itself a second major league in competition with the NL. By 1903, the upstart AL had placed new teams in the National League cities of Boston, Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, and St. Louis, as well as the \"abandoned\" NL cities Cleveland and Washington (and, temporarily, Baltimore). Only the Cincinnati Reds and Pittsburgh Pirates had no AL team in their markets. The AL among other things enforced a strict conduct policy among its players.\nThe National League at first refused to recognize the new league, but reality set in as talent and money was split between the two leagues, diluting the league and decreasing financial success. After two years of bitter contention, a new version of the National Agreement was signed in 1903. This meant formal acceptance of each league by the other as an equal partner in major-league baseball, mutual respect of player contracts, and an agreement to play a postseason championship\u2014the World Series.\nMajor League Baseball narrowly averted radical reorganization in November 1920. Dissatisfied with American League President and National Baseball Commission head Ban Johnson, NL owners dissolved the league on November 8 during heated talks on MLB reorganization in the wake of the Black Sox Scandal. Simultaneously, three AL teams also hostile to Johnson (Boston Red Sox, Chicago White Sox, and New York Yankees) withdrew from the AL and joined the eight NL teams in forming a new National League; the 12th team would be whichever of the remaining five AL teams loyal to Johnson first chose to join; if none did so an expansion team would have been placed in Detroit, by far the largest one-team city at that time. Four days later, on November 12, both sides met (without Johnson) and agreed to restore the two leagues and replace the ineffective National Commission with a one-man Commissioner in the person of federal Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis.\nThe National League circuit remained unchanged from 1900 through 1952. In 1953 the Braves moved from Boston to Milwaukee; in 1966 they moved again, to Atlanta. In 1958 the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants moved to Los Angeles and San Francisco, respectively, bringing major league baseball to the West Coast of the U.S. for the first time.\nDivisional reorganization.\nThe NL remained an eight-team league for over 60 years. (For the eight teams, see Expansion (1887\u20131899) above, and \"Classic Eight\" below.) In 1962\u2014facing competition from the proposed Continental League and confronted by the American League's unilateral expansion in 1961\u2014the NL expanded by adding the New York Mets and the Houston Colt .45s. The \"Colts\" were renamed the Houston Astros three years later. In 1969, the league added the San Diego Padres and the Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals), becoming a 12-team league for the first time since 1899.\nIn 1969, as a result of its expansion to 12 teams, the National League\u2014which for its first 93 years had competed equally in a single grouping\u2014was reorganized into two divisions of six teams (respectively named the National League East and West, although geographically it was more like North and South), with the division champions meeting in the National League Championship Series (an additional round of postseason competition) for the right to advance to the World Series.\nIn 1993 the league expanded to 14 teams, adding the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins (which became the Miami Marlins shortly after the end of the 2011 season). In 1998, the Arizona Diamondbacks became the league's fifteenth franchise, and the Milwaukee Brewers moved from the AL to the NL, giving the NL 16 teams for the next 15 seasons.\nIn 1994, the league was again reorganized, into three geographical divisions (East, West and Central, all currently with five teams; from 1994 to 1997 the West had one fewer team, and from 1998 to 2012, the Central had one more team). A third postseason round was added at the same time: the three division champions plus a wild card team (the team with the best record among those finishing in second place) now advance to the preliminary National League Division Series. Due to a players' strike, however, the postseason was not actually held in 1994.\nBefore the 1998 season, the American League and the National League each added a fifteenth team. Because of the odd number of teams, only seven games could possibly be scheduled in each league on any given day. Thus, one team in each league would have to be idle on any given day. This would have made it difficult for scheduling, in terms of travel days and the need to end the season before October. In order for MLB officials to continue primarily intraleague play, both leagues would need to carry an even number of teams, so the decision was made to move one club from the AL Central to the NL Central. Eventually, Milwaukee agreed (after Kansas City declined) to change leagues; the National League now had 16 teams, the American League 14 with the switch.\nBeginning with the 2013 season, the Houston Astros moved from the National League Central to the American League West, which now gave both leagues three divisions of five teams each and necessitated interleague play throughout the season.\nDesignated hitter rule.\nOften characterized as being a more \"traditional\" or \"pure\" league, the National League did not adopt the designated hitter rule until the shortened 2020 season. Only the American League previously adopted the rule in 1973. In theory, this meant that the role of the manager was greater in the National League than in the American League, because the NL manager must take offense into account when making pitching substitutions and vice versa. However, this was disputed by some, such as former Detroit Tigers manager Jim Leyland, who claimed that the American League is more difficult because AL managers are required to know exactly when to pull a pitcher, whereas an NL manager merely pulls his pitcher when that spot comes up in the batting order. Overall, there were fewer home runs and runs scored in the National League than in the American, due to the presence of the pitcher in the NL batting order. As the collective bargaining agreement came closer to expiring after the 2021 season, owners expressed their intentions to use the designated hitter in all games starting in 2022. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, rule changes were instituted in both leagues for the 2020 season, which included an abbreviated 60-game schedule, the use of the designated hitter in all games, and expanded rosters.\nThe National League reverted to its old batting rules during the 2021 season, but starting with the 2022 season, they permanently adopted the designated hitter rule after a new CBA was ratified.\nPermanent interleague play.\nFor the first 96 years of its coexistence with the American League, National League teams faced their AL counterparts only in exhibition games, the All-Star Game, or in the World Series. Beginning in 1997, however, interleague games have been played during the regular season and count in the standings. Prior to the early 2020s \u2013 before the universal designated hitter rule was started in both leagues \u2013 as part of the agreement instituting interleague play, the DH rule was used only in games where the American League team was the home team.\nIn 1999, the offices of American League and National League presidents were discontinued and all authority was vested in the Commissioner's office. The leagues subsequently appointed \"honorary\" presidents to carry out ceremonial roles such as the awarding of league championship trophies. Additionally, the distinction between AL and NL umpires was erased, and instead all umpires were unified under MLB control. Following these actions, as well as the institution of interleague play, little besides the DH rule remained to differentiate the two leagues.\nBy 2011, MLB had changed its policy on interleague play, deciding to schedule interleague games throughout the season rather than only during specially designated periods. This policy would allow each league to have 15 teams, with one team in each league playing an interleague game on any given day. As a condition of the sale of the Astros to Jim Crane in November 2011, the team agreed to move to the American League effective with the 2013 season.\nIn 2023, National League teams played 46 regular season interleague games against all 15 American League teams, 23 at home and 23 on the road. In 2025, this will be increased to 48 regular season interleague games, 24 at home and 24 on the road.\nChampions.\nAs of the end of the 2025 season, the Dodgers have won the most NL pennants, with 26. Representing the National League against the American League, the Cardinals have won the most World Series (11), followed by the Dodgers (9), Giants (8), Pirates (5), and Reds (5). St. Louis also holds the distinction of being the only AA club to defeat an NL club in the 19th-century version of the World Series, having done so against their now-division rival Cubs.\nTeams.\nCharter franchises (1876).\nThe eight charter teams were the following:\n Indianapolis Blues, folded after 1878\n Milwaukee Grays, folded after 1878\n Providence Grays, folded after 1885\n Buffalo Bisons, dropped out of the league after 1885\n Forest City of Cleveland, folded after 1884\n Syracuse Stars, folded after 1879\n Troy Trojans, folded after 1882\n Cincinnati Stars, dropped from the National League after the season for refusing to sign a pledge to end beer sales in their park.\n Worcester Ruby Legs, folded after 1882\n Detroit Wolverines, folded after 1888\n New York Gothams (exist today as the San Francisco Giants)\n Philadelphia Quakers (exist today as the Philadelphia Phillies)\n St. Louis Maroons, joined from U.A. Relocated to Indianapolis for 1887 season as the Indianapolis Hoosiers, folded after 1889\n Kansas City Cowboys, folded after 1886\n Washington Nationals, folded after 1889\n Pittsburgh Alleghenys (exist today as the Pittsburgh Pirates), joined from AA\n Cleveland Spiders, joined from AA, folded after 1899\n Cincinnati Reds, joined from AA (exist today)\n Brooklyn Grays (exist today as the Los Angeles Dodgers), joined from AA\n Baltimore Orioles, joined from AA, contracted after 1899\n Louisville Colonels, joined from AA, contracted after 1899\n St. Louis Browns (exist today as the St. Louis Cardinals), joined from AA\n Washington Senators, joined from AA, contracted after 1899\n\"Classic Eight\".\nThe eight-team lineup established in 1900 remained unchanged through 1952. All franchises are still in the league, with five remaining in the same city.\nTimeline.\nThe first line is the formation of the National League (NL) in 1876, and the second is the transformation of the American League (AL) to a major league in 1901, signifying the beginning of modern baseball. The third line is the beginning of the expansion era in 1961. The fourth line marks the legal merger of the American and National Leagues into a single Major League Baseball in 2000.\nWorld Series championships are shown with a \"\u2022\", National League Pennants before the World Series are shown with a \"^\", and American League Pennants who lost the World Series are shown with a \"#\". No World Series was played in 1904, so the pennant winners for each league are indicated. Due to the 1994\u201395 Major League Baseball strike, there were no pennant or World Series winners in 1994, so this year is left blank.\nPresidents.\nHonorary president.\nFollowing the 1999 season, the American and National Leagues were merged with Major League Baseball, and the leagues ceased to exist as business entities. The role of the league president was eliminated. In 2001, Bill Giles, son of Warren Giles, was named honorary president of the NL. Honorary presidents perform only ceremonial duties such as presenting league championship trophies and representing their respective leagues at All-Star Games.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64291", "revid": "51050526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64291", "title": "Lenny (film)", "text": "1974 American biographical drama film by Bob Fosse\nLenny is a 1974 American biographical drama film about the comedian Lenny Bruce, starring Dustin Hoffman and directed by Bob Fosse. The screenplay by Julian Barry is based on his play of the same name.\nPlot.\nThe film jumps between various sections of Lenny Bruce's life, including scenes of when he was in his prime, and the burned-out, strung-out performer who, in the twilight of his life, used his nightclub act to pour out his personal frustrations. Up-and-coming Bruce courts his \"Shiksa goddess\", a stripper named Honey. With family responsibilities, Lenny is encouraged to do a \"safe\" act, but he cannot do it. Constantly in trouble for flouting obscenity laws, Lenny develops a near-messianic complex that fuels both his comedy genius and his talent for self-destruction. Worn out by a lifetime of tilting at establishment windmills, Lenny Bruce dies of a morphine overdose in 1966.\nProduction.\nThe part of Honey Bruce was originally offered to Lynda Day George, who turned it down because she was uncomfortable with the nudity and harsh subject matter.\nRelease.\n\"Lenny\" opened at Cinema I in New York City on November 10, 1974, and grossed a house record $14,981 in its first day.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 88% based on 32 reviews. The critical consensus reads: \"Dustin Hoffman inhabits Lenny Bruce with nervy energy in Bob Fosse's richly stylized telling of the pioneering comedian's career and downfall.\" On Metacritic, it has a score of 61 out of 100, based on 9 critic reviews, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews.\nPauline Kael for \"The New Yorker\" wrote that the film was \"for audiences who want to believe that Lenny Bruce was a saintly gadfly who was martyred for having lived before their time\" and mentions it's \"well made\" but complains that it takes itself so \"insufferably seriously.\" Kae finishes with the acknowledgement that the movie is \"black and white earnest\" and that the \"youth-culture saintliness laid on Lenny Bruce are the ultimate in modern showbiz sentimentality.\" \nOne of the less enthusiastic reviews came from Roger Ebert, stating, \"Unless we go in convinced that Lenny Bruce was an important performer, the movie doesn't convince us.\"\nIn 2012, British film critic Mark Kermode put Hoffman's performance as Lenny Bruce at number eight in a top-ten video of Hoffman's best performances.\nHome media.\n\"Lenny\" was released on DVD by MGM Home Video April 1, 2003, in a Region 1 widescreen format, and by Twilight Time (under license from MGM and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment) as a Region 1 widescreen Blu-ray February 10, 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64292", "revid": "975750134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64292", "title": "Lenny (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64293", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64293", "title": "Grampa Simpson", "text": "Fictional character from The Simpsons franchise\nAbraham Jay \"Abe\" Simpson II, better known as Grampa Simpson, is a recurring character in the animated television series \"The Simpsons\". He made his first appearance in the episode entitled \"Grandpa and the Kids\", a one-minute Simpsons short on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", before the debut of the television show in 1989.\nGrampa Simpson is voiced by Dan Castellaneta, who also voices his son, Homer Simpson. He is the paternal grandfather of Bart, Lisa and Maggie Simpson. In the 1,000th issue of \"Entertainment Weekly\", Grampa was selected as the \"Grandpa for The Perfect TV Family\". Grampa is a World War II veteran and retired farmer who was later sent to the Springfield Retirement Castle by Homer. He is known for his long, rambling, often incoherent and irrelevant stories and senility.\nBiography.\nGrampa Simpson is the father to Homer Simpson, father-in-law to Marge Simpson and the paternal grandfather to siblings Bart, Lisa and Maggie. Grampa has also fathered two illegitimate children; a daughter named Abbey by a British woman named Edwina while in the United Kingdom during World War II, and Herbert Powell by a carnival prostitute. Grampa has an older brother named Cyrus, who lives in Tahiti and has multiple native wives. He also has a younger brother named Chet, who owns an unsuccessful shrimp company. Other siblings of his include Hubert, Tyrone, Fester, Bill, and Hortense. Grampa was briefly married to Amber, the same woman Homer married on a drinking binge in Las Vegas. Grampa has also been briefly married to Marge's sister, Selma Bouvier, and was once romantically linked to Marge's mother, Jacqueline Bouvier (his son's mother-in-law). Grampa Simpson is also married to Rita LaFleur.\nAlmost all of Grampa's biographical information is supplied by himself and seems to be made up, although this could be likely due to his old age. Many of his stories seem to be wildly inaccurate, often physically or historically impossible, and occasionally inconsistent even with each other, suggesting that Grampa is quite senile. It is unknown where Grampa was born. He claims that he came to America as a boy from the \"old country\", but he cannot remember which country it was, although most likely it was the United Kingdom or Ireland. Grampa was raised in New York City with his parents, Orville J. Simpson and Yuma Hickman. He gives his age as 83 in the Season 17 episode \"Million Dollar Abie,\" while in \"Grampy Can Ya Hear Me\" (season 29), the family celebrates his 87th birthday, although he is canonically 83. In the Season 25 episode \"The Winter of His Content,\" Homer states that Grampa's father is still alive. Due to the show's floating timeline, his age remains the same over the years, and newer episodes still depict him as a World War II veteran.\nGrampa is a veteran of World War II, where he served as Master Sergeant of the Flying Hellfish unit which included himself (the Unit Commander), Radio Operator Sheldon Skinner (Seymour Skinner's father), Private Fifth Class Arnie Gumble (Barney Gumble's father), Asa Phelps, Iggy Wiggum (Clancy Wiggum's father), Milton \"Oxford\" Haas, Etch Westgrin, Griff McDonald, Private Charles Montgomery Burns and Grey Fox. At the very end of the war in Europe, Grampa's unit \"liberated\" a stash of priceless art from surrendering German forces. The Flying Hellfish formed a tontine and buried the art in a trunk at sea. Decades later, Burns, the second surviving member of the unit, tried to murder Grampa in order to get the art, prompting Grampa to violate the tontine. When Grampa and Bart retrieved the art from Mr. Burns, the State Department arrived to return the art to its rightful owner. Grampa was a hated wrestler named \"Glamorous Godfrey\" in the 1950s, revealed in the episode \"Gorgeous Grampa\", starring him and Mr. Burns.\nHomer's mother, Mona Simpson, was married to Grampa for several years. According to \"Let's Go Fly a Coot\", they met in the 1950s and hooked up on the day Grampa allegedly broke the sound barrier. She became entranced with the hippie lifestyle after seeing Joe Namath's hair on television. She became a fugitive from justice after she abetted in the sabotage of a biological weapons research lab owned by Mr. Burns to deliberately poison everyone in Springfield. To explain this to his then-six-year-old son, Grampa said that Mona died while Homer was at the movies. Grampa has a poor, but sometimes loving relationship with his son, who placed him in a nursing home as soon as he could, despite Grampa selling his house in order to provide Homer with a mortgage. It is recurringly suggested that, while caring, Grampa was a strict disciplinarian who could be very controlling, neglectful, and even emotionally abusive towards Homer when he was growing up and he still had not forgiven him for that. After Mona left Homer at a young age and ran off with a jester, Grampa brought up Homer by himself. In the season four episode, \"The Front\", Grampa tells Roger Myers Jr., head of Itchy and Scratchy studios, that he worked as a cranberry silo night watchman for forty years.\nThe Simpson family will often do their best to avoid unnecessary contact with Grampa. A running gag in the show usually has Grampa in a cameo appearance where he wonders where everyone is or wishes to be noticed by the family. One example of this was when the family thought they left something on the plane in the episode \"Fear of Flying\", which is revealed to be Grampa. Despite this, Homer has shown feelings of love for his father from time to time.\nCharacter.\nCreation.\nMatt Groening, creator of \"The Simpsons\", wanted to have a character that was \"really cranky\" and old, and who complained a lot and invented stories to tell to children, so he created Grampa. After naming the main characters after his own family members (except for Bart, an anagram of \"brat\", which he substituted for his own name), Groening refused to name Grampa after his grandfather, Abraham Groening. He left it to the writers to choose a name and they ironically chose \"Abraham\", although not knowing that it was also the name of Groening's grandfather. Grampa first appeared in the Simpsons short \"Grandpa and the Kids\", which premiered on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" on January 10, 1988. In the short, Grampa tells his grandchildren stories of \"the good old days\". When they stop paying attention to him, he feigns his own death to recapture their attention.\n\"The Simpsons\" writer Al Jean commented that Grampa is often the focus of pointed jokes about old people. He said the reason for that is because the staff is trying to illustrate how society mistreats the elderly, \"and some of it is because people over 55 never watch our show\". Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein, former writers on the show, said that they liked to write episodes about Grampa because they are \"obsessed\" with old people. Weinstein commented that they \"both love [old people] and seem to really hate them at the same time\". He also said that he \"enjoys\" writing for characters such as Grampa and Mr. Burns because of their \"out-datedness\", and because he gets to use dictionaries for looking up \"old time slang\".\nVoice.\nGrampa's voice is performed by Dan Castellaneta, who also voices numerous other characters, including Homer Simpson, Krusty the Clown, Barney Gumble, Groundskeeper Willie, Mayor Quimby and Hans Moleman. Castellaneta was part of the regular cast of \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" and had previously done some voice-over work in Chicago alongside his wife Deb Lacusta. Castellaneta likes to stay in character during recording sessions, and tries to visualize a scene in his mind so that he can give the proper voice to it. The episode \"Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy\" (season six, 1994) featured many interactions between Grampa and Homer, so Castellaneta therefore had to talk to himself when he recorded the voices for that episode. Castellaneta said it is hard for him to do Grampa's voice because it is \"wheezy and airy\".\nReception.\nCommendations.\nNancy Basile of About.com named Grampa the fifth best character of \"The Simpsons\", calling him a \"perfect stereotypical old person\". In the 1000th issue of \"Entertainment Weekly\", Grampa was selected as the \"Grandpa for The Perfect TV Family\". Joe Rhodes of \"TV Guide\" considered Grampa's most memorable line to be \"If I'm not back at the home by nine, they declare me legally dead and collect my insurance.\" Dan Castellaneta has won two Primetime Emmy Awards in the Outstanding Voice-Over Performance category for voicing various characters, including Grampa. The first was awarded in 1992 for the episode \"Lisa's Pony\", and the second in 2004 for \"Today I Am A Clown\". In 2010, Castellaneta was nominated for the award for voicing Grampa and Homer in the episode \"Thursdays with Abie\".\n\"The Simpsons\" writer David Mirkin said that one of his favorite jokes on the show is the one where Grampa cycles down the street in high speed and shouts that he feels young again, and is then knocked flying from his bicycle after a doll's head flies into the spokes and falls into an open grave. In a review of the Grampa-centric episode \"Lady Bouvier's Lover\", Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict said that he is \"never terribly interested\" in episodes that revolve around Grampa, because he believes Grampa is \"great as a background character, but less so when he takes center stage.\" DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson said in a review of the same episode that Grampa is \"always fun\" and \"it\u2019s nice to see him in an ebullient mood, at least for a while.\"\nAnalysis.\nMirkin thinks it is hard to make a \"boring\" and \"tedious\" character, such as Grampa, funny. He believes that what ultimately makes Grampa funny is that the things he says are \"actually funny\" in the context of the boredom and the tedium. Anne-Marie Barry and Chris Yuill, the authors of the book \"Understanding the Sociology of Health\", commented that in episodes in which Grampa appears, the comedy content is often generated by Grampa falling asleep at \"inopportune\" moments or \"embarking\" on long rambling stories about his youth. \"Instances such as these match popular stereotypes that all old people are 'demented' and in poor health,\" they wrote.\nAlan S. Brown and Chris Logan wrote in \"The Psychology of The Simpsons\" that Grampa has the least amount of \"power\" in the Simpson family, and that he is treated as little more than a child and is often ignored. The family frequently laughs at his \"failing\" memory and his \"ineffectual\" attempts to get what he wants. They added that Grampa is left behind, forgotten, and rarely invited to spend time with the family. The authors commented that he is \"not without influence, but he certainly does not play the traditional grandfather role in the family hierarchy.\"\nBrown and Logan also wrote that Grampa had a considerable influence in the formation of Homer's character, and that flashbacks in \"The Simpsons\" show what an \"angry\", \"critical\" father he was to Homer. \"He yelled, used corporal punishment, and constantly belittled Homer's attempts to have fun, date, and excel at various activities,\" they added. The authors said that Homer tries \"in vain\" to repair his relationship with Grampa and continuously seeks for his approval, but Grampa continues to be \"as critical as ever\". However, in some episodes, he does show a loving side to Homer. Such as the episode \"Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy\", he and Homer watch the farm burn, or the episode \"To Cur with Love\", where he does everything to protect Homer's dog from Mr Burns in a flashback. In his book \"Understanding the Psychology of Diversity\", author Bruce Evan Blaine wrote that Grampa is typically portrayed as a \"doddering\", \"senile\", and \"dependent\" person who is a \"trivial\" and \"often disposable figure\" in his son's life.\nMerchandising.\nPlaymates Toys created two Grampa Simpson action figures for the World of Springfield series. The first, released in May 2000, depicts Grampa in his usual appearance. The second, \"Sunday Grampa\", was released in June 2002, and depicts Grampa in his Sunday church clothes. Alongside the television series, Grampa regularly appears in issues of \"Simpsons Comics\", which were first published on November 29, 1993. The final issue was published on October 17, 2018.\nGrampa also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride, launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood.\nIn 2014, \"LEGO\" released a line of \"The Simpsons\" characters as part of their LEGO Minifigures theme. Grampa is featured with the rest of the Simpsons family.\nIn 2015, Grampa appeared as a non-playable character in the toys-to-life video game \"Lego Dimensions\". In game, he only appears in the Simpsons levels and all his voice lines are archive audio from Dan Castellaneta.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64294", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64294", "title": "Cletus", "text": "Cletus or Cleatus is a given name (Ancient Greek \u039a\u03bb\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 or \"Kl\u0113tos)\", meaning \"\"one who has been called\" or \"summoned one\"\". It may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "64295", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64295", "title": "Cletus (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64296", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64296", "title": "Leopold (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64299", "revid": "507787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64299", "title": "Selma Bouvier", "text": ""}
{"id": "64300", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64300", "title": "Bart Simpson", "text": "Fictional character from The Simpsons franchise\nBartholomew Jo-Jo \"Bart\" Simpson is one of the main characters in the American animated television series \"The Simpsons\" who is part of the titular family. Widely regarded as one of the greatest fictional characters of all time, he was named by \"Time\" as one of the .\nBart made his television debut in the short \"Good Night\" on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" on April 19, 1987. Cartoonist Matt Groening created and designed Bart while waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks's office. Initially called to pitch a series of shorts based on his comic strip \"Life in Hell\", Groening developed a new set of characters. Unlike the other Simpson family members, who were named after Groening's relatives, Bart's name is an anagram of \"brat\". After two years on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", the Simpson family received their own series, which premiered on Fox on December 17, 1989. Bart has appeared in every episode of \"The Simpsons\" except \"Four Great Women and a Manicure\".\nAlways ten years old, Bart is the eldest child and only son of Homer and Marge Simpson and the brother of Lisa and Maggie. Known for his penchant for mischief, rebelliousness and disrespect for authority, Bart's most iconic traits include his chalkboard gags in the opening sequence, prank calls to Moe's Tavern, and catchphrases like \"Eat my shorts\", \"\u00a1Ay, caramba!\", \"Don't have a cow, man!\", and \"I'm Bart Simpson, who the hell are you?\". Bart has also appeared in \"The Simpsons\"'-related media, including video games, the 2007 film version of the series, \"The Simpsons\" Ride, commercials, comic books, and an extensive line of merchandise. Nancy Cartwright, Bart's voice actor, intended to audition for the role of Lisa, and Yeardley Smith auditioned for Bart. Smith's voice was deemed too high-pitched for a boy, while Cartwright found Lisa less appealing as a character and opted to try out for Bart\u2014a role she felt better suited her.\nBart's protagonist status during the show's first two seasons led to \"Bartmania\", which spawned Bart-themed merchandise touting his rebellious persona and pride in underachieving. The traits were criticized by parents and educators, who viewed him as a negative influence on children. By the third season, Homer became the show's figurehead character and the series shifted its focus to the family as a whole, although Bart remains a breakout character. He is considered one of the most iconic fictional television characters of the 1990s. \"Entertainment Weekly\" named him Entertainer of the Year in 1990. Cartwright has received accolades for her portrayal of Bart, including a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 and an Annie Award in 1995. In 2000, Bart and the rest of the Simpson family were honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nRole in \"The Simpsons\".\n\"The Simpsons\" employs a floating timeline, in which characters either do not age or age minimally; the show is always presumed to take place in the present year. Always ten years old, Bartholomew, best known by his short-form name Bart, is the eldest child and only son of Homer and Marge Simpson; he has two younger sisters, Lisa and Maggie. In several episodes of \"The Simpsons\", events have been tied to specific times, though these timelines are sometimes contradicted in later episodes. In \"I Married Marge\" (season three, 1991), Bart's birth is placed in the early 1980s. In \"Simpsorama\" (season 26, 2014), Bart states his birthday as February 23, while \"The Bart Book\" by series creator Matt Groening lists it as April 1. In \"Bart's Birthday\" (season 36, 2024), Bart, in a hypothetical series finale, celebrates his eleventh birthday, much to his dismay, as he has always identified as being ten years old.\nBart lived with his parents in Springfield's Lower East Side before the family purchased their first home. When Lisa was born, Bart initially felt jealous of the attention she received but soon warmed to her when her first word turned out to be \"Bart\". Bart's first day of school occurred in the early 1990s. Initially excited, his enthusiasm was quickly crushed by an indifferent teacher, prompting Marge to worry about him. During recess, Bart befriended Milhouse and began entertaining classmates with gestures and rude jokes. Principal Skinner warned Bart, \"You've just started school, and the path you choose now may be the one you follow for the rest of your life! Now, what do you say?\" Bart replied, \"Eat my shorts\". However, the episode \"That 90's Show\" (season 19, 2008) contradicted much of this timeline, revealing that Homer and Marge were childless during the early 1990s.\nBart's hobbies include skateboarding, watching television\u2014particularly \"The Krusty the Clown Show\" and its segment \"The Itchy &amp; Scratchy Show\"\u2014reading comic books, especially \"Radioactive Man\", playing video games, and causing general mischief. His favorite movies are \"Jaws\" and the \"Star Wars\" trilogy, while his favorite board games include \"Hippo in the House\", \"The Game of Lent\", and \"Citizenship\". Throughout the series, Bart has been a student at Springfield Elementary School, where he is part of Edna Krabappel's fourth-grade class. Although too young for full-time work, Bart has taken on several part-time jobs over the years. He works as a bartender at Fat Tony's social club in \"Bart the Murderer\" (season three, 1991); as Krusty the Clown's assistant in \"Bart Gets Famous\" (season five, 1994); as a doorman in Springfield's burlesque house, the Maison Derri\u00e8re, in \"Bart After Dark\" (season eight, 1996); and briefly owns his own factory in \"Homer's Enemy\" (season eight, 1997).\nCharacter.\nCreation.\nMatt Groening conceived Bart and the rest of the Simpson family in 1987 while waiting in the lobby of producer James L. Brooks's office. Groening was invited to pitch a series of animated shorts for \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" and initially planned to adapt his comic strip, \"Life in Hell\". Realizing that adapting the strip would require him to relinquish publication rights, he decided to create something new. Groening sketched a concept for a dysfunctional family, naming the characters after members of his family. For the rebellious son, he chose \"Bart\", an anagram of \"brat\", instead of his own name because he felt that \"Matt\" would not \"go over well in a pitch meeting\". Bart's middle initial \"J\" is an homage to the animated characters Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocket J. Squirrel from \"The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show\", who were named after creator Jay Ward. Although numerous interpretations of his middle initial have been given, Groening said that Bart's full middle name is \"Jo-Jo\", which was chosen by Cartwright during a recording session.\nAccording to \"The Oregonian\", Bart was conceived as \"a much milder, troubled youth given to existential angst who talks to himself\"; the character was changed due to Nancy Cartwright's voice acting. Groening has credited numerous sources as inspirations for Bart's character. His older brother, Mark Groening, influenced Bart's rebellious attitude. Mark introduced him to a variety of comics, including \"Mad\" (when it was still a comic), \"Donald Duck\", \"Uncle Scrooge\", \"Little Lulu\", and \"Tales From the Crypt\"; all were sources of inspiration for Matt. Bart was envisioned as an exaggerated version of a typical misbehaving child, combining the extreme traits of characters such as Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn. Groening described Bart as \"what would happen if the son of Eddie Haskell [from \"Leave It to Beaver\"] got his own show\". He was disappointed with the premise of \"Dennis the Menace\", which inspired him to create a character who was genuinely mischievous. Bart first appeared with the Simpson family on April 19, 1987, in \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" short \"Good Night\". On December 17, 1989, the shorts were developed into \"The Simpsons\", a half-hour series on the Fox Broadcasting Company, where Bart and the Simpson family became the central characters.\nDesign.\nThe Simpson family was designed to be easily recognizable in silhouette. The characters were initially crudely drawn because Groening submitted rough sketches to the animators, expecting them to refine the designs, but they simply traced over his drawings. Bart's early design, featured in the first shorts, included hair with spikes of varying length; this was later standardized to nine spikes of equal length. Groening primarily worked in black-and-white at the time and, without considering the eventual use of color, designed Bart's spikes to look like an extension of his head. This design feature is not replicated in other characters, although some background characters in the first few seasons shared his spiky hairline.\nBart's head was described by director Mark Kirkland as a basic rectangular shape resembling a coffee can. Homer's head is also rectangular, with a dome on top, while spheres define the heads of Marge, Lisa, and Maggie. In the season-seven (1995) episode \"Treehouse of Horror VI\", Bart, alongside Homer, was first rendered as a three-dimensional character in the episode's \"Homer3\" segment. The computer animation was by Pacific Data Images. Designing Bart's 3D model, the animators did not know how they would depict his hair; realizing that vinyl Bart dolls were in production, they purchased one to use as a model.\nVoice.\nBart's voice is provided by Nancy Cartwright, who also voices several other child characters on \"The Simpsons\" who include Nelson Muntz, Ralph Wiggum, Todd Flanders, and Kearney Zzyzwicz. After Dan Castellaneta and Julie Kavner were cast as Homer and Marge due to their roles on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", the producers held auditions for Bart and Lisa. Yeardley Smith initially auditioned for Bart, but casting director Bonita Pietila felt that her voice was too high-pitched. Smith recalled, \"I always sounded too much like a girl. I read two lines as Bart, and they said, 'Thanks for coming!'\". She was subsequently cast as Lisa instead. On March 13, 1987, Cartwright auditioned for Lisa. Discovering that Lisa was described only as the \"middle child\", with little personality at the time, she became interested in Bart, who was characterized as \"devious, underachieving, school-hating, irreverent, [and] clever\". Groening allowed her to audition for Bart, and offered her the role immediately after hearing her read. Cartwright is the only one of the six primary \"Simpsons\" cast members who had formal voice-acting training before joining the show.\nAccording to \"The Guardian\", Cartwright's speaking voice has \"no obvious traces of Bart\". The voice she uses for Bart came naturally to her, since she had incorporated elements of it on shows like \"My Little Pony\", \"Snorks\", and \"Pound Puppies\". Cartwright described Bart's voice as easy to create: \"Some characters take a little bit more effort, upper respiratory control, whatever it is technically. But Bart is easy to do. I can just slip into that without difficulty\". She typically records five or six takes of each line for variety, allowing producers more options to work with. Even in flashforward episodes, Cartwright continues to voice Bart; in the episode \"Lisa's Wedding\" (season six, 1995), Bart's voice was electronically pitched lower to reflect his age. Despite Bart's fame, Cartwright is seldom recognized in public. When she is recognized and asked to use Bart's voice in front of children, she declines because it \"freaks [them] out\". During the first season of \"The Simpsons\", Fox Network barred Cartwright from interviews to avoid the revelation that Bart was voiced by a woman.\nCartwright was paid US$30,000 per episode for her work on \"The Simpsons\" until 1998. A pay dispute arose that year, during which Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors and began preparing for new casting. The conflict was resolved, and Cartwright's salary increased to $125,000 per episode. The voice cast pushed for higher wages in 2004, seeking $360,000 per episode. The dispute was soon settled, and Cartwright's pay was increased to $250,000 per episode. In 2008, further negotiations increased the cast's salaries to about $400,000 per episode. Fox demanded production-cost reductions in 2011, threatening to cancel the series if costs were not cut. In response, Cartwright and the other main cast members agreed to a 30-percent pay reduction, lowering their per-episode earnings to just over $300,000. Cartwright was paid $315,000 per episode by 2016, which, according to \"Variety\", made her one of the highest-paid voice actors.\nHallmarks.\nIn the opening sequence of many episodes of \"The Simpsons\", the camera zooms in on Springfield Elementary School, where Bart is shown writing lines on a chalkboard. This scene, known as the \"chalkboard gag\", varies by episode. The messages often include political humor, such as \"The First Amendment does not cover burping\", pop culture references like \"I can't see dead people\", and meta-commentary such as \"I am not a 32-year-old woman\" or \"Nobody reads these anymore\". The animators create the gags quickly, and they sometimes reflect current events. In the episode \"Homer the Heretic\" (season four, 1992), the chalkboard gag read \"I will not defame New Orleans\"; it was an apology for a controversial song in the previous week's episode, \"A Streetcar Named Marge\", which described the city as a \"home of pirates, drunks, and whores\".\nAn early hallmark of Bart's character was his prank calls to Moe's Tavern, where he would ask owner Moe Szyslak for a fictitious person with a gag name. Moe would try to find the person, eventually realizing it was a prank and (unaware that Bart was the caller) responding with angry threats. The calls were inspired by the Tube Bar recordings, a series of prank calls to bar owner Louis \"Red\" Deutsch (whose profane reactions influenced Moe's violent temperament). The calls first appeared in \"Homer's Odyssey\" (season one, 1990), the third episode to air. It became increasingly difficult for the writers to create new fake names and Moe's responses, leading to the pranks being phased out as a regular feature by the fourth season; however, they have occasionally resurfaced in later episodes.\nThe catchphrase \"Eat my shorts\" originated as an ad-lib by Cartwright during one of the show's early table readings, inspired by an incident during her high-school years. While performing with the marching band at Fairmont High School, the group chanted \"Eat my shorts\" instead of their usual cheer (\"Fairmont West! Fairmont West!\") The phrase may also refer to \"The Breakfast Club\" (1985), in which John Bender says it to Principal Vernon. Bart's other notable catchphrases include \"\u00a1Ay, caramba!\" and \"Don't have a cow!\". The former was inspired by a Portuguese flamenco dancer; the latter, popularized during the 1950s, originated from the British phrase \"Don't have kittens\". Both were prominently featured on merchandise such as T-shirts during the show's early seasons. Another catchphrase, \"Cowabunga\", was borrowed from Chief Thunderthud of \"The Howdy Doody Show\".\nBart frequently appears nude in \"The Simpsons\", often by mooning. In \"The Simpsons Movie\" (2007), he skateboards nude. Although various objects obscure his genitalia throughout the scene, his penis is briefly visible. This scene was among the first created for the film, but producers were initially concerned that it might result in an R rating. However, the Motion Picture Association of America ultimately rated the film PG-13 for \"irreverent humor throughout\". The scene was later recognized by \"Entertainment Weekly\" as one of 30 Unforgettable Nude Scenes.\nPersonality.\nBart's disregard for authority has been compared to America's founding fathers, and been described as a modern fusion of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn. In his book \"Planet Simpson\", Chris Turner characterizes Bart as a nihilist who has the philosophical view that life lacks inherent meaning, purpose, or value. Bart's rebellious nature makes him disruptive at Springfield Elementary School, where he identifies as an underachiever. He frequently clashes with his teacher, Ms. Krabappel, and Principal Skinner. Bart acknowledges his poor performance at school: \"I am dumb, okay? Dumb as a post! Think I'm happy about it?\" Much like his father, his mental processes are often illogical and absurd; he once believed that if he reincarnated as a butterfly, he could burn the school down without suspicion, imagining he could hold a gas can as a butterfly. Bart thinks that writing his name in wet cement will leave people wondering how he did it in hardened cement. \"Brother's Little Helper\" (season eleven, 1999) reveals that Bart has attention deficit disorder. His intelligence may be impacted by the hereditary \"Simpson gene\", which affects males in his family. Despite his misbehavior and selfishness, he has moments of integrity and compassion and occasionally helps Ms. Krabappel and Principal Skinner.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Bart is a really good boy. He's just mischievous. He's not bad, like characters who followed him such as [Eric] Cartman (\"South Park\") or Beavis and Butthead. Bart can do some nasty things, but they seem so tame, by today's standards. What was shocking 19 years ago, when the show started, isn't the least bit shocking today. Bart hasn't changed.\u2014\u200a\nBart's mischievous nature and Homer's often-negligent, incompetent behavior create a turbulent, volatile, and abusive relationship between them. Bart frequently calls Homer by his first name rather than \"Dad\", and Homer often refers to him dismissively as \"the boy\". Homer's short temper leads to cartoonishly-violent outbursts, such as impulsively strangling Bart. Marge is the more caring, understanding and nurturing parent, although she acknowledges that Bart is \"a handful\" and is often embarrassed by his antics. In the episode \"Marge Be Not Proud\" (season seven, 1995), Marge struggles with adjusting her parenting style after Bart is caught shoplifting; she becomes more distant to avoid over-mothering, which causes Bart to feel guilty and try to make amends. Despite his rebellious attitude, Bart occasionally endures humiliation to please his mother. Marge frequently defends him, understanding his complexity. She describes him as her \"special little guy\", saying, \"I know Bart can be a handful, but I also know what he's like inside. He's got a spark. It's not a bad thing[...] of course, it makes him do bad things\".\nBart shares sibling rivalry with his younger sister, Lisa. Although they often disagree\u2014sometimes physically\u2014they have a deep bond and care for one another. Bart often apologizes when he goes too far and recognizes Lisa's superior intellect, frequently seeking her advice about problems. He is a popular \"cool kid\" at school, and has many friends; his closest is Milhouse Van Houten. His influence on Milhouse is often negative, leading them into mischief. In \"Homer Defined\" (season three, 1991), Milhouse's mother forbids him from playing with Bart due to his bad influence; Bart is unfazed until he realizes how much he values their friendship, and Marge convinces Mrs. Van Houten to reconsider.\nBart is a fan of the children's television host Krusty the Clown, and has stated that \"I've based my whole life on Krusty's teachings\"; his room is filled with Krusty merchandise. Bart helps Krusty a number of times, thwarting Sideshow Bob's attempt to frame Krusty for armed robbery in \"Krusty Gets Busted\" (season one, 1990), reuniting Krusty with his estranged father in \"Like Father, Like Clown\", and helping Krusty relaunch his career with a comeback special in \"Krusty Gets Kancelled\". Bart's initial confrontation with Sideshow Bob in \"Krusty Gets Busted\" sparks a long-term rivalry. The writers developed Bob as an intelligent, obsessive antagonist, inspired by the dynamic between Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner.\nReception.\nBartmania.\nBart became one of television's most popular characters in 1990, sparking a cultural phenomenon known as \"Bartmania\". He became the most prominent \"Simpsons\" character on merchandise, particularly T-shirts; during the early 1990s, millions of Bart-themed T-shirts were sold. Bart's rebellious persona led some American public schools to ban T-shirts with sayings such as \"I'm Bart Simpson. Who the hell are you?\" and \"Underachiever (and proud of it, man!)\". A T-shirt with the latter caption is in the National Museum of American History. The popularity of \"Simpsons\" merchandise was a commercial success, generating $2 billion in revenue in its first 14 months of sales. Bart's appeal also inspired a thriving black market for counterfeit merchandise, particularly T-shirts. The items featured Bart with various slogans and redesigns, including \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Bart\", \"Air Simpson Bart\", and \"RastaBart\". Although Groening generally tolerated bootleg merchandise, he objected to a series of \"Nazi Bart\" shirts with Bart in Nazi uniforms or as a white power skinhead. 20th Century Fox sued the creator of the offensive designs, who agreed to cease production.\nBart was described as \"television's king of 1990\", \"television's brightest new star\", and an \"undiminished smash\". He was one of the most popular write-in candidates in the 1990 United States congressional, senatorial and gubernatorial elections, second in a number of areas only to Mickey Mouse among fictional characters. In the 1990 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, Bart debuted as one of the giant helium-filled balloons for which the parade is known. This was noted in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Bart vs. Thanksgiving\", which aired the day of the parade, where Homer tells Bart: \"If you start building a balloon for every flash-in-the-pan cartoon character, you turn the parade into a farce!\". Behind and unbeknownst to Homer, the television briefly shows a Bart Simpson balloon.\nThe album \"The Simpsons Sing the Blues\" was recorded in September 1990 and released in December. It peaked at number three on the \"Billboard\" 200, and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. The first single from the album was the pop rap song \"Do the Bartman\", performed by Cartwright and released on November 20, 1990. The song was written by Bryan Loren, a friend of Michael Jackson (who provided backing vocals on the track). Jackson was a fan of \"The Simpsons\" (especially Bart), and had called the producers offering to write Bart a single and make a guest appearance on the show. Jackson guest-starred in the episode \"Stark Raving Dad\" (season three, 1991) with the pseudonym John Jay Smith. Although \"Do the Bartman\" was never released as a single in the United States, it was successful in the United Kingdom; it was the number-one song from February 16 to March 9, 1991, and was the year's fifth-best-selling song. It sold half a million copies, and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry on February 1, 1991.\nCultural influence and commendations.\nBart has been described as one of the most iconic television characters of the 1990s, and is considered an American cultural icon. In 1990, \"Entertainment Weekly\" named him Entertainer of the Year, writing that \"Bart has proved to be a rebel who's also a good kid, a terror who's easily terrorized, and a flake who astonishes us, and himself, with serious displays of fortitude\". In 1998, \"Time\" included Bart on the magazine's list of the , the only fictional character on the list. He had appeared previously on the cover of \"Time\"'s December 31, 1990, issue. In 1996, Bart was named 48th on TV Guide's list of \"50 Greatest TV Stars of All Time\". In 2002, he and Lisa were ranked eleventh on TV Guide's \"Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time\" list. In 2022, \"Paste\" writers ranked Bart the 26th-greatest cartoon character of all time.\nFrom entertainment critics, Bart has received mostly positive reviews. \"Screen Rant\"'s Dan Peeke praised him as the \"best main character\" in 2020, calling him \"relatable\" and saying that \"everyone can relate to at least some element of his personality\". In a 2024 review, Darryn King of \"Vulture\" called Bart a \"back-talking, trouble-making, prank-calling, cherry-bomb-detonating, and, yes, graffiti-tagging cartoon creation, who was at the time fast becoming a cultural icon\". A 2023 \"Collider\" review said that the episode \"Bart Gets an 'F'\" was a \"turning point for the show, showing that Bart could be more than just a punchline while paving the way for future episodes that fleshed out his character\". According to Erma Bombeck, \"Kids need to know that somewhere in this world is a contemporary who can pull off all the things they can only fantasize about, someone who can stick it to their parents once in a while and still be permitted to live\". In 2003, a survey of parents in the United Kingdom ranked Bart the most influential fictional character for children under age twelve.\nCartwright has received a number of awards for her performance. At the 44th Primetime Emmy Awards in 1992, she received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance for her portrayal of Bart in the season-three episode \"Separate Vocations\", sharing the award with five other voice actors from \"The Simpsons\". Episodes featuring Bart have been nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program, including \"Radio Bart\" in 1992, \"Future-Drama\" in 2005, and \"Homer's Phobia\" in 1997. Cartwright received an Annie Award for Voice Acting in the Field of Animation in 1995 for her work as Bart. In 2000, Bart and the rest of the Simpson family were recognized with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.\nNegative influence on children.\nBart's rebellious nature, often accompanied by a lack of consequences for his actions, led some parents, educators, and conservative groups to view him as a negative influence on children. Critics said that Bart's behavior made him a poor role model, with Robert Bianco of the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\" describing him as a character who \"outwits his parents and outtalks his teachers; in short, he's the child we wish we'd been, and fear our children will become\". Educators expressed concern that Bart's \"underachiever and proud of it\" attitude and disdain for education posed a \"threat to learning\", and others called him \"egotistical, aggressive, and mean-spirited\". In response to criticism, producer James L. Brooks defended the character: \"I'm very wary of television where everybody is supposed to be a role model. You don't run across that many role models in real life. Why should television be full of them?\"\nU.S. drug czar William Bennett visited a Pittsburgh drug treatment center in 1990 and saw a poster of Bart. Bennett said, \"You guys aren't watching \"The Simpsons\", are you? That's not going to help you any\". Bennett later apologized, saying that he was \"just kidding\": \"I'll sit down with the little spike head. We'll straighten this thing out.\" Bill Cosby called Bart a poor role model in a 1991 interview, describing him as \"angry, confused, [and] frustrated\". Groening responded, \"That sums up Bart, all right. Most people are in a struggle to be normal. He thinks normal is very boring and does things that others just wished they dare do\". U.S. president George H. W. Bush said in 1992, \"We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family, to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons\". The show's writers then produced a short segment that aired three days later (before a rerun of \"Stark Raving Dad\"), in which Bart says: \"Hey, we're just like the Waltons. We're praying for an end to the Depression, too.\"\nMerchandising.\nIn addition to T-shirts, Bart has been featured in a variety of \"The Simpsons\"-related merchandise which includes dolls, napkins, air fresheners, cups, chewing gum, beach towels, sleeping bags, snow boots, rubber sponge balls, license-plate frames, scratch paper, laminated magnets, and handheld pinball games. Two books have been published about the character: \"Bart Simpson's Guide to Life\" (1993) and \"The Bart Book\" (2004), both primarily by Groening. ' (2001) contains a chapter analyzing Bart's character and comparing him to the \"Nietzschean ideal\". Bart has appeared in media related to \"The Simpsons\". He is featured in most of \"The Simpsons\" video games, such as ' (1991), \"Bart Simpson's Escape from Camp Deadly\" (1991), ' (1991), ' (1992), and \"The Simpsons Game\" (2007). Bart was a recurring character in the Bongo Comics-distributed \"Simpsons Comics\", which debuted in November 1993 and was published until October 2018. He headlined his eponymous comic-book series, which was distributed by Bongo Comics from 2000 to 2016. Bart plays a role in \"The Simpsons\" Ride, a motion-simulator ride launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Universal Studios Hollywood. On December 9, 2024, \"Monday Night Football\" hosted an animated \"Simpsons\" version of the Cincinnati Bengals-Dallas Cowboys game which paralleled the events on the field.\nBart and other \"Simpsons\" characters appeared in television commercials for Nestl\u00e9's Butterfinger candy bars from 1988 to 2001, using the slogan \"Nobody better lay a finger on my Butterfinger!\". Groening later noted that the success of the Butterfinger commercials played a significant role in Fox's decision to greenlight the half-hour series. Bart has also appeared in commercials for the fast-food Burger King chain. In 2001, Kellogg's introduced the limited-edition Bart Simpson Peanut Butter Chocolate Crunch cereal. Groening pitched Bart as a spokesperson for Jell-O before the launch of the half-hour series, suggesting a commercial in which Bart would sing \"J-E-L-L-O\" and burp the letter \"O\". He believed that kids would try to mimic it, but the idea was rejected. On April 9, 2009, the United States Postal Service introduced a series of five 44-cent stamps commemorating Bart and the other members of the Simpson family. The stamps were the first since \"Sesame Street\" which were issued while their show was still in production. Designed by Groening, they became available for purchase on May 7, 2009.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64302", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64302", "title": "Patty Bouvier", "text": ""}
{"id": "64303", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64303", "title": "Superintendent Chalmers", "text": ""}
{"id": "64304", "revid": "19177367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64304", "title": "Jesus Prayer", "text": "Short formulaic prayer in Christianity\nThe Jesus Prayer, also known as The Prayer, is a short formulaic prayer. It is most common in Eastern Christianity. There are multiple versions of this prayer, however the most widely used version is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is often repeated continually as a part of personal ascetic practice, its use being an integral part of the Hermitic tradition of prayer known as hesychasm. The prayer is particularly important to the spiritual fathers of this tradition, such as in the \"Philokalia,\" as a method of cleaning and opening up the mind and after this the heart (), brought about first by the Prayer of the Mind, or more precisely the Noetic Prayer (; \"Noer\u00e1 Proseyx\u00ed\"), and after this the Prayer of the Heart (; \"Kardiak\u00ed Proseyx\u00ed).\" The \"Prayer of the Heart\" is considered to be the \"Unceasing Prayer\" that the Apostle Paul advocates in the New Testament. Theophan the Recluse regarded the \"Jesus Prayer\" stronger than all other prayers by virtue of the power of the Holy Name of Jesus.\nThough identified more closely with Eastern Christianity, the prayer is found in Western Christianity in the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\". It is also used in conjunction with the innovation of Anglican prayer beads. The prayer has been widely taught and discussed throughout the history of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Eastern Lutheran Churches and Eastern Catholic Churches. The ancient and original form did not include the words \"a sinner\", which were added later.\nThe Eastern Orthodox theology of the Jesus Prayer as enunciated in the 14th century by Gregory Palamas was generally rejected by Latin Church theologians until the 20th century. Pope John Paul II called Gregory Palamas a saint, a great writer, and an authority on theology. He also spoke with appreciation of hesychasm as \"that deep union of grace which Eastern theology likes to describe with the particularly powerful term \"theosis\", 'divinization'\", and likened the meditative quality of the Jesus Prayer to that of the Catholic rosary.\nOrigins.\nThe prayer's origin is the Egyptian desert, which was settled by the monastic Desert Fathers and Desert Mothers in the 5th century. It was found inscribed in the ruins of a cell from that period in the Egyptian desert.\nA formula similar to the standard form of the Jesus Prayer is found in a letter attributed to John Chrysostom, who died in AD\u00a0407. This \"Letter to an Abbot\" speaks of \"Lord Jesus Christ, son of God, have mercy\" and \"Lord Jesus Christ, son of God, have mercy on us\" being used as ceaseless prayer. Ammonas of Egypt advised another monk to \"always keep in your heart the words of the Publican\" (\"God, be merciful to me a sinner\", ), while Macarius of Egypt taught Evagrius Ponticus to say with each breath \"Lord Jesus, have mercy on me. I bless you, my Lord Jesus\", or when he is distressed, \"My Lord Jesus, help me\".\nEarly forms of the Jesus prayer are also mentioned in the context of Gazan monasticism; Saints Barsanuphius and John the Prophet recommended several formulae, including \"Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on me\". Their chief disciple, Dorotheus of Gaza, later taught his disciple Dositheus to preserve the \"remembrance of God\" by saying continuously \"Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on me\" and then at intervals \"Son of God, help me\".\nWhat may be the earliest explicit reference to the Jesus Prayer in a form that is similar to that used today is in \"Discourse on Abba Philimon\" from the . Philimon lived around AD\u00a0600. The version cited by Philimon is \"Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy upon me\", which is apparently the earliest source to cite this standard version. While the prayer itself was in use by that time, John S. Romanides writes that \"We are still searching the Fathers for the term 'Jesus prayer'.\"\nA similar idea is recommended in the \"Ladder of Divine Ascent\" of John Climacus (circa 523\u2013606), who recommends the regular practice of a , or one-worded \"Jesus Prayer\". The use of the Jesus Prayer according to the tradition of the is the subject of the 19th century anonymous Russian spiritual classic \"The Way of a Pilgrim\", also in the original form, without the addition of the words \"a sinner\".\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThe hesychastic practice of the Jesus Prayer is founded on the biblical view by which God's name is conceived as the place of his presence. Orthodox mysticism has no images or representations. The mystical practice (the prayer and the meditation) doesn't lead to perceiving representations of God (see below Palamism). Thus, the most important means of a life consecrated to praying is the invoked \"name of God\", as it is emphasized since the 5th century by the Thebaid anchorites, or by the later Athonite hesychasts. For the Orthodox the power of the Jesus Prayer comes not only from its content, but from the very invocation of Jesus' name.\nScriptural roots.\nThe Jesus Prayer combines three Bible verses: the Christological hymn of the Pauline epistle Philippians (verse\u00a011: \"Jesus Christ is Lord\"), the Annunciation of Luke (verse\u00a035: \"Son of God\"), and the Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican of Luke , in which the Pharisee demonstrates the improper way to pray (verse\u00a011: \"God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican\"), whereas the Publican prays correctly in humility (verse\u00a013: \"God be merciful to me a sinner\").\nPalamism, the underlying theology.\nApophatism (negative theology) is the main characteristic of the Eastern theological tradition. Incognoscibility is not conceived as agnosticism or refusal to know God, because the Eastern theology is not concerned with abstract concepts; it is contemplative, with a discourse on things above rational understanding. Therefore, dogmas are often expressed antinomically. This form of contemplation is experience of God, illumination, called the vision of God or, in Greek, theoria.\nFor the Eastern Orthodox the knowledge or of the uncreated energies is usually linked to apophatism.\nRepentance in Eastern Orthodoxy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church holds a non-juridical view of sin, by contrast to the satisfaction view of atonement for sin as articulated in the West, firstly by Anselm of Canterbury (as debt of honor) and Thomas Aquinas (as a moral debt). The terms used in the East are less legalistic (\"grace\", \"punishment\"), and more medical (\"sickness\", \"healing\") with less exacting precision. Sin, therefore, does not carry with it the guilt for breaking a rule, but rather the impetus to become something more than what men usually are. One repents not because one is or is not virtuous, but because human nature can change. Repentance (, \"metanoia\", \"changing one's mind\") is not remorse, justification, or punishment, but a continual enactment of one's freedom, deriving from renewed choice and leading to restoration (the return to man's original state). This is reflected in the Mystery of Confession for which, not being limited to a mere confession of sins and presupposing recommendations or penalties, it is primarily that the priest acts in his capacity of spiritual father. The Mystery of Confession is linked to the spiritual development of the individual, and relates to the practice of choosing an elder to trust as his or her spiritual guide, turning to him for advice on the personal spiritual development, confessing sins, and asking advice.\nAs stated at the local Council of Constantinople in 1157, Christ brought his redemptive sacrifice not to the Father alone, but to the Trinity as a whole. In the Eastern Orthodox theology redemption is not seen as \"ransom\". It is the \"reconciliation\" of God with man, the manifestation of God's love for humanity. Thus, it is not the anger of God the Father but His love that lies behind the sacrificial death of his son on the cross.\nThe redemption of man is not considered to have taken place only in the past, but continues to this day through theosis. The initiative belongs to God, but presupposes man's active acceptance (not an action only, but an attitude), which is a way of perpetually receiving God.\nDistinctiveness from analogues in other religions.\nThe practice of contemplative or meditative chanting is known in several religions including Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam (e.g. japa, zikr). The form of internal contemplation involving profound inner transformations affecting all the levels of the self is common to the traditions that posit the ontological value of personhood.\nPractice.\nLevels of the prayer.\nPaul Evdokimov, a 20th-century Russian philosopher and theologian, writes about beginner's way of praying: initially, the prayer is excited because the man is emotive and a flow of psychic contents is expressed. In his view this condition comes, for the modern men, from the separation of the mind from the heart: \"The prattle spreads the soul, while the silence is drawing it together.\" Old fathers condemned elaborate phraseologies, for one word was enough for the publican, and one word saved the thief on the cross. They only uttered Jesus' name by which they were contemplating God. For Evdokimov the acting faith denies any formalism which quickly installs in the external prayer or in the life duties; he quotes Seraphim of Sarov: \"The prayer is not thorough if the man is self-conscious and he is aware he's praying.\"\n\"Because prayer is a living reality, a deeply personal encounter with the living God, it is not to be confined to any given classification or rigid analysis\", says the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America. As general guidelines for the practitioner, different number of levels (3, 7 or 9) in the practice of the prayer are distinguished by Orthodox fathers. They are to be seen as being purely informative, because the practice of the Prayer of the Heart is learned under personal spiritual guidance in Eastern Orthodoxy which emphasizes the perils of temptations when it is done on one's own. Thus, Theophan the Recluse, a 19th-century Russian spiritual writer, talks about three stages:\nOnce this is achieved the Jesus Prayer is said to become \"self-active\" (). It is repeated automatically and unconsciously by the mind, becoming an internal habit like a (beneficial) earworm. Body, through the uttering of the prayer, mind, through the mental repetition of the prayer, are thus unified with \"the heart\" (spirit) and the prayer becomes constant, ceaselessly \"playing\" in the background of the mind, like a background music, without hindering the normal everyday activities of the person.\nOthers, like Father Archimandrite Ilie Cleopa, one of the most representative spiritual fathers of contemporary Romanian Orthodox monastic spirituality, talk about nine levels. They are the same path to theosis, more slenderly differentiated:\nVariants of repetitive formulas.\nA number of different repetitive prayer formulas have been attested in the history of Eastern Orthodox monasticism: the Prayer of St. Ioannikios the Great (754\u2013846): \"My hope is the Father, my refuge is the Son, my shelter is the Holy Spirit, O Holy Trinity, Glory unto You\", the repetitive use of which is described in his \"Life\"; or the more recent practice of Nikolaj Velimirovi\u0107.\nSimilarly to the flexibility of the practice of the Jesus Prayer, there is no imposed standardization of its form. The prayer can be from as short as \"Lord, have mercy\" (Kyrie eleison), \"Have mercy on me\" (\"Have mercy upon us\"), or even \"Jesus\", to its longer most common form. It can also contain a call to the Theotokos (Virgin Mary), or to the saints. The single essential and invariable element is Jesus' name.\nCatholic Church.\nThe Jesus Prayer is widely practiced among the 23 Eastern Catholic Churches.\nPart four of the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", which is dedicated to Christian prayer, devotes paragraphs 2665 to 2669 to prayer to Jesus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To pray \"Jesus\" is to invoke him and to call him within us. His name is the only one that contains the presence it signifies. Jesus is the Risen One, and whoever invokes the name of Jesus is welcoming the Son of God who loved him and who gave himself up for him. This simple invocation of faith developed in the tradition of prayer under many forms in East and West. The most usual formulation, transmitted by the spiritual writers of the Sinai, Syria, and Mt. Athos, is the invocation, \"Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on us sinners.\" It combines the Christological hymn of with the cry of the publican and the blind men begging for light. By it the heart is opened to human wretchedness and the Savior's mercy. The invocation of the holy name of Jesus is the simplest way of praying always. When the holy name is repeated often by a humbly attentive heart, the prayer is not lost by heaping up empty phrases, but holds fast to the word and \"brings forth fruit with patience.\" This prayer is possible \"at all times\" because it is not one occupation among others but the only occupation: that of loving God, which animates and transfigures every action in Christ Jesus.\nSimilar methods of prayer in use in the Catholic Church are recitation, as recommended by John Cassian, of \"O God, come to my assistance; O Lord, make haste to help me\" or other verses of Scripture; repetition of a single monosyllabic word, as suggested by the Cloud of Unknowing; the method used in Centering Prayer; the method used by The World Community for Christian Meditation, based on the Aramaic invocation \"Maranatha\"; the use of Lectio Divina; etc.\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvangelical Lutheran Churches.\nIn Evangelical Lutheranism, particularly in those Churches of the Eastern Lutheran tradition, the Jesus Prayer is prayed by the faithful. Evangelical-Lutheran theologian William Weedon, with regard to the Jesus Prayer, stated that \"People loved by God, remember this beautiful, fitting addition to praying the Our Father in your personal prayers.\" The Lutheran Church of Australia notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64305", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64305", "title": "Manjula Nahasapeemapetilon", "text": ""}
{"id": "64306", "revid": "47924678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64306", "title": "Hans Moleman", "text": ""}
{"id": "64308", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64308", "title": "Conglomerate (company)", "text": "Large company involved in many industries\nA conglomerate () is a type of multi-industry company that consists of several different and unrelated business entities that operate in various industries. A conglomerate usually is a parent company that owns and controls many subsidiaries, which are legally independent but financially and strategically dependent on the parent company. Conglomerates are often large and multinational corporations that have a global presence and a diversified portfolio of products and services. Conglomerates can be formed by merger and acquisitions, spin-offs, or joint ventures.\nConglomerates are common in many countries and sectors, such as media, banking, energy, mining, manufacturing, retail, defense, and transportation. This type of organization aims to achieve economies of scale, market power, risk diversification, and financial synergy. However, they also face challenges such as complexity, bureaucracy, agency problems, and regulation.\nThe popularity of conglomerates has varied over time and across regions. In the United States, conglomerates became popular in the 1960s as a form of economic bubble driven by low interest rates and leveraged buyouts. However, many of them collapsed or were broken up in the 1980s due to poor performance, accounting scandals, and antitrust regulation. In contrast, conglomerates have remained prevalent in Asia, especially in China, India, Japan, and South Korea. These conglomerates often have strong ties with the government and enjoy preferential policies and access to capital.\nUnited States.\nThe conglomerate fad of the 1960s.\nDuring the 1960s, the United States was caught up in a \"conglomerate fad\" which turned out to be a form of an economic bubble.\nDue to a combination of low interest rates and a repeating bear-bull market, conglomerates were able to buy smaller companies in leveraged buyouts (sometimes at temporarily deflated values). Famous examples from the 1960s include Gulf and Western Industries, Ling-Temco-Vought, ITT Corporation, Litton Industries, Textron, and Teledyne. The trick was to look for acquisition targets with solid earnings and much lower price\u2013earnings ratios than the acquirer. The conglomerate would make a tender offer to the target's shareholders at a princely premium to the target's current stock price. Upon obtaining shareholder approval, the conglomerate usually settled the transaction in something other than cash, like debentures, bonds, warrants or convertible debentures (issuing the latter two would effectively dilute its shareholders down the road, but many shareholders at the time were not thinking that far ahead). The conglomerate would then add the target's earnings to its earnings, thereby increasing the conglomerate's overall earnings per share. In finance jargon, the transaction was \"accretive to earnings.\" \nThe relatively lax accounting standards of the time meant that accountants were often able to get away with creative mathematics in calculating the conglomerate's post-acquisition consolidated earnings numbers. In turn, the price of the conglomerate's stock would go up, thereby re-establishing its previous price-earnings ratio, and then it could repeat the whole process with a new target. In plain English, conglomerates were using rapid acquisitions to create the illusion of rapid growth. In 1968, the peak year of the conglomerate fad, U.S. corporations completed a record number of mergers: approximately 4,500. In that year, at least 26 of the country's 500 largest corporations were acquired, of which 12 had assets above $250\u00a0million.\nAll this complex company reorganization had very real consequences for people who worked for companies that were either acquired by conglomerates or were seen as likely to be acquired by them. Acquisitions were a disorienting and demoralizing experience for executives at acquired companies\u2014those who were not immediately laid off found themselves at the mercy of the conglomerate's executives in some other distant city. Most conglomerates' headquarters were located on the West Coast or East Coast, while many of their acquisitions were located in the country's interior. Many interior cities were devastated by repeatedly losing the headquarters of corporations to mergers, in which independent ventures were reduced to subsidiaries of conglomerates based in New York or Los Angeles. Pittsburgh, for example, lost about a dozen. The terror instilled by the mere prospect of such harsh consequences for executives and their home cities meant that fending off takeovers, real or imagined, was a constant distraction for executives at all corporations seen as choice acquisition targets during this era.\nThe chain reaction of rapid growth through acquisitions could not last forever. When interest rates rose to offset rising inflation, conglomerate profits began to fall. The beginning of the end came in January 1968, when Litton shocked Wall Street by announcing a quarterly profit of only 21 cents per share, versus 63 cents for the previous year's quarter. This was \"just a decline in earnings of about 19 percent\", not an actual loss or a corporate scandal, and \"yet the stock was crushed, plummeting from $90 to $53\". It would take two more years before it was clear that the conglomerate fad was on its way out. The stock market eventually figured out that the conglomerates' bloated and inefficient businesses were as cyclical as any others\u2014indeed, it was that cyclical nature that had caused such businesses to be such undervalued acquisition targets in the first place\u2014and their descent put \"the lie to the claim that diversification allowed them to ride out a downturn.\" A major selloff of conglomerate shares ensued. To keep going, many conglomerates were forced to shed the new businesses they had recently purchased, and by the mid-1970s most conglomerates had been reduced to shells. The conglomerate fad was subsequently replaced by newer ideas like focusing on a company's core competency and unlocking shareholder value (which often translates into spin-offs).\nGenuine diversification.\nIn other cases, conglomerates are formed for genuine interests of diversification rather than manipulation of paper return on investment. Companies with this orientation would only make acquisitions or start new branches in other sectors when they believed this would increase profitability or stability by sharing risks. Flush with cash during the 1980s, General Electric also moved into financing and financial services, which in 2005 accounted for about 45% of the company's net earnings. GE formerly owned a minority interest in NBCUniversal, which owns the NBC television network and several other cable networks. United Technologies was also a successful conglomerate until it was dismantled in the late 2010s.\nMutual funds.\nWith the spread of mutual funds (especially index funds since 1976), investors could more easily obtain diversification by owning a small slice of many companies in a fund rather than owning shares in a conglomerate. Another example of a successful conglomerate is Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway, a holding company that used surplus capital from its insurance subsidiaries to invest in businesses across a variety of industries.\nInternational.\nThe end of the First World War caused a brief economic crisis in Weimar Germany, permitting entrepreneurs to buy businesses at rock-bottom prices. The most successful, Hugo Stinnes, established the most powerful private economic conglomerate in 1920s Europe \u2013 Stinnes Enterprises \u2013 which embraced sectors as diverse as manufacturing, mining, shipbuilding, hotels, newspapers, and other enterprises.\nThe best-known British conglomerate was Hanson. It followed a rather different timescale than the U.S. examples mentioned above, as it was founded in 1964 and ceased to be a conglomerate when it split itself into four separate listed companies between 1995 and 1997.\nIn Hong Kong, some of the well-known conglomerates such as:\nIn Japan, a distinct model of conglomerate, known as the \"keiretsu\", evolved. Whereas the Western model of conglomerate consists of a single corporation with multiple subsidiaries controlled by that corporation, the companies in a keiretsu are linked by interlocking shareholdings and a central role of a bank. Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo are some of Japan's best-known keiretsu, reaching from automobile manufacturing to the production of electronics such as televisions. While not a keiretsu, Sony is an example of a modern Japanese conglomerate with operations in consumer electronics, video games, the music industry, television and film production and distribution, financial services, and telecommunications.\nIn China, many of the country's conglomerates are state-owned enterprises, but there is a substantial number of private conglomerates. Notable conglomerates include BYD, CIMC, China Merchants Bank, Huawei, JXD, Meizu, Ping An Insurance, TCL, Tencent, TP-Link, ZTE, Legend Holdings, Dalian Wanda Group, China Poly Group, Beijing Enterprises, and Fosun International. Fosun is currently China's largest civilian-run conglomerate by revenue.\nIn South Korea, the \"chaebol\" is a type of conglomerate owned and operated by a family. A chaebol is also inheritable, as most of the current presidents of chaebols succeeded their fathers or grandfathers. Some of the largest and most well-known Korean chaebols are Samsung, LG, Hyundai Kia and SK.\nIn India, family-owned enterprises became some of Asia's largest conglomerates, such as the Aditya Birla Group, Tata Group, Emami, Kirloskar Group, Larsen &amp; Toubro, Mahindra Group, Bajaj Group, ITC Limited, Essar Group, Reliance Industries, Adani Group and the Bharti Enterprises.\nIn Brazil the largest conglomerates are J&amp;F Investimentos, Odebrecht, Ita\u00fasa, Camargo Corr\u00eaa, Votorantim Group, Andrade Gutierrez, and Queiroz Galv\u00e3o.\nIn Turkey the largest conglomerates are Ko\u00e7 Holding, Sabanc\u0131 Holding, Y\u0131ld\u0131z Holding, \u00c7ukurova Holding, Do\u011fu\u015f Holding and Do\u011fan Holding.\nIn New Zealand, Fletcher Challenge was formed in 1981 from the merger of Fletcher Holdings, Challenge Corporation, and Tasman Pulp &amp; Paper, in an attempt to create a New Zealand-based multi-national company. At the time, the newly merged company dealt in construction, building supplies, pulp and paper mills, forestry, and oil &amp; gas. Following a series of bungled investments, the company demerged in the early 2000s to concentrate on building and construction.\nIn Pakistan, some of the examples are Adamjee Group, Dawood Hercules, House of Habib, Lakson Group and Nishat Group.\nIn the Philippines, the largest conglomerate of the country is the Ayala Corporation which focuses on malls, bank, real estate development, and telecommunications. The other big conglomerates in the Philippines included JG Summit Holdings, Lopez Holdings Corporation, ABS-CBN Corporation, GMA Network, MediaQuest Holdings, TV5 Network, SM Investments, Metro Pacific Investments, and San Miguel Corporation.\nIn the United States, some of the examples are the Walt Disney Company, Warner Bros. Discovery and The Trump Organization.\nIn Canada, one of the examples is Hudson's Bay Company. Another such conglomerate is JD Irving, which controls a large portion of the economic activities as well as media in the Province of New Brunswick.\nAdvantages and disadvantages of conglomerates.\nDisadvantages.\nSome cite the decreased cost of conglomerate stock (a phenomenon known as conglomerate discount) as evidential of these disadvantages, while other traders believe this tendency to be a market inefficiency, which undervalues the true strength of these stocks.\nMedia conglomerates.\n \nIn her 1999 book \"No Logo\", Naomi Klein provides several examples of mergers and acquisitions between media companies designed to create conglomerates to create synergy between them:\nInternet conglomerates.\nA relatively new development, Internet conglomerates, such as Alphabet, Google's parent company belong to the modern media conglomerate group and play a major role within various industries, such as brand management. In most cases, Internet conglomerates consist of corporations that own several medium-sized online or hybrid online-offline projects. In many cases, newly joined corporations get higher returns on investment, access to business contacts, and better rates on loans from various banks.\nFood conglomerates.\nSimilar to other industries, many food companies can be termed as conglomerates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64309", "revid": "15958022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64309", "title": "Noord Brabant", "text": ""}
{"id": "64311", "revid": "1285674026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64311", "title": "July 1, 1867", "text": ""}
{"id": "64313", "revid": "287161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64313", "title": "House of Commons of Canada", "text": "Lower house of the Parliament of Canada\nThe House of Commons of Canada () is the lower house of the Parliament of Canada. Together with the Crown and the Senate of Canada, they comprise the bicameral legislature of Canada.\nThe House of Commons is a democratically elected body whose members are known as members of Parliament (MPs). The number of MPs is adjusted periodically in alignment with each decennial census. Since the 2025 federal election, the number of seats in the House of Commons has been 343.\nMembers are elected by simple plurality (\"first-past-the-post\" system) in each of the country's electoral districts, which are colloquially known as \"ridings\". MPs may hold office until Parliament is dissolved and serve for constitutionally limited terms of up to five years after an election. Historically, however, terms have ended before their expiry and the sitting government has typically dissolved parliament within four years of an election according to a long-standing convention. In any case, an act of Parliament now limits each term to four years. Seats in the House of Commons are distributed roughly in proportion to the population of each province and territory. However, some ridings are more populous than others, and the Canadian constitution contains provisions regarding provincial representation. As a result, there is some interprovincial and regional malapportionment relative to the population.\nThe British North America Act 1867 (now called the \"Constitution Act, 1867\") created the House of Commons, modelling it on the British House of Commons. The lower of the two houses making up the parliament, the House of Commons, in practice holds far more power than the upper house, the Senate. Although the approval of both chambers is necessary for legislation to become law, the Senate only occasionally amends bills passed by the House of Commons and rarely rejects them. Moreover, the Cabinet is responsible primarily to the House of Commons. The government stays in office only so long as they retain the support, or \"confidence\", of the lower house.\nThe traditional meeting chamber of the House of Commons is in the Centre Block of the Parliament Hill complex in Ottawa. However, as of 2025[ [update]], Centre Block is undergoing renovations; the House of Commons is therefore meeting in a temporary chamber in the West Block of the complex.\nEtymology.\nThe term derives from the Anglo-Norman word , referring to the geographic and collective \"communities\" of their parliamentary representatives and not the third estate, the commonality. This distinction is made clear in the official French name of the body, '. Canada and the United Kingdom remain the only countries to use the name \"House of Commons\" for a lower house of parliament. The body's formal name is: The Honourable the Commons of Canada in Parliament assembled ().\nHistory.\nThe House of Commons came into existence in 1867, when the British Parliament passed the British North America Act 1867, uniting the Province of Canada (which was divided into Quebec and Ontario), Nova Scotia and New Brunswick into a single federation called Canada. The new Parliament of Canada consisted of the monarch (represented by the governor general, who also represented the Colonial Office), the Senate and the House of Commons. The Parliament of Canada was based on the Westminster model (that is, the model of the Parliament of the United Kingdom). Unlike the UK Parliament, the powers of the Parliament of Canada were limited in that other powers were assigned exclusively to the provincial legislatures. The Parliament of Canada also remained subordinate to the British Parliament, the supreme legislative authority for the entire British Empire. Greater autonomy was granted by the Statute of Westminster 1931, after which new acts of the British Parliament did not apply to Canada, with some exceptions. These exceptions were removed by the Canada Act 1982.\nFrom 1867, the Commons met in the chamber previously used by the Legislative Assembly of Canada until the building was destroyed by fire in 1916. It relocated to the amphitheatre of the Victoria Memorial Museum \u2013 what is today the Canadian Museum of Nature, where it met until 1922. Until the end of 2018, the Commons sat in the Centre Block chamber. Starting with the final sitting before the 2019 federal election, the Commons sits in a temporary chamber in the West Block until at least 2028, while renovations are undertaken in the Centre Block of Parliament.\nLeadership.\nCeremonial and Constitutional officers.\nFollowing an election the House of Commons elects a presiding officer, known as the speaker, at the beginning of each new parliamentary term, and also whenever a vacancy arises. Formerly, the prime minister determined who would serve as speaker. Although the House voted on the matter, the voting constituted a mere formality. Since 1986, however, the House has elected speakers by secret ballot. The speaker is assisted by a deputy speaker, who also holds the title of chair of Committees of the Whole. Two other deputies\u2014the deputy chair of Committees of the Whole and the assistant deputy chair of Committees of the Whole\u2014also preside. The duties of presiding over the House are divided between the four officers aforementioned; however, the speaker usually presides over Question Period and over the most important debates.\nOfficers of the House who are not members include the clerk of the House of Commons, the deputy clerk, the law clerk and parliamentary counsel, and several other clerks. These officers advise the speaker and members on the rules and procedure of the House in addition to exercising senior management functions within the House administration. Another important officer is the sergeant-at-arms, whose duties include the maintenance of order and security on the House's premises and inside the buildings of the parliamentary precinct. (The Royal Canadian Mounted Police patrol Parliament Hill but are not allowed into the buildings unless asked by the speaker). The sergeant-at-arms also carries the ceremonial mace, a symbol of the authority of the Crown and the House of Commons, into the House each sitting. The House is also staffed by parliamentary pages, who carry messages to the members in the chamber and otherwise provide assistance to the House.\nThe term \"member of Parliament\" is usually just used only to refer to elected members of the House of Commons, even though the Senate is also a part of Parliament. Members of the House of Commons may use the post-nominal letters \"MP\". The annual salary of each MP, as of \u00a02024,[ [update]] was $203,100; members may receive additional salaries in right of other offices they hold (for instance, the speakership). MPs rank immediately below senators in the order of precedence.\nCommittees.\nThe Parliament of Canada uses committees for a variety of purposes. Committees consider bills in detail and may make amendments. Other committees scrutinize various Government agencies and ministries.\nPotentially, the largest of the Commons committees are the Committees of the Whole, which, as the name suggests, consist of all the members of the House. A Committee of the Whole meets in the Chamber of the House but proceeds under slightly modified rules of debate. (For example, a member may make more than one speech on a motion in a Committee of the Whole, but not during a normal session of the House.) Instead of the speaker, the chair, deputy chair, or assistant deputy chair presides. The House resolves itself into a Committee of the Whole to discuss appropriation bills, and sometimes for other legislation.\nThe House of Commons also has several standing committees, each of which has responsibility for a particular area of government (for example, finance or transport). These committees oversee the relevant government departments, may hold hearings and collect evidence on governmental operations and review departmental spending plans. Standing committees may also consider and amend bills. Standing committees consist of between sixteen and eighteen members each, and elect their chairs.\nSome bills are considered by legislative committees, each of which consists of up to fifteen members. The membership of each legislative committee roughly reflects the strength of the parties in the whole House. A legislative committee is appointed on an \"ad hoc\" basis to study and amend a specific bill. Also, the chair of a legislative committee is not elected by the members of the committee but is instead appointed by the speaker, normally from among the speaker's deputies. Most bills, however, are referred to standing committees rather than legislative committees.\nThe House may also create \"ad hoc\" committees to study matters other than bills. Such committees are known as special committees. Each such body, like a legislative committee, may consist of no more than fifteen members. Other committees include joint committees, which include both members of the House of Commons and senators; such committees may hold hearings and oversee government, but do not revise legislation.\nCurrent committees: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer committees:\nMembers and electoral districts.\nComposition.\nThe House of Commons is composed of Members of Parliament (MPs), each of whom represents a single geographic constituency called an electoral district (also known colloquially as a \"riding\"). The constitution specifies that each province is entitled to one MP for every unit of population (called the \"electoral quotient\") it has, or part thereof, but additional MPs are allocated according to various clauses described below. Territorial representation is independent of the population; each territory is entitled to one seat.\nThe number of MPs is adjusted periodically through a process called redistribution conducted in alignment with each decennial census. Since 2025, when the most recent redistribution took effect, there have been 343 MPs, distributed by province and territory as follows: \nSection 51 of the Constitution Act, 1867 specifies how seats are to be distributed among the provinces in proportion to population, subject to the following exceptions:\nAs a result of these clauses, smaller provinces that have experienced a relative decline in population have become over-represented in the House. Ontario, British Columbia, and Alberta are under-represented in proportion to their populations, while Quebec's representation is close to the national average (107,848 as at the 2025 election, based on the 2021 census). The other six provinces are over-represented. The \"representation rule\" was added in 2011 with the intent of adding a \"de facto\" backstop to ensure that the disproportionate representation afforded those six provinces, which are all majority English-speaking, did not result in an overall linguistic bias in the composition of the House of Commons by ensuring French-speaking Quebec obtained sufficient additional MPs of its own to always remain just under the national average.\nIn Canada, the calculation of provincial representation considers the entire permanent population rather than citizens or eligible electors, in effect giving children and adults who do not qualify to vote equal weight to registrable persons. The \"electoral quotient\" had been 111,166 for the redistribution of seats after the 2011 census and is adjusted following each decennial census pro rata, by population change, since the previous decennial census. The population of the province is then divided by the electoral quotient giving the base provincial-seat allocation. The \"special clauses\" are then applied to increase the number of seats for certain provinces, bringing the total number of seats (with the three seats for the territories), now, to 343.\nFollowing the apportionment of seats between the provinces, boundary commissions, appointed by the federal government for each province, have the task of drawing the boundaries of the electoral districts in each province.\nPrerequisites and Qualifications.\nUnder the \"Constitution Act, 1867\", Parliament is empowered to determine the qualifications of members of the House of Commons. The present qualifications are outlined in the \"Canada Elections Act\", which was passed in 2000. Under the Act, individuals must be eligible voters as of the day of nomination, to stand as a candidate. Thus, minors and individuals who are not citizens of Canada are not allowed to become candidates. The \"Canada Elections Act\" also bars prisoners from standing for election (although they may vote). Moreover, individuals found guilty of election-related crimes are prohibited from becoming members for five years (in some cases, seven years) after conviction.\nThe Act also prohibits certain officials from standing for the House of Commons. These officers include members of provincial and territorial legislatures (although this was not always the case), sheriffs, crown attorneys, most judges, and election officers. The chief electoral officer (the head of Elections Canada, the federal agency responsible for conducting elections) is prohibited from standing as candidate and, until recently, was prohibited from voting. Finally, under the \"Constitution Act, 1867\", a member of the Senate may not also become a member of the House of Commons, and MPs must give up their seats when appointed to the Senate or the bench.\nGeneral elections.\nElections Canada is the independent, non-partisan agency responsible for conducting federal elections and referendums.\nGeneral elections occur whenever parliament is dissolved by the governor general on the monarch's behalf. The timing of the dissolution has historically been chosen by the Prime minister. The \"Constitution Act, 1867\", provides that a parliament last no longer than five years. Canadian election law requires that elections must be held on the third Monday in October in the fourth year after the last election, subject to the discretion of the Crown. Campaigns must be at least 36 days long. Candidates are usually nominated by political parties. A candidate can run independently, although it is rare for such a candidate to win. Most successful independent candidates have been incumbents who were expelled from their political parties (for example, John Nunziata in 1997 or Jody Wilson-Raybould in 2019) or who failed to win their parties' nomination (for example, Chuck Cadman in 2004). Most Canadian candidates are chosen in meetings called by their party's local association. In practice, the candidate who signs up the most local party members generally wins the nomination. There is no set date for an election to take place.\nTo run for a seat in the house, candidates must file nomination papers bearing the signatures of at least 50 or 100 constituents (depending on the size of the electoral district). Each electoral district returns one member using the first-past-the-post electoral system, under which the candidate with a plurality of votes wins. To vote, one must be a citizen of Canada and at least eighteen years of age. Declining the ballot, which is possible in several provinces, is not an option under current federal regulations.\nOnce elected, a member of Parliament normally continues to serve until the next dissolution of parliament. If a member dies, resigns, or ceases to be qualified, their seat falls vacant. It is also possible for the House of Commons to expel a member, but this power is only exercised when the member has engaged in serious misconduct or criminal activity. Formerly, MPs appointed to the cabinet were expected to resign their seats, though this practice ceased in 1931. In each case, a vacancy may be filled by a by-election in the appropriate electoral district. The first-past-the-post system is used in by-elections, as in general elections.\nRoles and procedures.\nThough it does not formally elect the prime minister, the House of Commons indirectly controls who becomes prime minister. By convention, the prime minister is answerable to and must maintain the support of, the House of Commons. Thus, whenever the office of prime minister falls vacant, the governor general has the duty of appointing the person most likely to command the support of the House\u2014normally the leader of the largest party in the lower house, although the system allows a coalition of two or more parties. This has not happened in the Canadian federal parliament but has occurred in Canadian provinces. The leader of the second-largest party (or in the case of a coalition, the largest party out of government) usually becomes the leader of the Official Opposition. Moreover, the prime minister is, by unwritten convention, a member of the House of Commons, rather than of the Senate. Only two prime ministers governed from the Senate: Sir John Abbott (1891\u20131892) and Sir Mackenzie Bowell (1894\u20131896). Both men got the job following the death of a prime minister and did not contest elections.\nMeeting times and procedures.\nThe House usually sits Monday to Friday from late January to mid-June and from mid-September to mid-December according to an established calendar, though it can modify the calendar if additional or fewer sittings are required. During these periods, the House generally rises for one week per month to allow members to work in their constituencies. Sittings of the House are open to the public. Proceedings are broadcast over cable and satellite television and over live streaming video on the Internet by CPAC owned by a consortium of Canadian cable companies. They are also recorded in text form in print and online in Hansard, the official report of parliamentary debates.\nThe \"Constitution Act, 1867\" establishes a quorum of twenty members (including the member presiding) for the House of Commons. Any member may request a count of the members to ascertain the presence of a quorum; if however, the speaker feels that at least twenty members are clearly in the Chamber, the request may be denied. If a count does occur, and reveals that fewer than twenty members are present, the speaker orders bells to be rung, so that other members on the parliamentary precincts may come to the Chamber. If, after a second count, a quorum is still not present, the speaker must adjourn the House until the next sitting day.\nThe member of the Government responsible for steering legislation through the House is leader of the Government in the House of Commons. The \"government house leader\" (as they are more commonly known) is a member of Parliament selected by the prime minister and holds cabinet rank. The leader manages the schedule of the House of Commons and attempts to secure the Opposition's support for the Government's legislative agenda.\nQuestion period.\nThe House of Commons scrutinizes the ministers of the Crown through \"Question Period\", a daily forty-five-minute period during which members have the opportunity to ask questions of the prime minister and other Cabinet ministers. Questions must relate to the responding minister's official government activities, not to their activities as a party leader or as a private Member of Parliament. Members may also question committee chairmen on the work of their respective committees. Members of each party are entitled to the number of questions proportional to the party caucus' strength in the house. In addition to questions asked orally during Question Period, Members of Parliament may also make inquiries in writing.\nIn times where there is a majority government, the House of Commons' scrutiny of the government is weak. Since elections use the first-past-the-post electoral system, the governing party tends to enjoy a large majority in the Commons; there is often limited need to compromise with other parties. (Minority governments, however, are not uncommon.) Modern Canadian political parties are so tightly organized that they leave relatively little room for free action by their MPs. In many cases, MPs may be expelled from their parties for voting against the instructions of party leaders. As well, the major parties require candidates' nominations to be signed by party leaders, thus giving the leaders the power to, effectively, end a politician's career. Thus, defeats of majority governments on issues of confidence are very rare. Paul Martin's Liberal minority government lost a vote of no confidence in 2005; the last time this had occurred was in 1979, when Joe Clark's Progressive Conservative minority government was defeated after a term of just six months.\nRole in Federation.\nAs a Westminster modelled democracy, the Government of Canada, or more specifically the Governor-in-Council, exercising the executive power on behalf of the prime minister and Cabinet, enjoys a complementary relationship with the House of Commons\u2014similar to the UK model, and in contrast to the US model of separation of powers.\nThe prime minister stays in office by retaining the confidence of the House of Commons. The lower house may indicate its lack of support for the ruling party administration by rejecting a motion of confidence, or by passing a motion of no confidence. Important bills that form a part of the government's agenda are generally considered matters of confidence, as is any taxation or spending bill and the annual budget. When a government has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, the prime minister is obliged to either resign or request the governor general to dissolve parliament, thereby precipitating a general election. The governor general may theoretically refuse to dissolve parliament, thereby forcing the prime minister to resign. The last instance of a governor general refusing to grant a dissolution was in 1926.\nIn modern times the government of Canada has strengthened its relationship to the First Nations groups living in Canada in place of the Crown.\nDissolution of term.\nExcept when compelled to request a dissolution by an adverse vote on a confidence issue, the prime minister is allowed to choose the timing of dissolutions, and consequently the timing of general elections. The time chosen reflects political considerations, and is generally most opportune for the prime minister's party. However, no parliamentary term can last for more than five years from the first sitting of Parliament; a dissolution is automatic upon the expiry of this period. Normally, Parliaments do not last for full five-year terms; prime ministers typically ask for dissolutions after about three or four years. In 2006, the Harper government introduced a bill to set fixed election dates every four years, although snap elections are still permitted. The bill was approved by Parliament and has now become law.\nWhatever the reason\u2014the expiry of parliament's term, the choice of the prime minister, or a government defeat in the House of Commons\u2014a dissolution is followed by general elections. If the prime minister's party retains its majority in the House of Commons, then the prime minister may remain in power. On the other hand, if their party has lost its majority, the prime minister may resign or may attempt to retain leadership by winning support from members of other parties. A prime minister may resign even without being defeated at the polls (for example, for personal health reasons). If the prime minister resigns, the new leader of the outgoing prime minister's party becomes prime minister.\nLegislative functions.\nAlthough legislation may be introduced in either chamber, most bills originate in the House of Commons.\nIn conformity with the British model, the Lower House alone is authorized to originate bills imposing taxes or appropriating public funds. This restriction on the power of the Senate is not merely a matter of convention, but is explicitly stated in the \"Constitution Act, 1867\". Otherwise, the power of the two Houses of Parliament is theoretically equal; the approval of each is necessary for a bill's passage.\nIn practice, however, the House of Commons is the dominant chamber of Parliament, with the Senate very rarely exercising its powers in a way that opposes the will of the democratically elected chamber. The last major bill defeated in the Senate came in 2010, when a bill passed by the Commons concerning climate change was rejected in the Senate.\nA clause in the \"Constitution Act, 1867\" permits the governor general (with the approval of the monarch) to appoint up to eight extra senators to resolve a deadlock between the two houses. The clause was invoked only once, in 1990, when Prime Minister Brian Mulroney advised the appointment of an additional eight senators to secure the Senate's approval for the Goods and Services Tax.\nDebates.\nDuring debates, members may only speak if called upon by the speaker (or, as is most often the case, the deputy presiding). The speaker is responsible for ensuring that members of all parties have an opportunity to be heard. The speaker also determines who is to speak if two or more members rise simultaneously, but the decision may be altered by the House. Motions must be moved by one member and seconded by another before debate may begin. Some motions, however, are non-debatable.\nSpeeches may be made in either of Canada's official languages (English and French), and it is customary for bilingual members of parliament to respond to these in the same language they were made in. It is common for bilingual MPs to switch between languages during speeches. Members must address their speeches to the presiding officer, not the House, using the words \"Mr. Speaker\" () or \"Madam Speaker\" (). Other members must be referred to in the third person. Traditionally, members do not refer to each other by name, but by constituency or cabinet post, using forms such as \"the honourable member for [electoral district]\" or \"the minister of...\" Members' names are routinely used only during roll call votes, in which members stand and are named to have their vote recorded; at that point they are referred to by title (\"Ms.\" or \"mister\" for Anglophones and \"madame\", \"mademoiselle\", or \"monsieur\" for Francophones) and last name, except where members have the same or similar last names, at which point they would be listed by their name and riding (\"\"M. Mass\u00e9, Avignon\u2014La Mitis\u2014Matane\u2014Matap\u00e9dia; Mr. Masse, Windsor West...\").\nNo member may speak more than once on the same question (except that the mover of a motion is entitled to make one speech at the beginning of the debate and another at the end). Moreover, tediously repetitive or irrelevant remarks are prohibited, as are written remarks read into the record (although this behaviour is creeping into the modern debate). The speaker may order a member making such remarks to cease speaking. The Standing Orders of the House of Commons prescribe time limits for speeches. The limits depend on the nature of the motion but are most commonly between ten and twenty minutes. However, under certain circumstances, the prime minister, the Opposition leader, and others are entitled to make longer speeches. The debate may be further restricted by the passage of \"time allocation\" motions. Alternatively, the House may end debate more quickly by passing a motion for \"closure\".\nMember roll-call.\nWhen the debate concludes, the motion in question is put to a vote. The House first votes by voice vote; the presiding officer puts the question, and members respond either \"yea\" (in favour of the motion) or \"nay\" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote, but five or more members may challenge the assessment, thereby forcing a recorded vote (known as a division, although, in fact, the House does not divide for votes the way the British House of Commons does). First, members in favour of the motion rise, so that the clerks may record their names and votes. Then, the same procedure is repeated for members who oppose the motion. There are no formal means for recording an abstention, though a member may informally abstain by remaining seated during the division. If there is an equality of votes, the speaker has a casting vote.\nThe member of the Government responsible for steering legislation through the House is leader of the Government in the House of Commons. The \"government house leader\" (as they are more commonly known) is a member of Parliament selected by the prime minister and holds cabinet rank. The leader manages the schedule of the House of Commons and attempts to secure the Opposition's support for the Government's legislative agenda.\nThe outcome of most votes is largely known beforehand since political parties in Cabinet normally instruct members on how to vote. A party normally entrusts some members of Parliament, known as whips, with the task of ensuring that all party members vote as desired. Members of Parliament do not tend to vote against such instructions since those who do so are unlikely to reach higher political ranks in their parties. Errant members may be deselected as official party candidates during future elections, and, in serious cases, may be expelled from their parties outright. Thus, the independence of members of Parliament tends to be extremely low, and \"backbench rebellions\" by members discontent with their party's policies are rare. In some circumstances, however, parties announce \"free votes\", allowing members to vote as they please. This may be done on moral issues and is routine on private members' bills.\nPoints of order.\nThe speaker controls debates by calling on members to speak. If a member in the house believes that a rule (or standing order) has been breached, they may raise a \"point of order\", on which the speaker makes a ruling that is not subject to any debate or appeal. The speaker may also discipline members who fail to observe the rules of the House. When presiding, the speaker must remain impartial. The speaker also oversees the administration of the House and is chair of the Board of Internal Economy, the governing body for the House of Commons. The current speaker of the House of Commons is Francis Scarpaleggia.\nSymbols.\nThe Commons' mace has the shape of a medieval mace which was used as a weapon, but in brass and ornate in detail and symbolism. At its bulbous head is a replica of the Imperial State Crown; the choice of this crown for the Commons' mace differentiates it from the Senate's mace, which has St. Edward's Crown at its apex. The Commons mace is placed upon the table in front of the speaker for the duration of the sitting with the crown pointing towards the prime minister and the other cabinet ministers, who advise the monarch and governor general and are accountable to this chamber (in the Senate chamber, the mace points towards the throne, where the king has the right to sit himself).\nCarved above the speaker's chair is the royal arms of the United Kingdom. This chair was a gift from the United Kingdom Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Association in 1921, to replace the chair that was destroyed by the fire of 1916, and was a replica of the chair in the British House of Commons at the time. These arms at its apex were considered the royal arms for general purposes throughout the British Empire at the time. Since 1931, however, Canada has been an independent country and the Canadian coat of arms are now understood to be the royal arms of the monarch. Escutcheons of the same original royal arms can be found on each side of the speaker's chair held by a lion and a unicorn.\nIn response to a campaign by Bruce Hicks for the Canadianization of symbols of royal authority and to advance the identity of parliamentary institutions, a proposal that was supported by speakers of the House of Commons John Fraser and Gilbert Parent, a Commons committee was eventually struck following a motion by MP Derek Lee, before which Hicks and Robert Watt, the first chief herald of Canada, was called as the only two expert witnesses, though Senator Serge Joyal joined the committee on behalf of the Senate. Commons' speaker Peter Milliken then asked the governor general to authorize such a symbol. In the United Kingdom, the House of Commons and the House of Lords use the royal badge of the portcullis, in green and red respectively, to represent those institutions and to distinguish them from the government, the courts and the monarch. The Canadian Heraldic Authority on April 15, 2008, granted the House of Commons, as an institution, a badge consisting of the chamber's mace (as described above) behind the escutcheon of the shield of the royal arms of Canada (representing the monarch, in whose name the House of Commons deliberates).\nChamber and building characteristics.\nChamber design.\nThe current and original Canadian House of Commons chamber was influenced by the British House of Commons rectangular layout and that of the original St Stephen's Chapel in the Palace of Westminster. The difference from the British layout is with the use of individual chairs and tables for members, absent in the British Commons' design.\nWith the exception of the legislatures in Nunavut (circular seating), the Northwest Territories (circular seating), and Manitoba (U-shaped seating), all other Canadian provincial legislatures share the common design of the Canadian House of Commons.\nThe Department of Public Works and Government Services undertook work during the 41st Parliament to determine how the seating arrangement could be modified to accommodate the additional 30 seats added in the 2015 election. Ultimately, new \"theatre\" seats were designed, with five seats in a row at one desk, the seats pulling down for use. Such seat sets now form almost the entire length of the last two rows on each side of the chamber.\nSeating plan.\nLike the Senate, the House of Commons meets on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. The Commons Chamber is modestly decorated in green, in contrast with the more lavishly furnished red Senate Chamber. The arrangement is similar to the design of the Chamber of the British House of Commons. The seats are evenly divided between both sides of the Chamber, three sword-lengths apart (about three metres). The speaker's chair (which can be adjusted for height) is at the north end of the Chamber. In front of it is the Table of the House, on which rests the ceremonial mace. Various \"table officers\"\u2014clerks and other officials\u2014sit at the table, ready to advise the speaker on procedure when necessary. Members of the Government sit on the benches on the speaker's right, while members of the Opposition occupy the benches on the speaker's left. Government ministers sit around the prime minister, who is traditionally assigned the 11th seat in the front row on the speaker's right-hand side. The leader of the Official Opposition sits directly across from the prime minister and is surrounded by a Shadow Cabinet or critics for the government portfolios. The remaining party leaders sit in the front rows. Other members of Parliament who do not hold any kind of special responsibilities are known as \"backbenchers\".\nSeating plan for the current House of Commons:\nMember's offices.\nOff Parliament Hill, MPs have some offices at the Justice Building or Confederation Building down Wellington Street near the Supreme Court.\nRenovations.\nThe Centre Block chamber is undergoing an estimated decade-long restoration and renovation, which began in December 2018. Parliamentarians have relocated to the courtyard of the West Block, which also underwent seven years of renovations and repairs to get ready for the move. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau marked the closing of the Centre Block on December 12, 2018. The final sittings of both the House of Commons and the Senate in Centre Block took place on December 13, 2018.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64314", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64314", "title": "Ingeborg Bachmann", "text": "Austrian poet and author (1926\u20131973)\nIngeborg Bachmann (; 25 June 1926 \u2013 17 October 1973) was an Austrian poet and author. She is regarded as one of the major voices of German-language literature in the 20th century. In 1963, she was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature by German philologist Harald Patzer.\nEarly life and education.\nBachmann was born in Klagenfurt, in the Austrian state of Carinthia, the daughter of Olga (n\u00e9e Haas) and Matthias Bachmann, a schoolteacher. Her father was an early member of the Austrian National Socialist Party. She had a sister, Isolde, and a brother, Heinz.\nShe studied philosophy, psychology, German philology, and law at the universities of Innsbruck, Graz, and Vienna. In 1949, she received her PhD from the University of Vienna with her dissertation titled \"The Critical Reception of the Existential Philosophy of Martin Heidegger\"; her thesis adviser was Victor Kraft.\nCareer.\nAfter graduating, Bachmann worked as a scriptwriter and editor at the Allied radio station \"Rot-Weiss-Rot\", a job that enabled her to obtain an overview of contemporary literature and also supplied her with a decent income, making possible proper literary work. Her first radio dramas were published by the station. Her literary career was enhanced by contact with Hans Weigel (litt\u00e9rateur and sponsor of young post-war literature) and the literary circle known as Gruppe 47, whose members also included Ilse Aichinger, Paul Celan, Heinrich B\u00f6ll, Marcel Reich-Ranicki and G\u00fcnter Grass.\nIn 1953, she moved to Rome, Italy, where she spent the large part of the following years working on poems, essays and short stories as well as opera libretti in collaboration with Hans Werner Henze, which soon brought with them international fame and numerous awards.\nWritings.\nBachmann's doctoral dissertation expresses her growing disillusionment with Heideggerian existentialism, which was in part resolved through her growing interest in Ludwig Wittgenstein, whose \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" significantly influenced her relationship to language. During her lifetime, Bachmann was known mostly for her two collections of poetry, \"Die gestundete Zeit\" (Time Deferred) and \"Anrufung des Grossen B\u00e4ren\" (Invocation of Ursa Major).\nBachmann's literary work focuses on themes like personal boundaries, establishment of the truth, and philosophy of language, the latter in the tradition of Wittgenstein. Many of her prose works represent the struggles of women to survive and to find a voice in post-war society. She also addresses the histories of imperialism and fascism, in particular, the persistence of imperialist ideas in the present. Fascism was a recurring theme in her writings. In her novel \"Der Fall Franza\" (\"The Case of Franza\") Bachmann argued that fascism had not died in 1945 but had survived in the German speaking world of the 1960s in human relations and particularly in men's oppression of women. In Germany the achievements of the women's rights campaign at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century had been systematically undone by the fascist Nazi regime in the 1930s. Bachmann's engagement with fascism followed that of other women writers who in the immediate post-war period dealt with fascism from a woman's perspective, such as Anna Seghers, Ilse Aichinger, Ingeborg Drewitz and Christa Wolf.\nA crisis of \"Vergangenheitsbew\u00e4ltigung\", along with the fear of the continued existence of National Socialism within democracy, suffuses Bachmann's oeuvre. In her work for radio, this takes the form of a self-conscious pivoting between the possibility of freedom and the inevitability of imprisonment. Her first radio play \"Ein Gesch\u00e4ft mit Tr\u00e4umen\" (\"A Shop for Dreams\") is concerned with the inhumanity of violence and oppression. \"Der gute Gott von Manhattan\" (\"The Good God of Manhattan\") consciously echoes Bertolt Brecht's \"The Good Person of Szechwan\", as it tackles the impossibility of Good and Love surviving in capitalist, consumerist societies. In her analysis of Bachmann's radio drama \"Die Zikaden\" (\"The Cicadas\"), which was written in Ischia and then Naples towards the end of 1954, and first broadcast on Nordwestdeutscher Rundfunk (NWDR) on 25 March 1955, Lucy Jeffery states thatThe transitory existence of the exiled or marginalised writer who escapes prejudice, conflict, and dominance is paralleled by the experience of the refugee. The feeling of unsettledness is measured against the desire to find that utopian land away (both geographically and temporally) from suffering. Yet, as Bachmann knows too well, escapism is a temporary heterotopia where guilt and longing cannot be kept at bay. Similar themes can also be found throughout Bachmann's writings in works such as \"Ein Wildermuth\" (\"A Wildermuth\"), included in \"Das drei\u00dfigste Jahr\" (\"The Thirtieth Year: Stories\", published in 1961), \"Malina\" (published in 1971), and \"Kriegstagebuch\" (\"War Diary\", published posthumously in 2010).\nBachmann was also in the vanguard of Austrian women writers who discovered in their private lives the political realities from which they attempted to achieve emancipation. Bachmann's writings and those of Barbara Frischmuth, Brigitte Schwaiger and Anna Mitgutsch were widely published in Germany. Male Austrian authors such as Franz Innerhofer, Josef Winkler and Peter Turrini wrote equally popular works on traumatic experiences of socialisation. Often these authors produced their works for major German publishing houses. After Bachmann's death in 1973, Austrian writers such as Thomas Bernhard, Peter Handke and Elfriede Jelinek continued the tradition of Austrian literature in Germany.\nLectures.\nBetween November 1959 and February 1960 Bachmann gave five lectures on poetics at the Goethe University Frankfurt. Known as the \"Frankfurter Vorlesungen: Probleme zeitgen\u00f6ssischer Dichtung\" (\"Frankfurt Lectures: Problems of Contemporary Writings\") they are historically and substantively Bachmann's central work. In it she explained recurring themes in her early literary publications and she discussed the function of literature in society. Bachmann insisted that literature had to be viewed in its historic context, thus foreshadowing a rising interest in studying the connection between literary discourse and the contemporary understanding of history.\nIn the first lecture on \"Fragen und Scheinfragen\" (Questions and Pseudo-Questions) Bachmann focused on the role of writers in the post-war society and listed some essential questions that she defines \"destructive and frightening in their simplicity\". They are: why write? What do we mean by change and why do we want it through art? What are the limitations of the writer who wants to bring about change? According to Karen Achberger Bachmann views the great literary accomplishments of the twentieth century as expressions in language and poetic form of a moral and intellectual renewal in the individual writers; it is the writer's new thinking and experiencing that forms the core of their literary works, and lets them come closer to a new language. (\u2026) Bachmann stresses the need for a new language inhabited by a new spirit. (\u2026) She also associates literary renewal with writers on the verge of silence due to self-doubt and despair over the impotence of language and she cites in this context Hofmannsthal's \"Ein Brief\" (1902) \u2026 as the first articulation of this dilemma.\nIn the second lecture, \"\u00dcber Gedichte\" (On Poetry), she distinguished poetry with its new power to grasp reality in its language, from other genres such as novels and plays. With reference to G\u00fcnter Eich and Stefan George she identified a new generation of \"poet-prophets\" whose mission consisted in leading the world to the discovery of an \"ever purer heaven of art\" (George). Bachmann set these poets apart from the Surrealists who aspired to violence and the Futurists who claimed that \"war is beautiful\". She argued that these two movements exemplified \"art for art's sake\" and that the careers of Gottfried Benn and Ezra Pound exemplified the \"easy friendship between pure aestheticism with political barbarism\" (Achberger). She referenced Kafka on the need (with his words) to \"take the axe to the frozen sea in us\" and refuse to remain indifferent to the injustices that are perpetrated before our eyes. In the lecture she also named writings of Nelly Sachs, Marie Luise Kaschnitz, Hans Magnus Enzensberger and Paul Celan as examples of his concept of new poetry.\nIn the third lecture, on \"Das schreibende Ich\" (The writing \"I\"), Bachmann addressed the question of the first-person narrator. She was concerned with the \"accountability and authority, the authenticity and reliability, of the person in the position of narrating the work\" (Achberger). She distinguished between the unproblematic \"I\" in letters and diaries, which conceals the person from the author, and the unproblematic \"I\" in memoirs, in which a \"'naive' handling of the first person is requested (Achberger). She argued that Henry Miller and C\u00e9line placed \"themselves and their personal experience directly at the centre of their novels\" (Achberger). She referenced Tolstoy's \"The Kreutzer Sonata\" and Dostoyevsky's \"The House of Dead\" as first-person narrators of the inner story. She also argued that narrators could provide a new treatment of time (for example Italo Svevo), of material (for example Proust) or of space (for example Hans Henny Jahnn). According to Bachmann, in the modern novel the \"I\" had \"shifted: the narrator no longer lives in the story, but rather, the story lives inside the narrator\" (Achberger).\nIn the fourth lecture, \"Der Umgang mit Namen\" (The close association with names), Bachmann explored how names could have a life of their own. She discussed the use of names in contemporary literature. She identified \"denied names\" such as in Kafka's \"The Castle\", \"ironic naming\" by Thomas Mann, \"name games\" in Joyce's \"Ulysses\" and instances where the identity of the character is not secured by a name but by the context, such as in Faulkner's \"The Sound and the Fury\".\nIn the fifth lecture on \"Literatur als Utopie\" (Literature as Utopia), she turned to the question of what makes literature utopian. She argued that it was the process that was set in motion in the writer and reader, as a result of their interaction with literature, which made a work utopian. She argued that literature could make us aware of a lack, both in the work and in our own world. Readers could remove this lack by giving the work a chance in our time. Thus she argued that each work of literature is \"a realm which reaches forward and has unknown limits\". Bachmann's understanding of utopia as a direction rather than a goal, and her argument that it was the function of literature to take an utopian direction, stemmed from Robert Musil, who had analysed European modernism in his 1908 dissertation on Ernst Mach, \"Beitrag zur Beurteilung der Lehren Machs\" (Contribution to the assessment of Mach's theories.\nLater life and death.\nDuring her later years she suffered from alcoholism and from an addiction to medication (barbiturates and benzodiazepines) prescribed by her doctor. A friend described it:\"I was deeply shocked by the magnitude of her tablet addiction. It must have been 100 per day, the bin was full of empty boxes. She looked bad, she was waxlike and pale. And her whole body was covered in bruises. I wondered what could have caused them. Then, when I saw how she slipped her Gauloise that she smoked and let it burn off on her arm, I realized: burns caused by falling cigarettes. The numerous tablets had made her body insensible to pain.\" \nOn the night of 25 September 1973, her nightgown caught fire and she was taken to the Sant'Eugenio Hospital at 7:05 A.M. the following morning for treatment of second and third degree burns. Local police concluded that the fire was caused by a cigarette. During her stay, she experienced withdrawal symptoms from barbiturate substance abuse, though the doctors treating her were not aware of the cause. This may have contributed to her subsequent death on 17 October 1973.\nLegacy.\nAlthough German language writers such as Hilde Domin, Luise Rinser and Nelly Sachs had published notable works on women's issues in the post-war period, it was only in the 1970s that a feminist movement emerged in West Germany. After her death, Bachmann became popular among feminist readers. Feminist scholars' engagement with her work after her death led to a wave of scholarship that also drew attention to her prose work. Her works gained popularity within the emerging \"Frauenliteratur\" (\"women's literature\") movement which struggled to find the authentic female voice. New publishing houses carried the movement, such as the feminist press \"Frauenoffensive\" (\"Women's Offensive\"), which published writings by Verena Stefan.\nIn 2021, her childhood home on Henselstra\u00dfe in Klagenfurt was purchased by the state of Carinthia, to be turned into a museum dedicated to her.\nAwards and recognition.\nSource:\nThe Ingeborg Bachmann Prize.\nThe Ingeborg Bachmann Prize, awarded annually in Klagenfurt since 1977, is named after her.\nIn film.\n\"The Dreamed Ones\" (\"Die Getr\u00e4umten\"; 2016), is a feature film based on the almost 20-year correspondence between Bachmann and poet Paul Celan. It was directed by Ruth Beckermann and won the SCAM International Award at Cin\u00e9ma du R\u00e9el 2016.\nA biographical film, \"Ingeborg Bachmann \u2013 Journey into the Desert\", starring Vicky Krieps as Bachmann and directed by Margarethe von Trotta, premiered at 73rd Berlin International Film Festival in February 2023, and gets a cinema release on 26 October 2023. The film focuses on her relationship with Max Frisch and the impact it had on her life. It also depicts her friends, composer Hans Werner Henze, and writer Adolf Opel, with whom she travelled to Egypt to experience the desert.\nPersonal life.\nFrom 1945 to 1946, Bachmann fell in love with a former member of the British Army, the Viennese Jew Jack Hamesh. In May 1948 she began in Vienna a love affair with the poet and Holocaust survivor Paul Celan. In 1955 she met the political scientist Henry Kissinger; even though he was married and had two children, the two had a romantic relationship that lasted several years. From 1958 to 1963, she lived on and off with Swiss playwright Max Frisch. Her 1971 novel, \"Malina\", has been described as a response, at least partially, to his 1964 novel \"Mein Name sei Gantenbein\". She never married nor had children.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64315", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64315", "title": "Yabasic", "text": "Interpreter for BASIC software\nYabasic (Yet Another BASIC) is a free, open-source BASIC interpreter for Microsoft Windows and Unix platforms. Yabasic was originally developed by Marc-Oliver Ihm, who released the last stable version 2.91.2 in 2025. From version 2.77.1, the project has adopted the MIT License as well as the source code being moved to GitHub to encourage others to participate in its development.\nOther versions.\nYab.\nA version optimized for BeOS, ZETA and Haiku.\nFlyab.\nA port of Yabasic to the Fltk toolkit called \"Flyab\" was under development. It would have been source-compatible with programs written in yab, a variant of Yabasic that enables graphical programs to be written using the BeOS API. After BeOS and its successor ZETA finally were gone, the team members around yab for BeOS decided to move to Linux and therefore chose FLTK to implement the UI parts. Ports for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux would have been possible. Flyab added the ability to Yabasic to create native graphical user interfaces on all supported platforms. Main difficulty was to fully implement the layout commands to FLTK, as used from the BeOS version. As of November 2008, the project appears to be halted.\nPlayStation 2.\nSony also packaged a version of Yabasic for the PlayStation 2 on the demo disc shipped with PS2 consoles in PAL territories so it could be considered a home computer, not just a games machine, thus bypassing European import taxes.\nYabasic 3.0 (Unofficial).\nAs a continuation of the project prior to new changes by the original author, version 3 was being developed by a team centered on Pedro S\u00e1 and Thomas Larsen, but development has halted and the project now appears to be abandoned.\nYabasic example.\nREM Program Name: cbm-mtudemo.yab\nREM Author: mtu\nREM \nREM Purpose: demonstration for their CBM-PET graphics card 320x200\nopen window 320, 200\n20 P=160: Q=100\n30 XP=144: XR=1.5*3.1415927\n40 YP=56: YR=1: ZP=64\n50 XF=XR/XP: YF=YP/YR: ZF=XR/ZP\n60 FOR ZI=-Q TO Q-l\n70 IF ZI&lt;-ZP OR ZI&gt;ZP GOTO 150\n80 ZT=ZI*XP/ZP: ZZ=ZI\n90 XL=INT(0.5+SQRT(XP*XP-ZT*ZT))\n100 FOR XI=-XL TO XL\n110 XT=SQRT(XI*XI+ZT*ZT)*XF: XX=XI\n120 YY=(SIN(XT)+0.4*SIN(3.0*XT))*YF\n130 GOSUB 170\n140 NEXT XI\n150 NEXT ZI\n160 PAUSE 10\nEND\n170 X1=XX+ZZ+P\n180 Y1=YY-ZZ+Q:Y1=199-Y1\n190 LINE X1,Y1,X1,Y1-1\n200 IF Y1=0 GOTO 220\n210 CLEAR LINE X1,Y1+1,X1,199\n220 RETURN\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64316", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64316", "title": "PowerBASIC", "text": "Software compiler\nPowerBASIC, formerly Turbo Basic, was the brand of several commercial compilers by PowerBASIC Inc. that compiled a dialect of the BASIC programming language. There were both MS-DOS and Windows versions, and two kinds of the latter: Console and Windows. The MS-DOS version had a syntax similar to that of QBasic and QuickBASIC. The Windows versions used a BASIC syntax expanded to include many Windows functions, and the statements could be combined with calls to the Windows API.\nHistory.\nThe compiler was originally published as BASIC/Z, the first interactive compiler for CP/M and MDOS. Later it was extended to MS-DOS compatible operating systems. In 1987 Borland distributed it as \"Turbo Basic\".\n\"Turbo Basic\" was originally created by Robert \"Bob\" Zale (1945\u20132012) and bought from him by Borland. When Borland decided to stop publishing it (1989), Zale bought it back, renamed it PowerBASIC and set up PowerBASIC Inc. to continue its support and development; it was later called PBDOS.\nPowerBASIC went on to develop BASIC compilers for Windows, first PBWIN \u2014 their flagship product \u2014 and then PBCC, described below.\nOn November 6, 2012, Robert Zale, the creator of PowerBASIC, died. For a time, it was assumed that the company would quickly cease operations. His wife, Vivian Zale, posted on 8 March 2014 to the PowerBASIC forums that the company would continue operations. On May 10, 2015, Vivian Zale announced that work was continuing on new versions of PowerBASIC compilers.\nOn November 2, 2016, Vivian Zale announced her intention to seek a buyer for the company.\nOn January 31, 2017, Adam Drake announced Drake Software had acquired PowerBASIC source code from PowerBASIC, Inc., with the intention of updating and improving the functionality of the product. This was later confirmed by Vivian Zale with a forum post thanking the members for their support.\nWhen Bob Zale died, PBWin11 and PBCC7 were in beta testing, and 64-bit compilers and PB/Pro (PBWin and CC in one compiler) were in the alpha stages. However, development of PowerBASIC products stopped. No new version has been released since v10.04 (14 years ago as of May 2025). No 64-bit version or beta release has been announced. No development activity has been reported. No corrections (such as adding the correct DPI settings for the IDE) have been released. PowerBASIC Tools LLC no longer sells new licenses for the 32-bit Windows compilers. The PowerBasic website was taken down in 2025.\nCompilers.\nPowerBASIC programs are self-contained and use no runtime file to execute. In all versions of the compiler, the applications compile without external libraries, though it can use such libraries if needed. PBDOS creates 16-bit DOS MZ executable files, while PBWIN and PBCC create 32-bit Portable Executable (PE) files.\nTurbo Basic.\nBorland's Turbo Basic contains extensions to classic BASIC (without breaking compatibility), such as a drawing API and mouse access.\nUnlike most BASIC implementations of its time, Turbo Basic was a full compiler which generated native code for MS-DOS. Other implementations were either interpreters, or relied heavily on a runtime library. The integrated development environment could run a BASIC program internally for traditional BASIC debugging (see sample below), or generate an MS-DOS stand-alone executable file that could be run on other systems without the Turbo Basic product or runtime libraries.\nCode example.\nThe following program is an example of the ALGOL-like BASIC dialect that Turbo Basic supported. Unlike traditional BASIC, which used line numbers and had limited control structures and no support for ALGOL-like subroutines, modern BASIC dialects starting at this period were extended to make the language compatible with modern structured programming style by making line numbers optional and adding the control structures and subroutine definitions needed for structured programming.\nINPUT \"What is your name?: \", n$\nPRINT \"Hello \"; n$\nDO\n s$ = \"\"\n INPUT \"How many stars do you want to print\"; s\n FOR i = 1 TO s\n s$ = s$ + \"*\"\n NEXT i\n PRINT s$\n DO\n INPUT \"Do you want to print more stars\"; q$\n LOOP WHILE LEN(q$) = 0\n q$ = LCASE$(LEFT$(q$, 1))\nLOOP WHILE q$ = \"y\"\nPRINT \"Goodbye \"; n$\nLike the other Borland products of this era, the code executes within the integrated development environment.\nPowerBASIC for MS-DOS (PBDos).\nPBDOS includes an integrated development environment and supports MS-DOS 3.3 and all later versions.\nPowerBASIC Console Compiler (PBCC).\nPBCC is a 32-bit compiler for the Windows 9x series and Windows NT series of operating systems, including Windows XP, Windows Server 2008, Windows Vista, and Windows 7. PBCC applications can use dynamic-link libraries (DLLs). The compiler comes with an IDE including an editor and stepping debugger.\nNo knowledge of Windows programming is required to create character mode or graphical applications with this compiler. PBCC-compiled executables can also be used as Common Gateway Interface executables (for web servers).\nPBCC creates only executables, not DLLs. (PBWin \u2014 see below \u2014 can create both.)\nPowerBASIC Compiler for Windows (PBWin).\nPBWin is a 32-bit compiler compatible with the Windows 9x series and the Windows NT series of operating systems, including Windows XP, Windows Server 2008, Windows Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8 (8.1), Windows 10 and Windows 11 PBWin can create dynamic-link libraries. PBWin applications can read dynamic-link libraries]. PBWin comes with a compiler, IDE with editor, and stepping debugger.\nDynamic Dialog Tools (DDT).\nYou can create an application's graphical user interface using the Windows API, or by using the built-in DDT language extensions. The group of BASIC statements which wrap Windows API functions, particularly in the creation and handling of dialog boxes and child controls, is collectively known as Dynamic Dialog Tools. Using DDT requires less coding than to create a similar program using the Windows API. Using the DDT and the Windows API (known as SDK style as in Microsoft Windows SDK) are not mutually exclusive.\nTrial versions of compilers.\nPowerBASIC renamed PBWin v9.07 and PB/CC v5.07 as \"Classic PBWin\" and \"Classic PB/CC\", respectively, and on November 1, 2016, offered them for a short time through their online store as free, no-nag, trial versions along with PBForms v1.0 (PowerBASIC Forms).\nTools.\nPB Forms.\nPowerBASIC Forms, available for purchase separately, is a graphical user interface design tool add-on for PBWin. It automatically produces source code using the DDT language extension that creates forms using the Windows graphical user interface.\nCOM Browser.\nThe PowerBASIC COM Browser, which comes with PBWin, is an application that exposes the interfaces, methods, and properties of COM objects, as described by type-library files. The PowerBASIC COM Browser exports an interface structure of a COM object for early-binding purposes in PowerBASIC code, and gives syntax reference and context-help on the interface members exposed by a COM object.\nProgramming language.\nCharacteristics.\nPowerBASIC is a native-code BASIC compiler whose reported merits are simplicity of use and speed compared to other languages.\nAlthough the compiled code is fast enough for most purposes, the compilers also support inline assembler which can be used for hand optimization of critical routines. The Windows compilers (PBWin &amp; PBCC) support almost all of the x86 instruction set, including FPU, SIMD, and MMX, the main exceptions being a few which are useful mostly to systems programmers. One can insert any unsupported instructions by inserting their opcodes with the \"db\", \"dw\", and \"dd\" statements. Lines of assembler code can be freely interspersed with lines of BASIC code, although one must always consider the potential interactions between the two types of code.\nHello world.\nHello world is used to give a very small example of the syntax used by a programming language and is often the smallest possible program for any given programming language.\nHere is an example of a PBCC hello world program. By default PBCC creates a console window at runtime for displaying output. The use of Waitkey$ in this example prevents the console window from automatically closing until the operator sees the displayed text.\nFunction PBMain\n Print \"Hello, World!\"\n Waitkey$\nEnd Function\nHere is the PBWin version, which displays a Windows \"dialog\" message box.\nFunction PBMain\n MsgBox \"Hello, World!\"\nEnd Function\nStructured control statements.\nThese structured control statements eliminate many instances that would require the use of GOTO and labels:\nObject-oriented programming.\nPBWin and PBCC support object-oriented programming in the form of COM classes, however the compilers do not force you to use OOP, it is merely an option. In-process and out-of-process COM Servers can also be built using these compilers.\nGraphics.\nBoth the Console Compiler and Windows Compiler can create graphic windows. The GRAPHICs statements are higher-level than Windows' Graphics Device Interface (GDI) library functions.\nElements of the GRAPHIC statements.\nGRAPHIC WINDOWS are dedicated dialogs each containing a single control which fills the dialog's client area. GRAPHIC controls are child windows which support the same GRAPHIC drawing functionality as GRAPHIC windows. GRAPHIC BITMAPS are also defined, again supporting the GRAPHIC drawing functionality, but as purely memory objects, like Windows bitmaps or DIB sections. Keyboard and mouse handling statements are included among the GRAPHIC statements. Character output to a GRAPHIC target uses fonts specified via the FONT NEW statement.\nCreating a GRAPHIC WINDOW application.\nA GRAPHIC WINDOW is the equivalent of a Windows dialog box containing a static control on which drawing operations can be done. A single BASIC statement will create a GRAPHIC WINDOW and specify its size, position and title. It is not essential to specify a WNDPROC for the GRAPHIC WINDOW. A short source code example for a complete GRAPHIC WINDOW application follows:\nFunction PBMain\n Local GW As Dword\n ' start a GRAPHIC WINDOW\n Graphic Window New \"graphic window\", 100, 100, 200, 200 to GW\n ' show a coloured disc\n Graphic Ellipse (10, 10)-(190, 190), %rgb_Red, %rgb_SeaGreen, 0\n ' wait for a keypress\n Graphic Waitkey$\nEnd Function\nComparison of PB GRAPHIC statements with the GDI API.\nUsing PB GRAPHIC statements, a GRAPHIC (WINDOW, BITMAP, or control) is first selected as the current GRAPHIC target, then operations are done on it without requiring it to be identified again. Contrast this with the GDI API approach, where the Device Context handle is required for every drawing operation.\nIt is not necessary when using the PB GRAPHIC statements to define a brush or pen as a separate entity, nor is it necessary to redraw the GRAPHIC target (when in view) in response to Windows messages such as WM_PAINT and WM_ERASEBKGND. GRAPHIC targets are persistent.\nWhen GRAPHIC targets are attached, a REDRAW option can be specified which buffers the results of drawing operations until they are specifically requested. Using this technique reduces flicker in a similar way to the technique of drawing on memory DCs when using the GDI API.\nPixel operations are possible using the GRAPHIC GET|SET PIXEL statements, in a manner similar to GetPixel/SetPixel of the GDI API. GRAPHIC GET BITS allows the entire bitmap to be loaded into a dynamic string. This can be manipulated either as a string or by mapping an array onto it. It can be placed back into the GRAPHIC target by GRAPHIC SET BITS.\nComplementarity of GRAPHIC statements and the Windows GDI API.\nThe GRAPHIC statements contain all the commonly used GDI API functions, but if you need one that is not included it is possible to obtain the hDC of any GRAPHIC target and thereby use GDI API functions on it.\nUser community.\nPowerBASIC provides an online forum for users to ask questions and share knowledge. On 8 July 2012 the forum had 5,623 members (only a fraction of them still active) and contained 50,093 threads comprising 408,642 posts since August 26, 1998. The Source Code section alone contained 3,768 threads.\nIn early 2024 the main PowerBASIC website was switched to \"under construction\". This was heavily discussed in PB forums. The IP-rights owner wrote that the website will not come back. The forum subdomain was taken offline in the fall of 2025. \"As a result, most of the powerbasic.com and forum.powerbasic.com links on Wikipedia no longer work.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64333", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64333", "title": "Reed's law", "text": "Network value increases as 2^n, this being the number of possible subgroups within the network\nReed's law is the assertion of David P. Reed that the utility of large networks, particularly social networks, can scale exponentially with the size of the network.\nThe reason for this is that the number of possible sub-groups of network participants is 2\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01, where \"N\" is the number of participants. This grows much more rapidly than either \nso that even if the utility of groups available to be joined is very small on a per-group basis, eventually the network effect of potential group membership can dominate the overall economics of the system.\nDerivation.\nGiven a set \"A\" of \"N\" people, it has 2\"N\" possible subsets. This is not difficult to see, since we can form each possible subset by simply choosing for each element of \"A\" one of two possibilities: whether to include that element, or not.\nHowever, this includes the (one) empty set, and \"N\" singletons, which are not properly subgroups. So 2\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 subsets remain, which is exponential, like\u00a02\"N\".\nQuote.\nFrom David P. Reed's, \"The Law of the Pack\" (Harvard Business Review, February 2001, pp 23\u20134):\n\"[E]ven Metcalfe's law understates the value created by a group-forming network [GFN] as it grows. Let's say you have a GFN with \"n\" members. If you add up all the potential two-person groups, three-person groups, and so on that those members could form, the number of possible groups equals 2\"n\". So the value of a GFN increases exponentially, in proportion to\u00a02\"n\". I call that Reed's Law. And its implications are profound.\"\nBusiness implications.\nReed's Law is often mentioned when explaining competitive dynamics of internet platforms. As the law states that a network becomes more valuable when people can easily form subgroups to collaborate, while this value increases exponentially with the number of connections, business platform that reaches a sufficient number of members can generate network effects that dominate the overall economics of the system.\nCriticism.\nOther analysts of network value functions, including Andrew Odlyzko, have argued that both Reed's Law and Metcalfe's Law overstate network value because they fail to account for the restrictive impact of human cognitive limits on network formation. According to this argument, the research around Dunbar's number implies a limit on the number of inbound and outbound connections a human in a group-forming network can manage, so that the actual maximum-value structure is much sparser than the set-of-subsets measured by Reed's law or the complete graph measured by Metcalfe's law.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64337", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64337", "title": "Externalities", "text": ""}
{"id": "64342", "revid": "29278485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64342", "title": "Dunedin (disambiguation)", "text": "Dunedin is the second-largest city in the South Island of New Zealand.\nDunedin may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShips.\nListed chronologically\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64343", "revid": "8885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64343", "title": "Moir\u00e9 pattern", "text": "Interference pattern\nIn mathematics, physics, and art, moir\u00e9 patterns ( , , ) or moir\u00e9 fringes are large-scale interference patterns that can be produced when a partially opaque ruled pattern with transparent gaps is overlaid on another similar pattern. For the moir\u00e9 interference pattern to appear, the two patterns must not be completely identical, but rather displaced, rotated, or have slightly different pitch.\nMoir\u00e9 patterns appear in many situations. In printing, the printed pattern of dots can interfere with the image. In television and digital photography, a pattern on an object being photographed can interfere with the shape of the light sensors to generate unwanted artifacts. They are also sometimes created deliberately; in micrometers, they are used to amplify the effects of very small movements.\nIn physics, its manifestation is wave interference like that seen in the double-slit experiment and the beat phenomenon in acoustics.\nEtymology.\nThe term originates from \"moire\" (\"moir\u00e9\" in its French adjectival form), a type of textile, traditionally made of silk but now also made of cotton or synthetic fiber, with a rippled or \"watered\" appearance. Moire, or \"watered textile\", is made by pressing two layers of the textile when wet. The similar but imperfect spacing of the threads creates a characteristic pattern which remains after the fabric dries.\nIn French, the noun \"moire\" is in use from the 17th century, for \"watered silk\". It was a loan of the English \"mohair\" (attested 1610). In French usage, the noun gave rise to the verb \"moirer\", \"to produce a watered textile by weaving or pressing\", by the 18th century. The adjective \"moir\u00e9\" formed from this verb is in use from at least 1823.\nPattern formation.\nMoir\u00e9 patterns are often an artifact of images produced by various digital imaging and computer graphics techniques, for example when scanning a halftone picture or ray tracing a checkered plane (the latter being a special case of aliasing, due to undersampling a fine regular pattern). This can be overcome in texture mapping through the use of mipmapping and anisotropic filtering.\nThe drawing on the upper right shows a moir\u00e9 pattern. The lines could represent fibers in moir\u00e9 silk, or lines drawn on paper or on a computer screen. The nonlinear interaction of the optical patterns of lines creates a real and visible pattern of roughly parallel dark and light bands, the moir\u00e9 pattern, superimposed on the lines.\nThe moir\u00e9 effect also occurs between overlapping transparent objects. For example, an invisible phase mask is made of a transparent polymer with a wavy thickness profile. As light shines through two overlaid masks of similar phase patterns, a broad moir\u00e9 pattern occurs on a screen some distance away. This phase moir\u00e9 effect and the classical moir\u00e9 effect from opaque lines are two ends of a continuous spectrum in optics, which is called the universal moir\u00e9 effect. The phase moir\u00e9 effect is the basis for a type of broadband interferometer in x-ray and particle wave applications. It also provides a way to reveal hidden patterns in invisible layers.\nLine moir\u00e9.\nLine moir\u00e9 is one type of moir\u00e9 pattern; a pattern that appears when superposing two transparent layers containing correlated opaque patterns. Line moir\u00e9 is the case when the superposed patterns comprise straight or curved lines. When moving the layer patterns, the moir\u00e9 patterns transform or move at a faster speed. This effect is called optical moir\u00e9 speedup.\nMore complex line moir\u00e9 patterns are created if the lines are curved or not exactly parallel.\nShape moir\u00e9.\nShape moir\u00e9 is one type of moir\u00e9 pattern demonstrating the phenomenon of moir\u00e9 magnification. 1D shape moir\u00e9 is the particular simplified case of 2D shape moir\u00e9. One-dimensional patterns may appear when superimposing an opaque layer containing tiny horizontal transparent lines on top of a layer containing a complex shape which is periodically repeating along the vertical axis.\nMoir\u00e9 patterns revealing complex shapes, or sequences of symbols embedded in one of the layers (in form of periodically repeated compressed shapes) are created with shape moir\u00e9, otherwise called \"band moir\u00e9\" patterns. One of the most important properties of shape moir\u00e9 is its ability to magnify tiny shapes along either one or both axes, that is, stretching. A common 2D example of moir\u00e9 magnification occurs when viewing a chain-link fence through a second chain-link fence of identical design. The fine structure of the design is visible even at great distances.\nCalculations.\nMoir\u00e9 of parallel patterns.\nGeometrical approach.\nConsider two patterns made of parallel and equidistant lines, e.g., vertical lines. The step of the first pattern is p, the step of the second is \"p\" + \"\u03b4p\", with 0 &lt; \"\u03b4p\" &lt; \"p\".\nIf the lines of the patterns are superimposed at the left of the figure, the shift between the lines increases when going to the right. After a given number of lines, the patterns are opposed: the lines of the second pattern are between the lines of the first pattern. If we look from a far distance, we have the feeling of pale zones when the lines are superimposed (there is white between the lines), and of dark zones when the lines are \"opposed\".\nThe middle of the first dark zone is when the shift is equal to . The nth line of the second pattern is shifted by \"n \u03b4p\" compared to the nth line of the first network. The middle of the first dark zone thus corresponds to\nformula_1\nthat is\nformula_2\nThe distance d between the middle of a pale zone and a dark zone is\nformula_3\nthe distance between the middle of two dark zones, which is also the distance between two pale zones, is\nformula_4\nFrom this formula, we can see that:\nThe principle of the moir\u00e9 is similar to the Vernier scale.\nMathematical function approach.\nThe essence of the moir\u00e9 effect is the (mainly visual) perception of a distinctly different third pattern which is caused by inexact superimposition of two similar patterns. The mathematical representation of these patterns is not trivially obtained and can seem somewhat arbitrary. In this section we shall give a mathematical example of two parallel patterns whose superimposition forms a moir\u00e9 pattern, and show one way (of many possible ways) these patterns and the moir\u00e9 effect can be rendered mathematically.\nThe visibility of these patterns is dependent on the medium or substrate in which they appear, and these may be opaque (as for example on paper) or transparent (as for example in plastic film). For purposes of discussion we shall assume the two primary patterns are each printed in greyscale ink on a white sheet, where the opacity (e.g., shade of grey) of the \"printed\" part is given by a value between 0 (white) and 1 (black) inclusive, with representing neutral grey. Any value less than 0 or greater than 1 using this grey scale is essentially \"unprintable\".\nWe shall also choose to represent the opacity of the pattern resulting from printing one pattern atop the other at a given point on the paper as the average (i.e. the arithmetic mean) of each pattern's opacity at that position, which is half their sum, and, as calculated, does not exceed 1. (This choice is not unique. Any other method to combine the functions that satisfies keeping the resultant function value within the bounds [0,1] will also serve; arithmetic averaging has the virtue of simplicity\u2014with hopefully minimal damage to one's concepts of the printmaking process.)\nWe now consider the \"printing\" superimposition of two almost similar, sinusoidally varying, grey-scale patterns to show how they produce a moir\u00e9 effect in first printing one pattern on the paper, and then printing the other pattern over the first, keeping their coordinate axes in register. We represent the grey intensity in each pattern by a positive opacity function of distance along a fixed direction (say, the x-coordinate) in the paper plane, in the form\nformula_5\nwhere the presence of 1 keeps the function positive definite, and the division by 2 prevents function values greater than 1.\nThe quantity k represents the periodic variation (i.e., spatial frequency) of the pattern's grey intensity, measured as the number of intensity cycles per unit distance. Since the sine function is cyclic over argument changes of 2\u03c0, the distance increment \u0394\"x\" per intensity cycle (the wavelength) obtains when \"k\" \u0394\"x\" \n 2\u03c0, or \u0394\"x\" \nConsider now two such patterns, where one has a slightly different periodic variation from the other:\nformula_6\nsuch that \"k\"1 \u2248 \"k\"2.\nThe average of these two functions, representing the superimposed printed image, evaluates as follows (see reverse identities here :Prosthaphaeresis ):\nformula_7\nwhere it is easily shown that\nformula_8\nand\nformula_9\nThis function average, \"f\"3, clearly lies in the range [0,1]. Since the periodic variation A is the average of and therefore close to \"k\"1 and \"k\"2, the moir\u00e9 effect is distinctively demonstrated by the sinusoidal envelope \"beat\" function cos(\"Bx\"), whose periodic variation is half the difference of the periodic variations \"k\"1 and \"k\"2 (and evidently much lower in frequency).\nOther one-dimensional moir\u00e9 effects include the classic beat frequency tone which is heard when two pure notes of almost identical pitch are sounded simultaneously. This is an acoustic version of the moir\u00e9 effect in the one dimension of time: the original two notes are still present\u2014but the listener's \"perception\" is of two pitches that are the average of and half the difference of the frequencies of the two notes. Aliasing in sampling of time-varying signals also belongs to this moir\u00e9 paradigm.\nRotated patterns.\nConsider two patterns with the same step p, but the second pattern is rotated by an angle \u03b1. Seen from afar, we can also see darker and paler lines: the pale lines correspond to the lines of nodes, that is, lines passing through the intersections of the two patterns.\nIf we consider a cell of the lattice formed, we can see that it is a rhombus with the four sides equal to \"d\" \n ; (we have a right triangle whose hypotenuse is d and the side opposite to the angle \u03b1 is p).\nThe pale lines correspond to the small diagonal of the rhombus. As the diagonals are the bisectors of the neighbouring sides, we can see that the pale line makes an angle equal to with the perpendicular of each pattern's line.\nAdditionally, the spacing between two pale lines is D, half of the long diagonal. The long diagonal 2\"D\" is the hypotenuse of a right triangle and the sides of the right angle are \"d\"(1 + cos \"\u03b1\") and p. The Pythagorean theorem gives:\nformula_10\nthat is:\nformula_11\nthus\nformula_12\nWhen \u03b1 is very small (\"\u03b1\" &lt;) the following small-angle approximations can be made:\nformula_13\nthus\nformula_14\nWe can see that the smaller \u03b1 is, the farther apart the pale lines; when both patterns are parallel (\"\u03b1\" \n 0), the spacing between the pale lines is infinite (there is no pale line).\nThere are thus two ways to determine \u03b1: by the orientation of the pale lines and by their spacing\nformula_15\nIf we choose to measure the angle, the final error is proportional to the measurement error. If we choose to measure the spacing, the final error is proportional to the inverse of the spacing. Thus, for the small angles, it is best to measure the spacing.\nImplications and applications.\nPrinting full-color images.\nIn graphic arts and prepress, the usual technology for printing full-color images involves the superimposition of halftone screens. These are regular rectangular dot patterns\u2014often four of them, printed in cyan, yellow, magenta, and black. Some kind of moir\u00e9 pattern is inevitable, but in favorable circumstances the pattern is \"tight\"; that is, the spatial frequency of the moir\u00e9 is so high that it is not noticeable. In the graphic arts, the term \"moir\u00e9\" means an \"excessively visible\" moir\u00e9 pattern. Part of the prepress art consists of selecting screen angles and halftone frequencies which minimize moir\u00e9. The visibility of moir\u00e9 is not entirely predictable. The same set of screens may produce good results with some images, but visible moir\u00e9 with others.\nTelevision screens and photographs.\nMoir\u00e9 patterns are commonly seen on television screens when a person is wearing a shirt or jacket of a particular weave or pattern, such as a houndstooth jacket. This is due to interlaced scanning in televisions and non-film cameras, referred to as interline twitter. As the person moves about, the moir\u00e9 pattern is quite noticeable. Because of this, newscasters and other professionals who regularly appear on TV are instructed to avoid clothing which could cause the effect.\nPhotographs of a TV screen taken with a digital camera often exhibit moir\u00e9 patterns. Since both the TV screen and the digital camera use a scanning technique to produce or to capture pictures with horizontal scan lines, the conflicting sets of lines cause the moir\u00e9 patterns. To avoid the effect, the digital camera can be aimed at an angle of 30 degrees to the TV screen.\nMarine navigation.\nThe moir\u00e9 effect is used in shoreside beacons called \"Inogon leading marks\" or \"Inogon lights\", manufactured by Inogon Licens AB, Sweden, to designate the safest path of travel for ships heading to locks, marinas, ports, etc., or to indicate underwater hazards (such as pipelines or cables). The moir\u00e9 effect creates arrows that point towards an imaginary line marking the hazard or line of safe passage; as navigators pass over the line, the arrows on the beacon appear to become vertical bands before changing back to arrows pointing in the reverse direction. An example can be found in the UK on the eastern shore of Southampton Water, opposite Fawley oil refinery (). Similar moir\u00e9 effect beacons can be used to guide mariners to the centre point of an oncoming bridge; when the vessel is aligned with the centreline, vertical lines are visible.\nInogon lights are deployed at airports to help pilots on the ground keep to the centreline while docking on stand.\nStrain measurement.\nIn manufacturing industries, these patterns are used for studying microscopic strain in materials: by deforming a grid with respect to a reference grid and measuring the moir\u00e9 pattern, the stress levels and patterns can be deduced. This technique is attractive because the scale of the moir\u00e9 pattern is much larger than the deflection that causes it, making measurement easier.\nThe moir\u00e9 effect can be used in strain measurement: the operator just has to draw a pattern on the object, and superimpose the reference pattern to the deformed pattern on the deformed object.\nA similar effect can be obtained by the superposition of a holographic image of the object to the object itself: the hologram is the reference step, and the difference with the object are the deformations, which appear as pale and dark lines.\nImage processing.\nSome image scanner computer programs provide an optional filter, called a \"descreen\" filter, to remove moir\u00e9 pattern artifacts which would otherwise be produced when scanning printed halftone images to produce digital images.\nBanknotes.\nMany banknotes exploit the tendency of digital scanners to produce moir\u00e9 patterns by including fine circular or wavy designs that are likely to exhibit a moir\u00e9 pattern when scanned and printed.\nMicroscopy.\nIn super-resolution microscopy, the moir\u00e9 pattern can be used to obtain images with a resolution higher than the diffraction limit, using a technique known as structured illumination microscopy.\nIn scanning tunneling microscopy, moir\u00e9 fringes appear if surface atomic layers have a different crystal structure than the bulk crystal. This can for example be due to surface reconstruction of the crystal, or when a thin layer of a second crystal is on the surface, e.g. single-layer, double-layer graphene, or Van der Waals heterostructure of graphene and hBN, or bismuth and antimony nanostructures.\nIn transmission electron microscopy (TEM), translational moir\u00e9 fringes can be seen as parallel contrast lines formed in phase-contrast TEM imaging by the interference of diffracting crystal lattice planes that are overlapping, and which might have different spacing and/or orientation. Most of the moir\u00e9 contrast observations reported in the literature are obtained using high-resolution phase contrast imaging in TEM. However, if probe aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging is used, more direct interpretation of the crystal structure in terms of atom types and positions is obtained.\nMaterials science and condensed matter physics.\nIn condensed matter physics, the moir\u00e9 phenomenon is commonly discussed for two-dimensional materials. The effect occurs when there is mismatch between the lattice parameter or angle of the 2D layer and that of the underlying substrate, or another 2D layer, such as in 2D material heterostructures. The phenomenon is exploited as a means of engineering the electronic structure or optical properties of materials, which some call moir\u00e9 materials. The often significant changes in electronic properties when twisting two atomic layers and the prospect of electronic applications has led to the name twistronics of this field. A prominent example is in twisted bi-layer graphene, which forms a moir\u00e9 pattern and at a particular \"magic angle\" exhibits superconductivity and other important electronic properties.\nIn materials science, known examples exhibiting moir\u00e9 contrast are thin films or nanoparticles of MX-type (M = Ti, Nb; X = C, N) overlapping with austenitic matrix. Both phases, MX and the matrix, have face-centered cubic crystal structure and cube-on-cube orientation relationship. However, they have significant lattice misfit of about 20 to 24% (based on the chemical composition of alloy), which produces a moir\u00e9 effect.\nInteraction Tracking.\nThe Moir\u00e9 effect has been explored as a means of enabling interaction tracking in tangible user interfaces. By overlaying patterned layers, typically one fixed and one movable, small physical displacements produce visually amplified interference patterns. These patterns can be passively monitored using optical methods, such as standard cameras, to detect precise movements without the need for embedded electronics. This approach allows for the creation of passive, high-resolution input mechanisms such as sliders, knobs, and dials, which are robust to viewing angles and perspective distortion. As a result, the Moir\u00e9 effect supports accurate, low-cost tracking in interactive systems, offering a novel solution for tangible and spatial user input.\nAudible moir\u00e9.\nIf the beats of one track correspond to where in space a black dot or line exists and the beats of the other track correspond to the points in space where a camera is sampling light, because the frequencies are not exactly the same and aligned perfectly together, beats (or samples) will align closely at some moments in time and far apart at other times. The closer together beats are, the darker it is at that spot; the farther apart, the lighter. The result is periodic in the same way as a graphic moir\u00e9 pattern.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64345", "revid": "11009441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64345", "title": "North East", "text": ""}
{"id": "64346", "revid": "34863727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64346", "title": "Oak Park", "text": "Oak Park or Oaks Park is the name of several places, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "64351", "revid": "34928717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64351", "title": "Oceanside", "text": "Oceanside may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64354", "revid": "11203371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64354", "title": "Pekin", "text": "Pekin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64360", "revid": "33107761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64360", "title": "Plainfield, New Jersey", "text": "City in Union County, New Jersey, US\nPlainfield is a city in Union County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. Nicknamed \"The Queen City,\" it serves as both a regional hub for Central New Jersey and a bedroom suburb of the New York Metropolitan area, located in the Raritan Valley region. As of the 2020 United States census, the city's population, majority Latino for the first time, was 54,586. This was an increase of 4,778 (+9.6%) from the 2010 census count of 49,808, which in turn reflected an increase of 1,979 (+4.1%) from the 47,829 counted in the 2000 census. In 2023, the Census Bureau estimated the city's population to be 54,670.\nThe area of present-day Plainfield was originally formed as Plainfield Township, a township that was created on April 5, 1847, from portions of Westfield Township, while the area was still part of Essex County. On March 19, 1857, Plainfield Township became part of the newly created Union County.\nPlainfield was incorporated as a city by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 21, 1869, from portions of Plainfield Township, based on the results of a referendum held that same day. The city and township coexisted until March 6, 1878, when Plainfield Township was dissolved and parts were absorbed by Plainfield city, with the remainder becoming Fanwood Township (now known as Scotch Plains).\nThe name \"Plainfield\", also used in both North Plainfield and South Plainfield, is derived from a local estate or from its scenic location.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nPlainfield was settled in 1684 by Quakers, and incorporated as a city in 1869. Formerly a bedroom suburb in the New York metropolitan area, it has become the urban center of 10 closely allied municipalities, with diversified industries, including printing and the manufacture of chemicals, clothing, electronic equipment, and vehicular parts. Among the several 18th-century buildings remaining are a Friends' meetinghouse (1788), the Martine house (1717), and the Nathaniel Drake House (1746), known as George Washington's headquarters during the Battle of Short Hills in June 1777. Nearby Washington Rock is a prominent point of the Watchung Mountains and is reputed to be the vantage point from which Washington watched British troop movements.\nThe \"Queen City\" moniker arose in the second half of the 19th century. Plainfield had been developing a reputation during this period as featuring a climate that was beneficial for respiratory ailments. In 1886, in an effort to publicize the climate, local newspaper publisher Thomas W. Morrison began to use the slogan \"Colorado of the East\" to promote Plainfield. As Denver, Colorado, was known as the \"Queen City of the Plains,\" the slogan for Plainfield eventually became abbreviated to \"The Queen City.\"\nIn 1902, the New Jersey Legislature approved measures that would have allowed the borough of North Plainfield to become part of Union County (a measure repealed in 1903) and to allow for a merger of North Plainfield with the City of Plainfield subject to the approval of a referendum by voters in both municipalities.\nMusic history.\nPlainfield is the birthplace of P-Funk. George Clinton founded The Parliaments while working in a Plainfield barber shop. Parliament-Funkadelic was inducted in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1997. A number of other well-known musicians are from, or have resided, in Plainfield.\nSports history.\nIn sports history, Plainfield is the birthplace and/or home of several current and former athletes, including professionals and well-known amateurs. Included in their number are Milt Campbell, the 1956 Olympic Decathlon gold medalist (the first African-American to earn this title), Joe Black, the first African-American pitcher to win a World Series game; Jeff Torborg, former MLB player, coach and manager; former Duke University and Chicago Bulls basketball player Jay Williams; and the NFL player Vic Washington\nArchitectural history.\nPlainfield's history as a place to call home for the 19th and 20th century wealthy has led to a significant and preserved suburban architectural legacy. An influx of Wall Street money led to the creation of what was called Millionaires' Row after the opening of the railway in the 19th century.\nThere are numerous sites, including homes, parks, and districts in the city that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. While not listed, the Plainfield Armory, a prominent landmark completed in 1932, was sold by the state in 2013 as surplus property.\nPlainfield's wealthy northeast corner, known as the \"Sleepy Hollow\" section of the city, was and still is characterized by its array of finely landscaped streets and neighborhoods with homes defined by a broad array of architectural styles, most built during the first half of the twentieth century. From the tree-lines neighborhoods, it can be seen that the lot sizes vary, but the stateliness and distinction of each house is evident, whether a stately Queen Anne mansion or gingerbread cottage. Most lots are nicely landscaped and semi or fully private.\nPlainfield has been home to former New Jersey governor James McGreevey.\nRebellion.\nPlainfield was affected by the Plainfield Rebellion in July 1967. This civil disturbance occurred in the wake of the larger Newark riots. A Plainfield police officer was killed, about fifty people were injured, and several hundred thousand dollars of property was damaged by looting and arson. The New Jersey National Guard restored order after three days of unrest. This civil unrest caused a massive white flight, characterized by the percentage of Black residents rising from 40% in 1970 to 60% a decade later.\nAuthor and Plainfield native Isaiah Tremaine published \"Insurrection\" in 2017 as a mournful accounting of the Plainfield riots\u2014and subsequent racial tensions at Plainfield High School\u2014from his perspective as a Black teenager living in the city with both white and Black friends at the time. Prior to the rebellion, Plainfield was a regional shopping and entertainment center. Residents of nearby Union, Middlesex and Somerset counties would drive to shop and explore the business districts of Plainfield. Other than during the holidays, peak shopping times Plainfield were Thursday nights and Saturday, when Front Street and the areas around it bustled.\nPlainfield had several entertainment venues at that time. At the peak, there were four operating movie theaters: the Strand, the Liberty, the Paramount and the Oxford theaters.\nManufacturers of heavy goods included Chelsea Fan Corp., Mack Truck and National Starch and Chemical Corp. Plainfield Iron and Metal maintained a large scrapyard in the West End.\nNatural disasters.\nIn 2025, Plainfield and surrounding communities were affected by two separate natural disasters in the span of two weeks. On July 3, three people were killed when severe thunderstorms swept through the area. Heavy damage occurred when the storms brought down trees and powerlines, leaving 8,000 residents without power. Following the storms, Mayor Adrian O. Mapp issued a state of emergency. The state of emergency was lifted on July 9. Five days later, on July 14, flash floods killed two women when their car was swept into the Cedar Brook, designed to catch and drain all of the city's flood water.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city had a total area of , including of land and of water (0.15%).\nUnincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the city include Netherwood.\nThe city is located in Central Jersey on the southwestern edge of Union County and is bordered by nine municipalities. In Union County are Scotch Plains to the north and east and Fanwood to the northeast. In Middlesex County, are South Plainfield and Piscataway to the south; Dunellen to the southwest and Edison to the southeast. In Somerset County, Green Brook Township lies to the northwest, North Plainfield lies to the north and Watchung borders to the northwest.\nPlainfield is in the Raritan Valley, a line of cities in central New Jersey, and lies on the east side of the Raritan Valley along with Edison.\nThe Robinson's Branch of the Rahway River additionally flows through Plainfield en route to the Robinson's Branch Reservoir.\nClimate.\nPlainfield has a humid continental climate, characterized by brisk to cold winters and hot, muggy summers. The lowest temperature ever recorded was on February 9, 1934, and the highest temperature ever recorded was on July 10, 1936, and August 11, 1949. According to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Plainfield has a humid subtropical climate, which is abbreviated as \"Cfa\" on climate maps.\nDemographics.\nPlainfield has seen a rapid rise in its Latino community in recent decades. The city's population is now majority Hispanic for the first time, as of the 2020 census.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nIn the 2017 gubernatorial election, Democrat Phil Murphy received 6,992 votes (89.5% vs. 65.2% countywide), ahead of Republican Kim Guadagno with 631 votes (8.1% vs. 32.6%), and other candidates with 189 votes (2.4% vs. 2.1%), among the 8,183 ballots cast by the city's 22,852 registered voters, for a turnout of 35.8%. In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Democrat Barbara Buono received 75.9% of the vote (5,757 cast), ahead of Republican Chris Christie with 22.7% (1,723 votes), and other candidates with 1.4% (104 votes), among the 8,174 ballots cast by the city's 21,996 registered voters (590 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 37.2%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Democrat Jon Corzine received 7,140 ballots cast (81.3% vs. 50.6% countywide), ahead of Republican Chris Christie with 1,057 votes (12.0% vs. 41.7%), Independent Chris Daggett with 355 votes (4.0% vs. 5.9%) and other candidates with 84 votes (1.0% vs. 0.8%), among the 8,786 ballots cast by the city's 21,738 registered voters, yielding a 40.4% turnout (vs. 46.5% in the county).\n!scope=\"col\" rowspan=\"2\"|Year\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Republican\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Democratic\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Third party(ies)\n!!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|% !!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|% !!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|%\n!scope=\"col\" rowspan=\"2\"|Year\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Republican\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Democratic\n!scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\"|Third party(ies)\n!!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|% !!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|% !!scope=\"col\"|No.\u202f !!scope=\"col\"|%\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nThe Plainfield Public School District serves students in kindergarten through twelfth grade. The district is one of 31 former Abbott districts statewide that were established pursuant to the decision by the New Jersey Supreme Court in \"Abbott v. Burke\" which are now referred to as \"SDA Districts\" based on the requirement for the state to cover all costs for school building and renovation projects in these districts under the supervision of the New Jersey Schools Development Authority.\nAs of the 2022\u201323 school year, the district, comprised of 14 schools, had an enrollment of 10,097 students and 628.7 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student\u2013teacher ratio of 16.1:1. Schools in the district (with 2022\u201323 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are \nDeWitt D. Barlow Elementary School (417 students; in grades K\u20135), \nCharles and Anna Booker Elementary School (NA; PreK\u20135), \nCedarbrook K-8 Center (623; K\u20138), \nClinton Elementary School (413; K\u20135), \nFrederic W. Cook Elementary School (389; K\u20135), \nEmerson Community School (509; K\u20135), \nEvergreen Elementary School (602; K\u20135), \nJefferson Elementary School (441; K\u20135), \nCharles H. Stillman Elementary School (354; K\u20135), \nWashington Community School (649; K\u20135), \nFrank J. Hubbard Middle School (775; 6\u20138), \nMaxson Middle School (818; 6\u20138), \nPinnacle Academy High School (90; 9\u201312), \nPlainfield Academy for the Arts and Advanced Studies (356; 7\u201312) and \nPlainfield High School (1,925; 9\u201312).\nThe district's main high school was the 318th-ranked public high school in New Jersey out of 339 schools statewide in \"New Jersey Monthly\" magazine's September 2014 cover story on the state's \"Top Public High Schools\", using a new ranking methodology. The school had been ranked 280th in the state of 328 schools in 2012, after being ranked 307th in 2010 out of 322 schools listed. The school was removed in 2009 from the list of persistently dangerous schools in New Jersey.\nPlainfield is also home to New Jersey's first high school focused on sustainability, the Barack Obama Green Charter High School.\nPrivate schools.\nEstablished in 1984, Koinonia Academy moved to Plainfield in 1997, where it serves students in Pre-K through twelfth grades and operates under the auspices of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Newark.\nHigher education.\nUnion College, a community college headquartered in nearby Cranford, maintains a campus in downtown Plainfield.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nRoads and highways.\nAs of \u00a02010[ [update]], the city had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Union County.\nPlainfield is one of the few large suburban cities in central New Jersey to have no federal highway within it. The only major thoroughfare through Plainfield is Route 28, connecting Somerville with Elizabeth and New Jersey Route 27. U.S. Route 22, a mecca for highway shopping and dining, is accessible from Plainfield through North Plainfield, Dunellen and Fanwood. In the early 1960s, Interstate highways were completed near, but not through Plainfield. Interstate 287 is accessible through South Plainfield and Piscataway, while Interstate 78 is accessible through Watchung / Warren Township and neighboring communities. The busiest connecting thoroughfares are Park Avenue (north-south), traversing from U.S. 22 to and into South Plainfield and Edison; Front Street (east-west), connecting Scotch Plains with Dunellen; South Avenue and 7th Street, both of which parallel Front Street, connecting Scotch Plains/Fanwood with Piscataway, South Plainfield and the Middlesex County border.\nPublic transportation.\nPlainfield has two NJ Transit rail stations on the Raritan Valley Line, formerly the mainline of the Central Railroad of New Jersey. The main Plainfield station is in the downtown and a second, smaller Netherwood station is in the Netherwood section, east of downtown and within a mile of the Fanwood border. A third station, located in the west end of town, was closed long ago. The New Brunswick train station is approximately 15 minutes away.\nThe Central Railroad of New Jersey first offered service to Plainfield in 1839. At the height of popularity, the Plainfield \"Jersey Central\" train station, with its main station building constructed in 1902, was a hub for commuting to Newark and New York. (The Central Railroad of New Jersey terminal was in Jersey City, where ferries would take the rail passengers to New York City.) The station was located near the main post office and downtown stores. The station was serviced by the now defunct Railway Express postal carrier company.\nNJ Transit provides bus service on the 113 and 114 to and from the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Midtown Manhattan; the 59, 65 and 66 (limited) to Newark; and local service on the 819 and 822 routes.\nIn years past, Plainfield was serviced by the Somerset Bus Company with service from Union County to Essex and New York City, the Public Service Bus Company with similar service and Plainfield Transit, providing local service.\nNewark Liberty International Airport is approximately 30 minutes away. A proposed PATH train extension to Plainfield in the 1970s, with stops at the airport and at Elizabeth, was canceled in 1976.\nHealth care.\nSolaris Health System, the nonprofit company that owns Muhlenberg Regional Medical Center, asked for permission to close the hospital. This request has been opposed by People's Organization for Progress, an advocacy group based in Newark, New Jersey. The closing has been attributed to the large number of uninsured patients served by the hospital.\nNeighborhood Health Services Corporation (NHSC) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit community health center serving the greater Plainfield and Elizabeth communities. NHSC has been designated a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) by the U.S. Department of Health &amp; Human Service's Bureau of Primary Health. NHSC's 340B Drug Pricing Program, in partnership with Drug Mart Pharmacy of South Plainfield, New Jersey, provides eligible patients access to outpatient drugs at significantly reduced prices.\nAt the height of popularity in the 1950s through the 1970s, Plainfield was a hub for medical practices. Park Avenue was lined with doctors and medical offices and was nicknamed \"Doctors Row\".\nPlainfield Teacher's College hoax.\nPlainfield Teacher's College was a mythical institution created as a hoax by a duo of college football fans in 1941. The phony college's equally nonexistent football team had its scores carried by major newspapers including \"The New York Times\" before the hoax was discovered.\nNotable people.\nPeople who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Plainfield include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64364", "revid": "1318382484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64364", "title": "Sheridan", "text": "Sheridan often refers to:\nSheridan may also refer to:\nFictional characters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64371", "revid": "9267683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64371", "title": "Pieter Brueghel the Younger", "text": "Flemish painter (1564\u20131638)\nPieter Brueghel (also Bruegel or Breughel) the Younger ( , ; ; between 23 May and 10 October 1564 \u2013 between March and May 1638) was a Flemish painter known for numerous copies after his father Pieter Bruegel the Elder's work, as well as original compositions and Bruegelian pastiches. The large output of his studio (some 1,400 pictures exist with plausible links to Brueghel and his shop), which produced for the local and export market, contributed to the international spread of his father's imagery.\nTraditionally Pieter Brueghel the Younger was nicknamed \"de helse Brueghel\" or \"Hellish Brueghel\" on the belief that he was the author of several paintings with fantastic depictions of fire and grotesque imagery. These paintings have now been attributed to his brother Jan Brueghel the Elder.\nLife.\nPieter Brueghel the Younger was born in Brussels, the oldest son of the famous sixteenth-century Netherlandish painter Pieter Brueghel the Elder (known as \"Peasant Brueghel\") and Mayken Coecke van Aelst. His mother was the daughter of the prominent artist Pieter Coecke van Aelst (already deceased at the time of Pieter's birth) and artist and print publisher Mayken Verhulst. Mayken Verhulst was an accomplished artist in her own right, known for her miniature paintings. The Brueghel family lived in the centre of Brussels in the home of Mayken Verhulst. In 1569, when Pieter the younger was only five years old, his father died. Following the death of his mother in 1578, Pieter, together with his brother Jan Brueghel the Elder (also referred to as \"Velvet Brueghel\", \"Paradise Breughel\" and \"Flower Breughel\") and sister Maria, were raised by their maternal grandmother Mayken Verhulst. According to the biographer and art theorist Karel van Mander, who published a 'Life' of Pieter Bruegel the Elder in his 1604 \"Schilder-boeck\" (\"Painter Book\"), Mayken Verhulst provided her grandson Jan with artistic training. On that basis it has been assumed traditionally that, like his brother Jan, Pieter also received his initial artistic instruction from his maternal grandmother. Doubts have been raised, however, over Mayken Verhulst's role in the training of Jan Brueghel the Elder as Jan reportedly lived in Brussels from his birth in 1568 until 1583, while Mayken moved to Mechelen long before he had reached the age to start his artistic training. It is more likely he learned painting from relatives working as tapestry designers in Brussels and received from his maternal grandmother Mayken Verhulst only training in watercolor techniques, such as miniature painting. A similar training pattern may have been followed by Pieter Brueghel the Younger. \nEarly in 1583, Pieter and Jan moved to Antwerp. Pieter entered the workshop of the landscape painter Gillis van Coninxloo (1544\u20131607), who was related to the Brueghel family through marriage. Van Coninxloo's mother Adriana van Doornicke was the sister of the first wife of Pieter Coecke van Aelst who was Pieter's grandfather. His teacher was a Protestant and was forced to flee Antwerp in 1585 after the Fall of Antwerp. Pieter Brueghel the Younger is admitted as an independent master of the Guild of Saint Luke of Antwerp in 1585, enrolling as one of the 'free master's sons' (\"vrymeesterssonen\").\nIt is not known exactly when Brueghel established his own independent studio after becoming an independent master. His first surviving dated painting dates to 1593, several years later. It is however known that from 1589 he was established in a house in Antwerp located on the Bogaardestraat, near to the junction with Sint-Antoniusstraat. The house, which he rented, was located in a poorer part of town, nestled amongst small shopkeepers' houses and at least one brothel, and comprised a front and rear building containing a large studio where Brueghel could work, store materials and, presumably, finished works. He lived at the property with his wife Elisabeth Goddelet (or Godelet), whom he married in 1588 and with whom he had seven children between 1589 and 1597, many of whom died young. One son called Pieter Brueghel III was also a painter. The family lived at this property until at least May 1609, before relocating, at some point before 1616, to the more affluent area on the Brabantse Korenmarkt behind the Tapestry Hall.\nNine formal apprentices, including Frans Snyders and Andries Daniels, passed through Brueghel's workshop between 1588 and 1626/27. Many other artists must have found work in his studio as 'journeymen' \u2013 peripetetic jobbing artists hired by day or by contract without need of Guild registration. With an average of one or two formal apprentices every few years, and perhaps several journeymen at any one time, Brueghel thus had a relatively large workforce at his disposal to assist with his prodigious output.\nThe precise date of Brueghel's death is not known. His name appears in the register of Antwerp's Guild of St. Luke in a section recording funerary debts for the year 1638, indicating that he died during the Guild year 1637\u201338.\nWork.\nGeneral.\nPieter Brueghel the Younger painted landscapes, religious subjects, proverbs, and village scenes. A few flower still-life paintings by Pieter have been recorded. His genre paintings of peasants emphasize the picturesque and are regarded by some as lacking Pieter the Elder's subtlety and humanism.\nHe and his workshop were prolific copyists of Pieter Bruegel the Elder's most famous compositions. His name and work were largely forgotten in the 18th and 19th centuries until he was rediscovered in the first half of the 20th century.\nOriginal works.\nPieter Brueghel the Younger created original works largely in the idiom of his father which are energetic, bold and bright and adapted to the 17th-century style. One of the artist's most successful original designs was the painting of \"The Village Lawyer\" (sometimes also called the \"Tax Collector's Office\", the \"Payment of the Tithe\", the \"Lawyer of Bad Cases\" and the \"Notary's Office\"). The different titles of the work indicate that it may have been interpreted in these different ways in the 17th century. The title \"The Village Lawyer\" is probably the best suited since the person behind the desk is wearing a lawyer's bonnet, the collection of taxes usually did not occur in such setting and the paperwork and bags on the desk look like those for requests and decrees. The picture also shows peasants lining up with presents such as chickens and eggs to please the lawyer, which was a common occurrence, whereas tithe payments were made in grain. The painting shows his interest in and close observation of village life. Pieter Brueghel the Younger's workshop made many copies of the composition in different formats. There exist 19 signed and dated versions of this work (from between 1615 and 1622) out of some 25 originals and 35 questionable versions.\nAnother original composition of Pieter Brueghel the Younger is the \"\", which is known in at least five autograph versions. One of the copies was formerly held by the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The picture depicts a Flemish springtime custom of choosing and crowning a queen at Whitsuntide. The festival is focused around a flower gathered in the fields by children. This painting distinguishes itself in style and colour clearly from his father's work. The painting uses bright colours, with much vermilion and a rich blue-green in the figures and blue for the sky. The colours display a unity of tone distinctive of the 17th century. The picture also displays a unity in drawing and composition. Another original composition by Pieter Brueghel the Younger are four small tondos representing the \"Four Stages of the River\" (all at the National Gallery in Prague). As his style never evolved from the manner of his early career it is difficult to date his work.\nIn several cases, it is not clear whether a composition is an original composition by Pieter Brueghel the Younger or a copy after a lost work by his father.\nCopyist.\nApart from these paintings of his own invention, Pieter Brueghel the Younger also copied the famous compositions of his father through a technique called pouncing. This large scale activity was only possible thanks to his large, well-organized workshop. Comparison of some copies with the originals reveals differences, both in terms of colour as well as the omission or addition of certain details. This may indicate that the copyist re-drafted some sections, or possibly based the copies on prints after original works, rather than on the originals themselves. Pieter the Younger frequently made paintings out of his father's figural designs, including drawings for prints.\nAs Pieter Brueghel the Younger did not always have access to the original paintings of his father he would in fact often rely on prints of his father's work to create his derived compositions. He also had access to (now lost) compositional drawings and intermediary cartoons which his father had made and then transferred to panels using pouncing. His work is often the only source of knowledge about works of his father that are lost. One example of just such a work is the \"Two Peasants Binding Firewood,\" of which several autograph versions exist (Barber Institute of Fine Arts; Private Collection), alongside various studio productions and even copies made outside the Brueghel workshop, which seems to preserve a now-lost original composition by the Elder Bruegel.\nThe subjects of the copied works cover the entire range of themes and works by Pieter the Elder, including specific religious compositions on both the grand and the small scale. The principal subjects are proverb and peasant scenes of his father.\nThe most frequently copied work of his father was the \"Winter Landscape with Skaters and a Bird-trap\". This work was reproduced by Pieter Brueghel the Younger and his workshop at least 60 times. Of these copies 10 are signed and 4 are dated (1601, 1603, 1616 and 1626). The next most popular work of Pieter the Elder was the \"Adoration of the Magi in the Snow\" of which Pieter Brueghel the Younger and his workshop produced about 30 copies.\nThe workshop also produced no less than 25 copies of Pieter Brueghel the Elder's \"St John the Baptist Preaching\", the original of which is widely believed to be the picture dated 1566, in the Museum of Fine Arts in Budapest. Some of the copies are held in the collections of museums such as the Hermitage, the Royal Museum of Fine Arts in Antwerp, the National Museum in Krak\u00f3w, the Rheinisches Landesmuseum in Bonn, the Stedelijk Museum Wuyts-Van Campen en Baron Caroly in Lier and the Mus\u00e9e des Beaux-Arts de Valenciennes. Some of the copies are signed and dated. The quality and the large number of versions produced by Brueghel the Younger suggest that he had first-hand knowledge of his father's original. Scholars have contended that Brueghel the Elder's original picture offered a coded comment on the religious debates that raged in the Low Countries during the 1560s and that it represented a clandestine sermon as held by the Protestant reformers of that time.\nPieter the Younger changed some details of his father's original composition. For instance, some versions omit an unidentified figure of a bearded man in black, who is turned towards the spectator. The omission appears to confirm speculation that his prominent presence in the original composition was not accidental. The distinctive face of this figure suggests that it may be a portrait, possibly of the artist himself or the patron who commissioned the painting. The figure of Christ has often been identified either as the man in grey behind the left arm of the Baptist or the bearded man further to the left with his arms crossed. The continued popularity of the picture a generation after Pieter Brueghel the Elder's death when the subject had not only lost its political implications but ran contrary to the religious current of the time, shows there was a more aesthetic appreciation of the subject. The composition was then likely enjoyed more for its representation of humanity in all its diversity of race, class, temperament and attitude.\nThe large-scale production of copies of his father's oeuvre demonstrates that there was a significant demand for Pieter the Elder's work. At the same time the copies contributed to the popularisation of Pieter the Elder's idiom. Without the son's copying work the public would not have had access to his father's work, which was mainly held in elite private collections, such as the imperial collection of Rudolf II in Prague or the Farnese collection in Parma. At the same time Pieter the Younger extended his father's repertoire through his own inventions and variations on themes by his father.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64372", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64372", "title": "Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis", "text": "First Lady of the United States from 1961 to 1963\n \nJacqueline Lee Kennedy Onassis (n\u00e9e\u00a0Bouvier ; July 28, 1929 \u2013 May 19, 1994), also known as Jackie O, was the first lady of the United States from 1961 to 1963, as the wife of President John F. Kennedy. During her lifetime, she was regarded as an international icon for her unique fashion choices, and her work as a cultural ambassador of the United States made her popular globally.\nAfter studying history and art at Vassar College and graduating with a Bachelor of Arts in French literature from George Washington University in 1951, Bouvier started working for the \"Washington Times-Herald\" as an inquiring photographer. The following year, she met then-Congressman John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts at a dinner party in Washington. He was elected to the Senate that same year, and the couple married on September 12, 1953, in Newport, Rhode Island. They had four children, two of whom died in infancy. Following her husband's election to the presidency in 1960, Kennedy was known for her highly publicized restoration of the White House and emphasis on arts and culture as well as for her style. She also traveled to many countries where her fluency in foreign languages and history made her very popular. At age 33, she was named \"Time\" magazine's Woman of the Year in 1962.\nAfter her husband's assassination and funeral in 1963, Kennedy and her children largely withdrew from public view. In 1968, she married Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis, which caused controversy. Following Onassis's death in 1975, she had a career as a book editor in New York City, first at Viking Press and then at Doubleday, and worked to restore her public image. Even after her death, she ranks as one of the most popular and recognizable First Ladies in American history, and in 1999, she was placed on the list of Gallup's Most-Admired Men and Women of the 20th century. She died in 1994 and is buried at Arlington National Cemetery alongside President Kennedy and two of their children, one stillborn and one who died shortly after birth. Surveys of historians conducted periodically by the Siena College Research Institute since 1982 have also consistently found Kennedy Onassis to rank among the most highly regarded First Ladies.\nEarly life (1929\u20131951).\nFamily and childhood.\nJacqueline Lee Bouvier was born on July 28, 1929, at Southampton Hospital in Southampton, New York, to Wall Street stockbroker John Vernou \"Black Jack\" Bouvier III and socialite Janet Norton Lee. Her mother was of Irish descent, and her father had French, Scottish, and English ancestry. Named after her father, she was baptized at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan and raised in the Roman Catholic faith. Caroline Lee, her younger sister, was born four years later on March 3, 1933.\nJacqueline Bouvier spent her early childhood years in Manhattan and at Lasata, the Bouviers' country estate in East Hampton on Long Island. She looked up to her father, who likewise favored her over her sister, calling his elder child \"the most beautiful daughter a man ever had\". Biographer Tina Santi Flaherty reports Jacqueline's early confidence in herself, seeing a link to her father's praise and positive attitude to her, and her sister Lee Radziwill stated that Jacqueline would not have gained her \"independence and individuality\" had it not been for the relationship she had with their father and paternal grandfather, John Vernou Bouvier Jr. From an early age, Jacqueline was an enthusiastic equestrian and successfully competed in the sport, and horse-riding remained a lifelong passion. She took ballet lessons, was an avid reader, and excelled at learning foreign languages, including French, Spanish, and Italian. French was particularly emphasized in her upbringing.\nIn 1935, Jacqueline Bouvier was enrolled in Manhattan's Chapin School, where she attended grades 1\u20137. She was a bright student but often misbehaved; one of her teachers described her as \"a darling child, the prettiest little girl, very clever, very artistic, and full of the devil\". Her mother attributed this behavior to her finishing her assignments ahead of classmates and then acting out in boredom. Her behavior improved after the headmistress warned her that none of her positive qualities would matter if she did not behave.\nThe marriage of the Bouviers was strained by the father's alcoholism and extramarital affairs; the family had also struggled with financial difficulties following the Wall Street Crash of 1929. They separated in 1936 and divorced four years later, with the press publishing intimate details of the split. According to her cousin John H. Davis, Jacqueline was deeply affected by the divorce and subsequently had a \"tendency to withdraw frequently into a private world of her own.\" When their mother married stockbroker and lawyer Hugh D. Auchincloss Jr., the Bouvier sisters did not attend the ceremony because it was arranged quickly and travel was restricted due to World War II. They gained three stepsiblings from Auchincloss's previous marriages, Hugh \"Yusha\" Auchincloss III, Thomas Gore Auchincloss, and Nina Gore Auchincloss. Jacqueline formed the closest bond with Yusha, who became one of her most trusted confidants. The marriage later produced two more children, Janet Jennings Auchincloss in 1945 and James Lee Auchincloss in 1947.\nAfter the remarriage, Auchincloss's Merrywood estate in McLean, Virginia, became the Bouvier sisters' primary residence, although they also spent time at his other estate, Hammersmith Farm in Newport, Rhode Island, and in their father's homes in New York City and Long Island. Although she retained a relationship with her father, Jacqueline Bouvier also regarded her stepfather as a close paternal figure. He gave her a stable environment and the pampered childhood she otherwise would have never experienced. While adjusting to her mother's remarriage, she sometimes felt like an outsider in the WASP social circle of the Auchinclosses, attributing the feeling to her being Catholic as well as being a child of divorce, which was not common in that social group at that time.\nAfter seven years at Chapin, Jacqueline Bouvier attended the Holton-Arms School in Northwest Washington, D.C., from 1942 to 1944 and Miss Porter's School in Farmington, Connecticut, from 1944 to 1947. She chose Miss Porter's because it was a boarding school that allowed her to distance herself from the Auchinclosses and because the school placed an emphasis on college preparatory classes. In her senior class yearbook, Bouvier was acknowledged for \"her wit, her accomplishment as a horsewoman, and her unwillingness to become a housewife\". She later hired her childhood friend Nancy Tuckerman to be her social secretary at the White House. She graduated among the top students of her class and received the Maria McKinney Memorial Award for Excellence in Literature.\nCollege and early career.\nIn the fall of 1947, Jacqueline Bouvier entered Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York, at that time a women's institution. She had wanted to attend Sarah Lawrence College, closer to New York City, but her parents insisted that she choose the more isolated Vassar. She was an accomplished student who participated in the school's art and drama clubs and wrote for its newspaper. Due to her dislike of Vassar's location in Poughkeepsie, she did not take an active part in its social life and instead traveled back to Manhattan for the weekends. She had made her debut to high society in the summer before entering college and became a frequent presence in New York social functions. Hearst columnist Igor Cassini dubbed her the \"debutante of the year\". She spent her junior year (1949\u20131950) in France\u2014at the University of Grenoble in Grenoble, and at the Sorbonne in Paris\u2014in a study-abroad program through Smith College. Upon returning home, she transferred to George Washington University in Washington, D.C., graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree in French literature in 1951. During the early years of her marriage to John F. Kennedy, she took continuing education classes in American history at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.\nWhile attending George Washington, Jacqueline Bouvier won a twelve-month junior editorship at \"Vogue\" magazine; she had been selected over several hundred other women nationwide. The position entailed working for six months in the magazine's New York City office and spending the remaining six months in Paris. Before beginning the job, she celebrated her college graduation and her sister Lee's high school graduation by traveling with her to Europe for the summer. The trip was the subject of her only autobiography, \"One Special Summer\", co-authored with Lee; it is also the only one of her published works to feature Jacqueline Bouvier's drawings. On her first day at \"Vogue\", the managing editor advised her to quit and go back to Washington. According to biographer Barbara Leaming, the editor was concerned about Bouvier's marriage prospects; she was 22 years of age and was considered too old to be single in her social circles. She followed the advice, left the job and returned to Washington after only one day of work.\nBouvier moved back to Merrywood and was referred by a family friend to the \"Washington Times-Herald\", where editor Frank Waldrop hired her as a part-time receptionist. A week later she requested more challenging work, and Waldrop sent her to city editor Sidney Epstein, who hired her as an \"Inquiring Camera Girl\" despite her inexperience, paying her $25 a week. He recalled, \"I remember her as this very attractive, cute-as-hell girl, and all the guys in the newsroom giving her a good look.\" The position required her to pose witty questions to individuals chosen at random on the street and take their pictures for publication in the newspaper alongside selected quotations from their responses. In addition to the random \"man on the street\" vignettes, she sometimes sought interviews with people of interest, such as six-year-old Tricia Nixon. Bouvier interviewed Tricia a few days after her father Richard Nixon was elected to the vice presidency in the 1952 election. During this time, Bouvier was briefly engaged to a young stockbroker named John Husted. After only a month of dating, the couple published the announcement in \"The New York Times\" in January 1952. After three months, she called off the engagement because she had found him \"immature and boring\" once she got to know him better.\nMarriage to John F. Kennedy.\nJacqueline and U.S. representative John F. Kennedy met at a dinner party hosted by journalist Charles L. Bartlett in May 1952. She was attracted to Kennedy's physical appearance, wit and wealth. The pair also shared the similarities of Catholicism, writing, enjoying reading and having previously lived abroad. Kennedy was busy running for the U.S. Senate seat in Massachusetts; the relationship grew more serious and he proposed to her after the November election. Bouvier took some time to accept, because she had been assigned to cover the coronation of Elizabeth II in London for \"The Washington Times-Herald\".\nAfter a month in Europe, she returned to the United States and accepted Kennedy's marriage proposal. She then resigned from her position at the newspaper. Their engagement was officially announced on June 25, 1953. She was 24 and he was 36.\nBouvier and Kennedy married on September 12, 1953, at St. Mary's Church in Newport, Rhode Island, in a Mass celebrated by Boston's Archbishop Richard Cushing. The wedding was considered the social event of the season with an estimated 700 guests at the ceremony and 1,200 at the reception that followed at Hammersmith Farm. The wedding dress was designed by Ann Lowe of New York City, and is now housed in the Kennedy Presidential Library in Boston. The dresses of her attendants were also created by Lowe, who was not credited by Jacqueline Kennedy.\nThe newlyweds honeymooned in Acapulco, Mexico, before settling in their new home, Hickory Hill in McLean, Virginia, a suburb of Washington, D.C. Kennedy developed a warm relationship with her parents-in-law, Joseph and Rose Kennedy. In the early years of their marriage, the couple faced several personal setbacks. John Kennedy suffered from Addison's disease and from chronic and at times debilitating back pain, which had been exacerbated by a war injury; in late 1954, he underwent a near-fatal spinal operation. Additionally, Jacqueline Kennedy suffered a miscarriage in 1955 and in August 1956 gave birth to a stillborn daughter, Arabella. They subsequently sold their Hickory Hill estate to Kennedy's brother Robert, who occupied it with his wife Ethel and their growing family, and bought a townhouse on N Street in Georgetown. The Kennedys also resided at an apartment at 122 Bowdoin Street in Boston, their permanent Massachusetts residence during John's congressional career.\nKennedy gave birth to daughter Caroline on November 27, 1957. At the time, she and her husband were campaigning across Massachusetts for his re-election to the Senate, and they posed with their infant daughter for the cover of the April 21, 1958, issue of \"Life\" magazine. They traveled together during the campaign as part of their efforts to reduce the physical separation that had characterized the first five years of their marriage. Soon enough, John Kennedy started to notice the value his wife added to his congressional campaign. Kenneth O'Donnell remembered \"the size of the crowd was twice as big\" when she accompanied her husband; he also recalled her as \"always cheerful and obliging\". John's mother Rose, however, observed that Jacqueline was not \"a natural-born campaigner\" due to her shyness and was uncomfortable with too much attention. In November 1958, John was reelected to a second term. He credited Jacqueline's visibility in the ads and stumping as vital assets in securing his victory and called her \"simply invaluable\".\nIn July 1959, historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. visited the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts and had his first conversation with Jacqueline Kennedy; he found her to have \"tremendous awareness, an all-seeing eye and a ruthless judgment\". That year, John Kennedy traveled to 14 states, but Jacqueline took long breaks from the trips to spend time with their daughter, Caroline. She also counseled her husband on improving his wardrobe in preparation for the presidential campaign planned for the following year. In particular, she traveled to Louisiana to visit Edmund Reggie and to help her husband garner support in the state for his presidential bid.\nFirst Lady of the United States (1961\u20131963).\nCampaign for presidency.\nOn January 2, 1960, John F. Kennedy, then a U.S. senator from Massachusetts, announced his candidacy for the presidency at the Russell Senate Office Building, and launched his campaign nationwide. In the early months of the election year, Jacqueline Kennedy accompanied her husband to campaign events such as whistle-stops and dinners. Shortly after the campaign began, she became pregnant. Due to her previous high-risk pregnancies, she decided to stay at home in Georgetown. Jacqueline subsequently participated in the campaign by writing a weekly syndicated newspaper column, \"Campaign Wife\", answering correspondence, and giving interviews to the media.\nDespite her non-participation in the campaign, Kennedy became the subject of intense media attention with her fashion choices. On one hand, she was admired for her personal style; she was frequently featured in women's magazines alongside film stars and named as one of the 12 best-dressed women in the world. On the other hand, her preference for French designers and her spending on her wardrobe brought her negative press. In order to downplay her wealthy background, Kennedy stressed the amount of work she was doing for the campaign and declined to publicly discuss her clothing choices.\nOn July 13, at the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, the party nominated John F. Kennedy for president. Jacqueline did not attend the nomination due to her pregnancy, which had been publicly announced ten days earlier. She was in Hyannis Port when she watched the September 26, 1960 debate\u2014which was the nation's first televised presidential debate\u2014between her husband and Republican candidate Richard Nixon, who was the incumbent vice president. Marian Cannon, the wife of Arthur Schlesinger, watched the debate with her. Days after the debates, Jacqueline Kennedy contacted Schlesinger and informed him that John wanted his aid along with that of John Kenneth Galbraith in preparing for the third debate on October 13; she wished for them to give her husband new ideas and speeches. On September 29, 1960, the Kennedys appeared together for a joint interview on \"Person to Person\", interviewed by Charles Collingwood.\nAs first lady.\nOn November 8, 1960, John F. Kennedy narrowly defeated Republican opponent Richard Nixon in the U.S. presidential election. A little over two weeks later on November 25, Jacqueline Kennedy gave birth to the couple's first son, John F. Kennedy Jr. She spent two weeks recuperating in the hospital, during which the most minute details of both her and her son's conditions were reported by the media in what has been considered the first instance of national interest in the Kennedy family.\nKennedy's husband was sworn in as president on January 20, 1961. At 31, Kennedy was the third youngest woman to serve as first lady, as well as the first Silent Generation first lady. She insisted they also kept a family home away from the public eye and rented Glen Ora at Middleburg. As a presidential couple, the Kennedys differed from the Eisenhowers by their political affiliation, youth, and their relationship with the media. Historian Gil Troy has noted that in particular, they \"emphasized vague appearances rather than specific accomplishments or passionate commitments\" and therefore fit in well in the early 1960s' \"cool, TV-oriented culture\". The discussion about Kennedy's fashion choices continued during her years in the White House, and she became a trendsetter, hiring American designer Oleg Cassini to design her wardrobe. She was the first presidential wife to hire a press secretary, Pamela Turnure, and carefully managed her contact with the media, usually shying away from making public statements, and strictly controlling the extent to which her children were photographed. The media portrayed Kennedy as the ideal woman, which led academic Maurine Beasley to observe that she \"created an unrealistic media expectation for first ladies that would challenge her successors\". Nevertheless, she attracted worldwide positive public attention and gained allies for the White House and international support for the Kennedy administration and its Cold War policies.\nAlthough Kennedy stated that her priority as a first lady was to take care of the president and their children, she also dedicated her time to the promotion of American arts and preservation of its history. The restoration of the White House was her main contribution, but she also furthered the cause by hosting social events that brought together elite figures from politics and the arts. One of her unrealized goals was to found a Department of the Arts, but she did contribute to the establishment of the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, established during Johnson's tenure.\nWhite House restoration.\nKennedy had visited the White House on two occasions before she became first lady: the first time as a grade-school tourist in 1941 and again as the guest of outgoing first lady Mamie Eisenhower shortly before her husband's inauguration. She was dismayed to find that the mansion's rooms were furnished with undistinguished pieces that displayed little historical significance and made it her first major project as first lady to restore its historical character. On her first day in residence, she began her efforts with the help of interior decorator Sister Parish. She decided to make the family quarters attractive and suitable for family life by adding a kitchen on the family floor and new rooms for her children. The $50,000 that had been appropriated for this effort was almost immediately exhausted. Continuing the project, she established a fine arts committee to oversee and fund the restoration process and solicited the advice of early American furniture expert Henry du Pont. To solve the funding problem, a White House guidebook was published, sales of which were used for the restoration. Working with Rachel Lambert Mellon, Jacqueline Kennedy also oversaw the redesign and replanting of the Rose Garden and the East Garden, which was renamed the Jacqueline Kennedy Garden after her husband's assassination. In addition, Kennedy helped to stop the destruction of historic homes in Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C., because she felt these buildings were an important part of the nation's capital and played an essential role in its history. She helped to stop the destruction of historic buildings along the square, including the Renwick Building, now part of the Smithsonian Institution, and her support of historic preservation also reached beyond the United States as she brought international attention to the thirteenth-century B.C. temples of Abu Simbel that were in danger of being flooded by Egypt's Aswan Dam.\nPrior to Kennedy's years as first lady, presidents and their families had taken furnishings and other items from the White House when they departed; this led to the lack of original historical pieces in the mansion. She personally wrote to possible donors in order to track down these missing furnishings and other historical pieces of interest. Jacqueline Kennedy initiated a Congressional bill establishing that White House furnishings would be the property of the Smithsonian Institution rather than available to departing ex-presidents to claim as their own. She also founded the White House Historical Association, the Committee for the Preservation of the White House, the position of a permanent Curator of the White House, the White House Endowment Trust, and the White House Acquisition Trust. She was the first presidential spouse to hire a White House curator.\nOn February 14, 1962, Jacqueline Kennedy, accompanied by Charles Collingwood of CBS News, took American television viewers on a tour of the White House. In the tour, she stated, \"I feel so strongly that the White House should have as fine a collection of American pictures as possible. It's so important ... the setting in which the presidency is presented to the world, to foreign visitors. The American people should be proud of it. We have such a great civilization. So many foreigners don't realize it. I think this house should be the place we see them best.\" The film was watched by 56 million television viewers in the United States, and was later distributed to 106 countries. Kennedy won a special Academy of Television Arts &amp; Sciences Trustees Award for it at the Emmy Awards in 1962, which was accepted on her behalf by Lady Bird Johnson. Kennedy was the only first lady to win an Emmy.\nForeign trips.\nJackie Kennedy was a cultural ambassador of the United States known for her cultural and diplomatic work globally and would travel sometimes without President Kennedy to different countries to promote cultural exchange and diplomatic relations. She was highly regarded by foreign dignitaries, as she used her fluency in foreign languages such as French, Spanish, and Italian, as well as her cultural knowledge, to establish strong relationships with foreign leaders and to give speeches. She was awarded the French Legion of Honor, the highest civilian award given by the French government, becoming the initial First Lady and first American woman to be such a recipient. Her role as a cultural ambassador had a significant impact on cultural diplomacy and helped strengthen ties between the United States and other countries.\nJacqueline's language skills and cultural knowledge were highly respected by the French people, and her visit to France with President Kennedy in 1961 was seen as a great success. During the visit, she made a speech in French at the American University in Paris, which was widely praised for its eloquence. In her speech, Jacqueline Kennedy spoke about the importance of cultural exchange between France and the United States, and she emphasized the shared values and history of the two nations.\nThroughout her husband's presidency and more than any of the preceding first ladies, Kennedy made many official visits to other countries, on her own or with the President. Despite the initial worry that she might not have \"political appeal\", she proved popular among international dignitaries. Before the Kennedys' first official visit to France in 1961, a television special was shot in French with the First Lady on the White House lawn. After arriving in the country, she impressed the public with her ability to speak French, as well as her extensive knowledge of French history. At the conclusion of the visit, \"Time\" magazine seemed delighted with the First Lady and noted, \"There was also that fellow who came with her.\" Even President Kennedy joked: \"I am the man who accompanied Jacqueline Kennedy to Paris\u00a0\u2013 and I have enjoyed it!\"\nFrom France, the Kennedys traveled to Vienna, Austria, where Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was asked to shake the president's hand for a photo. He replied, \"I'd like to shake her hand first.\" Khrushchev later sent her a puppy, Pushinka; the animal was significant for being the offspring of Strelka, the dog that had gone to space during a Soviet space mission.\nAt the urging of U.S. ambassador to India John Kenneth Galbraith, Kennedy undertook a tour of India and Pakistan with her sister Lee Radziwill in 1962. The tour was amply documented in photojournalism as well as in Galbraith's journals and memoirs. The president of Pakistan, Ayub Khan, had given her a horse named Sardar as a gift. He had found out on his visit to the White House that he and the first lady had a common interest in horses. \"Life\" magazine correspondent Anne Chamberlin wrote that Kennedy \"conducted herself magnificently\" although noting that her crowds were smaller than those that President Dwight Eisenhower and Queen Elizabeth II attracted when they had previously visited these countries. In addition to these well-publicized trips during the three years of the Kennedy administration, she traveled to countries including Afghanistan, Austria, Canada, Colombia, United Kingdom, Greece, Italy, Mexico, Morocco, Turkey, and Venezuela. Unlike her husband, Kennedy was fluent in Spanish, which she used to address Latin American audiences.\nDeath of infant son.\nIn early 1963, Kennedy was again pregnant, which led her to curtail her official duties. She spent most of the summer at a home she and the president had rented on Squaw Island, which was near the Kennedy compound on Cape Cod, Massachusetts. On August 7 (five weeks ahead of her scheduled due date), she went into labor and gave birth to a boy, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, via emergency Caesarean section at nearby Otis Air Force Base. The infant's lungs were not fully developed, and he was transferred from Cape Cod to Boston Children's Hospital, where he died of hyaline membrane disease two days after birth. Kennedy had remained at Otis Air Force Base to recuperate after the Caesarean delivery; her husband went to Boston to be with their infant son and was present when he died. On August 14, the president returned to Otis to take her home and gave an impromptu speech to thank nurses and airmen who had gathered in her suite. In appreciation, she presented hospital staff with framed and signed lithographs of the White House.\nThe first lady was deeply affected by Patrick's death and proceeded to enter a state of depression. However, the loss of their child had a positive impact on the marriage and brought the couple closer together in their shared grief. Arthur Schlesinger wrote that while John Kennedy always \"regarded Jackie with genuine affection and pride,\" their marriage \"never seemed more solid than in the later months of 1963\". Jacqueline Kennedy's friend Aristotle Onassis was aware of her depression and invited her to his yacht to recuperate. President Kennedy initially had reservations, but he relented because he believed that it would be \"good for her\". The trip was widely disapproved of within the Kennedy administration, by much of the general public, and in Congress. The First Lady returned to the United States on October 17, 1963. She would later say she regretted being away as long as she was but had been \"melancholy after the death of my baby\".\nAssassination and funeral of John F. Kennedy.\nOn November 21, 1963, the first lady and the president embarked on a political trip to Texas with several goals in mind. This was the first time that she had joined her husband on such a trip in the U.S. After a breakfast on November 22, they took a very short flight on Air Force One from Fort Worth's Carswell Air Force Base to Dallas's Love Field, accompanied by Texas Governor John Connally and his wife Nellie. The First Lady was wearing a bright pink Chanel suit and a pillbox hat, which had been personally selected by President Kennedy. A motorcade was to take them to the Trade Mart, where the president was scheduled to speak at a lunch. The first lady was seated to her husband's left in the third row of seats in the presidential car, with the Governor and his wife seated in front of them. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and his wife followed in another car in the motorcade.\nAfter the motorcade turned the corner onto Elm Street in Dealey Plaza, the first lady heard what she thought to be a motorcycle backfiring. She did not realize that it was a gunshot until she heard Governor Connally scream. Within 8.4 seconds, two more shots had rung out, and one of the shots struck her husband in the head. Almost immediately, she began to climb onto the back of the limousine. Clinton J. Hill, Special Agent, Secret Service, ran to the car and leapt onto it, directing her back to her seat. As Hill stood on the back bumper, Associated Press photographer Ike Altgens snapped a photograph that was featured on the front pages of newspapers around the world. She would later testify that she saw pictures \"of me climbing out the back. But I don't remember that at all\".\nThe president was rushed for the trip to Parkland Hospital. At the first lady's request, she was allowed to be present in the operating room. President Kennedy never regained consciousness.\nHe died not long after, aged 46. After her husband was pronounced dead, Kennedy refused to remove her blood-stained clothing and reportedly regretted having washed the blood off her face and hands, explaining to Lady Bird Johnson that she wanted \"them to see what they have done to Jack\". She continued to wear the blood-stained pink suit as she boarded Air Force One and stood next to Johnson when he took the oath of office as president. The unlaundered suit became a symbol of her husband's assassination, and was donated to the National Archives and Records Administration in 1964. Under the terms of an agreement with her daughter, Caroline, the suit would not be placed on public display before 2103. Johnson's biographer Robert Caro wrote that Johnson wanted Jacqueline Kennedy to be present at his swearing-in in order to demonstrate the legitimacy of his presidency to JFK loyalists and to the world at large.\nKennedy took an active role in planning her husband's state funeral, modeling it after Abraham Lincoln's service. She requested a closed casket, overruling the wishes of her brother-in-law, Robert. The funeral service was held at the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle in Washington D.C., with the burial taking place at nearby Arlington National Cemetery. Kennedy led the procession on foot and lit the eternal flame\u2014created at her request\u2014at the gravesite. Lady Jeanne Campbell reported back to the London \"Evening Standard\": \"Jacqueline Kennedy has given the American people ... one thing they have always lacked: Majesty.\"\nA week after the assassination, new president Lyndon B. Johnson issued an executive order that established the Warren Commission\u2014led by Chief Justice Earl Warren\u2014to investigate the assassination. Ten months later, the Commission issued its report finding that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone when he assassinated President Kennedy. Privately, his widow cared little about the investigation, stating that even if they had the right suspect, it would not bring her husband back. Nevertheless, she gave a deposition to the Warren Commission. Following the assassination and the media coverage that had focused intensely on her during and after the burial, Kennedy stepped back from official public view, apart from a brief appearance in Washington to honor the Secret Service agent, Clint Hill, who had climbed aboard the limousine in Dallas to try to shield her and the President.\nLife following the assassination (1963\u20131975).\nMourning period and later public appearances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDon't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot.\nThere'll be great presidents again ... but there will never be another Camelot.\n \u2014Kennedy describing the years of her husband's presidency for \"Life\"\nOn November 29, 1963\u2014a week after her husband's assassination\u2014Kennedy was interviewed in Hyannis Port by Theodore H. White of \"Life\" magazine. In that session, she compared the Kennedy years in the White House to King Arthur's mythical Camelot, commenting that the President often played the title song of Lerner and Loewe's musical recording before retreating to bed. She also quoted Queen Guinevere from the musical, trying to express how the loss felt. The era of the Kennedy administration has subsequently been referred to as the \"Camelot Era\", although historians have later argued that the comparison is not appropriate, with Robert Dallek stating that Kennedy's \"effort to lionize [her husband] must have provided a therapeutic shield against immobilizing grief.\"\nKennedy and her children remained in the White House for two weeks following the assassination. Wanting to \"do something nice for Jackie\", President Johnson offered an ambassadorship to France to her, aware of her heritage and fondness for the country's culture, but she turned the offer down, as well as follow-up offers of ambassadorships to Mexico and the United Kingdom. At her request, Johnson renamed the Florida space center the John F. Kennedy Space Center a week after the assassination. Kennedy later publicly praised Johnson for his kindness to her.\nKennedy spent 1964 in mourning and made few public appearances. In the winter following the assassination, she and the children stayed at Averell Harriman's home in Georgetown. On January 14, 1964, Kennedy made a televised appearance from the office of the attorney general, thanking the public for the \"hundreds of thousands of messages\" she had received since the assassination, and said she had been sustained by America's affection for her late husband. She purchased a house for herself and her children in Georgetown but sold it later in 1964 and bought a 15th-floor penthouse apartment for $250,000 at 1040 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan in the hopes of having more privacy. During the summer of 1964, Kennedy retreated to Salutation in Glen Cove, Long Island.\nIn the following years, Kennedy attended selected memorial dedications to her late husband. She also oversaw the establishment of the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, which is the repository for official papers of the Kennedy Administration. Designed by architect I.M. Pei, it is situated next to the University of Massachusetts campus in Boston.\nDespite having commissioned William Manchester's authorized account of President Kennedy's death, \"The Death of a President\", Kennedy was subject to significant media attention in 1966\u20131967 when she and Robert Kennedy tried to block its publication. They sued publishers Harper &amp; Row in December 1966; the suit was settled the following year when Manchester removed passages that detailed President Kennedy's private life.\nDuring the Vietnam War in November 1967, \"Life\" magazine dubbed Kennedy \"America's unofficial roving ambassador\" when she and David Ormsby-Gore, former British ambassador to the United States during the Kennedy administration, traveled to Cambodia, where they visited the religious complex of Angkor Wat with Chief of State Norodom Sihanouk. According to historian Milton Osborne, her visit was \"the start of the repair to Cambodian-US relations, which had been at a very low ebb\". She also attended the funeral services of Martin Luther King Jr. in Atlanta, Georgia, in April 1968, despite her initial reluctance due to the crowds and reminders of President Kennedy's death.\nRelationship with Robert F. Kennedy.\nAfter her husband's assassination, Jacqueline Kennedy relied heavily on her brother-in-law Robert F. Kennedy; she observed him to be the \"least like his father\" of the Kennedy brothers. He had been a source of support after she had suffered a miscarriage early in her marriage; it was he, not her husband, who stayed with her in the hospital. In the aftermath of the assassination, Robert became a surrogate father for her children until eventual demands by his own large family and his responsibilities as attorney general required him to reduce attention. He credited her with convincing him to stay in politics, and she supported his 1964 run for United States senator from New York.\nThe January 1968 Tet Offensive in Vietnam resulted in a drop in President Johnson's poll numbers, and Robert Kennedy's advisors urged him to enter the upcoming presidential race. When Art Buchwald asked him if he intended to run, Robert replied, \"That depends on what Jackie wants me to do\". She met with him around this time and encouraged him to run after she had previously advised him not to follow Jack, but to \"be yourself\". Privately, she worried about his safety; she believed that Bobby was more disliked than her husband had been and that there was \"so much hatred\" in the United States. She confided in him about these feelings, but by her own account, he was \"fatalistic\" like her. Despite her concerns, Jacqueline Kennedy campaigned for her brother-in-law and supported him, and at one point even showed outright optimism that through his victory, members of the Kennedy family would once again occupy the White House.\nJust after midnight PDT on June 5, 1968, an enraged Jordanian gunman named Sirhan Sirhan mortally wounded Robert Kennedy minutes after he and a crowd of his supporters had been celebrating his victory in the California Democratic presidential primary. Jacqueline Kennedy rushed to Los Angeles to join his wife Ethel, her brother-in-law Ted, and the other Kennedy family members at his bedside in Good Samaritan Hospital. Robert Kennedy never regained consciousness and died the following day. He was 42 years old.\nMarriage to Aristotle Onassis.\nAfter Robert Kennedy's death in 1968, Kennedy reportedly suffered a relapse of the depression she had suffered in the days following her husband's assassination nearly five years prior. She came to fear for her life and those of her two children, saying: \"If they're killing Kennedys, then my children are targets ... I want to get out of this country.\"\nOn October 20, 1968, Jacqueline Kennedy married her long-time friend Aristotle Onassis, a Greek shipping magnate who was able to provide the privacy and security she sought for herself and her children. The wedding took place on Skorpios, Onassis's private Greek island in the Ionian Sea. After marrying Onassis, she took the legal name Jacqueline Onassis and consequently lost her right to Secret Service protection, which is an entitlement of a widow of a U.S. president. The marriage brought her considerable adverse publicity. The fact that Aristotle was divorced and his former wife Athina Livanos was still living led to speculation that Jacqueline might be excommunicated by the Roman Catholic church, though that concern was explicitly dismissed by Boston's archbishop, Cardinal Richard Cushing, as \"nonsense\". She was condemned by some as a \"public sinner\", and became the target of paparazzi who followed her everywhere and nicknamed her \"Jackie O\".\nIn 1968, billionaire heiress Doris Duke, with whom Jacqueline Onassis was friends, appointed her as the vice president of the Newport Restoration Foundation. Onassis publicly championed the foundation.\nDuring their marriage, Jacqueline and Aristotle Onassis inhabited six different residences: her 15-room Fifth Avenue apartment in Manhattan, her horse farm in Peapack-Gladstone, New Jersey, his Avenue Foch apartment in Paris, his private island Skorpios, his house in Athens, and his yacht \"Christina O\". Onassis ensured that her children continued a connection with the Kennedy family by having Ted Kennedy visit them often. She developed a close relationship with Ted, and from then on he was involved in her public appearances.\nAristotle Onassis's health deteriorated rapidly following the death of his son Alexander in a plane crash in 1973. He died of respiratory failure aged 69 in Paris on March 15, 1975. His financial legacy was severely limited under Greek law, which dictated how much a non-Greek surviving spouse could inherit. After two years of legal wrangling, Jacqueline Onassis eventually accepted a settlement of $26\u00a0million from Christina Onassis\u2014Aristotle's daughter and sole heir\u2014and waived all other claims to the Onassis estate.\nLater years (1975\u20131990s).\nAfter the death of her second husband, Onassis returned permanently to the United States, splitting her time between Manhattan, Martha's Vineyard, and the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. In 1975, she became a consulting editor at Viking Press, a position that she held for two years. \nAfter almost a decade of avoiding participation in political events, Onassis attended the 1976 Democratic National Convention and stunned the assembled delegates when she appeared in the visitors' gallery. She resigned from Viking Press in 1977 after John Leonard of \"The New York Times\" stated that she held some responsibility for Viking's publication of the Jeffrey Archer novel \"Shall We Tell the President?\", set in a fictional future presidency of Ted Kennedy and describing an assassination plot against him. Two years later, she appeared alongside her mother-in-law Rose Kennedy at Faneuil Hall in Boston when Ted Kennedy announced that he was going to challenge incumbent president Jimmy Carter for the Democratic nomination for president. She participated in the subsequent presidential campaign, which was unsuccessful.\nFollowing her resignation from Viking Press, Onassis was hired by Doubleday, where she worked as an associate editor under an old friend, John Turner Sargent, Sr. Among the books she edited for the company are Larry Gonick's \"The Cartoon History of the Universe\", the English translation of the three volumes of Naghib Mahfuz's \"Cairo Trilogy\" (with Martha Levin), and autobiographies of ballerina Gelsey Kirkland, singer-songwriter Carly Simon, and fashion icon Diana Vreeland. She also encouraged Dorothy West, her neighbor on Martha's Vineyard and one of the last surviving members of the Harlem Renaissance, to complete the novel \"The Wedding\" (1995), a multi-generational story about race, class, wealth, and power in the U.S. The book was later adapted as a miniseries in 1998, starring Halle Berry and Lynn Whitfield and produced by Oprah Winfrey's Harpo Productions.\nIn addition to her work as an editor, Onassis participated in cultural and architectural preservation. In the 1970s, she led a historic preservation campaign to save Grand Central Terminal from demolition and renovate the structure in Manhattan. A plaque inside the terminal acknowledges her prominent role in its preservation. In the 1980s, she was a major figure in protests against a planned skyscraper at Columbus Circle that would have cast large shadows on Central Park; the project was canceled. A later project proceeded despite protests: a large twin-towered skyscraper, the Time Warner Center, was completed in 2003. Her historic preservation efforts also include her influence in the campaign to save Olana, the home of Frederic Edwin Church in upstate New York. She was awarded the Fine Arts Federation medal for her devotion to the cause of historic preservation in New York City.\nOnassis remained the subject of considerable press attention, especially from the paparazzi photographer Ron Galella, who followed her around and photographed her as she went about her normal activities; he took candid photos of her without her permission. She ultimately obtained a restraining order against him, and the situation brought attention to the problem of paparazzi photography. From 1980 until her death, Onassis maintained a close relationship with Maurice Tempelsman, a Belgian-born industrialist and diamond merchant who was her companion and personal financial adviser. Tempelsman and his wife Lilly had previously been frequent guests at the White House during the Kennedy Administration. Details of their romance received limited, if any, media coverage until the short time after Onassis's death in May 1994, with the \"New York Times\" even noting that Tempelsman had been \"quietly at her side\" even toward the end of her life and didn't go \"public\" until afterwards; even by 1989, Templesman was described as a \"public escort and private companion\" who only \"stayed several nights a week in Onassis's Fifth Avenue Apartment\" rather than living there full time. In the July 11, 1994 edition of \"People\", it was revealed that Tempelsman had in fact been living in Onassis's Fifth Avenue home since 1988; by this time, Onassis had in fact been living a more private life. Despite separating from his wife in 1984, Tempelsman remained legally married to Lilly throughout his relationship with Onassis.\nIn 1988, Onassis became a first-time grandmother when her daughter Caroline \u2013 married to designer Edwin Schlossberg \u2013 gave birth to daughter Rose, followed by Tatiana Celia (b. 1990) and John Bouvier (b. 1993). Caroline would later recall: \"I have never seen her so happy as when she's around the kids.\"\nIn the early 1990s, Onassis supported Bill Clinton and contributed money to his presidential campaign. Following the election, she met with First Lady Hillary Clinton and advised her on raising a child in the White House. In her memoir \"Living History\", Clinton wrote that Onassis was \"a source of inspiration and advice for me\". Democratic consultant Ann Lewis observed that Onassis had reached out to the Clintons \"in a way she has not always acted toward leading Democrats in the past\".\nIllness, death, and funeral.\nIn November 1993, Onassis was thrown from her horse while participating in a fox hunt in Middleburg, Virginia, and was taken to the hospital to be examined. A swollen lymph node was discovered in her groin, which was initially diagnosed by the doctor to be caused by an infection. The fall from the horse contributed to her deteriorating health over the next six months. In December, Onassis developed new symptoms, including a stomach ache and swollen lymph nodes in her neck, and was diagnosed with non-Hodgkins lymphoma. She began chemotherapy in January 1994 and publicly announced the diagnosis, saying the initial prognosis was good. She continued to work at Doubleday, but by March the cancer had spread to her spinal cord, brain and liver and by May it was deemed terminal. \nOnassis made her last trip home from New York Hospital\u2013Cornell Medical Center on May 18, 1994. The following night at 10:15\u00a0p.m., she died in her sleep in her Manhattan apartment at age 64, with her children by her side. In the morning, her son, John F. Kennedy Jr., announced his mother's death to the press saying she had been \"surrounded by her friends and her family and her books, and the people and the things that she loved\". He added that \"she did it in her very own way, and on her own terms, and we all feel lucky for that.\"\nOn May 23, 1994, her funeral Mass was held a few blocks away from her apartment at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola\u2014the Catholic parish where she was baptized in 1929 and confirmed as a teenager\u2014and asked for no cameras to film the event, for privacy. She was interred at Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia, alongside President Kennedy, their son Patrick, and their stillborn daughter Arabella. President Bill Clinton delivered a eulogy at her graveside service.\nShe left an estate that its executors valued at US$million (equivalent to $million in 2024).\nLegacy.\nPopularity.\nJacqueline Kennedy's marriage to Aristotle Onassis caused her popularity to decline sharply among an American public who viewed it as a betrayal of the assassinated president. Her lavish lifestyle as Onassis's \"trophy wife\", in contrast to \"the shy, selfless, and sacrificing mother the American public had come to respect\" as First Lady, led the press to portray her as \"a spendthrift and a reckless woman\".\nJacqueline Kennedy Onassis took conscious control of her public image and, by the time of her death, succeeded in rehabilitating it. By moving back to New York City after Onassis's death, working as an editor for Viking Press and Doubleday, focusing on her children and grandchildren, and participating in charitable causes, she reversed her \"reckless spendthrift\" image. She also reestablished her relationship with the Kennedy family and supported the John F. Kennedy Library and Museum.\nOnassis remains one of the most popular First Ladies. She was featured 27 times on the annual Gallup list of the top 10 most admired people of the second half of the 20th century; this number is surpassed by only Billy Graham and Queen Elizabeth II and is higher than that of any U.S. president.\nBoth Tina Turner and Jackie Joyner-Kersee have cited Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis as an influence.\nStyle icon.\nJacqueline Kennedy became a global fashion icon during her husband's presidency. After the 1960 election, she commissioned French-born American fashion designer and Kennedy family friend Oleg Cassini to create an original wardrobe for her appearances as First Lady. From 1961 to 1963, Cassini dressed her in many of her ensembles, including her Inauguration Day fawn coat and Inaugural gala gown, as well as many outfits for her visits to Europe, India, and Pakistan. In 1961, Kennedy spent $45,446 more on fashion than the $100,000 annual salary her husband earned as president.\nKennedy preferred French couture, particularly the work of Chanel, Balenciaga, and Givenchy, but was aware that in her role as first lady, she would be expected to wear American designers' work. After noticing that her taste for Paris fashion was being criticized in the press, she wrote to the fashion editor Diana Vreeland to ask for suitable American designers, particularly those who could reproduce the Paris look. After considering the letter, which expressed her dislike of prints and her preference for \"terribly simple, covered-up clothes,\" Vreeland recommended Norman Norell, who was considered America's first designer and known for his high-end simplicity and fine quality work. She also suggested Ben Zuckerman, another highly regarded tailor who regularly offered re-interpretations of Paris couture, and the sportswear designer Stella Sloat, who occasionally offered Givenchy copies. Kennedy's first choice for her Inauguration Day coat was originally a purple wool Zuckerman model that was based on a Pierre Cardin design, but she instead settled on a fawn Cassini coat and wore the Zuckerman for a tour of the White House with Mamie Eisenhower.\nIn her role as first lady, Kennedy preferred to wear clean-cut suits with a skirt hem down to middle of the knee, three-quarter sleeves on notch-collar jackets, sleeveless A-line dresses, above-the-elbow gloves, low-heel pumps, and pillbox hats. Dubbed the \"Jackie\" look, these clothing items rapidly became fashion trends in the Western world. More than any other First Lady, her style was copied by commercial manufacturers and a large segment of young women. Her influential bouffant hairstyle, described as a \"grown-up exaggeration of little girls' hair,\" was created by Mr. Kenneth, who worked for her from 1954 until 1986. Her tastes in eyewear were also influential, the most famous of which were the bespoke pairs designed for her by French designer, Fran\u00e7ois Pinton. The coinage 'Jackie O glasses' is still used today to refer to this style of oversized, oval-lensed sunglasses.\nAfter leaving the White House, Kennedy underwent a style change. Her new looks consisted of wide-leg pantsuits, silk Herm\u00e8s headscarves, and large, round, dark sunglasses. She began wearing jeans in public as part of a casualization of her look. \nJacqueline Kennedy Onassis acquired a large collection of jewelry throughout her lifetime. Her triple-strand pearl necklace, designed by American jeweler Kenneth Jay Lane, became her signature piece of jewelry during her time as first lady in the White House. Often referred to as the \"berry brooch\", the two-fruit cluster brooch of strawberries made of rubies with stems and leaves of diamonds, designed by French jeweler Jean Schlumberger for Tiffany &amp; Co., was personally selected and given to her by her husband several days prior to his inauguration in January 1961. She wore Schlumberger's gold and enamel bracelets so frequently in the early and mid-1960s that the press called them \"Jackie bracelets\"; she also favored his white enamel and gold \"banana\" earrings. Kennedy wore jewelry designed by Van Cleef &amp; Arpels throughout the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s; her sentimental favorite was the Van Cleef &amp; Arpels wedding ring given to her by President Kennedy.\nKennedy, a Catholic, was known for wearing a mantilla at Mass and in the presence of the Pope.\nMary Tyler Moore's \"Dick Van Dyke Show\" character Laura Petrie, who symbolized the \"feel-good nature\" of the Kennedy White House, often dressed like Kennedy.\nKennedy was named to the International Best Dressed List Hall of Fame in 1965. Many of her signature clothes are preserved at the John F. Kennedy Library and Museum; pieces from the collection were exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York in 2001. Titled \"Jacqueline Kennedy: The White House Years\", the exhibition focused on her time as a first lady.\nIn 2012, \"Time\" magazine included Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis on its All-TIME 100 Fashion Icons list. In 2016, \"Forbes\" included her on the list \"10 Fashion Icons and the Trends They Made Famous\".\nHistorical assessments.\nIn 2020, \"Time\" magazine included her name on its list of 100 Women of the Year. She was named Woman of the Year 1962 for her efforts in uplifting American history and art.\nJacqueline Kennedy Onassis is seen as being customary in her role as first lady, though Frank N. Magill argued that her life was validation that \"fame and celebrity\" changed the way that first ladies are evaluated historically. Hamish Bowles, curator of the \"Jacqueline Kennedy: The White House Years\" exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, attributed her popularity to a sense of unknown that was felt in her withdrawal from the public which he dubbed \"immensely appealing\". After her death, Kelly Barber referred to Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis as \"the most intriguing woman in the world\", furthering that her stature was also due to her affiliation with valuable causes. Historian Carl Sferrazza Anthony summarized that the former first lady \"became an aspirational figure of that era, one whose privilege might not be easily reached by a majority of Americans but which others could strive to emulate\". Since the late 2000s, Onassis's traditional persona has been invoked by commentators when referring to fashionable political spouses. A wide variety of commentators have positively credited the work of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis in restoring the White House, including Hugh Sidey, Letitia Baldrige, Laura Bush, Kathleen P. Galop, and Carl Anthony.\nSince 1982 Siena College Research Institute has periodically conducted surveys asking historians to assess American first ladies according to a cumulative score on the independent criteria of their background, value to the country, intelligence, courage, accomplishments, integrity, leadership, being their own women, public image, and value to the president. Consistently, Onassis has ranked among the three-eight highly regarded first ladies in these surveys. In terms of cumulative assessment, Onassis has been ranked:\nIn the 2008 Siena Research Institute survey, Onassis was ranked in the top-five of all criteria, ranking the 2nd-highest in background, 4th-highest in intelligence, 2nd-highest in value to the country, 4th-highest in being her \"own woman\", 4th-highest in integrity, 5th-highest in her accomplishments, 2nd-highest in courage, 4th-highest in leadership, 1st in public image, and 3rd-highest in her value to the president. In the 2003 survey, Onassis made the top-five in half of the categories, being ranked 1st-highest in background, 5th-highest in intelligence, 4th-highest in courage, 4th-highest in value to the country, and 1st-highest in public image. In the 2014 Siena Research Institute survey, in the rankings of 20th and 21st century American first ladies in additional survey questions, Onassis was ranked 2nd-highest for management of family life, 4th-highest for advancement of women's issues, 3rd-greatest as a political asset, 4th-strongest public communicator, and 2nd-highest for creation of a lasting legacy. In the 2014 survey, Onassis and her first husband were also ranked the 6th-highest out of 39 first couples in terms of being a \"power couple\".\nIn the 1982 Siena College Research Institute survey, Onassis had been ranked the lowest in the criteria of integrity. In subsequent iterations of the survey, historians' regard for her integrity markedly improved. The initial disapproving view of her integrity may have been due to sentiments towards her marriage to Aristotle Onassis. Historians' overall opinions towards Onassis as a whole appear to have become more favorable in the subsequent years as she, in her second widowhood, demonstrated her independence with her career in publishing.\nPortrayals.\nJaclyn Smith portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 1981 television film \"Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy\", depicting her life until the end of the JFK presidency. The film's producer Louis Rudolph stated an interest in creating a \"positive portrait of a woman who I thought had been very much maligned,\" comments that were interpreted by John J. O'Connor of \"The New York Times\" as erasing any chances of critique toward her. Though Smith received praise for her performance, with Marilynn Preston calling her \"convincing in an impossible role\", Tom Shales wrote \"Jaclyn Smith couldn't act her way out of a Gucci bag\".\nBlair Brown portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 1983 miniseries \"Kennedy\", set during the Kennedy presidency. Brown used wigs and makeup to better resemble Kennedy and said through playing the role she gained a different view of the assassination: \"I realized that this was a woman witnessing the public execution of her husband.\" Jason Bailey praised her performance, while Andrea Mullaney noted her resemblance to Kennedy and general shyness. Brown was nominated for a television BAFTA as Best Actress and a Golden Globe as Best Actress in a Miniseries or Television Film.\nMarianna Bishop, Sarah Michelle Gellar, and Roma Downey portray Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis in the 1991 miniseries \"A Woman Named Jackie\", covering her entire life until the death of Aristotle Onassis. Of being contacted for the role, Downey reflected: \"I thought I was a strange choice because I didn't think I looked anything like her and I was Irish.\" Half of Downey's wardrobe was designed by Shelley Komarov and Downey stated that though she had long harbored \"great respect and admiration\" for Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, she was unaware of the troubles in her childhood. Reviewer Rick Kogan praised Downey with doing \"a surprisingly fine job in the demanding title role\", while Howard Rosenberg lamented Downey's performance failing to \"pierce this thick glaze of superficiality\". \"Ability\" credited the role with raising Downey's profile. In 1992, the miniseries won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Miniseries.\nRhoda Griffis portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 1992 film \"Love Field\", set shortly before and in the aftermath of JFK's assassination. It was Griffis's feature film debut. Griffis said she had been told by her orthodontist of her resemblance to Kennedy and was cast as her upon walking into the auditions for the role.\nSally Taylor-Isherwood, Emily VanCamp, and Joanne Whalley portray Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis in the 2000 television miniseries \"Jackie Bouvier Kennedy Onassis\", covering chronologically her entire life. Whalley prepared for the role by listening to recordings of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's voice along with working with a dialect coach; by the end of production, she developed an attachment to her. Laura Fries assessed Whalley as lacking Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's charisma despite being \"soulful and regal\" in her own right while Ron Wertheimer viewed Whalley as being passive in the role and lamented \"the filmmakers render Jackie as Forrest Gump in a pillbox hat, someone who keeps passing close to the center of things without really touching \u2013 or being touched by \u2013 very much.\"\nStephanie Romanov portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2000 film \"Thirteen Days\", taking place during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Philip French of \"The Guardian\" noted her small role and being out of \"the loop\" was accurate of women's roles in \"the early Sixties\". Laura Clifford called Romanov \"unconvincing\" in the role.\nJill Hennessy portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2001 television film \"Jackie, Ethel, Joan: The Women of Camelot\". Hennessy prepared for the performance by watching hours of archival footage of Kennedy and cited one of the reasons for her favoring of the miniseries was its distinctiveness in not focusing \"strictly on the men or only on Jackie\". Reviewers Anita Gates and Terry Kelleher believed Hennessy brought \"elegance\" to the role while Steve Oxman panned the performance: \"Hennessy simply doesn't possess the right natural grace. But this pic has a habit of telling us more that [sic] it shows us, and the actress manages to communicate the most important elements of the story without ever making it especially convincing.\"\nJacqueline Bisset portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2003 film \"\". Bisset said the glasses she used during the film were holdovers from a prior role in \"The Greek Tycoon\". Neil Genzlinger thought Bisset \"should have known better\" in taking on the role while Kristen Tauer wrote Bisset portraying Kennedy as a mother was a \"different central light than many proceeding films\".\nJeanne Tripplehorn portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2009 film \"Grey Gardens\" for a single scene. Tripplehorn said questions she had about Edith Bouvier Beale that she thought would be answered by being a part of the film remained unresolved. Tripplehorn received diverse reactions to her performance while Brian Lowry noted her resemblance to Kennedy and small role.\nKatie Holmes portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2011 miniseries \"The Kennedys\", set during the Kennedy presidency and its 2017 sequel \"\", focusing on her life after 1968. Mary McNamara and Hank Stuever regarded Holmes's performance with neutrality in their reviews of \"The Kennedys\" while Hadley Freeman called her \"bloodless\" in the role. Holmes stated reprising the role was a \"bigger challenge\" for having to act through later periods of Kennedy's life. When asked of the concurrent \"Jackie\" film, Holmes said, \"I think its [sic] really exciting. It's [sic] just is a testament to how amazing Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was and how much she meant to our country.\" Holmes also stated both should be watched due to covering different periods of Jackie's life. In \"The Kennedys: After Camelot\", Holmes's performance was viewed favorably by Daniel Feinberg and Allison Keane while Kristi Turnquist panned her.\nMinka Kelly portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2013 film \"The Butler\", giving the film's protagonist Cecil one of her husband's neckties after his assassination. Kelly said she was intimidated and scared taking on the role. Kelly admitted to having difficulty with perfecting Kennedy's voice, going \"to sleep listening to her\", and having discomfort with the wool clothing associated with the role.\nGinnifer Goodwin portrays her in the 2013 television film \"Killing Kennedy\". Goodwin used intimate photos to better portray Jacqueline Kennedy and was concerned \"to do her justice and to play her as accurately as possible without ever doing an impression of her\". Costar Rob Lowe said of seeing Goodwin in the pink Chanel suit, \"It made it real. If I were under any illusions about what we were doing, seeing her in that iconic moment was, I would say, sobering.\" Tom Carson wrote that Goodwin's \"trademark vulnerability humanizes Jackie considerably\" while Bruce Miller called her a miscast and Robert Lloyd and Brian Lowry panned her performance.\nKim Allen portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2016 film \"LBJ\". Ray Bennett noted in his review of the film that Allen was in a non-speaking role.\nNatalie Portman portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2016 film \"Jackie\", set during the JFK presidency and the immediate aftermath of the assassination. Portman admitted being intimidated taking the role and doing research in preparation for filming. Nigel M. Smith wrote that by portraying Kennedy, Portman was \"taking on arguably the biggest challenge of her career\". Manohla Dargis, David Edelstein, and Peter Bradshaw praised her performance. Portman was nominated for Best Actress by Academy Awards, AACTA Awards, AWFJ, AFCA, and BSFC, and won the category by the Online Film Critics Society.\nJodi Balfour portrays Jacqueline Kennedy in the 2017 eighth episode of the second season of Netflix's drama series, \"The Crown\", titled \"Dear Mrs. Kennedy\", set during the June 1961 visit of the Kennedy couple to Buckingham Palace and the immediate reaction to the assassination of John F. Kennedy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64379", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64379", "title": "Jacqueline Bouvier (The Simpsons)", "text": ""}
{"id": "64384", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64384", "title": "Pieter Bruegel the Elder", "text": "Dutch and Flemish painter (c. 1525/30\u20131569)\nPieter Bruegel (also Brueghel or Breughel) the Elder ( , ; ; c.\u20091525\u20131530 \u2013 9 September 1569) was among the most significant artists of Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting, a painter and printmaker, known for his landscapes and peasant scenes (so-called genre painting); he was a pioneer in presenting both types of subject as large paintings.\nHe was a formative influence on Dutch Golden Age painting and later painting in general in his innovative choices of subject matter, as one of the first generation of artists to grow up when religious subjects had ceased to be the natural subject matter of painting. He also painted no portraits, the other mainstay of Netherlandish art. After his training and travels to Italy, he returned in 1555 to settle in Antwerp, where he worked mainly as a prolific designer of prints for the leading publisher of the day. At the end of the 1550s, he made painting his main medium, and all his famous paintings come from the following period of little more than a decade before his early death in 1569, when he was probably in his early forties.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, Bruegel's works have inspired artists in both the literary arts and in cinema. His painting \"Landscape with the Fall of Icarus\", now thought only to survive in copies, is the subject of the final lines of the 1938 poem \"Mus\u00e9e des Beaux Arts\" by W. H. Auden. Russian film director Andrei Tarkovsky refers to Bruegel's paintings in his films several times, including \"Solaris\" (1972) and \"Mirror\" (1975). Director Lars von Trier also uses Bruegel's paintings in his film \"Melancholia\" (2011). In 2011, the film \"The Mill and the Cross\" was released featuring Bruegel's \"The Procession to Calvary\".\nLife.\nEarly life.\nBruegel's birth date is not documented, but inferred from the fact that Bruegel entered the Antwerp painters' guild in 1551. This usually happened between the ages of twenty and twenty-five, giving a range for his birth between 1525 and 1530. His master, according to Karel van Mander, was the Antwerp painter Pieter Coecke van Aelst.\nThe two main early sources for Bruegel's biography are Lodovico Guicciardini's account of the Low Countries (1567) and Karel van Mander's 1604 \"Schilder-boeck\". Guicciardini recorded that Bruegel was born in Breda, but van Mander specified that Bruegel was born in a village (\"dorp\") near Breda called \"Brueghel\", which does not fit any known place. Nothing at all is known of his family background. Van Mander seems to assume he came from a peasant background, in keeping with the over-emphasis on Bruegel's peasant genre scenes given by van Mander and many early art historians and critics.\nIn contrast, scholars of the last six decades have emphasised the intellectual content of his work, and conclude: \"There is, in fact, every reason to think that Pieter Bruegel was a townsman and a highly educated one, on friendly terms with the humanists of his time\", ignoring van Mander's \"dorp\" and just placing his childhood in Breda itself. Breda was already a significant centre as the base of the House of Orange-Nassau, with a population of some 8,000, although 90% of its 1300 houses were destroyed in a fire in 1534. This reversal can be taken to excess; although Bruegel moved in highly educated humanist circles, it seems \"he had not mastered Latin\", and had others add the Latin captions in some of his drawings.\nBetween 1545 and 1550, he was a pupil of Pieter Coecke, who died on 6 December 1550. Before this, Bruegel was already working in Mechelen, where he is documented between September 1550 and October 1551 assisting Peeter Baltens on an altarpiece (now lost), painting the wings in \"grisaille\". Bruegel possibly got this work via the connections of Mayken Verhulst, the wife of Pieter Coecke. Mayken's father and eight siblings were all artists or married artists, and lived in Mechelen.\nTravel.\nIn 1551, Bruegel became a free master in the Guild of Saint Luke of Antwerp. He set off for Italy soon after, probably by way of France. He visited Rome and, rather adventurously for the period, by 1552 had reached Reggio Calabria at the southern tip of the mainland, where a drawing records the city in flames after a Turkish raid. He probably continued to Sicily, but by 1553 was back in Rome. There he met the miniaturist Giulio Clovio, whose will of 1578 lists paintings by Bruegel; in one case, a joint work. These works, apparently landscapes, have not survived, but marginal miniatures in manuscripts by Clovio are attributed to Bruegel.\nHe left Italy by 1554, and had reached Antwerp by 1555, when the set of prints to his designs known as the \"Large Landscapes\" were published by Hieronymus Cock, the most important print publisher of northern Europe. Bruegel's return route is uncertain, but much of the debate over it was made irrelevant in the 1980s when it was realised that the celebrated series of large drawings of mountain landscapes thought to have been made on the trip were not by Bruegel at all. All the drawings from the trip that are considered authentic are of landscapes; unlike most other 16th-century artists visiting Rome, he seems to have ignored both classical ruins and contemporary buildings.\nAntwerp and Brussels.\nFrom 1555 until 1563, Bruegel lived in Antwerp, then the publishing centre of northern Europe, mainly working as a designer of over forty prints for Cock, though his dated paintings begin in 1557. With one exception, Bruegel did not work the plates himself, but produced a drawing which Cock's specialists worked from. From 1559, he dropped the 'h' from his name and signed his paintings as \"Bruegel\"; his relatives continued to use \"Brueghel\" or \"Breughel\". He moved in the lively humanist circles of the city, and his change of name (or at least its spelling) in 1559 can be seen as an attempt to Latinise it; at the same time he changed the script he signed in from the Gothic blackletter to Roman capitals.\nIn 1563, he married Pieter Coecke van Aelst's daughter Mayken Coecke in Brussels, where he lived for the remainder of his short life. Antwerp was the capital of Netherlandish commerce and the art market; Brussels was the centre of government. Van Mander tells a story that his mother-in-law pushed for the move to distance him from his established servant girl mistress. By now, painting had become his main activity, and his most famous works come from these years. His paintings were much sought after, with patrons including wealthy Flemish collectors and Cardinal Granvelle, in effect the Habsburg chief minister, who was based in Mechelen. Bruegel had two sons, both well known as painters, and a daughter about whom nothing is known. These were Pieter Brueghel the Younger (1564\u20131638) and Jan Brueghel the Elder (1568\u20131625); he died too early to train either of them. He died in Brussels on 9 September 1569 and was buried in the Kapellekerk.\nVan Mander records that before he died he told his wife to burn some drawings, perhaps designs for prints, carrying inscriptions \"which were too sharp or sarcastic ... either out of remorse or for fear that she might come to harm or in some way be held responsible for them\", which has led to much speculation that they were politically or doctrinally provocative, in a climate of sharp tension in these areas.\nHistorical background.\nBruegel was born at a time of extensive change in Western Europe. Humanist ideals from the previous century influenced artists and scholars. Italy was at the end of its High Renaissance of arts and culture, when artists such as Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci painted their masterpieces. In 1517, about eight years before Bruegel's birth, Martin Luther created his \"Ninety-five Theses\" and began the Protestant Reformation in neighbouring Germany. Reformation was accompanied by iconoclasm and widespread destruction of art, including in the Low Countries. The Catholic Church viewed Protestantism and its destructive iconoclasm of art as a threat to the Church. The Council of Trent, which concluded in 1563, determined that religious art should be more focused on religious subject-matter and less on material things and decorative qualities.\nAt this time, the Low Countries were divided into Seventeen Provinces, some of which wanted separation from the Habsburg rule based in Spain. The Reformation, meanwhile, produced a number of Protestant denominations that gained followers in the Seventeen Provinces, influenced by the newly Lutheran German states to the east and the newly Anglican England to the west. The Habsburg monarchs of Spain attempted a policy of strict religious uniformity for the Catholic Church within their domains and enforced it with the Inquisition. Increasing religious antagonisms and riots, political manoeuvrings, and executions eventually resulted in the outbreak of the Eighty Years' War.\nIn this atmosphere, Bruegel reached the height of his career as a painter. Two years before his death, the Eighty Years' War began between the United Provinces and Spain. Although Bruegel did not live to see it, seven provinces became independent and formed the Dutch Republic, while the other ten remained under Habsburg control at the end of the war.\nSubjects.\nPeasants.\nPieter Bruegel specialised in genre paintings populated by peasants, often with a landscape element, though he also painted religious works. Making the life and manners of peasants the main focus of a work was rare in painting in Bruegel's time, and he was a pioneer of the genre painting. Many of his peasant paintings fall into two groups in terms of scale and composition, both of which were original and influential on later painting. His earlier style shows dozens of small figures, seen from a high viewpoint, and spread fairly evenly across the central picture space. The setting is typically an urban space surrounded by buildings, within which the figures have a \"fundamentally disconnected manner of portrayal\", with individuals or small groups engaged in their own distinct activity, while ignoring all the others.\nHis earthy, unsentimental but vivid depiction of the rituals of village life\u2014including agriculture, hunts, meals, festivals, dances, and games\u2014are unique windows on a vanished folk culture, though still characteristic of Belgian life and culture today, and a prime source of iconographic evidence about both physical and social aspects of 16th-century life. For example, his famous painting \"Netherlandish Proverbs\", originally \"The Blue Cloak\", illustrates dozens of then-contemporary aphorisms, many of which still are in use in current Flemish, French, English and Dutch. The Flemish environment provided a large artistic audience for proverb-filled paintings because proverbs were well known and recognisable as well as entertaining. \"Children's Games\" shows the variety of amusements enjoyed by young people. His winter landscapes of 1565, like \"The Hunters in the Snow\", are taken as corroborative evidence of the severity of winters during the Little Ice Age. Bruegel often painted community events, as in \"The Peasant Wedding\" and \"The Fight Between Carnival and Lent\". In paintings like \"The Peasant Wedding\", Bruegel painted individual, identifiable people, while the people in \"The Fight Between Carnival and Lent\" are unidentifiable, muffin-faced allegories of greed or gluttony.\nBruegel also painted religious scenes in a wide Flemish landscape setting, as in the \"Conversion of Paul\" and \"The Sermon of St. John the Baptist\". Even if Bruegel's subject matter was unconventional, the religious ideals and proverbs driving his paintings were typical of the Northern Renaissance. He accurately depicted people with disabilities, such as in \"The Blind Leading the Blind\", which depicted a quote from the Bible: \"If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch\" (Matthew 15:14). Using the Bible to interpret this painting, the six blind men are symbols of the blindness of mankind in pursuing earthly goals instead of focusing on Christ's teachings.\nUsing abundant spirit and comic power, Bruegel created some of the very early images of acute social protest in art history. Examples include paintings such as \"The Fight Between Carnival and Lent\" (a satire of the conflicts of the Protestant Reformation) and engravings like \"The Ass in the School\" and \"Strongboxes Battling Piggybanks\".\nIn the 1560s, Bruegel moved to a style showing only a few large figures, typically in a landscape background without a distant view. His paintings, dominated by their landscapes, take a middle course as regards both the number and size of figures.\nLandscape elements.\nBruegel adapted and made more natural the world landscape style, which shows small figures in an imaginary panoramic landscape seen from an elevated viewpoint that includes mountains and lowlands, water, and buildings. Back in Antwerp from Italy he was commissioned in the 1550s by the publisher Hieronymus Cock to make drawings for a series of engravings, the \"Large Landscapes\", to meet what was now a growing demand for landscape images.\nSome of his earlier paintings, such as his \"Landscape with the Flight into Egypt\" (Courtauld, 1563), are fully within the Patinir conventions, but his \"Landscape with the Fall of Icarus\" (known from two copies) had a Patinir-style landscape, in which already the largest figure was a genre figure who was only a bystander for the supposed narrative subject, and may not even be aware of it. The date of Bruegel's lost original is unclear, but it is probably relatively early, and if so, foreshadows the trend of his later works. During the 1560s, the early scenes crowded with multitudes of very small figures, whether peasant genre figures or figures in religious narratives, give way to a small number of much larger figures.\nMonths of the year.\nHis well-known set of landscapes with genre figures depicting the seasons are the culmination of his landscape style; the five surviving paintings use the basic elements of the world landscape (only one lacks craggy mountains) but transform them into his own style. They are larger than most previous works, with a genre scene with several figures in the foreground, and the panoramic view seen past or through trees. Bruegel was also aware of the Danube School's landscape style through old master prints. The surviving five paintings are \"The Gloomy Day\" (February-March), \"The Hunters in the Snow\" (December-January), and \"The Return of the Herd\" (October-November) which are on display in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna; \"The Hay Harvest\" (June-July) is on display in the Lobkowicz Palace in Prague; and \"The Harvesters\" (July-August) which is on display at the Metropolitan in New York. The painting associated with the April-May seasonal transition is assumed to be lost.\nThe series on the months of the year includes several of Bruegel's best-known works. In 1565, a wealthy patron in Antwerp, Niclaes Jonghelinck, commissioned him to paint a series of paintings of each month of the year. There has been a dispute among art historians as to whether the series originally included six or twelve works. Joseph Koerner in his 2018 book \"Bosch and Bruegel\" states that Archduke Ernst, who took possession of the paintings after Niclaes defaulted on taxes, had as early as 1569 inventoried only six paintings in this series during the year of Bruegel's death. The collection is next inventoried to be in the possession of Archduke Leopold who in 1659 indicated that five of them were extant. Only five of these paintings are known to have survived into the 21st century. Traditional Flemish luxury books of hours (e.g., the ; 1416) had calendar pages that included the Labours of the Months, depictions set in landscapes of the agricultural tasks, weather, and social life typical for that month.\nBruegel's paintings were on a far larger scale than a typical calendar page painting, each one approximately three feet by five feet. For Bruegel, this was a large commission (the price of a commission was based on how large the painting was) and an important one. In 1565, the Calvinist riots began, and it was only two years before the Eighty Years' War broke out. Bruegel may have felt safer with a secular commission so as not to offend Calvinists or Catholics. Some of the most famous paintings from this series included \"The Hunters in the Snow\" (December\u2013January) and \"The Harvesters\" (August-September).\nPrints and drawings.\nOn his return from Italy to Antwerp, Bruegel earned his living producing drawings to be turned into prints for the leading print publisher of the city, and indeed northern Europe, Hieronymus Cock. At his \"House of the Four Winds\" Cock ran a production and distribution operation, efficiently producing prints of many sorts that were more concerned with sales than the finest artistic achievement. Most of Bruegel's prints come from this period, but he continued to produce drawn designs for prints until the end of his life, leaving only two completed out of a series of the \"Four Seasons\". The prints were popular and it is reasonable to assume that all those published have survived. In many cases, Bruegel's drawings also exist. Although the subject matter of his graphic work was often continued in his paintings, there are considerable differences in emphases between the two \"oeuvres\". To his contemporaries and for long after, until public museums and good reproductions of the paintings made these better known, Bruegel was much better known through his prints than his paintings, which largely explains the critical assessment of him as merely the creator of comic peasant scenes.\nThe prints are mostly engravings, though from about 1559 onwards some are etchings or mixtures of both techniques. Only one complete woodcut was made from a Bruegel design, with another left incomplete. This, \"The Dirty Wife\", is a most unusual survival (now Metropolitan Museum of Art) of a drawing on the wooden block intended for printing. For some reason, the specialist block-cutter who carved away the block, following the drawing while also destroying it, had only done one corner of the design before stopping work. The design then appears as an engraving, perhaps soon after Bruegel's death.\nAmong his greatest successes were a series of allegories, among several designs adopting many of the very individual mannerisms of his compatriot Hieronymus Bosch: \"The Seven Deadly Sins\" and \"The Virtues\". The sinners are grotesque and unidentifiable while the allegories of virtue often wear odd headgear. That imitations of Bosch sold well is demonstrated by his drawing \"Big Fish Eat Little Fish\" (held in the Albertina museum collection), which Bruegel signed but Cock shamelessly attributed to Bosch in the print version.\nAlthough Bruegel presumably made them, no drawings that are clearly preparatory studies for paintings survive. Most surviving drawings are finished designs for prints, or landscape drawings that are fairly finished. After a considerable purge of attributions in recent decades, led by Hans Mielke, sixty-one sheets of drawings are now generally agreed to be by Bruegel. A new \"Master of the Mountain Landscapes\" has emerged from the carnage. Mielke's key observation was that the lily watermark on the paper of several sheets was only found from around 1580 onwards, which led to the rapid acceptance of his proposal. Another group of about twenty-five pen drawings of landscapes, many signed and dated as by Bruegel, are now attributed to Jacob Savery, probably from the decade of so before his death in 1603. A giveaway was that two drawings, including the walls of Amsterdam, were dated 1563 but included elements only built in the 1590s. This group appears to have been made as deliberate forgeries.\nFamily.\nAround 1563, Bruegel moved from Antwerp to Brussels, where he married Mayken Coecke, the daughter of the painter Pieter Coecke van Aelst and Mayken Verhulst. As registered in the archives of the Cathedral of Antwerp, their deposition for marriage was registered on 25 July 1563. The marriage was concluded in the Chapel Church, Brussels in 1563.\nPieter the Elder had two sons: Pieter Brueghel the Younger and Jan Brueghel the Elder (both kept their name as Brueghel). Their grandmother, Mayken Verhulst, trained the sons because \"the Elder\" died when both were very small children. The older brother, Pieter Brueghel, copied his father's style and compositions with competence and considerable commercial success. Jan was much more original and very versatile. He was an important figure in the transition to the Baroque style in Flemish Baroque painting and Dutch Golden Age painting in a number of its genres. He was often a collaborator with other leading artists, including with Peter Paul Rubens on many works, including the \"Allegory of Sight\".\nOther members of the family include Jan van Kessel the Elder (grandson of Jan Brueghel the Elder) and Jan van Kessel the Younger. Through David Teniers the Younger, son-in-law of Jan Brueghel the Elder, the family is also related to the whole Teniers family of painters and the Quellinus family of painters and sculptors, through the marriage of Jan-Erasmus Quellinus to Cornelia, daughter of David Teniers the Younger.\nReception history.\nBruegel's art was long more highly valued by collectors than critics. His friend Abraham Ortelius described him in a friendship album in 1574 as \"the most perfect painter of his century\", but both Vasari and Van Mander see him as essentially a comic successor to Hieronymus Bosch. As well as being forward-looking, his art reinvigorates medieval subjects such as marginal drolleries of ordinary life in illuminated manuscripts, and the calendar scenes of agricultural labours set in landscape backgrounds, and puts these on a much larger scale than before, and in the expensive medium of oil painting. He does the same with the fantastic and anarchic world developed in Renaissance prints and book illustrations.\nBruegel's work was, as far as we know, always keenly collected. The banker Nicolaes Jonghelinck owned sixteen paintings; his brother Jacques Jonghelinck was a gentleman-sculptor and medallist, who also had significant business interests. He made medals and tombs in an international style for the Brussels elite, especially Cardinal Granvelle, who was also a keen patron of Bruegel. Granvelle owned at least two Bruegels, including the Courtauld \"Flight into Egypt\", but we do not know if he bought them directly from the artist. Granvelle's nephew and heir was strong-armed out of his Bruegels by Rudolf II, the very acquisitive Austrian Habsburg Emperor. The series of the \"Months\" entered the Habsburg collections in 1594, given to Rudolf's brother and later taken by the emperor himself. Rudolf eventually owned at least ten Bruegel paintings. A generation later Rubens owned eleven or twelve, which mostly passed to the Antwerp senator Pieter Stevens, and were then sold in 1668.\nBruegel's son Pieter could still keep himself and a large studio team busy producing replicas or adaptations of Bruegel's works, as well as his own compositions along similar lines, sixty years or more after they were first painted. The most frequently copied works were generally not the ones that are most famous today, though this may reflect the availability of the full-scale, detailed drawings that were evidently used. The most-copied painting is the \"Winter Landscape with (Skaters and) a Bird Trap\" (1565), of which the original is in Brussels; 127 copies are recorded. They include paintings after some of Bruegel's drawn print designs, especially \"Spring\".\nThe next century's artists of peasant genre scenes were heavily influenced by Brueghel. Outside the Brueghel family, early figures were Adriaen Brouwer (c.\u20091605/6 \u2013 1638) and David Vinckboons (1576 \u2013 c. 1632), both Flemish-born but spending much of their time in the northern Netherlands. As well as the general conception of such \"kermis\" subjects, Vinckboons and other artists took from Bruegel \"such stylistic devices as the bird's-eye perspective, ornamentalised vegetation, bright palette, and stocky, odious figures.\" Forty years after their deaths, and over a century after Bruegel's, Jan Steen (1626\u201379) continued to show a particular interest in Bruegelian treatments.\nThe critical treatment of Bruegel as essentially an artist of comic peasant scenes persisted until the late 19th century, even after his best paintings became widely visible as royal and aristocratic collections were turned into museums. This had been partly explicable when his work was mainly known from copies, prints, and reproductions. Even Henri Hymans, whose work of 1890/1891 was the first important contribution to modern Bruegel scholarship, could describe him thus: \"His field of enquiry is certainly not of the most extensive; his ambition, too, is modest. He confines himself to a knowledge of mankind and the most immediate objects\", a line no modern scholar is likely to take. As his landscape paintings, in good colour reproduction, have become his best-loved works, so his importance in the history of landscape art has become understood.\nWorks.\nThere are about forty generally accepted surviving paintings, twelve of which are in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. Others are known to have been lost, including what, according to van Mander, Bruegel himself thought his best work, \"a picture in which Truth triumphs\".\nBruegel only etched one plate himself, \"The Rabbit Hunt,\" but designed some forty prints, both engravings and etchings, mostly for the Cock publishing house. As discussed above, about sixty-one drawings are now recognised as authentic, mostly designs for prints or landscapes.\nReferences in other works.\nIn literature.\nHis painting \"Landscape with the Fall of Icarus\", now thought only to survive in copies, is the subject of the final lines of the 1938 poem \"Mus\u00e9e des Beaux Arts\" by W. H. Auden:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nIn Brueghel's Icarus, for instance: how everything turns away\nQuite leisurely from the disaster; the ploughman\nHave heard the splash, the forsaken cry,\nBut for him it was not an important failure; the sun shone\nAs it had to on the white legs disappearing into the green\nWater, and the expensive delicate ship that must have seen\nSomething amazing, a boy falling out of the sky,\nHad somewhere to get to and sailed calmly on.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIt also was the subject of a 1960 poem \"Landscape with the Fall of Icarus\" by William Carlos Williams, and was mentioned in Nicolas Roeg's 1976 science fiction film \"The Man Who Fell to Earth\". Williams' final collection of poetry alludes to several of Bruegel's works.\nBruegel's painting \"Two Monkeys\" was the subject of Wis\u0142awa Szymborska's 1957 poem, \"Brueghel's Two Monkeys\".\nSeamus Heaney refers to Brueghel in his poem \"The Seed Cutters\". David Jones alludes to the painting \"The Blind Leading the Blind\" in his World War One prose-poem \"In Parenthesis\": \"the stumbling dark of the blind, that Breughel knew about \u2013 ditch circumscribed\".\nMichael Frayn's novel \"Headlong\", imagines a lost panel from the 1565 \"Months\" series resurfacing unrecognised, which triggers a conflict between an art (and money) lover and the boor who possesses it. Much thought is spent on Bruegel's secret motives for painting it.\nAuthor Don Delillo uses Bruegel's painting \"The Triumph of Death\" in his novel \"Underworld\" and his short story \"Pafko at the Wall\". It is believed that the painting \"The Hunters in the Snow\" influenced the classic short story with the same title written by Tobias Wolff and featured in \"In the Garden of the North American Martyrs\".\nIn the foreword to his novel \"The Folly of the World\", author Jesse Bullington explains that Bruegel's painting \"Netherlandish Proverbs\" inspired the title and also the plot to some extent. Various sections are introduced with a proverb depicted in the painting that alludes to a plot element.\nPoet Sylvia Plath refers to Bruegel's painting \"The Triumph of Death\" in her poem \"Two Views of a Cadaver Room\" from her 1960 collection \"The Colossus and Other Poems\".\nIn film.\nRussian film director Andrei Tarkovsky refers to Bruegel's paintings in his films several times, notably in \"Solaris\" (1972) and \"The Mirror\" (1975).\nDirector Lars von Trier also uses Bruegel's paintings in his film \"Melancholia\" (2011). This was used as a reference to Tarkovsky's \"Solaris\", a movie with related themes.\nHis 1564 painting \"The Procession to Calvary\" inspired the 2011 Polish-Swedish film co-production \"The Mill and the Cross\", in which Bruegel is played by Rutger Hauer. Bruegel's paintings in the Kunsthistorisches Museum are featured in the 2012 film, \"Museum Hours\", where his work is discussed in conversations between a security guard at the museum and a visitor from Montreal who is visiting a hospitalised relative, and takes time off between hospital visits to visit the museum. Some scenes feature tour guides who present their analysis and interpretation of Bruegel's paintings.\nIn music.\nThe album cover of Fleet Foxes' debut self-titled LP features Bruegel's 1559 masterpiece \"Netherlandish Proverbs\", a decision made by vocalist/guitarist Robin Pecknold. In an interview with Mojo, Pecknold noted he drew inspiration from the painting after seeing it in a book, and viewed it as an appropriate allegory to the album's dense \u2013 but unified \u2013 sound. Pecknold further added that the Gem\u00e4ldegalerie, which houses the painting, was thrilled to have the work featured on a contemporary record. The cover claimed the Best Art Vinyl Award 2008, an annual award organized by Artvinyl.com.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64385", "revid": "11554556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64385", "title": "Maude Flanders", "text": ""}
{"id": "64386", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64386", "title": "Jan Brueghel the Elder", "text": "Flemish painter (1568\u20131625)\nJan Brueghel (also Bruegel or Breughel) the Elder ( , ; ; 1568 \u2013 13 January 1625) was a Flemish painter and draughtsman. He was the younger son of the eminent Flemish Renaissance painter Pieter Bruegel the Elder. A close friend and frequent collaborator with Peter Paul Rubens, the two artists were the leading Flemish painters in the Flemish Baroque painting of the first three decades of the 17th century.\nBrueghel worked in many genres including history paintings, flower still lifes, allegorical and mythological scenes, landscapes and seascapes, hunting pieces, village scenes, battle scenes and scenes of hellfire and the underworld. He was an important innovator who invented new types of paintings such as flower garland paintings, paradise landscapes, and gallery paintings in the first quarter of the 17th century. However, he generally avoided painting large figures, as in portraits, though he often collaborated with other painters who did these, while he did the landscape backgrounds, and sometimes the clothes.\nHe further created genre paintings that were imitations, pastiches and reworkings of his father's works, in particular his father's genre scenes and landscapes with peasants. Brueghel represented the type of the \"pictor doctus\", the erudite painter whose works are informed by the religious motifs and aspirations of the Catholic Counter-Reformation as well as the scientific revolution with its interest in accurate description and classification. He was court painter of the Archduke and Duchess Albrecht and Isabella, sovereigns of the Spanish Netherlands.\nThe artist was nicknamed \"Velvet\" Brueghel, \"Flower\" Brueghel, and \"Paradise\" Brueghel. The first is believed to have been given him because of his mastery in the rendering of fabrics. The second nickname is a reference to his fame as a painter of (although not a specialist in) flower pieces and the last one to his invention of the genre of the paradise landscape. His brother Pieter Brueghel the Younger was traditionally nicknamed \"de helse Brueghel\" or \"Hell Brueghel\" because it was believed he was the author of a number of paintings with fantastic depictions of fire and grotesque imagery. These paintings have now been reattributed to Jan Brueghel the Elder.\nLife.\nJan Brueghel the Elder was born in Brussels as the son of Pieter Bruegel the Elder and Maria (called 'Mayken') Coecke van Aelst. His mother was the daughter of the prominent Flemish Renaissance artists Pieter Coecke van Aelst and Mayken Verhulst. His father died about a year after Jan's birth in 1569. It is believed that after the death of his mother in 1578, Jan, together with his older brother Pieter Brueghel the Younger and sister Marie, went to live with their grandmother Verhulst, who was by then widowed. The early Flemish biographer Karel van Mander wrote in his Schilder-boeck published in 1604 that Verhulst was the first art teacher of her two grandsons. She taught them drawing and watercolour painting of miniatures. Jan and his brother may also have trained with local artists in Brussels who were active as tapestry designers.\nJan and his brother Pieter were then sent to Antwerp to study oil painting. According to Karel van Mander he studied under Peter Goetkint, an important dealer with a large collection of paintings in his shop. Goetkint died on 15 July 1583 not very long after Jan had started his training. It is possible that Jan continued his studies in this shop, which was taken over by Goetkint's widow, as no other master is recorded.\nIt was common for Flemish painters of that time to travel to Italy to complete their studies. Jan Brueghel left for Italy, first travelling to Cologne where his sister Marie and her family lived. He later visited Frankenthal, an important cultural centre where a number of Flemish landscape artists were active. \nHe then travelled on to Naples after probably spending time in Venice. In Naples he produced some drawings after June 1590 which show his interest in landscapes and monumental architecture. He worked for Don Francesco Caracciolo, a prominent nobleman and priest and founder of the Clerics Regular Minor. Jan produced small-scale cabinet paintings for Don Francesco.\nBrueghel left Naples for Rome where he lived from 1592 to 1594. He befriended Paul Bril, a landscape specialist from Antwerp who had moved to Rome in the late 16th century. Together with his brother Mathijs Bril, he created atmospheric landscapes for many Roman residences. Brueghel took inspiration from Bril's lively drawings and small-scale landscapes of the mid-1590s. During his time in Rome Jan Brueghel became acquainted with Hans Rottenhammer, a German painter of small highly finished cabinet paintings on copper. Rottenhammer painted religious and mythological compositions, combining German and Italian elements of style, which were highly esteemed. Brueghel collaborated with both Paul Bril and Rottenhammer. Brueghel also spent time making watercolours of Rome's antique monuments and seemed particularly fascinated by the vaulted interiors of the Colosseum.\nHe enjoyed the protection of Cardinal Ascanio Colonna. In Rome he also met Cardinal Federico Borromeo, who played an important role in the Counter-Reformation and was also an avid art collector. The Cardinal became Brueghel's lifelong friend and patron. Brueghel took up residence in Borromeo's Palazzo Vercelli. When Borromeo became archbishop of Milan in June 1595, Brueghel followed him and became part of the Cardinal's household. He produced many landscape and flower paintings for the Cardinal.\nBrueghel stayed about a year in Milan and in 1596 he had returned to Antwerp where he remained active, save for a few interruptions, for the rest of his life. A year after his return Jan Brueghel was admitted as a Free Master in Antwerp's Guild of Saint Luke as the son of a master. The artist married on 23 January 1599 in the Cathedral of Our Lady in Antwerp. The bride was Isabella de Jode, the daughter of the cartographer, engraver and publisher Gerard de Jode. Their son Jan was born on 13 September 1601. This first-born had Rubens as his godfather and later took over his father's workshop and was known as Jan Brueghel the Younger.\nBrueghel was registered as a burgher of Antwerp on 4 October 1601 as 'Jan Bruegel, Peetersone, schilder, van Bruessele' ('Jan Bruegel, son of Peeter, painter, of Brussels'). Just a month before, Brueghel had been elected dean of the Guild of Saint Luke, but he had not been able to take up the position as he was not a burgher of Antwerp. Upon becoming formally registered as a burgher the same year Brueghel could finally be the dean. The next year he was re-elected as dean.\nIn 1603 his daughter Paschasia Brueghel was born. Rubens was also her godfather. His wife Isabella de Jode died the same year leaving him with two young children. It has been speculated that death of his wife was linked to the birth of his latest child.\nIn the mid-1604 Brueghel visited Prague, the main location of the court of Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor, who promoted artistic innovation. The Emperor's court had attracted many Northern artists such as Bartholomeus Spranger and Hans von Aachen who created a new affected style, full of conceits, today known as Northern Mannerism.\nUpon returning to Antwerp in September 1604 Brueghel bought a large house called \"De Meerminne\" (The Mermaid) in the Lange Nieuwstraat in Antwerp on 20 September 1604. The artist remarried in April 1605. With his second wife Catharina van Mari\u00ebnburg he had 8 children of whom Ambrosius became a painter.\nAfter his appointment in 1606 as court painter to the Archduke and Duchess Albrecht and Isabella, sovereigns of the Spanish Netherlands, the artist was present in Brussels for periods in 1606, 1609, 1610 and 1613. On 28 August 1613 the court in Brussels paid Brueghel 3625 guilders for completing various works.\nFrom October 1610 onwards Rubens started taking on the role of intermediary for his friend Jan Brueghel. By 1625 Rubens had written about 25 letters to Cardinal Borromeo on behalf of Brueghel. In a letter to Borromeo Brueghel referred, jokingly, to his friend's role as that of \"mio secretario Rubens\" (my secretary Rubens). In 1612 or 1613 Peter Paul Rubens painted a portrait of Jan Brueghel and his family (Courtauld Institute, London). In 1613 he accompanied Rubens and Hendrick van Balen the Elder on a diplomatic mission to the Dutch Republic. Here they met Hendrick Goltzius and other Haarlem artists.\nWhen John Ernest, Duke of Saxe-Eisenach passed through Antwerp in 1614 he took time to pay a visit to Rubens and Brueghel in their workshops. Brueghel received many official commissions from the Antwerp city magistrate. Four of his paintings were offered by the Antwerp city magistrates to the Archduke and Duchess Albrecht and Isabella on 27 August 1615. He was in 1618 one of twelve important painters from Antwerp who were commissioned by the Antwerp city magistrates to produce a series of paintings for the Archduke and Duchess Albrecht and Isabella. For this commission, Brueghel coordinated the work on a painting cycle depicting an \"Allegory of the Five Senses\". The artists participating in the project included Rubens, Frans Snyders, Frans Francken the Younger, Joos de Momper, Hendrick van Balen the Elder and Sebastiaen Vrancx. The works were destroyed in a fire in 1713.\nOn 9 March 1619 Brueghel bought a third house called Den Bock (the Billy Goat) located in the Antwerp Arenbergstraat. When on 6 August 1623 his daughter Clara Eugenia was baptized, Archduchess Isabella and Cardinal Borromeo were her godparents. Jan Brueghel died on 13 January 1625 in Antwerp from complications arising from a gastrointestinal upset.\nThe artist's estate was distributed on 3 June and 23 June 1627 among his surviving wife and his children from both marriages. Rubens, Hendrick van Balen the Elder, Cornelis Schut and Paulus van Halmaele were the executors of his last will. Rubens was the guardian of the surviving Brueghel children.\nHis students included his son Jan as well as Daniel Seghers. Brueghel's daughter Paschasia married the painter Hieronymus van Kessel the Younger, and their son Jan van Kessel the Elder studied with Jan Brueghel the Younger. Brueghel's daughter Anna married David Teniers the Younger in 1637.\nWork.\nGeneral.\nJan Brueghel the Elder was a versatile artist who practised in many genres and introduced various new subjects into Flemish art. He was an innovator who contributed to the development of the various genres to which he put his hand such as flower still lifes, landscapes and seascapes, hunting pieces, battle scenes and scenes of hellfire and the underworld. His best-known innovations are the new types of paintings, which he introduced into the repertoire of Flemish art in the first quarter of the 17th century such as flower garland paintings, paradise landscapes and paintings of art galleries. Unlike contemporary Flemish Baroque artists, such as Rubens, he did not produce large altarpieces for the local churches.\nJan Brueghel the Elder achieved a superb technical mastery, which enabled him to render materials, animals and landscapes with remarkable accuracy and a high degree of finish. He had an accomplished miniaturist technique allowing him to achieve an accurate description of nature.\nLittle is known about the workshop practices of Brueghel. He operated a large workshop that allowed him to produce a large quantity of works, which were in turn reproduced in his workshop. After Brueghel's death in 1625, Jan Brueghel the Younger took charge of his father's workshop which he operated in the same way as his father. This is clear in the style of the surviving paintings which are in the vein of his father's and the continued collaboration with former collaborators of his father such as Rubens and Hendrick van Balen. This workshop production contributed to the wide distribution of Jan Brueghel the Elder's creations.\nWhile his brother Pieter was engaged in the large-scale production of numerous works for the Antwerp art market, Jan Brueghel worked for a select clientele of aristocratic patrons and collectors of pictures to create more expensive and exclusive images. His works, such as his paradise landscapes, appealed to the aesthetic preferences of aristocrats who loved collecting such precious objects. His works, often painted on copper, were luxury objects intended for the simple pleasure of viewing as well as contemplation.\nCollaborations.\nCollaboration between artists specialised in distinctive genres was a defining feature of artistic practice in 17th-century Antwerp. Jan Brueghel was likewise a frequent collaborator with fellow artists. As he was an artist with a wide range of skills he worked with a number of collaborators in various genres. His collaborators included landscape artists Paul Bril and Joos de Momper, architectural painter Paul Vredeman de Vries and figure painters Frans Francken the Younger, Hendrick de Clerck, Pieter van Avont and Hendrick van Balen.\nHis collaborations with figure painter Hans Rottenhammer began in Rome around 1595 and ended in 1610. Rottenhammer was a gifted figure painter and known for his skill in painting nudes. Initially when the artists both lived in Venice, their collaborative works were executed on canvas, but in their later collaborations after Brueghel had returned to Antwerp they typically used copper. After Brueghel's return to Antwerp, their collaboration practice was for Brueghel to send the coppers with the landscape to Rottenhammer in Venice, who painted in the figures and then returned the coppers. In a few instances, the process was the other way around. Brueghel and Rottenhammer did not collaborate only on landscape paintings with figures; they jointly created one of the earliest devotional garland paintings, made for Cardinal Federico Borromeo, depicting a Virgin and Child surrounded by a flower garland (Pinacoteca Ambrosiana).\nWhile in his collaborations with Hans Rottenhammer, the landscapes were made by Brueghel, the roles were reversed when he worked with Joos de Momper as it was Brueghel who provided the figures to the landscapes painted by de Momper. An example of their collaboration is (c.\u20091616, Liechtenstein Museum). There are about 59 known collaborations between Brueghel and de Momper making de Momper his most frequent collaborator. Hendrick van Balen the Elder was another regular collaborator with Jan Brueghel. Their collaboration was simplified by the fact that from 1604 onwards both painters had moved to the Lange Nieuwstraat, which made it easier to carry the panels and copper plates on which they collaborated back and forth.\nAnother frequent collaborator of Jan Brueghel was Rubens. The two artists executed about 25 joint works between 1598 and 1625. Their first collaboration was on \"The Battle of the Amazons\" (c.\u20091598-1600, Sanssouci Picture Gallery). The artists worked together in the development of the genre of the devotional garland painting with works such as the (c.\u20091616-1618, Alte Pinakothek). They further jointly made mythological scenes and an allegorical series representing the Five Senses. The collaboration between the two friends was remarkable because they worked in very different styles and specialisations and were artists of equal status. They were able to preserve the individuality of their respective styles in these joint works.\nBrueghel appears to have been the principal initiator of their joint works, which were made principally during the second half of the 1610s when their method of collaboration had become more systemised and included Rubens' workshop. Usually it would be Brueghel who started a painting and he would leave space for Rubens to add the figures. In their early collaborations they seem to have made major corrections to the work of the other. For instance, in the early collaborative effort Rubens overpainted most of the lower-right corner with grey paint so he could enlarge his figures. In later collaborations the artists seem to have streamlined their collaboration and agreed on the composition early on so that these later works show little underdrawing. As court painters to the archdukes their collaborations reflected the court's desire to emphasise the continuity of its reign with the previous Burgundian and Habsburg rulers as well as the rulers' piousness. While they were mindful of the prevailing tastes in courtly circles, which favoured subjects such as the hunt, the two artists were creative in their response to the court's preferences by devising new iconography and genres, such as the devotional garland paintings, which were equally capable of conveying the devoutness and splendour of the archducal court. The joint artistic output of Brueghel and Rubens was highly prized by collectors all over Europe.\nIdeological context.\nJan Brueghel's work reflects the various ideological currents at work in the Catholic Spanish Netherlands during his lifetime. The Catholic Counter-Reformation's worldview played an important role in the artist's practice. Central in this worldview was the belief that the earth and its inhabitants were revelations of a supreme being, God. Artistic representation of, and scientific investigation into, that divine revelation was encouraged and valued. Breughel's friend and patron, the Counter-Reformation Cardinal Federico Borromeo, particularly emphasised the beauty and diversity of the animal world. In his \"I tre libri delle laudi divine\" (published only posthumously in 1632) Borromeo wrote: 'Looking then with attentive study at animals' construction and formation, and at their parts, members, and characters, can it not be said how excellently divine wisdom has demonstrated the value of its great works?' Jan Brueghel's realistic depictions of nature in all its various forms, in flowers, landscapes, animals, etc., was clearly in line with the view that study of God's creation was an important source for knowing God.\nBrueghel's era also saw a growing interest in the study of nature through empirical evidence as opposed to relying on inherited tradition. The increased access to new animals and exotic plants from the newly discovered territories played an important role in this intellectual exploration. This resulted in the appearance of the first scholarly catalogues and encyclopedias, including the illustrated natural history catalogues of 16th-century naturalists Conrad Gesner and Ulisse Aldrovandi. Their major contribution to natural history was the creation of an extensive system of description of each animal. Gesner placed all the species within four general categories: quadrupeds, birds, fish and serpents. He described animals in alphabetical order and in terms of nomenclature, geographic origins, mode of living and behaviour. Aldrovandi took another approach and did not order animals alphabetically. He relied on visual resemblance as the classifying factor. For example, he grouped the horse together with analogous animals, such as the donkey and mule, and separated species into categories, such as birds with webbed feet and nocturnal birds.\nBrueghel's works reflect this contemporary encyclopedic interest in the classification and ordering of all of the natural world. This is evidenced in his flower pieces, landscapes, allegorical works and gallery paintings. In his paradise landscapes, for instance, Brueghel grouped most of the species according to their basic categories of biological classification, in other words, according to the main groups of related species that resemble one another, such as birds or quadrupeds. He further classified most of them into subdivisions consisting of similar morphological and behavioural characteristics. His paradise landscapes thus constituted a visual catalogue of animals and birds which fulfilled the role of micro-encyclopedia.\nBrueghel's endeavour to represent the world through ordering and classifying its many elements based on empirical observation did not stop with the natural world. In Prague he had acquired knowledge of the large collections of Emperor Rudolf II, which were divided in natural, artificial and scientific objects. Brueghel's allegorical paintings of the four elements and of the five senses reveal the same classifying obsession, using each element or sense to organise natural, man-made instruments and scientific objects. In this skillful union of the areas of art, science, and nature Brueghel demonstrates his mastery of these various disciplines. His paintings serve the same purpose to that of encyclopedic collections, then known as cabinets of curiosities, by linking between the \"mundus sensibilis\" and the \"mundus intelligibilis\". His approach to describing and cataloguing nature in art resembles the distinction natural historians were starting to make between perceptual experience and theoretical knowledge.\nBrueghel's obsession with classifying the world was completely in line with the encyclopedic tastes of the court in Brussels as is demonstrated by their large art collection of predominantly Flemish paintings, menagerie of exotic species and extensive library.\nFlower paintings.\nJan Brueghel the Elder was one of the first artists in the Habsburg Netherlands who started to paint pure flower still lifes. A pure flower still life depicts flowers, typically arranged in a vase or other vessel, as the principal subject of the picture, rather than as a subordinate part of another work such as a history painting. Jan Brueghel is regarded as an important contributor to the emerging genre of the flower piece in Northern art, a contribution that was already appreciated in his time when he received the nickname 'Flower Brueghel'. While the traditional interpretation of these flower pieces was that they were vanitas symbols or allegories of transience with hidden meanings, it is now more common to interpret them as mere depictions of the natural world. Brueghel's approach to these works was informed by his desire to display his skill in giving a realistic, almost scientific rendering of nature. These works reflected the ideological concerns demonstrated in his work, which combined the worldview that nature was a revelation of a god with the interest in gaining a scientific understanding of nature.\nBrueghel's flower pieces are dominated by the floral arrangements, which are placed against a neutral dark background. Minor details such as insects, butterflies, snails and separate sprays of flowers or rosemary may occasionally be added but are subordinate to the principal subject. While Brueghel sought out very rare flowers, he used certain common blooms such as tulips, irises and roses to anchor his bouquets. This may have been a response to his patrons' wishes as well as compositional considerations. His bouquets were typically composed of flowers blooming in different seasons of the year so they could never have been painted together directly from nature. Brueghel was in the habit of travelling to make drawings of flowers that were not available in Antwerp, so that he could paint them into his bouquets. Brueghel rendered the flowers with an almost scientific precision. He arranged each flower with hardly any overlap so that they are shown off to their best advantage, and many are shown at different angles. The flowers are arranged by size with smaller ones at the bottom of the bouquet, larger flowers such as tulips, cornflowers, peonies and guelder roses in the centre and large flowers, such as white lilies and blue irises, at the top of the bouquet.\nThis arrangement is clear in the \"Flowers in a Ceramic Vase\" (c. 1620, Royal Museum of Fine Arts Antwerp). The vase in which the flowers are arranged is decorated with motifs in relief. The two cartouches - separated by a fantastic figure - show Amphitrite, a sea goddess from Greek mythology, on the left, and Ceres, the Roman corn goddess, on the right. These two goddesses were typically used in allegorical representations of the four elements to symbolise water and earth respectively. The other two cartouches on that part of the vase that is invisible likely show Vulcan, who was associated with fire, and Apollo, who was associated with air. The occurrence of the four elements and the flowers in a single work can be interpreted as the emanation of the macrocosm in the microcosm.\nBrueghel often repeated motifs in his flower pieces. Even so, he was able to give each work a remarkable freshness and vitality of its own.\nGarland paintings.\nJan Brueghel the Elder played a key role in the invention and development of the genre of garland paintings. Garland paintings typically show a flower garland around a devotional image or portrait. Together with Hendrick van Balen, he painted around 1607-1608 the first known garland painting for Italian cardinal Federico Borromeo, a passionate art collector and Catholic reformer. Borromeo requested the painting to respond to the destruction of images of the Virgin in the preceding century and it thus combined both the cardinal's interests in Catholic reform and the arts. Brueghel, the still life specialist, painted the flower garland, while van Balen, a specialist figure painter, was responsible for the image of the Virgin.\nThe genre of garland paintings was inspired by the cult of veneration and devotion to Mary prevalent at the Habsburg court (then the rulers over the Habsburg Netherlands) and in Antwerp generally. The genre was initially connected to the visual imagery of the Counter-Reformation movement. Garland paintings were usually collaborations between a still life and a figure painter. Brueghel's collaborators on garland paintings included Rubens, Frans Francken the Younger and Pieter van Avont.\nAn example of a collaborative garland painting made by Jan Brueghel the Elder and Rubens is the (1621, Alte Pinakothek).\nAn example of a collaborative garland painting he made with Hendrick van Balen is the \"Garland of Fruit surrounding a Depiction of a Goddess Receiving Gifts from Personifications of the Four Seasons\" of which there are two versions, one in the Belfius collection and in the Mauritshuis in The Hague. Both versions are considered to be autograph paintings, but small differences between the two suggest that the panel in the Belfius collection is the original version. The medallion in the centre is traditionally believed to depict Cybele, the ancient Phrygian goddess of the earth and nature as it was described as such in 1774 when it was catalogued in the collection of William V, Prince of Orange in The Hague. More recently an identification of the goddess with Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture, grain crops, fertility and motherly relationships, has been proposed. The reason is that the goddess in the medallion has none of the attributes traditionally connected with Cybele. Around the medallion is suspended a garland of flowers, vegetables and fruit \u2013 a tribute to the goddess and an ode to plenty and fertility. Van Balen painted the medallion while Brueghel painted the abundant garland, the surrounding figures and the numerous animals.\nLandscapes.\nJan Brueghel's father, Pieter Bruegel the Elder, is regarded as an important innovator of landscape art. By introducing greater naturalism in his Alpine mountain settings, his father had expanded on the world landscape tradition that had been founded mainly by Joachim Patinir. Some of Pieter the Elder's works also foreshadowed the forest landscape that would start to dominate landscape painting around the turn of the 16th century. Pieter the Elder also developed the village and rural landscape, placing Flemish hamlets and farms in exotic prospects of mountains and river valleys.\nJan developed on the formula he learned from his father of arranging country figures travelling a road, which recedes into the distance. He emphasised the recession into space by carefully diminishing the scale of figures in the foreground, middle-ground, and far distance. To further the sense of atmospheric perspective, he used varying tones of brown, green, and blue progressively to characterise the recession of space. His landscapes with their vast depth are balanced through his attention to the peasant figures and their humble activities in the foreground.\nLike his father, Jan Brueghel also painted various village landscapes. He used the surrounding landscapes as the stage for the crowds of anecdotal, colourfully dressed peasants who engage in various activities in the market, the country roads and during the rowdy kermesses. Jan Brueghel's landscape paintings with their strong narrative elements and attention to detail had a significant influence on Flemish and Dutch landscape artists in the second decade of the 17th century. His river views were certainly known to painters working in Haarlem, including Esaias van de Velde and Willem Buytewech, whom Brueghel may have met there when he accompanied Peter Paul Rubens on a diplomatic mission to the Dutch Republic in 1613.\nJan Brueghel was along with artists such as Gillis van Coninxloo one of the prime developers of the dense forest landscape in the 17th century. Jan Breughel experimented with such works before Coninxloo's first dated wooded landscape of 1598. In his forest landscapes Brueghel depicted heavily wooded glades in which he captured the verdant density, and even mystery, of the forest. Although on occasion inhabited by humans and animals, these forest scenes contain dark recesses, virtually no open sky and no outlet for the eye to penetrate beyond the thick trees.\nParadise landscapes.\nJan Brueghel invented the 'paradise landscape', a subgenre that involved a combination of landscape and animal painting. Works in this genre are typically crawling with numerous animals from exotic and native European species who coexist harmoniously in a lush landscape setting. These landscapes are inspired by episodes from Genesis, the chapter of the bible, which tells the story of the creation of the world and of man. The favourite themes taken from Genesis where the creation of man, Adam and Eve in paradise, the fall of man and the entry of the animals in Noah's ark.\nLike his flower pieces, these landscapes were informed by the Catholic Counter-Reformation's worldview, which regarded earth and its inhabitants as revelations of their god and valued artistic representation of, and scientific investigation into, that divine revelation. As described above, Breughel's friend and patron, the Counter-Reformation Cardinal Federico Borromeo, had particularly emphasised the beauty and diversity of the animal world. Brueghel tried to render this worldview in his paradise landscapes. The novelty of Brueghel's paradise landscapes lies not only in the impressive variety of animals, which the artist studied mainly from life but also in their presentation as both figures of a religious narrative and as subjects of a scientific order.\nBrueghel developed his earliest paradise landscapes during his stay in Venice in the early 1590s. His first paradise landscape known as is now in the Doria Pamphilj Gallery in Rome. The reference to Genesis in the picture appears in a small vignette representing the creation of Man in the background, but the main focus is on the animals and the landscape itself. This work was the first paradise landscape in which Brueghel 'catalogued' animals and depicts common and domesticated types. Brueghel's interest in the cataloguing of animals was stimulated by his visit to the court of Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor in Prague. The emperor had established an encyclopedic collection of rarities and animals. While in his early paradise landscapes Brueghel seems to have based some of his renderings of the animals on works by other artists, he later could rely on studies from life of the various species in the menagerie of the court in Brussels. Brueghel had also seen Albrecht D\u00fcrer's depiction of animals during his visit to Prague and had made a painted copy of D\u00fcrer's watercolour (1503). D\u00fcrer's representations of animals play a pivotal role in Renaissance zoology, since they are the purest artistic form of nature study. The studies of animals by Flemish artists Hans Bol and Joris Hoefnagel also had an important influence on Brueghel. In particular Hoefnagel's \"Four Elements\" (1575\u20131582) was the first artistic work to categorise animals in a book format. Hoefnagel's approach to the representation of the animal world combined natural historical, classical, emblematic, and biblical references, which incorporated the various species into the categories of the four elements of the cosmos: earth, water, air, and fire. Brueghel's paradise landscapes also embodied the encyclopedic attitudes of his time by depicting a wide variety of species.\nBrueghel continued refining his treatment of the subject of paradise landscapes throughout his career. The many renderings and variations of the paradise landscape produced by Brueghel earned him the nickname Paradise Brueghel.\nAllegorical paintings.\nJan Brueghel the Elder produced various sets of allegorical paintings, in particular on the themes of the \"Five senses\" and the \"Four Elements\". These paintings were often collaborations with other painters such as is the case with the five paintings representing the \"Five senses\" on which Brueghel and Rubens collaborated and which are now in the Prado Museum in Madrid. He also collaborated with Hendrick van Balen on various allegorical compositions such as a series on the \"Four Elements\" as well as an \"Allegory of Public Welfare\" (Museum of Fine Arts, Budapest).\nIn his allegories Jan Breughel illustrated an abstract concept, such as one of the senses or one of the four elements through a multitude of concrete objects that can be associated with it. He thus represented a concept by means of descriptive tropes. Brueghel resorted in these allegorical compositions to the encyclopedic imagery that he also displayed in his paradise landscapes. This is demonstrated in his composition \"Allegory of Fire; Venus in the Forge of Vulcan\" of which there are various versions of which (Doria Pamphilj Gallery, Rome) is a collaboration with Hendrick van Balen and (Pinacoteca Ambrosiana, Milan) is attributed to Jan Brueghel alone. Brueghel's encyclopedic approach in this composition offers such detail that historians of science have relied on the composition as a source of information on the types of tools used in 17th-century metallurgical practice.\nScenes of hell and demons.\nJan was early on nicknamed 'Hell Brueghel' but by the 19th century that name had become erroneously associated with his brother Pieter the Younger. Jan Brueghel was given the nickname because of his scenes with demons and hell scenes. An example is the (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna), which reprises a subject first explored by Hieronymus Bosch. In this demon-plagued scene the monsters are seen attacking the small saint in the corner of a large and dense forest landscape, rather than within the expanded panoramas of Patinir.\nJan Brueghel is believed to have produced his hell scenes for a newer, elite audience of learned and sophisticated collectors. To appeal to this erudite clientele he often populated the hell scenes with mythological rather than religious subjects, in particular the Vergilian scene of Aeneas in Hades, escorted by the Cumaean Sibyl. An example is (1619, Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna). Other mythological themes appearing in his hell scenes included the image of Juno visiting Hades and Orpheus in the Underworld from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". An example of the latter is (Palazzo Pitti). In these compositions brightly coloured monsters provide the 'recreational terror' of the later manifestations of Boschian design.\nBrueghel's hell scenes were influential and Jacob van Swanenburg, one of Rembrandt's teachers, was inspired by them to create his own hell scenes.\nGallery paintings.\nJan Brueghel the Elder and Frans Francken the Younger were the first artists to create paintings of art and curiosity collections in the 1620s. Gallery paintings depict large rooms in which many paintings and other precious items are displayed in elegant surroundings. These rooms were often referred to as \"Kunstkammern\" (\"art rooms\") or \"Wunderkammern\" (\"wonder rooms\"). The earliest works in this genre depicted art objects together with other items such as scientific instruments or peculiar natural specimens. Some gallery paintings include portraits of the owners or collectors of the art objects or artists at work. The paintings are heavy with symbolism and allegory and are a reflection of the intellectual preoccupations of the age, including the cultivation of personal virtue and the importance of connoisseurship. The genre became immediately quite popular and was followed by other artists such as Jan Brueghel the Younger, Cornelis de Baellieur, Hans Jordaens, David Teniers the Younger, Gillis van Tilborch and Hieronymus Janssens.\nA famous example of a gallery painting by Jan Brueghel is \"The Archdukes Albert and Isabella Visiting a Collector's Cabinet\" (now referred to as \"The Archdukes Albert and Isabella Visiting the Collection of Pieter Roose\") (c. 1621\u20131623, Walters Art Museum, Baltimore). The work is believed to be a collaboration between Jan Brueghel the Elder and Hieronymus Francken II. This gallery painting represents the early phase of the genre of collector's cabinets. During this early 'encyclopaedic' phase, the genre reflected the culture of curiosity of that time, when art works, scientific instruments, naturalia and artificialia were equally the object of study and admiration. As a result, the cabinets depicted in these compositions are populated by persons who appear to be as interested in discussing scientific instruments as in admiring paintings. Later the genre concentrated more on galleries solely containing works of art. The compositions depicted in \"The Archdukes Albert and Isabella Visiting a Collector's Cabinet\" are predominantly allegories of iconoclasm and the victory of painting (art) over ignorance. They are references to the iconoclasm of the Beeldenstorm that had raged in the Low Countries in the 16th century and the victory over the iconoclasts during the reign of the Archdukes Albert and Isabella who jointly ruled the Spanish Netherlands in the beginning of the 17th century. Jan Brueghel was responsible for the large vase of flowers, which is crowned by a large sunflower. This South American flower, which could grow very tall and would turn towards the sun, was first seen by Europeans in the mid-16th century. It had been illustrated as a New World wonder in botanical treatises, but Jan Brueghel was the first to include the flower in a painting and use it as a symbol of princely patronage in this composition. By turning toward Albert and Isabella (taking the position of the sun), the sunflower symbolises the way that the arts were able to grow and blossom in the light and warmth of princely patronage.\nSingeries.\nBreughel contributed to the development of the genre of the 'monkey scene', also called 'singerie' (a word derived from the French for 'monkey' and meaning a 'comical grimace, behaviour or trick'). Comical scenes with monkeys appearing in human attire and a human environment are a pictorial genre that was initiated in Flemish painting in the 16th century and was further developed in the 17th century. Monkeys were regarded as shameless and impish creatures and excellent imitators of human behaviour. These depictions of monkeys enacting various human roles were a playful metaphor for all the folly in the world. \nThe Flemish engraver Pieter van der Borcht introduced the singerie as an independent theme around 1575 in a series of prints, which were strongly embedded in the artistic tradition of Pieter Bruegel the Elder. These prints were widely disseminated and the theme was then picked up by other Flemish artists. The first one to do so was the Antwerp artist Frans Francken the Younger, who was quickly followed by Jan Brueghel the Elder, the Younger, Sebastiaen Vrancx and Jan van Kessel the Elder. Jan Brueghel the Elder's son-in-law David Teniers the Younger became the principal practitioner of the genre and developed it further with his younger brother Abraham Teniers. Later in the 17th century Nicolaes van Verendael started to paint these 'monkey scenes' as well.\nAn example of a singerie by Jan Brueghel is the \"Monkeys feasting\", which dates from his early years as an artist (private collection, on long-term loan to the Rubenshuis, Antwerp). This painting on copper was probably one of the first examples of a singerie painting. Jan Brueghel likely drew his monkeys in the zoo of the Archdukes in Brussels. While the composition shows the monkeys engaged in all kinds of mischief, it includes a painting above the door jamb, which is a work from Rubens' studio, called \"Ceres and Pan\". The representation of Ceres and Pan provides a contrast between the cultivated versus the wild world of the monkeys below.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64387", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64387", "title": "Jan Brueghel the Younger", "text": "Flemish painter (1601\u20131678)\nJan Brueghel (also Bruegel or Breughel) the Younger ( , ; ; 13 September 1601 \u2013 1 September 1678) was a Flemish Baroque painter. He was the son of Jan Brueghel the Elder, and grandson of Pieter Bruegel the Elder, both prominent painters who contributed respectively to the development of Renaissance and Baroque painting in the Habsburg Netherlands. Taking over his father's workshop at an early age, he largely painted the same subjects as his father in a style which was similar to that of his father. He gradually was able to break away from his father's style by developing a broader, more painterly, and less structured manner of painting. He regularly collaborated with leading Flemish painters of his time.\nLife.\nJan Brueghel was born in Antwerp on 13 September 1601 as the son of Jan and Isabella de Jode. His mother was the daughter of the cartographer, engraver and publisher Gerard de Jode. He trained with his father in his workshop. His father was a friend and close collaborator of Rubens. Jan likely assisted with his father's large-scale commissions.\nOn the wishes of his father he traveled around 1622 to Milan where he was welcomed by Cardinal Federico Borromeo. The cardinal was a patron and friend of his father who had met in Rome about 30 years earlier. In what was likely an act of rebellion against his father, he went to Genoa where he stayed with his cousins, the Antwerp painters and art dealers Lucas de Wael and Cornelis de Wael. Their mother was a sister of Jan's mother. At the time his friend and fellow Antwerp artist Anthony van Dyck was also active in Genoa. He later worked in Valletta on Malta in 1623. From 1624 to 1625 he lived in Palermo on Sicily at the time when van Dyck was also working there.\nJan learned that his father had died on 13 January 1625 from cholera only after his return to Northern Italy in Turin. Wanting to return to Antwerp immediately, he had to delay his departure for 16 days due to a severe fever. After recovering from his illness, he set off for his homeland by way of France. In Paris he met the Antwerp art dealer and painter Peter Goetkint the Younger, who was the son of Peter Goetkint the Elder, the master of Jan's father. Goetkint was eager to return to Antwerp because his wife was expected to deliver a baby soon. The child was born on 25 August, the day on which Jan Breughel arrived in Antwerp with his travelling companion who died a few days later. Jan took over the management of his father's workshop, sold the finished works of his father and finished some of his father's unfinished paintings. In the Guild year 1624\u20131625, Jan became a master painter of the Guild of Saint Luke of Antwerp.\nIn 1626 he married Anna Maria Janssens, daughter of Abraham Janssens, a prominent history painter in Antwerp. He continued to operate the large workshop of his father. In 1630 he became dean of the Guild of Saint Luke, and was commissioned by the French court to paint a series of paintings of the biblical character Adam. It seems that his studio declined after this period and that he started to paint smaller scale paintings which commanded lower prices than those produced earlier.\nHe worked independently in Paris in the 1650s and produced paintings for the Austrian court in 1651. He is recorded again in Antwerp in 1657 where he remained for the remainder of his life . During a meeting of the Antwerp Guild of St Luke held on 8 October 1672, he got into a heated argument with Peter van Brekeveldt, another former dean of the guild, who injured him in an eye. As this injury affected his ability to paint, he sued van Brekeveldt for indemnification. He died on 1 September 1678 at his home address on the Pruymenstraat in Antwerp.\nHis pupils included his older sons Abraham, Philips and Jan Peeter, his nephew Jan van Kessel, and his younger brother Ambrosius.\nWork.\nGeneral.\nTaking over his father's workshop at an early age, he painted the same subjects as his father in a style which was similar to that of his father. About 340 paintings have been attributed to him. His repertoire included history paintings, allegorical and mythological scenes, landscapes and seascapes, hunting pieces, village scenes, battle scenes and scenes of hellfire and the underworld. Unlike his father, he did not paint many flower still lifes. Like his father and uncle, he would also reinterpret the genre and landscape paintings of his grandfather Pieter Brueghel the Elder. An example is the (Dorotheum Vienna 30 April 2019, lot 383), which goes back to a now lost painting of his grandfather, which was likely in the collection of his father and of which a print exists. Whereas in the print after Pieter Brueghel the Elder the viewer looks at the scene a 'spectator from a raised stage', in Jan Brueghel the Younger's version the viewer is more involved due to the lower viewpoint. Jan de Younger further created a new painting category of animals in landscapes. After the death of his father he changed his signature from 'Brueghel' to 'Breughel'.\nWhile he did not surpass his father in the quality of his output, his early works can hardly be distinguished from those of his father in terms of their high level of execution. He gradually was able to break away from his father's style by developing a broader, more painterly, and less structured manner of painting.\nLandscapes.\nHe painted a wide variety of landscapes including: landscapes of woods, rivers and harbours, villages, cityscapes, architectural views with figures, veduti, hell scenes, landscapes with the Holy Family, paradise landscapes and allegorical landscapes. These landscapes show his father's influence although he would develop some personal touches in his later career.\nHis best works are his wide landscapes, which he produced on his own or in collaboration with other painters such as Hendrick van Balen the Elder and Joos de Momper. During his career, he collaborated with many other artists such as Jan van Balen - the son of his father's collaborator Hendrick van Balen the Elder, Pieter de Lierner, Adriaen Stalbemt, Lucas Van Uden, his brother-in-law David Teniers the Younger, his father-in-law Abraham Janssens, Sebastiaen Vrancx, Denijs van Alsloot and Hendrik de Clerck. In view of the strong demand for large decorative landscapes at the time, Jan the Younger would sometimes have his father's works copied in his workshop and then sell them under his father's signature. In the wide landscapes he often reprised compositions of his father but executed them in a different palette. Among his veduta paintings can be counted a (c. 1627, Museo del Prado) executed in collaboration with Sebastiaen Vrancx.\nIn his village landscapes Jan initially followed his father's precedent and gradually developed his own idiom in the 1640s.\nStill lifes.\nA less prolific flower painter than his father, he was inspired by his father's works on which he produced his variations. His flower pieces are usually executed on a smaller scale and are less compact, slimmer and less detailed.\nHis father had created the new still life category of garland paintings, a special type of still life developed in Antwerp along with other artists such as Hendrick van Balen, Frans Francken the Younger, Peter Paul Rubens and Daniel Seghers. These paintings typically show a flower garland around a devotional image or portrait. This genre was initially inspired by the cult of veneration and devotion to Mary prevalent at the Habsburg court (then the rulers over the Southern Netherlands) and in Antwerp generally. Jan also painted various garland paintings in collaboration with other artists. They show the influence of Daniel Seghers. An example is the in which the portrait was painted by Jan Thomas van Ieperen and the landscape by Lucas van Uden (Christie's London auction of 6 December 2018 lot 26).\nAllegorical paintings.\nLike his father, Jan the Elder produced various sets of allegorical paintings, in particular on the themes of the \"Five senses\", the \"Four Elements\". These paintings were often collaborations with other painters such as is the case with the five paintings representing the \"Five senses\" on which Brueghel and Pieter van Avont collaborated and of which an was auctioned at Dorotheum on 18 December 2017. Another recurring allegorical theme also treated by his father is \"Abundance\". An example is the (c. 1624, Museo del Prado\") in which fertility is represented by a six-breasted figure at the centre of the composition.\nHe gradually developed his own themes and style for his allegorical subjects. From the 1640s he created complex allegories dealing with subjects such as the horrors of war and the benefits of commerce, the arts and science. In particular the subject of the horrors of war occupied Jan Brueghel in the 1640s, when Europe was emerging from the Thirty Years' War. The long-hoped-for end of the war was achieved by the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. A work made against this background is the (Lempertz 16 November 2013, Cologne Lot 1243). The work is full of symbols of war and strife such as weapons, fighting animals, zodiac symbols of bad luck in the heavens, the furies, a burning city, the god of war and the battling troops in the background which all evoke the theme of the horrors of war. In these mature works Jan Brueghel the Younger distanced himself from his father's models to create his own visual language, reflecting the new art and mood of his time.\nSingeries.\nJan Breughel the Elder had contributed to the development of the genre of the 'monkey scene', also called 'singerie' (a word, which in French means a 'comical grimace, behaviour or trick'). Comical scenes with monkeys appearing in human attire and a human environment are a pictorial genre that was initiated in Flemish painting in the 16th century and was subsequently further developed in the 17th century. Monkeys appear in medieval cathedral sculpture as symbols of evil, while in Renaissance art they were a personification of man. Monkeys were regarded as shameless and impish creatures and excellent imitators of human behaviour. These depictions of monkeys enacting various human roles were a playful metaphor for all the folly in the world. Painters could use the figure of the monkey to express moral judgement and dubious traits of human behaviour.\nThe Flemish engraver Pieter van der Borcht introduced singeries as an independent theme around 1575 through a series of prints, which were strongly embedded in the artistic tradition of Pieter Bruegel the Elder. These prints were widely disseminated causing the theme to be picked up by other Flemish artists. The Antwerp artist Frans Francken the Younger was the first one to do so. He was quickly followed by Jan Brueghel the Elder, Sebastiaen Vrancx and Jan van Kessel the Elder. Jan Brueghel the Elder's son-in-law David Teniers the Younger later became the principal practitioner of the genre and developed it further with his younger brother Abraham Teniers. Later in the 17th century Nicolaes van Verendael painted these 'monkey scenes' as well.\nJan Brueghel the Younger also practised this genre. An example is his \"Allegory of Tulipomania\" or \"Satire of Tulipomania\" of which he painted at least four versions, of which three place the scene outdoors and one situates it in a loggia. The painting mocks the obsession of Dutch society with the trade and speculation in tulips. A lively trade in tulips and tulip bulbs had developed in the Dutch Republic with prices rising to unprecedented levels. Speculation was rife, resulting in big profits and big losses. Brueghel's \"Satire of Tulipomania\" pokes fun at the tulip traders. The version in the Frans Hals Museum in Haarlem shows monkeys negotiating, weighing bulbs, counting money and handling administrative tasks. The monkey on the left holds a list of bulb prices. On the right, a monkey is urinating on tulips, thus mocking this tulip mania."}
{"id": "64388", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64388", "title": "Flanders family", "text": ""}
{"id": "64393", "revid": "1318438421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64393", "title": "Video game crash of 1983", "text": "1983 US video gaming economic recession\nThe video game crash of 1983 (known in Japan as the Atari shock) was a large-scale recession in the video game industry that occurred from 1983 to 1985 in the United States. The crash was attributed to several factors, including market saturation in the number of video game consoles and available games, many of which were of poor quality. Waning interest in console games in favor of personal computers also played a role. Home video game revenue peaked at around $3.2\u00a0billion in 1983 (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024), then fell to around $100\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024), a drop of almost 97%. The crash abruptly ended what is retrospectively considered the second generation of console video gaming in North America. To a lesser extent, the arcade video game market also weakened as the golden age of arcade video games came to an end.\nLasting about two years, the crash shook a then-booming video game industry and led to the bankruptcy of several companies producing home computers and video game consoles. Analysts of the time expressed doubts about the long-term viability of video game consoles and software.\nThe North American video game console industry recovered a few years later, mostly due to the widespread success of Nintendo's Western branding for its Famicom console, the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), released in October 1985. The NES was designed to avoid the missteps that caused the 1983 crash and the stigma associated with video games at that time.\nCauses and factors.\nFlooded console market.\nThe Atari VCS (renamed the Atari 2600 in late 1982) was not the first home system with swappable game cartridges, but by 1980 it was the most popular second-generation console by a wide margin. Launched in 1977 just ahead of the collapse of the market for home \"Pong\" console clones, the Atari VCS experienced modest sales for its first few years. In 1980, Atari's licensed version of \"Space Invaders\" from Taito became the console's killer application; sales of the VCS quadrupled, and the game was the first title to sell more than a million copies. Spurred by the success of the Atari VCS, other consoles were introduced, both from Atari and other companies: Odyssey\u00b2, Intellivision, ColecoVision, Atari 5200, and Vectrex. Notably, Coleco sold an add-on allowing Atari VCS games to be played on the ColecoVision, as well as bundling the console with a licensed home version of Nintendo's arcade hit \"Donkey Kong\". In 1982, the ColecoVision held roughly 17% of the hardware market, compared to the VCS's 58%. This was the first real threat to Atari's dominance of the home console market.\nEach new console had its own library of games produced exclusively by the console maker, while the Atari VCS also had a large selection of titles produced by third-party developers. In 1982, analysts marked trends of saturation, mentioning that the amount of new software coming in would only allow a few big hits, that retailers had devoted too much floor space to systems, and that price drops for home computers could result in an industry shakeup. Atari had a large inventory after significant portions of the 1982 orders were returned.\nIn addition, the rapid growth of the video game industry led to an increased demand, which the manufacturers over-projected. In 1983, an analyst for Goldman Sachs stated the demand for video games was up 100% from the previous year, but the manufacturing output had increased by 175%, creating a significant surplus. Atari CEO Raymond Kassar recognized in 1982 that the industry's saturation point was imminent. However, Kassar expected this to occur when about half of American households had a video game console. The crash occurred when about 15 million machines had been sold, which soundly under-shot Kassar's estimate. Michael Katz, the president of Atari's electronic division, stated that the console market was too saturated as 30 million consoles were sold by 1982, out of the 35 million households with children between the ages of six and sixteen.\nLoss of publishing control.\nPrior to 1979, there were no third-party developers, with console manufacturers like Atari publishing all the games for their respective platforms. This changed in 1979, when Activision was founded by four former Atari video game programmers who left the company because they felt that Atari's developers should receive the same recognition and accolades (specifically in the form of sales-based royalties and public-facing credits) as the actors, directors, and musicians working for other subsidiaries of Warner Communications (Atari's parent company at the time). Already being quite familiar with the Atari VCS, the four programmers developed their own games and cartridge manufacturing processes. Atari quickly sued to block sales of Activision's products but failed to secure a restraining order, and they ultimately settled the case in 1982. While the settlement stipulated that Activision pay royalties to Atari, this case ultimately legitimized the viability of third-party game developers. Activision's games were as popular as Atari's, with \"Pitfall!\" (released in 1982) selling over four million units.\nPrior to 1982, Activision was one of only a handful of third parties publishing games for the Atari VCS. By 1982, Activision's success emboldened numerous other competitors to penetrate the market. However, Activision co-founder David Crane observed that several of these companies were supported by venture capitalists attempting to emulate the success of Activision. Without the experience and skill of Activision's team, these inexperienced competitors mostly created games of poor quality, which Crane notably described as \"the worst games you can imagine\". While Activision's success could be attributed to the team's existing familiarity with the Atari VCS, other publishers had no such advantage.\nThe rapid growth of the third-party game industry was easily illustrated by the number of vendors present at the semi-annual Consumer Electronics Show (CES). According to Crane, the number of third-party developers jumped from 3 to 30 between two consecutive events. At the Summer 1982 CES, there were 17 companies, including MCA Inc. and Fox Video Games, announcing a combined 90 new Atari games. By 1983, an estimated 100 companies were attempting to leverage the CES into a foothold in the market. \"AtariAge\" documented 158 different vendors that had developed for the Atari VCS. In June 1982, the Atari games on the market numbered just 100, which grew to over 400 by December. Experts predicted a glut in 1983, with only 10% of games producing 75% of sales.\n\"BYTE\" stated in December, \"in 1982 few games broke new ground in either design or format ... If the public really likes an idea, it is milked for all its worth, and numerous clones of a different color soon crowd the shelves. That is, until the public stops buying or something better comes along. Companies who believe that microcomputer games are the hula hoop of the 1980s only want to play Quick Profit.\" Bill Kunkel said in January 1983 that companies had \"licensed everything that moves, walks, crawls, or tunnels beneath the earth. You have to wonder how tenuous the connection will be between the game and the movie \"Marathon Man\". What are you going to do, present a video game root canal?\" By September 1983, the \"Phoenix\" stated that 2600 cartridges were \"no longer a growth industry\". Activision, Atari, and Mattel all had experienced programmers, but many of the new companies rushing to join the market did not have the expertise or talent to create quality games. Titles such as the \"Kaboom!\"-like \"Lost Luggage\", rock band tie-in \"Journey Escape\", and plate-spinning game \"Dishaster\", were examples of titles made in the hopes of taking advantage of the video-game boom, but later proved unsuccessful with retailers and potential customers.\nThe flood of new games was released into a limited competitive space. According to Activision's Jim Levy, they had projected that the total cartridge market in 1982 would be around 60 million, anticipating Activision would be able to secure between 12% and 15% of that market for their production numbers. However, with at least 50 different companies in the new marketspace, and each having produced between one and two million cartridges, along with Atari's own estimated 60 million cartridges in 1982, there was over 200% production of the actual demand for cartridges in 1982, which contributed to the stockpiling of unsold inventory during the crash.\nCompetition from home computers.\nInexpensive home computers had been first introduced in 1977. By 1979, Atari unveiled the 400 and 800 computers, built around a chipset originally meant for use in a game console, and which retailed for the same price as their respective names. In 1981, IBM introduced the first IBM Personal Computer with a $1,565 base price (). By 1982, new desktop computer designs were commonly providing better color graphics and sound than game consoles and personal computer sales were booming. The TI-99/4A and the Atari 400 were both at $349 (), the TRS-80 Color Computer sold at $379 (), and Commodore International had just reduced the price of the VIC-20 to $199 () and the Commodore 64 to $499 ().\nBecause computers generally had more memory and faster processors than a console, they permitted more sophisticated games. A 1984 compendium of reviews of Atari 8-bit software used 198 pages for games, compared to 167 for all other software types. Home computers could also be used for tasks such as word processing and home accounting. Games were easier to distribute, since they could be sold on floppy disks or cassette tapes instead of ROM cartridges. This opened the field to a cottage industry of third-party software developers. Writeable storage media allowed players to save games in progress, a useful feature for increasingly complex games which was not available on the consoles of the era.\nIn 1982, a price war that began between Commodore and Texas Instruments led to home computers becoming as inexpensive as video-game consoles; after Commodore cut the retail price of the C64 to $300 in June 1983, some stores began selling it for as little as $199. Dan Gutman, founder in 1982 of \"Video Games Player\" magazine in an article in 1987, recalled in 1983 that \"People asked themselves, 'Why should I buy a video game system when I can buy a computer that will play games and do so much more?'\" \"The Boston Phoenix\" stated in September 1983 about the cancellation of the Intellivision III, \"Who was going to pay $200-plus for a machine that could only play games?\" Commodore explicitly targeted video game players. Spokesman William Shatner asked in VIC-20 commercials \"Why buy just a video game from Atari or Intellivision?\", stating that \"unlike games, it has a real computer keyboard\" yet \"plays great games too\". Commodore's ownership of chip fabricator MOS Technology allowed manufacture of integrated circuits in-house, so the VIC-20 and C64 sold for much lower prices than competing home computers. In addition, both Commodore computers were designed to utilize the ubiquitous Atari controllers so they could tap into the existing controller market.\n\"I've been in retailing 30 years and I have never seen any category of goods get on a self-destruct pattern like this\", a Service Merchandise executive told \"The New York Times\" in June 1983. The price war was so severe that in September Coleco CEO Arnold Greenberg welcomed rumors of an IBM 'Peanut' home computer because although IBM was a competitor, it \"is a company that knows how to make money\". \"I look back a year or two in the videogame field, or the home-computer field\", Greenberg added, \"how much better everyone was, when most people were making money, rather than very few\". Companies reduced production in the middle of the year because of weak demand even as prices remained low, causing shortages as sales suddenly rose during the Christmas season; only the Commodore 64 was widely available, with an estimated more than 500,000 computers sold during Christmas. The 99/4A was such a disaster for TI, that the company's stock immediately rose by 25% after the company discontinued it and exited the home-computer market in late 1983. JCPenney announced in December 1983 that it would soon no longer sell home computers, because of the combination of low supply and low prices. Radio Shack avoided drastic price cuts for its home computers and remained profitable in 1983.\nBy that year, Gutman wrote, \"Video games were officially dead and computers were hot\". He renamed his magazine \"Computer Games\" in October 1983, but \"I noticed that the word \"games\" became a dirty word in the press. We started replacing it with \"simulations\" as often as possible\". Soon \"The computer slump began ... Suddenly, everyone was saying that the home computer was a fad, just another hula hoop\". \"Computer Games\" published its last issue in late 1984. In 1988, \"Computer Gaming World\" founder Russell Sipe noted that \"the arcade game crash of 1984 took down the majority of the computer game magazines with it.\" He stated that, by \"the winter of 1984, only a few computer game magazines remained\", and by mid-1985, \"Computer Gaming World\" \"was the only 4-color computer game magazine left\".\nImmediate effects.\nWith the release of so many new games in 1982 that flooded the market, most stores had insufficient space to carry new games and consoles. As stores tried to return the surplus games to the new publishers, the publishers had neither new products nor cash to issue refunds to the retailers. Many publishers, including Games by Apollo and U.S. Games, quickly folded. Unable to return the unsold games to defunct publishers, stores marked down the titles and placed them in discount bins and sale tables. Recently released games which initially sold for US$35 (equivalent to $116 in 2024) were in bins for $5 ($16 in 2024).\nThe presence of third-party sales drew the market share that the console manufacturers had. Atari's share of the cartridge-game market fell from 75% in 1981 to less than 40% in 1982, which negatively affected their finances. The bargain sales of poor-quality titles further drew sales away from the more successful third-party companies like Activision due to poorly informed consumers being drawn by price to purchase the bargain titles rather than quality. By June 1983, the market for the more expensive games had shrunk dramatically and was replaced by a new market of rushed-to-market, low-budget games. Crane said that \"those awful games flooded the market at huge discounts, and ruined the video game business\".\nA massive industry shakeout resulted. Magnavox abandoned the video game business entirely. Imagic withdrew its IPO the day before its stock was to go public; the company later collapsed. Activision had to downsize across 1984 and 1985 due to loss of revenue, and to stay competitive and maintain financial security, began development of games for the personal computer. Within a few years, Activision no longer produced cartridge-based games and focused solely on personal computer games.\nAtari was one of the companies most affected by the crash. As a company, its revenue dropped significantly due to dramatically lower sales and cost of returned stock. By mid-1983, the company had lost US$, was forced to lay off 30% of its 10,000 employees, and moved all manufacturing to Hong Kong and Taiwan. Unsold \"Pac-Man\", \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\", and other 1982 and 1983 games and consoles started to fill their warehouses. In September 1983, Atari discreetly buried much of this excess stock in a landfill near Alamogordo, New Mexico, though Atari did not comment about their activity at the time. Misinformation related to sales of \"Pac-Man\" and \"E.T.\" led to the urban legend of the Atari video game burial, that millions of unsold cartridges were buried there. Gaming historians received permission to dig up the landfill as part of a documentary in 2014, during which former Atari executive James Heller, who had overseen the original burial clarified that only about 728,000 cartridges had been buried in 1982, backed by estimates made during the excavation, and disproving the scale of the urban legend. Atari's burial remains an iconic representation of the 1983 video game crash. By the end of 1983, Atari had over US$ in losses, leading Warner Communication to sell Atari's consumer products division in July 1984 to Jack Tramiel, who had recently departed Commodore International. Tramiel's new company took the name Atari Corporation, and they directed their efforts into developing their new personal computer line, the Atari ST, over the console business.\nLack of confidence in the video game sector caused many retailers to stop selling video game consoles or reduced their stock significantly, reserving floor or shelf space for other products. Retailers established to exclusively sell video games folded, which impacted sales of personal computer games.\nThe full effects of the industry crash were not felt until 1985. Despite Atari's claim of 1 million in worldwide sales of its 2600 game system that year, recovery was slow. The sales of home video games had dropped from $3.2 billion in 1982 to $100 million in 1985. Analysts doubted the long-term viability of the video game industry, and, according to Electronic Arts' Trip Hawkins, it had been very difficult to convince retailers to carry video games due to the stigma carried by the fall of Atari until 1985.\nIn late 1985, the Nintendo Entertainment System saw a limited release in North America, with a nationwide release the following year. Following 1986, the industry began recovering, and by 1988, annual sales in the industry exceeded $2.3 billion, with 70% of the market dominated by Nintendo. In 1986, Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi noted that \"Atari collapsed because they gave too much freedom to third-party developers and the market was swamped with rubbish games\". In response, Nintendo limited the number of titles that third-party developers could release for their system each year, and promoted its \"Seal of Quality\", which it allowed to be used on games and peripherals by publishers that met Nintendo's quality standards.\nLong-term effects.\nThe crash in 1983 had the largest impact in the United States. It rippled through all sectors of the global video game market worldwide, though sales of video games still remained strong in Japan, Europe, and Canada from the beleaguered American companies. It took several years for the U.S. industry to recover. The estimated US$ worldwide market in 1982, including arcade, console, and computer games, dropped to US$ by 1985. There was also a significant shift in the home video game market, away from consoles to personal computer software, between 1983 and 1985.\n1984 is when some of the longer-term effects started to take a toll on the video game console. Companies like Magnavox had decided to pull out of the video game console industry. The general consensus was that video games were just a fad that came as quickly as they left. But outside of North America the video game industry was doing very well. Home consoles were growing in popularity in Japan while home computers were surging across Europe.\nUnited States sales fell from $3 billion to around $100 million in 1985. During the holiday season of 1985 Hiroshi Yamauchi decided to go to New York small markets about putting their products in their stores. Minoru Arakawa offered a money back guarantee from Nintendo that they would pay back for any stock that was left unsold. In total Nintendo sold 50,000 units, about half of the units they shipped to the US.\nJapanese domination.\nThe U.S. video game crash had two long-lasting results. The first result was that dominance in the home console market shifted from the United States to Japan. The crash did not directly affect the financial viability of the video game market in Japan, but it still came as a surprise there and created repercussions that changed that industry, and thus became known as the \"Atari shock\".\nPrior to the crash, Jonathan Greenberg of \"Forbes\" had predicted in early 1981 that Japanese companies would eventually dominate the North American video game industry, as American video game companies were increasingly licensing products from Japanese companies, who in turn were opening up North American branches. By 1982\u20131983, Japanese manufacturers had captured a large share of the North American arcade market, which Gene Lipkin of Data East USA partly attributed to Japanese companies having more finances to invest in new ideas.\nAs the crash was happening in the United States, Japan's game industry started to shift its attention from arcade games to home consoles. On July 15, 1983, two new home consoles were released in Japan: the Nintendo Family Computer (Famicom) and Sega's SG-1000 (which was later supplanted by the Master System) heralding the third generation of home consoles retrospectively. These two consoles were very popular, buoyed by an economic bubble in Japan. The units readily outsold Atari and Mattel's existing systems, and with both Atari and Mattel focusing on recovering domestic sales, the Japanese consoles effectively went uncontested over the next few years. By 1986, three years after its introduction, 6.5 million Japanese homes \u2013 19% of the population \u2013 owned a Famicom, and Nintendo began exporting it to the U.S., where the home console industry was only just recovering from the crash.\nThe impact on the retail sector of the crash was the most formidable barrier that confronted Nintendo as it tried to market the Famicom in the United States. A planned deal with Atari to distribute the Famicom in North America fell apart in the wake of the crash, resulting in Nintendo handling the international release themselves two years later. Additionally, retailer opposition to video games was directly responsible for causing Nintendo to brand its product the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) rather than a \"video game system\", and using terms such as \"control deck\" and \"Game Pak\", as well as producing a toy robot called R.O.B. to convince toy retailers to allow it in their stores. Furthermore, the design for the NES used a front-loading cartridge slot to mimic how video cassette recorders, popular at that time, were loaded, further pulling the NES away from previous console designs.\n Following the crash, Nintendo became the market leader in America with the Nintendo Entertainment System (top), with Japanese companies dominating the market for years to come. The Sega Genesis (bottom), released in 1989, was the first real challenger to Nintendo's market dominance in North America.\nBy the time the U.S. video game market recovered in the late 1980s, the NES was by far the dominant console in the United States, leaving only a fraction of the market to Atari. By 1989, home video game sales in the United States had reached $5 billion, surpassing the 1982 peak of $3 billion during the previous generation. A large majority of the market was controlled by Nintendo; it sold more than 35 million units in the United States, exceeding the sales of other consoles and personal computers by a considerable margin. New Japanese companies entered the market to challenge Nintendo's success in the United States, with NEC's TurboGrafx-16 and the Sega Genesis both released in the U.S. in 1989. While the TurboGrafx underwhelmed in the market, the Genesis' release set the stage for a major rivalry between Sega and Nintendo in the early 1990s in the United States video game market.\nImpact on third-party software development.\nA second, highly visible result of the crash was the advancement of measures to control third-party development of software. Using secrecy to combat industrial espionage had failed to stop rival companies from reverse engineering the Mattel and Atari systems and hiring away their trained game programmers. While Mattel and Coleco implemented lockout measures to control third-party development (the ColecoVision BIOS checked for a copyright string on power-up), the Atari 2600 was completely unprotected and once information on its hardware became available, little prevented anyone from making games for the system. Nintendo thus instituted a strict licensing policy for the NES that included equipping the cartridge and console with lockout chips, which were region-specific, and had to match in order for a game to work. In addition to preventing the use of unlicensed games, it also was designed to combat software piracy, rarely a problem in North America or Western Europe, but rampant in East Asia. The concepts of such a control system remain in use on every major video game console produced today, even with fewer cartridge-based consoles on the market than in the 8/16-bit era. Replacing the security chips in most modern consoles are specially encoded optical discs that cannot be copied by most users and can only be read by a particular console under normal circumstances. Accolade achieved a technical victory in one court case against Sega, challenging this control, even though it ultimately yielded and signed the Sega licensing agreement. Several publishers, notably Tengen (Atari Games), Color Dreams, and Camerica, challenged Nintendo's control system during the 8-bit era by producing unlicensed NES games.\nInitially, Nintendo was the only developer for the Famicom. Under pressure from Namco and Hudson Soft, it opened the Famicom to third-party development, but instituted a license fee of 30% per game cartridge for these third-parties to develop games, a system used by console manufacturers to this day. Nintendo maintained strict manufacturing control and requiring payment in full before manufacturing. Cartridges could not be returned to Nintendo, so publishers assumed all the financial risk of selling all units ordered. Nintendo limited most third-party publishers to only five games per year on its systems (some companies tried to get around this by creating additional company labels like Konami's Ultra Games label). Nintendo ultimately dropped this rule by 1993, after the release of the successor Super Nintendo Entertainment System. Nintendo's all-encompassing oversight of the creation of Famicom cartridges led to the manufacture of bootleg cartridges in Asian regions. Outside of Japan, Nintendo placed its Nintendo Seal of Quality on all licensed games released for the system to try to promote authenticity and detract from bootleg sales, but failed to make significant traction to stalling these sales.\nAs Nintendo prepared to release the Famicom in the United States, it wanted to avoid both the bootleg problem it had in Asia as well as the mistakes that led up to the 1983 crash. The company created the proprietary 10NES system, a lockout chip which was designed to prevent cartridges made without the chip from being played on the NES. The 10NES lockout was not perfect, as later in the NES' lifecycle methods were found to bypass it, but it did sufficiently allow Nintendo to strengthen its publishing control to avoid the mistakes Atari had made and initially prevent bootleg cartridges in the Western markets. These strict licensing measures backfired somewhat after Nintendo was accused of monopolistic behavior. In the long run, this pushed many western third-party publishers such as Electronic Arts away from Nintendo consoles and supported competing consoles such as the Sega Genesis or Sony PlayStation. Most of the Nintendo platform-control measures were adopted by later console manufacturers such as Sega, Sony, and Microsoft, although not as stringently.\nComputer game growth.\nWith waning console interests in the United States, the computer game market was able to gain a strong foothold in 1983 and beyond. Developers that had been primarily in the console games space, like Activision, turned their attention to developing computer game titles to stay viable. Newer companies also were founded to capture the growing interest in the computer games space with novel elements that borrowed from console games, as well as taking advantage of low-cost dial-up modems that allowed for multiplayer capabilities. The computer game market grew between 1983 and 1984, overtaking the console market, but overall video game revenue had declined significantly due to the considerable decline of the console market as well as the arcade market to an extent. The home computer industry, however, experienced a downturn in mid-1984, with global computer game sales declining in 1985 to a certain extent.\nMicrocomputers dominated the European market throughout the 1980s and with domestic production for those formats thriving over the same period. There was minimal trans-Atlantic ripple from American game production and trends, and thus minimal affect from the crash. Partly as a distant knock-on effect of the crash and partly due to the continuing quality of homegrown computer and microcomputer games, consoles did not achieve a dominant position in some European markets until the early 1990s. In the United Kingdom, there was a short-lived home console market between 1980 and 1982, but the 1983 crash led to the decline of consoles in the UK, which was offset by the rise of LCD games in 1983 and then the rise of computer games in 1984. It was not until the late 1980s with the arrival of the Master System and NES that the home console market recovered in the UK. Computer games remained the dominant sector of the UK home video game market up until they were surpassed by Sega and Nintendo consoles in 1991.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64394", "revid": "21345908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64394", "title": "Goodfellas", "text": "1990 American film by Martin Scorsese\nGoodfellas (stylized as GoodFellas) is a 1990 American biographical gangster film directed by Martin Scorsese, written by Nicholas Pileggi and Scorsese, and produced by Irwin Winkler. It is a film adaptation of Pileggi's 1985 nonfiction book \"Wiseguy\". Starring Robert De Niro, Ray Liotta, Joe Pesci, Lorraine Bracco and Paul Sorvino, the film narrates the rise and fall of Mafia associate Henry Hill and his friends and family from 1955 to 1980.\nScorsese initially titled the film \"Wise Guy\" and postponed making it; he and Pileggi later changed the title to \"Goodfellas\". To prepare for their roles in the film, De Niro, Pesci and Liotta often spoke with Pileggi, who shared research material remaining from writing the book. According to Pesci, improvisation and ad-libbing came from rehearsals wherein Scorsese gave the actors freedom to do whatever they wanted. The director made transcripts of these sessions, took the lines that he liked most and put them into a revised script, from which the cast worked during principal photography.\n\"Goodfellas\" premiered at the 47th Venice International Film Festival on September 9, 1990, where Scorsese was awarded with the Silver Lion award for Best Director, and was released in the United States on September 18 by Warner Bros. Pictures. When released, the film grossed $47 million against a budget of $25 million and received widespread acclaim. The critical consensus on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes calls it \"arguably the high point of Martin Scorsese's career\". The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, with Pesci winning Best Supporting Actor. The film also won five awards from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, including Best Film and Best Director, and was named the year's best film by various critics' groups.\n\"Goodfellas\" is widely regarded as one of the greatest films ever made, particularly in the gangster genre. In 2000, it was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress. Its content and style have been emulated in numerous other pieces of media.\nPlot.\nIn 1955, teenager Henry Hill becomes enamored by the criminal life and Mafia presence in East New York, a working-class Italian-American neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York City. He begins working for local \"caporegime\" Paulie Cicero and his associates Jimmy Conway, an Irish-American truck hijacker and gangster, and Tommy DeVito, a fellow juvenile delinquent. Henry begins as a fence for Jimmy, gradually working his way up to more serious crimes.\nThroughout the 1960s, the three men excel at carjacking, stealing cargo trucks from JFK Airport, and eventually commit the Air France Robbery. They spend most of their nights at the Copacabana nightclub, carousing with women. Henry starts dating Karen Friedman, a Jewish woman who is initially confused by Henry's criminal activities. She is soon seduced by Henry's glamorous lifestyle, and marries him, despite her parents' disapproval.\nIn 1970, Billy Batts, a made man in the Gambino crime family who was recently released from prison, insults Tommy at a nightclub that is owned by Henry. In response, Tommy and Jimmy beat, stab and fatally shoot Billy. Realizing that the unsanctioned murder of a made man will invite retribution, Jimmy, Henry and Tommy bury the body in Upstate New York. Six months later, Jimmy learns that the burial site is slated for development, prompting them to exhume and relocate the decaying corpse.\nIn 1974, Karen harasses Henry's mistress Janice, and threatens Henry at gunpoint. Henry moves in with Janice, but Paulie insists that he return to Karen after collecting a debt from a gambler in Tampa with Jimmy. Jimmy and Henry are arrested after being turned in by the gambler's sister, an FBI typist, and they receive ten-year prison sentences. To support his family on the outside, Henry has Karen smuggle in drugs from Pittsburgh, which he sells to fellow inmates.\nIn 1978, Henry is paroled and expands his cocaine business with Jimmy and Tommy, against Paulie's orders. Jimmy organizes a crew to raid the Lufthansa vault at JFK Airport, stealing six million dollars in cash and jewelry. After some members purchase expensive items against Jimmy's orders and the getaway truck is found by police, he has most of the crew killed. Only Henry and Tommy are spared, as Henry is making money through his Pittsburgh connection, and Tommy is about to become a made man. However, Tommy is killed when he arrives at the bogus initiation ceremony, in retribution for murdering Batts, much to Jimmy's dismay.\nBy 1980, Henry has become a nervous wreck due to heavy cocaine use. He sets up another drug deal with his Pittsburgh associates but is arrested by narcotics agents and incarcerated. After bailing him out, Karen explains that she flushed $60,000 worth of cocaine down the toilet to prevent FBI agents from finding it during their raid, leaving the Hills penniless.\nFeeling betrayed by Henry's drug dealing, and realizing that he is a liability, Paulie gives him $3,200 and ends their association. Henry meets Jimmy at a diner and is asked to travel to a hit assignment, but the request makes him suspicious. Realizing that Jimmy plans to have him killed, Henry decides to finally become an informant and enroll with his family in the witness protection program. Henry gives sufficient testimony and evidence in court to have Paulie and Jimmy convicted, and moves to a neighborhood in an undisclosed location, in accordance with the witness protection program. Henry describes his unhappiness by leaving his exciting and turbulent gangster life, feeling condemned to live a boring, average life as a \"schnook\".\nHenry remained in witness protection through the 1980s. In 1987, he was arrested for narcotics conspiracy, and received 5 years' probation, but has been clean since. Henry and Karen separated in 1989. Paulie died in prison in 1988, at age 73. Jimmy would served a 20 years to life sentence in Federal Prison, ineligible for parole until 2004.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"Goodfellas\" is based on New York crime reporter Nicholas Pileggi's book \"Wiseguy\". Martin Scorsese did not intend to make another Mafia film, but he saw a review of Pileggi's book, which he read while working on \"The Color of Money\" in 1986. He had always been fascinated by the mob lifestyle, and was drawn to Pileggi's book because he thought that it was the most honest portrayal of gangsters that he had ever read.\nAfter reading the book, Scorsese knew what approach he wanted to take: \"To begin \"Goodfellas\" like a gunshot and have it get faster from there, almost like a two-and-a-half-hour trailer. I think it's the only way you can really sense the exhilaration of the lifestyle, and to get a sense of why a lot of people are attracted to it.\" According to Pileggi, Scorsese cold-called the writer and told him, \"I've been waiting for this book my entire life,\" to which Pileggi replied, \"I've been waiting for this phone call my entire life.\"\nScorsese decided to postpone making the film when funds materialized in 1988 to make \"The Last Temptation of Christ\". He was drawn to the documentary aspects of Pileggi's book. \"The [\"Wiseguy\"] book gives you a sense of the day-to-day life, the tedium, how they work, how they take over certain nightclubs, and for what reasons. It shows how it's done.\" He saw \"Goodfellas\" as the third film in an unplanned trilogy of films that examined the lives of Italian-Americans \"from slightly different angles\". He has often described the film as \"a mob home movie\" that is about money, because \"that's what they're really in business for\". Two weeks in advance of the filming, the real Henry Hill was paid $480,000.\nScreenplay.\nScorsese and Pileggi collaborated on the screenplay, and during the course of the 12 drafts that it took to reach the ideal script, the reporter realized that \"the visual styling had to be completely redone... So we decided to share credit.\" They chose the sections of the book that they liked and assembled them like building blocks. Scorsese persuaded Pileggi that they did not need to follow a traditional narrative structure.\nScorsese wanted to take the gangster film and deal with it episode by episode, but start in the middle and move backward and forward. Scorsese compacted scenes, realizing that if they were kept short, \"the impact after about an hour and a half would be terrific.\" He wanted to use narration in a manner reminiscent of Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut's 1962 film \"Jules and Jim\", and use \"all the basic tricks of the New Wave from around 1961.\" This is the first time since \"Mean Streets\" that Scorsese is credited as a co-writer.\nThe names of several real-life gangsters are altered for the film: Tommy \"Two Gun\" DeSimone became Tommy DeVito, Paul Vario became Paulie Cicero, and Jimmy \"The Gent\" Burke became Jimmy Conway, after Burke's birth surname. Scorsese initially titled the film \"Wise Guy\", but he and Pileggi decided to change the title of their film to \"Goodfellas\" because two contemporary projects, the 1986 Brian De Palma film \"Wise Guys\" and the 1987\u20131990 TV series \"Wiseguy\", had used similar titles.\nCasting.\nOnce Robert De Niro agreed to play Jimmy Conway, Scorsese was able to secure the money needed to make the film. Ray Liotta, who played Henry Hill, had read Pileggi's book when it came out and was fascinated by it. A couple of years afterward, his agent told him that Scorsese was going to direct a film adaptation. In 1988, Liotta met with Scorsese over a period of a couple of months and auditioned for the film. He campaigned aggressively for a role, although Warner Bros. wanted a well-known actor; he later said, \"I think they would've rather had Eddie Murphy than me\".\nScorsese cast Liotta after De Niro saw him in Jonathan Demme's \"Something Wild\" (1986); Scorsese was surprised by \"his explosive energy\" in that film. Al Pacino and John Malkovich were considered for the role of Conway, and Sean Penn, Alec Baldwin, Val Kilmer and Tom Cruise were considered for the role of Hill.\nTo prepare for the role, De Niro consulted with Pileggi, who had research material that had been discarded while writing the book. De Niro often called Hill several times a day to ask how Burke walked, held his cigarette, and so on. Driving to and from the set, Liotta listened to FBI audio cassette tapes of Hill, so that he could practice speaking like his real-life counterpart.\nMadonna was considered for the role of Karen Hill. To research her role, Lorraine Bracco tried to get close to a mob wife but was unable due to the insular nature of Mafia communities. She decided not to meet the real Karen, saying that she \"thought it would be better if the creation came from me\". Paul Sorvino had no problem finding the voice and walk of his character, but found it challenging to find what he called \"that kernel of coldness and absolute hardness that is antithetical to my nature except when my family is threatened\".\nFormer EDNY prosecutor Edward A. McDonald appeared in the film as himself, re-creating the conversation that he had with Henry and Karen Hill about joining the Witness Protection Program. McDonald, who was friends with Pileggi, was cast on a whim; while a location scout was taking pictures of his office, McDonald casually remarked that he would be happy to play himself if needed. Pileggi called him an hour later asking if he was serious, and he was cast. The scene was unscripted, with McDonald improvising the line referring to Karen as a \"babe-in-the-woods\".\nPhotography.\nThe film was shot on location in Queens, Upstate New York, New Jersey and parts of Long Island during spring and summer 1989, with a budget of $25 million. According to Scorsese, shooting wrapped up in August 14. Scorsese broke the film into sequences and storyboarded everything because of the complicated style throughout. The filmmaker stated, \"[I] wanted lots of movement and I wanted it to be throughout the whole picture, and I wanted the style to kind of break down by the end, so that by [Henry's] last day as a wise guy, it's as if the whole picture would be out of control, give the impression he's just going to spin off the edge and fly out.\"\nHe added that the film's style came from the opening scenes of \"Jules and Jim\": extensive narration, quick edits, freeze frames and multiple locale switches. It is this reckless attitude toward convention that mirrors the attitude of many of the gangsters in the film. Scorsese remarked, \"So if you do the movie, you say, 'I don't care if there's too much narration. Too many quick cuts?\u2014That's too bad.' It's that kind of really punk attitude we're trying to show.\" He adopted a frenetic style to almost overwhelm the audience with images and information. He also put plenty of detail in every frame because he believed that the gangster life is so rich. Freeze frames were used for certain scenes because Scorsese wanted to highlight that \"a point was being reached\" in Henry's life.\nJoe Pesci did not judge his character, but found that the scene in which he kills Spider hard to do until he forced himself to feel the way Tommy did. Bracco found the shoot to be an emotionally difficult one because of the male-dominated cast, and realized that if she did not make her \"work important, it would probably end up on the cutting room floor\". When it came to the relationship between Henry and Karen, Bracco saw no difference between an abused wife and her character.\nAccording to Pesci, improvisation and ad-libbing came out of rehearsals wherein Scorsese let the actors do whatever they wanted. He made transcripts of these sessions, took the lines that the actors came up with that he liked best, and put them into a revised script from which the cast worked during principal photography. For example, the scene in which Tommy tells a story and Henry is responding to him\u2014the \"Funny how? Do I amuse you?\" scene\u2014is based on an actual event that Pesci experienced. Pesci was working as a waiter when he thought that he was making a compliment to a mobster by saying he was \"funny\"; however, the comment was not taken well. It was worked on in rehearsals at which he and Liotta improvised, and Scorsese recorded four to five takes, rewrote their dialogue and inserted it into the script.\nThe dinner scene with Tommy's mother (portrayed by Scorsese's mother Catherine) was also improvised, with the only scripted line being \"Did Tommy tell you about my painting?\". Tommy's mother's painting of the bearded man with the dogs was painted by Nicholas Pileggi's mother and based on a photograph from the November 1978 edition of \"National Geographic\" magazine. Pesci's character Tommy DeVito shared a name with (but was otherwise unrelated to) a close friend and employee of Pesci's, musician Tommy DeVito. The cast did not meet Henry Hill until a few weeks before the film's premiere. Liotta met him in an undisclosed city; Hill had seen the film and told the actor that he loved it.\nThe long tracking shot through the Copacabana nightclub came about because of a practical problem: the filmmakers could not get permission to go in the short way, and this forced them to go round the back. Scorsese decided to film the sequence in one unbroken shot to symbolize that Henry's entire life was ahead of him, commenting, \"It's his seduction of her [Karen] and it's also the lifestyle seducing him\". This sequence was shot eight times because Henny Youngman messed up his lines.\nHenry's last day as a criminal was the hardest part of the film for Scorsese to shoot because he wanted to properly show Henry's state of anxiety and paranoia caused by cocaine and amphetamine use. In an interview with film critic Mark Cousins, Scorsese explained the reason for Pesci shooting at the camera at the end of the film: \"Well that's a reference right to the end of \"The Great Train Robbery\"...and basically the plot of this picture is very similar to \"The Great Train Robbery\". It hasn't changed, 90 years later, it's the same story, the gun shots will always be there, he's always going to look behind his back, he's gotta have eyes behind his back, because they're gonna get him someday.\" The director ended the film with Henry regretting that he is no longer a wise guy, about which Scorsese said that \"I think the audience should get angry at him and I would hope they do\u2014and maybe with the system which allows this\".\nPost-production.\nScorsese wanted to depict the film's violence realistically, \"cold, unfeeling and horrible. Almost incidental\". However, he had to remove 10 frames of blood to ensure an R rating from the MPAA. \"Goodfellas\" was Scorsese's most expensive film to that point, but still a medium-sized budget by Hollywood standards.\nIt is also the first time that he was obliged by Warner Bros. to preview the film. At two preview screenings in California, audiences were \"agitated\" by the sequence depicting Henry's final day as a gangster, which Scorsese argued was his and editor Thelma Schoonmaker's intention. In the first test screening, forty audience members walked out in the first ten minutes. One of the favorite scenes for test audiences was the \"Funny like a clown? Do I amuse you?\" scene.\nSoundtrack.\nAlthough there is no incidental score in the film, Scorsese chose songs for the soundtrack that he felt obliquely commented on the scene or the characters. In any given scene, he used only music contemporary to or older than the scene's setting. According to Scorsese, many of the non-dialogue scenes were shot to playback. For example, he had \"Layla\" by Derek and the Dominos playing on the set while shooting the scene in which the dead bodies are discovered in the car, dumpster and meat truck. Sometimes, the lyrics of songs were inserted between lines of dialogue to comment on the action. Some of the music Scorsese had written into the script, while other songs he discovered during the editing phase.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n\"Goodfellas\" premiered at the 47th Venice International Film Festival, where Scorsese received the Silver Lion award for best director. It was given a wide release in North America on September 21, 1990.\nHome media.\n\"Goodfellas\" was released on DVD in March 1997, in a single-disc, double-sided, single-layer format that requires the disc to be flipped during viewing. In 2004, Warner Home Video released a two-disc, dual-layer version, with remastered picture and sound, and bonus materials such as commentary tracks.\nIn early 2007, the film became available on single Blu-ray with all the features from the 2004 release; an expanded Blu-ray version was released on February 16, 2010, for its 20th anniversary, bundled with a disc with features that include the 2008 documentary \"Public Enemies: The Golden Age of the Gangster Film.\" On May 5, 2015, a 25th anniversary edition was released. The film was released on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on December 6, 2016. The 25th anniversary release and subsequent releases include a Merrie Melodies and Looney Tunes collection with the shorts \"I Like Mountain Music\" (1933), \"She Was an Acrobat's Daughter\" (1937), \"Racketeer Rabbit\" (1946) and \"Bugs and Thugs\" (1954).\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Goodfellas\" grossed $6.3\u00a0million from 1,070 theaters in its opening weekend, topping the box office. In its second weekend, the film made $5.9\u00a0million from 1,291 theaters, falling just 8% and finishing second behind newcomer \"Pacific Heights\". It went on to make $46.8\u00a0million domestically.\nCritical response.\nAccording to review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 94% of 166 critics have given the film a positive review, with an average rating of 9.00/10. The website's critics consensus reads: \"Hard-hitting and stylish, \"GoodFellas\" is a gangster classic\u2014and arguably the high point of Martin Scorsese's career.\" Metacritic has assigned the film a weighted average score of 92 out of 100, based on reviews from 21 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of A\u2212 on a scale of A+ to F.\nIn his review for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", Roger Ebert gave the film a full four stars and wrote, \"No finer film has ever been made about organized crime \u2013 not even \"The Godfather\".\"\nIn his review for the \"Chicago Tribune\", Gene Siskel wrote, \"All of the performances are first-rate; Pesci stands out, though, with his seemingly unscripted manner. \"GoodFellas\" is easily one of the year's best films.\" Both critics named it the best film of 1990. In his review for \"The New York Times\", Vincent Canby wrote, \"More than any earlier Scorsese film, \"Goodfellas\" is memorable for the ensemble nature of the performances... The movie has been beautifully cast from the leading roles to the bits. There is flash also in some of Mr. Scorsese's directorial choices, including freeze frames, fast cutting and the occasional long tracking shot. None of it is superfluous.\"\n\"USA Today\" gave the film four stars out of four, and called it, \"great cinema\u2014and also a whopping good time\".\nDavid Ansen, in his review for \"Newsweek\" magazine, wrote, \"Every crisp minute of this long, teeming movie vibrates with outlaw energy.\"\nRex Reed said, \"Big, rich, powerful and explosive. One of Scorsese's best films! \"Goodfellas\" is great entertainment.\"\nIn his review for \"Time\", Richard Corliss wrote, \"So it is Scorsese's triumph that \"GoodFellas\" offers the fastest, sharpest 2\u00bd-hr. ride in recent film history.\"\nLists.\nThe film is ranked the best of 1990 by Roger Ebert, Gene Siskel and Peter Travers. In a poll of 80 film critics, \"Goodfellas\" was named the best film of the year by 34 critics. Director Martin Scorsese was chosen as the year's best director in 45 of the 80 ballots.\n\"Goodfellas\" is ranked No. 92 on the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list, published in 2007. In 2012, the Motion Picture Editors Guild listed \"Goodfellas\" as the fifteenth best-edited film of all time based on a survey of its membership. In the 2012 Sight &amp; Sound polls, it was ranked the 48th-greatest film ever made in the directors' poll. In the subsequent 2022 polls, it was ranked 28th in the directors' poll and tied for 63rd (with \"Casablanca\" and \"The Third Man\") in the critics' poll.\n\"Goodfellas\" is 39th on James Berardinelli's 2014-made list of the top 100 films of all time. In 2014, WhatCulture included Joe Pesci's role in top \"10 Most Convincing Movie Psychopath Performances\". In 2015, \"Goodfellas\" ranked 20th on BBC's \"100 Greatest American Films\" list, voted on by film critics from around the world. The February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"Goodfellas\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nAccolades.\n\"Goodfellas\" is one of eight films to have won Best Picture from three out of the four major U.S. film critics' groups (LA, NY, and NSFC, in its case), along with \"Nashville\", \"All the President's Men\", \"Terms of Endearment,\" \"Pulp Fiction\", \"The Hurt Locker,\" \"Drive My Car\", and \"T\u00e1r\".\nLegacy.\n\"Goodfellas\" is No. 94 on the American Film Institute's \"100 Years, 100 Movies\" list and moved up to No. 92 on its AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) from 2007. In June 2008, the AFI put \"Goodfellas\" at No. 2 on their AFI's 10 Top 10\u2014the best ten films in ten \"classic\" American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the movie-related community.\n\"Goodfellas\" was regarded as the second-best in the gangster film genre (after \"The Godfather\"). In 2000, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nRoger Ebert named \"Goodfellas\" the \"best mob movie ever\" and placed it among the ten best films of the 1990s. In December 2002, a UK film critics poll in \"Sight &amp; Sound\" ranked the film No. 4 on their list of the 10 Best Films of the Last 25 Years. \"Time\" included \"Goodfellas\" in their list of Time's All-Time 100 Movies. \"Channel 4\" placed \"Goodfellas\" at No. 10 in their 2002 poll \"The 100 Greatest Films\", \"Empire\" listed \"Goodfellas\" at No. 6 on their \"500 Greatest Movies Of All Time,\" and \"Total Film\" voted \"Goodfellas\" No. 1 as the greatest film of all time.\n\"Premiere\" listed Joe Pesci's Tommy DeVito as No. 96 on its list of \"The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time,\" calling him \"perhaps the single most irredeemable character ever put on film\". \"Empire\" ranked Tommy DeVito No. 59 in their \"The 100 Greatest Movie Characters\" poll.\nThe film's two-and-a-half-minute tracking shot through the Copacabana nightclub, colloquially called the \"Copa shot,\" is widely considered one of the greatest shots of all time, and is \"one of the few shots in the history of cinema readily identifiable by name.\" It is credited with popularizing the use of long Steadicam tracking shots in future productions, including \"Pulp Fiction\", \"Boogie Nights\", \"The Place Beyond the Pines\", and the \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" episode \"The Body.\"\n\"Goodfellas\" inspired director David Chase to make the HBO television series \"The Sopranos\". He told Peter Bogdanovich, \"\"Goodfellas\" is a very important movie to me and \"Goodfellas\" really plowed that ... I found that movie very funny and brutal and it felt very real. And yet that was the first mob movie that Scorsese ever dealt with a mob crew. ... as opposed to say \"The Godfather\" ... which there's something operatic about it, classical, even the clothing and the cars. You know I mean I always think about \"Goodfellas\" when they go to their mother's house that night when they're eating, you know when she brings out her painting, that stuff is great. I mean \"The Sopranos\" learned a lot from that.\" Indeed, the film shares a total of 27 actors with \"The Sopranos\", including Bracco, Sirico, Imperioli, Pellegrino, Lip and Vincent, who all had roles in Chase's HBO series.\nJuly 24, 2010, marked the 20th anniversary of the film's release. The milestone was celebrated with Henry Hill hosting a private screening for a select group of invitees at the Museum of the American Gangster in New York City.\nIn January 2012, it was announced that the AMC Network put a television series version of the movie in development. Pileggi was on board to co-write the adaptation with television writer and producer Jorge Zamacona. The two were set to executive produce with the film's producer Irwin Winkler and his son David.\nLuc Besson's 2013 film \"The Family\" features a sequence in which Giovanni Manzoni (De Niro), a gangster who is in witness protection for testifying against a member of his family, watches \"Goodfellas\".\nIn 2014, the ESPN-produced \"30 for 30\" documentary series debuted \"Playing for the Mob\", depicting the point shaving scandal orchestrated by Hill, his Pittsburgh associates, and several Boston College men's basketball players during the 1978\u201379 season. The episode was narrated by Liotta and contains references to \"Goodfellas\".\nIn 2015, \"Goodfellas\" closed the Tribeca Film Festival with a screening of its 25th-anniversary remaster.\nIn 2020, AMC began including a content warning when airing \"Goodfellas:\" \"This film includes language and/or cultural stereotypes that are inconsistent with today's standards of inclusion and tolerance and may offend some viewers.\" By comparison, \"The Godfather\" gets a standard \"viewer discretion\" warning.\nAmerican Film Institute Lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64397", "revid": "18585311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64397", "title": "Fat Tony (The Simpsons)", "text": "Fictional character from The Simpsons franchise\nDon Marion Anthony \"Fat Tony\" D'Amico is the name of two recurring characters in the animated sitcom \"The Simpsons\". Both are voiced by Joe Mantegna and first appeared in the episode \"Bart the Murderer\" of the third season. Fat Tony is a mobster and the underboss of the Springfield Mafia. His henchmen include Legs, Louie, and Johnny Tightlips, and he reports to Don Vittorio DiMaggio. Upon the death of the original Fat Tony in the episode \"Donnie Fatso\" of the twenty-second season, the character's near-identical cousin of the same name is introduced. The characters somewhat resemble real-life mobster Anthony \"Fat Tony\" Salerno.\nProfile.\nFirst Fat Tony.\nThe original Fat Tony, full name Marion Anthony D'Amico, was the chief racketeer behind several of Springfield's criminal enterprises, covering a wide range of rackets which included illegal gambling, cigarette smuggling, bootlegging, fraud, and making and selling fake IDs. In \"The Twisted World of Marge Simpson\", Homer contracts with the mafia to drive out Marge's rival snack food distributors. Fat Tony took out a hit on Mayor Quimby in \"Mayored to the Mob\" in retaliation for a raid on their rat milk facility, which Quimby opposed, as they had promised him \"dog or higher\". Fat Tony puts out a contract on Homer after his private security business interferes with the mob's interests in \"Poppa's Got a Brand New Badge\". Homer would have been executed gangland-style if not for Maggie coming to the rescue with her rifle. Fat Tony's son Michael is first mentioned by Fat Tony as he is talking to Marge in \"The Seven-Beer Snitch\", saying she drove him home from school sometimes. He is then properly introduced in the episode \"The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer\". The episode also reveals that Fat Tony's wife \"was whacked by 'natural causes'.\" Fat Tony and his associates meet in what is known as the \"Legitimate Businessman's Social Club\". Fat Tony played the violin in \"Insane Clown Poppy\".\nSecond Fat Tony.\nThe original Fat Tony dies in the twenty-second season episode \"Donnie Fatso\" from a heart attack, with his final words to Homer being \"I loved you man.\" Shortly afterwards, he is replaced by his slimmer cousin Anthony Paul D'Amico, initially nicknamed \"Fit Tony\". By the end of that episode, Tony has taken to stress eating as a way of dealing with the numerous attempts on his life, and the resulting weight gain causes a change of nickname to \"Fit-Fat Tony\" and eventually \"Fat Tony\", essentially restoring the status quo from before the first Fat Tony died. This iteration of Fat Tony, although similar in character to the original, does have notable differences in his appearance such as lighter skin, darker hair, and wearing a red polo shirt instead of a teal one.\nIn \"The Real Housewives of Fat Tony\", he supposedly marries Selma Bouvier, but the relationship falls apart when Selma discovers Tony only held a ceremony to make her his goomar as he is already married to another woman.\nName.\nThe original Fat Tony's actual name is the source of some dispute, as several different real names have been revealed over the course of the series. In the third-season episode \"Bart the Murderer\", Fat Tony is referred to in a news report given by Kent Brockman as William \"Fat Tony\" Williams, presumably an alias. In the eighth-season episode \"The Homer They Fall\", the announcer at Homer's boxing match against Drederick Tatum refers to Fat Tony as Anthony D'Amico (incidentally the name of one of the three Re-Recording Mixers in the end credits), which he is called later as well, for example, by the FBI. In the twelfth-season episode \"Insane Clown Poppy\", Frankie the Squealer claims that Fat Tony's first name is Marion, a reference to actor John Wayne's real name, Marion Robert Morrison.\nCharacter.\nDevelopment.\nFat Tony first appeared in the third season episode \"Bart the Murderer\". The writers conceived the episode before the film \"Goodfellas\", which has a similar plot, was released. However, when it was, the writers incorporated references to the film in the episode. Fat Tony was modeled on Paul Sorvino, who played mobster Paul Cicero in \"Goodfellas\". The appearance of Louie, one of Tony's henchmen, was based on another \"Goodfellas\" actor, Frank Sivero. The end of the episode portrays a TV movie about the events depicted in the episode, in which Joe Mantegna will play Fat Tony (this was before it was decided that Fat Tony would be a recurring character). In the episode \"Donnie Fatso\", Fat Tony dies of a heart attack; his cousin Fit Tony takes his place as head of the syndicate, but soon becomes known as Fat Tony due to stress-induced overeating.\nVoice.\nThe writers originally wanted Sheldon Leonard to voice Fat Tony. When they were unable to get him, they cast Joe Mantegna. It is his longest-running role. Mantegna said, \"You feel honored that they asked you to do a voice. The fact that they bring you back and keep writing for the character, it is very satisfying.\" Mantegna based his raspy voice for Fat Tony on his Uncle Willy, a long-standing cigarette smoker. He insists that the producers must \"not let anyone else do his noises,\" even going so far as to say, \"If Fat Tony sneezes, I want to be there.\" This is adhered to in the season 20 episode \"Sex, Pies, and Idiot Scrapes, where the script required only grunting. Despite this, Phil Hartman voiced the character in the season 7 episode \"A Fish Called Selma\". Mantegna voiced Fat Tony in a scene in \"The Simpsons Movie\" that almost got cut. Of the Fat Tony episodes, Mantegna favors \"Bart the Murderer\" and \"The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer\", because they are the character's first appearance and a season premiere.\nReception.\nIGN ranked Fat Tony at No. 18 on their 2006 list of the \"Top 25 \"Simpsons\" Peripheral Characters\". Star News Online listed Joe Mantegna as one of the 400 reasons why they love \"The Simpsons\". In 2007, Adam Finley of TV Squad called Mantegna one of the five best \"The Simpsons\" guest stars and \"Vanity Fair\" called \"Bart the Murderer\" the eighth best episode of the show, saying, \"This episode makes the cut because of the inspired Mafia satire\". Playmates Toys made Fat Tony into an action figure as part of the World of Springfield toy line.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64398", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64398", "title": "Coudei", "text": ""}
{"id": "64402", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64402", "title": "Sherri and Terri", "text": ""}
{"id": "64437", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64437", "title": "Benjamin Britten", "text": "English composer and pianist (1913\u20131976)\nEdward Benjamin Britten, Baron Britten (22 November 1913\u00a0\u2013 4 December 1976) was an English composer, conductor, and pianist. He was a central figure of 20th-century British music, with a range of works including opera, other vocal music, orchestral and chamber pieces. His best-known works include the opera \"Peter Grimes\" (1945), the \"War Requiem\" (1962) and the orchestral showpiece \"The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra\" (1945).\nBritten was born in Lowestoft, Suffolk, the son of a dentist. He showed talent from an early age. He studied at the Royal College of Music in London and privately with the composer Frank Bridge. Britten first came to public attention with the \"a cappella\" choral work \"A Boy Was Born\" in 1934. With the premiere of \"Peter Grimes\" in 1945, he leapt to international fame. Over the next 28 years, he wrote 14 more operas, establishing himself as one of the leading 20th-century composers in the genre. In addition to large-scale operas for Sadler's Wells and Covent Garden, he wrote chamber operas for small forces, suitable for performance in venues of modest size. Among the best known of these is \"The Turn of the Screw\" (1954). Recurring themes in his operas include the struggle of an outsider against a hostile society and the corruption of innocence.\nBritten's other works range from orchestral to choral, solo vocal, chamber and instrumental as well as film music. He took a great interest in writing music for children and amateur performers, including the opera \"Noye's Fludde\", a \"Missa Brevis\", and the song collection \"Friday Afternoons\". He often composed with particular performers in mind. His most frequent and important muse was his personal and professional partner, the tenor Peter Pears; others included Kathleen Ferrier, Jennifer Vyvyan, Janet Baker, Dennis Brain, Julian Bream, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Osian Ellis and Mstislav Rostropovich. Britten was a celebrated pianist and conductor, performing many of his own works in concert and on record. He also performed and recorded works by others, such as Bach's \"Brandenburg Concertos\", Mozart symphonies, and song cycles by Schubert and Schumann.\nTogether with Pears and the librettist and producer Eric Crozier, Britten founded the annual Aldeburgh Festival in 1948, and he was responsible for the creation of Snape Maltings concert hall in 1967. In 1976, he was the first composer to be given a life peerage. He died shortly afterwards, aged 63.\nEarly years.\nBritten was born in the fishing port of Lowestoft in Suffolk, on the east coast of England on 22 November 1913, the feast day of Saint Cecilia, the patron saint of music. He was the youngest of four children of Robert Victor Britten (1877\u20131934) and his wife Edith Rhoda, \"n\u00e9e\" Hockey (1874\u20131937). Robert Britten's youthful ambition to become a farmer had been thwarted by lack of capital, and he had instead trained as a dentist, a profession he practised successfully but without pleasure. While studying at Charing Cross Hospital in London he met Edith Hockey, the daughter of a civil service clerk in the British Government's Home Office. They were married in September 1901 at St John's, Smith Square, London.\nThe consensus among biographers of Britten is that his father was a loving but somewhat stern and remote parent. Britten, according to his sister Beth, \"got on well with him and shared his wry sense of humour, dedication to work and capacity for taking pains.\" Edith Britten was a talented amateur musician and secretary of the Lowestoft Musical Society. In the English provinces of the early 20th century, distinctions of social class were taken very seriously. Britten described his family as \"very ordinary middle class\", but there were aspects of the Brittens that were not ordinary: Edith's father was illegitimate, and her mother was an alcoholic; Robert Britten was an agnostic and refused to attend church on Sundays. Music was the principal means by which Edith Britten strove to maintain the family's social standing, inviting the pillars of the local community to musical soir\u00e9es at the house.\nWhen Britten was three months old he contracted pneumonia and nearly died. The illness left him with a damaged heart, and doctors warned his parents that he would probably never be able to lead a normal life. He recovered more fully than expected, and as a boy was a keen tennis player and cricketer. To his mother's great delight he was an outstandingly musical child, unlike his sisters, who inherited their father's indifference to music, while his brother, Robert, though musically talented, was interested only in ragtime. Edith gave the young Britten his first lessons in piano and notation. He made his first attempts at composition when he was five. He started piano lessons when he was seven years old, and three years later began to play the viola. He was one of the last composers brought up on exclusively live music: his father refused to have a gramophone or, later, a radio in the house.\nEducation.\nLowestoft.\nWhen he was seven Britten was sent to a dame school, run by the Misses Astle. The younger sister, Ethel, gave him piano lessons; in later life he said that he remained grateful for the excellence of her teaching. The following year he moved on to a prep school, South Lodge, Lowestoft, as a day boy. The headmaster, Thomas Sewell, was an old-fashioned disciplinarian; the young Britten was outraged at the severe corporal punishments frequently handed out, and later he said that his lifelong pacifism probably had its roots in his reaction to the regime at the school. He himself rarely fell foul of Sewell, a mathematician, in which subject Britten was a star pupil. The school had no musical tradition, and Britten continued to study the piano with Ethel Astle. From the age of ten he took viola lessons from a friend of his mother, Audrey Alston, who had been a professional player before her marriage. In his spare time he composed prolifically. When his \"Simple Symphony\", based on these juvenilia, was recorded in 1956, Britten wrote this pen-portrait of his young self for the sleeve note:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Once upon a time there was a prep-school boy.\u00a0... He was quite an ordinary little boy\u00a0... he loved cricket, only quite liked football (although he kicked a pretty \"corner\"); he adored mathematics, got on all right with history, was scared by Latin Unseen; he behaved fairly well, only ragged the recognised amount, so that his contacts with the cane or the slipper were happily rare (although one nocturnal expedition to stalk ghosts left its marks behind); he worked his way up the school slowly and steadily, until at the age of thirteen he reached that pinnacle of importance and grandeur, never to be quite equalled in later days: the head of the Sixth, head-prefect, and Victor Ludorum. But \u2013 there was one curious thing about this boy: he wrote music. His friends bore with it, his enemies kicked a bit but not for long (he was quite tough), the staff couldn't object if his work and games didn't suffer. He wrote lots of it, reams and reams of it.\nAudrey Alston encouraged Britten to go to symphony concerts in Norwich. At one of these, during the triennial Norfolk and Norwich Festival in October 1924, he heard Frank Bridge's orchestral poem \"The Sea\", conducted by the composer. It was the first substantial piece of modern music he had ever encountered, and he was, in his own phrase, \"knocked sideways\" by it. Audrey Alston was a friend of Bridge; when he returned to Norwich for the next festival in 1927 she brought her not quite 14-year-old pupil to meet him. Bridge was impressed with the boy, and after they had gone through some of Britten's compositions together he invited him to come to London to take lessons from him. Robert Britten, supported by Thomas Sewell, doubted the wisdom of pursuing a composing career; a compromise was agreed by which Britten would, as planned, go on to his public school the following year but would make regular day-trips to London to study composition with Bridge and piano with his colleague Harold Samuel.\nBridge impressed on Britten the importance of scrupulous attention to the technical craft of composing and the maxim that \"you should find yourself and be true to what you found.\" The earliest substantial works Britten composed while studying with Bridge are the String Quartet in F, completed in April 1928, and the \"Quatre Chansons Fran\u00e7aises\", a song-cycle for high voice and orchestra. Authorities differ on the extent of Bridge's influence on his pupil's technique. Humphrey Carpenter and Michael Oliver judge that Britten's abilities as an orchestrator were essentially self-taught; Donald Mitchell considers that Bridge had an important influence on the cycle.\nPublic school and Royal College of Music.\nIn September 1928 Britten went as a boarder to Gresham's School, in Holt, Norfolk. At the time he felt unhappy there, even writing in his diary of contemplating suicide or running away: he hated being separated from his family, most particularly from his mother; he despised the music master; and he was shocked at the prevalence of bullying, though he was not the target of it. He remained there for two years and in 1930 he won a composition scholarship at the Royal College of Music (RCM) in London; his examiners were the composers John Ireland and Ralph Vaughan Williams and the college's harmony and counterpoint teacher, S. P. Waddington.\nBritten was at the RCM from 1930 to 1933, studying composition with Ireland and piano with Arthur Benjamin. He won the Sullivan Prize for composition, the Cobbett Competition for chamber music, and was twice winner of the Ernest Farrar Prize for composition. Despite these honours, he was not greatly impressed by the establishment: he found his fellow-students \"amateurish and folksy\" and the staff \"inclined to suspect technical brilliance of being superficial and insincere.\" Another Ireland pupil, the composer Humphrey Searle, said that Ireland could be \"an inspiring teacher to those on his own wavelength\"; Britten was not, and learned little from him. He continued to study privately with Bridge, although he later praised Ireland for \"nurs[ing] me very gently through a very, very difficult musical adolescence.\"\nBritten also used his time in London to attend concerts and become better acquainted with the music of Stravinsky, Shostakovich and, most particularly, Mahler. He intended postgraduate study in Vienna with Alban Berg, Arnold Schoenberg's student, but was eventually dissuaded by his parents, on the advice of the RCM staff.\nThe first of Britten's compositions to attract wide attention were composed while at the RCM: the Sinfonietta, Op. 1 (1932), the oboe quartet \"Phantasy\", Op. 2, dedicated to L\u00e9on Goossens who played the first performance in a BBC broadcast on 6 August 1933, and a set of choral variations \"A Boy Was Born\", written in 1933 for the BBC Singers, who first performed it the following year. In this same period he wrote \"Friday Afternoons\", a collection of 12 songs for the pupils of Clive House School, Prestatyn, where his brother was headmaster.\nCareer.\nEarly professional life.\nIn February 1935, at Bridge's instigation, Britten was invited to a job interview by the BBC's director of music Adrian Boult and his assistant Edward Clark. Britten was not enthusiastic about the prospect of working full-time in the BBC music department and was relieved when what came out of the interview was an invitation to write the score for a documentary film, \"The King's Stamp\", directed by Alberto Cavalcanti for the GPO Film Unit.\nBritten became a member of the film unit's small group of regular contributors, another of whom was W. H. Auden. Together they worked on the documentary films \"Coal Face\" and \"Night Mail\" in 1935. They also collaborated on the song cycle \"Our Hunting Fathers\" (1936), radical both in politics and musical treatment, and subsequently other works including \"Cabaret Songs\", \"On This Island\", \"Paul Bunyan\" and \"Hymn to St Cecilia\". Auden was a considerable influence on Britten, encouraging him to widen his aesthetic, intellectual and political horizons, and also to come to terms with his homosexuality. Auden was, as David Matthews puts it, \"cheerfully and guiltlessly promiscuous\"; Britten, puritanical and conventional by nature, was sexually repressed.\nIn the three years from 1935 to 1937 Britten wrote nearly 40 scores for the theatre, cinema and radio. Among the film music of the late 1930s Matthews singles out \"Night Mail\" and \"Love from a Stranger\" (1937); from the theatre music he selects for mention \"The Ascent of F6\" (1936), \"On the Frontier\" (1938), and \"Johnson Over Jordan\" (1939); and of the music for radio, \"King Arthur\" (1937) and \"The Sword in the Stone\" (1939).\nIn 1937 there were two events of huge importance in Britten's life: his mother died, and he met the tenor Peter Pears. Although Britten was extraordinarily devoted to his mother and was devastated at her death, it also seems to have been something of a liberation for him. Only after that did he begin to engage in emotional relationships with people his own age or younger. Later in the year he got to know Pears while they were both helping to clear out the country cottage of a mutual friend who had died in an air crash. Pears quickly became Britten's musical inspiration and close (though for the moment platonic) friend. Britten's first work for him was composed within weeks of their meeting, a setting of Emily Bront\u00eb's poem, \"A thousand gleaming fires\", for tenor and strings.\nDuring 1937 Britten composed a \"Pacifist March\" to words by Ronald Duncan for the Peace Pledge Union, of which, as a pacifist, he had become an active member; the work was not a success and was soon withdrawn. The best known of his compositions from this period is probably \"Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge\" for string orchestra, described by Matthews as the first of Britten's works to become a popular classic. It was a success in North America, with performances in Toronto, New York, Boston, Chicago and San Francisco, under conductors including John Barbirolli and Serge Koussevitzky.\nAmerica 1939\u201342.\nIn April 1939 Britten and Pears sailed to North America, going first to Canada and then to New York. They had several reasons for leaving England, including the difficult position of pacifists in an increasingly bellicose Europe; the success that \"Frank Bridge\" had enjoyed in the US; the departure of Auden and his friend Christopher Isherwood to the US from England three months previously; hostile or belittling reviews of Britten's music in the English press; and under-rehearsed and inadequate performances. Britten and Pears consummated their relationship and from then until Britten's death they were partners in both their professional and personal lives. When the Second World War began, Britten and Pears turned for advice to the British embassy in Washington and were told that they should remain in the US as artistic ambassadors. Pears was inclined to disregard the advice and go back to England; Britten also felt the urge to return, but accepted the embassy's counsel and persuaded Pears to do the same.\nAlready a friend of the composer Aaron Copland, Britten encountered his latest works \"Billy the Kid\" and \"An Outdoor Overture\", both of which influenced his own music. In 1940 Britten composed \"Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo\", the first of many song cycles for Pears. Britten's orchestral works from this period include the Violin Concerto, \"Sinfonia da Requiem\", and \"An American Overture\". In 1941 Britten produced his first music drama, \"Paul Bunyan\", an operetta, to a libretto by Auden. While in the US, Britten had his first encounter with Balinese gamelan music, through transcriptions for piano duo made by the Canadian composer Colin McPhee. The two met in the summer of 1939 and subsequently performed a number of McPhee's transcriptions for a recording. This musical encounter bore fruit in several Balinese-inspired works later in Britten's career.\nMoving to the US did not relieve Britten of the nuisance of hostile criticism: although both Olin Downes, the doyen of New York music critics, and Irving Kolodin took to Britten's music, Virgil Thomson was, as the music scholar Suzanne Robinson puts it, consistently \"severe and spiteful\". Thomson described \"Les Illuminations\" (1940) as \"little more than a series of bromidic and facile 'effects'\u00a0... pretentious, banal and utterly disappointing\", and was equally unflattering about Pears's voice. Robinson surmises that Thomson was motivated by \"a mixture of spite, national pride, and professional jealousy.\" \"Paul Bunyan\" met with wholesale critical disapproval, and the \"Sinfonia da Requiem\" (already rejected by its Japanese sponsors because of its overtly Christian nature) received a mixed reception when Barbirolli and the New York Philharmonic premiered it in March 1941. The reputation of the work was much enhanced when Koussevitzky took it up shortly afterwards.\nReturn to England.\nIn 1942 Britten read the work of the poet George Crabbe for the first time. \"The Borough\", set on the Suffolk coast close to Britten's homeland, awakened in him such longings for England that he knew he must return. He also knew that he must write an opera based on Crabbe's poem about the fisherman Peter Grimes. Before Britten left the US, Koussevitzky, always generous in encouraging new talent, offered him a $1,000 commission to write the opera. Britten and Pears returned to England in April 1942. During the long transatlantic sea crossing Britten completed the choral works \"A Ceremony of Carols\" and \"Hymn to St Cecilia\". The latter was his last large-scale collaboration with Auden. Britten had grown away from him, and Auden became one of the composer's so-called \"corpses\" \u2013 former intimates from whom he completely cut off contact once they had outlived their usefulness to him or offended him in some way.\nHaving arrived in Britain, Britten and Pears applied for recognition as conscientious objectors; Britten was initially allowed only non-combatant service in the military, but on appeal he gained unconditional exemption. After the death of his mother in 1937 he had used money she bequeathed him to buy the Old Mill in Snape, Suffolk which became his country home. He spent much of his time there in 1944 working on the opera \"Peter Grimes\". Pears joined Sadler's Wells Opera Company, whose artistic director, the singer Joan Cross, announced her intention to re-open the company's home base in London with Britten's opera, casting herself and Pears in the leading roles. There were complaints from company members about supposed favouritism and the \"cacophony\" of Britten's score, as well as some ill-suppressed homophobic remarks. \"Peter Grimes\" opened in June 1945 and was hailed by public and critics; its box-office takings matched or exceeded those for \"La boh\u00e8me\" and \"Madame Butterfly\", which were staged during the same season. The opera administrator Lord Harewood called it \"the first genuinely successful British opera, Gilbert and Sullivan apart, since Purcell.\" Dismayed by the in-fighting among the company, Cross, Britten and Pears severed their ties with Sadler's Wells in December 1945, going on to found what was to become the English Opera Group.\nA month after the opening of \"Peter Grimes\", Britten and Yehudi Menuhin went to Germany to give recitals to concentration camp survivors. What they saw, at Belsen most of all, so shocked Britten that he refused to talk about it until towards the end of his life, when he told Pears that it had coloured everything he had written since. Colin Matthews comments that the next two works Britten composed after his return, the song-cycle \"The Holy Sonnets of John Donne\" and the Second String Quartet, contrast strongly with earlier, lighter-hearted works such as \"Les Illuminations\". Britten recovered his \"joie de vivre\" for \"The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra\" (1945), written for an educational film, \"Instruments of the Orchestra\", directed by Muir Mathieson and featuring the London Symphony Orchestra conducted by Malcolm Sargent. It became, and remained, his most often played and popular work.\nBritten's next opera, \"The Rape of Lucretia\", was presented at the first post-war Glyndebourne Festival in 1946. It was then taken on tour to provincial cities under the banner of the \"Glyndebourne English Opera Company\", an uneasy alliance of Britten and his associates with John Christie, the autocratic proprietor of Glyndebourne. The tour lost money heavily, and Christie announced that he would underwrite no more tours. Britten and his associates set up the English Opera Group; the librettist Eric Crozier and the designer John Piper joined Britten as artistic directors. The group's express purpose was to produce and commission new English operas and other works, presenting them throughout the country. Britten wrote the comic opera \"Albert Herring\" for the group in 1947; while on tour in the new work Pears came up with the idea of mounting a festival in the small Suffolk seaside town of Aldeburgh, where Britten had moved from Snape earlier in the year, and which became his principal place of residence for the rest of his life.\nAldeburgh; the 1950s.\nThe Aldeburgh Festival was launched in June 1948, with Britten, Pears, and Crozier directing. \"Albert Herring\" played at the Jubilee Hall, and Britten's new cantata for tenor, chorus, and orchestra, \"Saint Nicolas\", was presented in the parish church. The festival was an immediate success and became an annual event that has continued into the 21st century. New works by Britten featured in almost every festival until his death in 1976, including the premieres of his operas \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" at the Jubilee Hall in 1960 and \"Death in Venice\" at Snape Maltings Concert Hall in 1973.\nUnlike many leading English composers, Britten was not known as a teacher, but in 1949 he accepted his only private pupil, Arthur Oldham, who studied with him for three years. Oldham made himself useful, acting as musical assistant and arranging \"Variations on a Theme by Frank Bridge\" for full orchestra for the Frederick Ashton ballet \"Le R\u00eave de L\u00e9onor\" (1949), but he later described the teacher\u2013pupil relationship as \"beneficial five per cent to [Britten] and ninety-five per cent to me!\"\nThroughout the 1950s Britten continued to write operas. \"Billy Budd\" (1951) was well received at its Covent Garden premiere and was regarded by reviewers as an advance on \"Peter Grimes\". \"Gloriana\" (1953), written to mark the coronation of Elizabeth II, had a cool reception at the gala premiere in the presence of the Queen and the British Establishment \"en masse\". The downbeat story of Elizabeth I in her decline, and Britten's score \u2013 reportedly thought by members of the premiere's audience \"too modern\" for such a gala \u2013 did not overcome what Matthews calls the \"ingrained philistinism\" of the ruling classes. Although \"Gloriana\" did well at the box office, there were no further productions in Britain for another 13 years. It was later recognised as one of Britten's finer operas. \"The Turn of the Screw\" the following year was an unqualified success; together with \"Peter Grimes\" it became, and at 2013 remained, one of the two most frequently performed of Britten's operas.\nIn the 1950s the \"fervently anti-homosexual\" Home Secretary, Sir David Maxwell Fyfe, urged the police to enforce the Victorian laws making homosexual acts illegal. Britten and Pears came under scrutiny; Britten was visited by police officers in 1953 and was so perturbed that he discussed with his assistant Imogen Holst the possibility that Pears might have to enter a sham marriage (with whom is unclear). In the end nothing was done.\nAn increasingly important influence on Britten was the music of the East, an interest that was fostered by a tour there with Pears in 1956, when Britten once again encountered the music of the Balinese gamelan and saw for the first time Japanese Noh plays, which he called \"some of the most wonderful drama I have ever seen.\" These eastern influences were seen and heard in the ballet \"The Prince of the Pagodas\" (1957) and later in two of the three semi-operatic \"Parables for Church Performance\": \"Curlew River\" (1964), \"The Burning Fiery Furnace\" (1966) and \"The Prodigal Son\" (1968).\nHe was invited to a competition to compose the future anthem of the Federation of Malaya (now Malaysia) in 1956. He attempted a composition after several couple of days which he described as \"curious\" and \"unsuccessful\". The committee returned the score with suggestions that he could make it \"sound more Malaysian\", but to no avail.\n1960s.\nBy the 1960s, the Aldeburgh Festival was outgrowing its customary venues, and plans to build a new concert hall in Aldeburgh were not progressing. When redundant Victorian maltings buildings in the village of Snape, six miles inland, became available for hire, Britten realised that the largest of them could be converted into a concert hall and opera house. The 830-seat Snape Maltings hall was opened by the Queen at the start of the twentieth Aldeburgh Festival on 2 June 1967; it was immediately hailed as one of the best concert halls in the country. The hall was destroyed by fire in 1969, but Britten was determined that it would be rebuilt in time for the following year's festival, which it was. The Queen again attended the opening performance in 1970.\nThe Maltings gave the festival a venue that could comfortably house large orchestral works and operas. Britten conducted the first performance outside Russia of Shostakovich's Fourteenth Symphony at Snape in 1970. Shostakovich, a friend since 1960, dedicated the symphony to Britten; he was himself the dedicatee of \"The Prodigal Son\". Two other Russian musicians who were close to Britten and regularly performed at the festival were the pianist Sviatoslav Richter and the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich. Britten composed his cello suites, \"Cello Symphony\" and Cello Sonata for Rostropovich, who premiered them at the Aldeburgh Festival.\nOne of the best known of Britten's works, the \"War Requiem\", was premiered in 1962. He had been asked four years earlier to write a work for the consecration of the new Coventry Cathedral, a modernist building designed by Basil Spence. The old cathedral had been left in ruins by an air-raid on the city in 1940 in which hundreds of people died. Britten decided that his work would commemorate the dead of both World Wars in a large-scale score for soloists, chorus, chamber ensemble and orchestra. His text interspersed the traditional Requiem Mass with poems by Wilfred Owen. Matthews writes, \"With the \"War Requiem\" Britten reached the apex of his reputation: it was almost universally hailed as a masterpiece.\" Shostakovich told Rostropovich that he believed it to be \"the greatest work of the twentieth century\".\nIn 1967 the BBC commissioned Britten to write an opera specially for television. \"Owen Wingrave\" was based, like \"The Turn of the Screw\", on a ghost story by Henry James. By the 1960s Britten found composition much slower than in his prolific youth; he told the 28-year-old composer Nicholas Maw, \"Get as much done now as you can, because it gets much, much more difficult as you grow older.\" He did not complete the score of the new opera until August 1970. \"Owen Wingrave\" was first broadcast in Britain in May 1971, when it was also televised in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the US and Yugoslavia.\nLast years.\nIn September 1970 Britten asked Myfanwy Piper, who had adapted the two Henry James stories for him, to turn another prose story into a libretto. This was Thomas Mann's novella \"Death in Venice\", a subject he had been considering for some time. At an early stage in composition Britten was told by his doctors that a heart operation was essential if he was to live for more than two years. He was determined to finish the opera and worked urgently to complete it before going into hospital for surgery. His long-term colleague Colin Graham wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Perhaps of all his works, this one went deepest into Britten's own soul: there are extraordinary cross-currents of affinity between himself, his own state of health and mind, Thomas Mann, Aschenbach (Mann's dying protagonist), and Peter Pears, who must have had to tear himself in three in order to reconstitute himself as the principal character.\nAfter the completion of the opera Britten went into the National Heart Hospital and was operated on in May 1973 to replace a failing heart valve. The replacement was successful, but he suffered a slight stroke, affecting his right hand. This brought his career as a performer to an end. While in hospital Britten became friendly with a senior nursing sister, Rita Thomson; she moved to Aldeburgh in 1974 and looked after him until his death.\nBritten's last works include the \"Suite on English Folk Tunes \"A Time There Was\"\" (1974); the Third String Quartet (1975), which drew on material from \"Death in Venice\"; and the dramatic cantata \"Phaedra\" (1975), written for Janet Baker.\nIn June 1976, the last year of his life, Britten accepted a life peerage \u2013 the first composer so honoured \u2013 becoming Baron Britten, of Aldeburgh in the County of Suffolk. After the 1976 Aldeburgh Festival, Britten and Pears travelled to Norway, where Britten began writing \"Praise We Great Men\", for voices and orchestra based on a poem by Edith Sitwell. He returned to Aldeburgh in August, and wrote \"Welcome Ode\" for children's choir and orchestra. In November, Britten realised that he could no longer compose. On his 63rd birthday, 22 November, at his request Rita Thomson organised a champagne party and invited his friends and his sisters Barbara and Beth, to say their goodbyes to the dying composer. When Rostropovich made his farewell visit a few days later, Britten gave him what he had written of \"Praise We Great Men\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI heard of his death\u00a0... and took a long walk in total silence through gently falling snow across a frozen lake, which corresponded exactly to the inexpressible sense of numbness at such a loss. The world is colder and lonelier without the presence of our supreme creator of music.\n Peter Maxwell Davies, 1977.\nBritten died of congestive heart failure on 4 December 1976. His funeral service was held at Aldeburgh Parish Church three days later, and he was buried in its churchyard, with a gravestone carved by Reynolds Stone. The authorities at Westminster Abbey had offered burial there, but Britten had made it clear that he wished his grave to be side by side with that, in due course, of Pears. A memorial service was held at the Abbey on 10 March 1977, at which the congregation was headed by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother.\nPersonal life and character.\nDespite his large number of works on Christian themes, Britten has sometimes been thought of as an agnostic. Pears said that when they met in 1937 he was not sure whether or not Britten would have described himself as a Christian. In the 1960s Britten called himself a dedicated Christian, though sympathetic to the radical views propounded by the Bishop of Woolwich in \"Honest to God\". Politically, Britten was on the left. He told Pears that he always voted either Liberal or Labour and could not imagine ever voting Conservative, but he was never a member of any party, except the Peace Pledge Union.\nPhysically, Britten was never robust. He walked and swam regularly and kept himself as fit as he could, but in his 1992 biography, Carpenter mentions 20 illnesses, a few of them minor but most fairly serious, suffered over the years by Britten before his final heart complaint developed. Emotionally, according to some commentators, Britten never completely grew up, retaining in his outlook something of a child's view of the world. He was not always confident that he was the genius others declared him to be, and though he was hypercritical of his own works, he was acutely, even aggressively sensitive to criticism from anybody else.\nBritten was, as he himself acknowledged, notorious for dumping friends and colleagues who either offended him or ceased to be of use to him \u2013 his \"corpses\". The conductor Sir Charles Mackerras believed that the term was invented by Lord Harewood. Both Mackerras and Harewood joined the list of corpses, the former for joking that the number of boys in \"Noye's Fludde\" must have been a delight to the composer, and the latter for an extramarital affair and subsequent divorce from Lady Harewood, which shocked the puritanical Britten. Among other corpses were his librettists Montagu Slater and Eric Crozier. The latter said in 1949, \"He has sometimes told me, jokingly, that one day I would join the ranks of his 'corpses' and I have always recognized that any ordinary person must soon outlive his usefulness to such a great creative artist as Ben.\" Dame Janet Baker said in 1981, \"I think he was quite entitled to take what he wanted from others\u00a0... He did not want to hurt anyone, but the task in hand was more important than anything or anybody.\" Matthews feels that this aspect of Britten has been exaggerated, and he observes that the composer sustained many deep friendships to the end of his life.\nControversies.\nBoys.\nThroughout his adult life, Britten had a particular rapport with children and enjoyed close friendships with several boys, particularly those in their early teens. The first such friendship was with Piers Dunkerley, who was 13 years old in 1934, when Britten was aged 20. Other boys Britten befriended were the young David Hemmings and Michael Crawford, both of whom sang treble roles in his works in the 1950s. Hemmings later said, \"In all of the time that I spent with him he never abused that trust\", and Crawford wrote \"I cannot say enough about the kindness of that great man\u00a0... he had a wonderful patience and affinity with young people. He loved music, and loved youngsters caring about music.\"\nIt was long suspected by several of Britten's close associates that there was something exceptional about his attraction to teenage boys: Auden referred to Britten's \"attraction to thin-as-a-board juveniles\u00a0... to the sexless and innocent\", and Pears once wrote to Britten: \"remember there are lovely things in the world still\u00a0\u2013 children, boys, sunshine, the sea, Mozart, you and me.\" In public, the matter was little discussed during Britten's lifetime and much discussed after it. Carpenter's 1992 biography closely examined the evidence, as do later studies of Britten, most particularly John Bridcut's \"Britten's Children\" (2006), which concentrates on Britten's friendships and relationships with various children and adolescents. Some commentators have continued to question Britten's conduct, sometimes very sharply. Carpenter and Bridcut conclude that he held any sexual impulses under firm control and kept the relationships affectionate \u2013 including bed-sharing, kissing and nude bathing \u2013 but strictly platonic.\nCause of death.\nA more recent controversy was the statement in a 2013 biography of Britten by Paul Kildea that the composer's heart failure was due to undetected syphilis, which Kildea speculates was a result of Pears's promiscuity while the two were living in New York. In response, Britten's consultant cardiologist said that, like all the hospital's similar cases, Britten was routinely screened for syphilis before the operation, with negative results. He described as \"complete rubbish\" Kildea's allegation that the surgeon who operated on Britten in 1973 would or even could have covered up a syphilitic condition. Kildea continued to maintain, \"When all the composer's symptoms are considered there can be only one cause.\" In \"The Times\", Richard Morrison praised the rest of Kildea's book, and hoped that its reputation would not be \"tarnished by one sensational speculation\u00a0... some second-hand hearsay\u00a0... presenting unsubstantiated gossip as fact.\"\nMusic.\nInfluences.\nBritten's early musical life was dominated by the classical masters; his mother's ambition was for him to become the \"Fourth B\" \u2013 after Bach, Beethoven and Brahms. Britten was later to assert that his initial development as a composer was stifled by reverence for these masters: \"Between the ages of thirteen and sixteen I knew every note of Beethoven and Brahms. I remember receiving the full score of \"Fidelio\" for my fourteenth birthday\u00a0... But I think in a sense I never forgave them for having led me astray in my own particular thinking and natural inclinations.\" He developed a particular animosity towards Brahms, whose piano music he had once held in great esteem; in 1952 he confided that he played through all Brahms's music from time to time, \"to see if I am right about him; I usually find that I underestimated last time how bad it was!\"\nThrough his association with Frank Bridge, Britten's musical horizons expanded. He discovered the music of Debussy and Ravel which, Matthews writes, \"gave him a model for an orchestral sound\". Bridge also led Britten to the music of Schoenberg and Berg; the latter's death in 1935 affected Britten deeply. A letter at that time reveals his thoughts on the contemporary music scene: \"The real musicians are so few &amp; far between, aren't they? Apart from the Bergs, Stravinskys, Schoenbergs &amp; Bridges one is a bit stumped for names, isn't one?\" \u2013 adding, as an afterthought: \"Shostakovitch \u2013 perhaps \u2013 possibly\". By this time Britten had developed a lasting hostility towards the English Pastoral School represented by Vaughan Williams and Ireland, whose work he compared unfavourably with the \"brilliant folk-song arrangements of Percy Grainger\"; Grainger became the inspiration of many of Britten's later folk arrangements. Britten was also impressed by Delius, and thought \"Brigg Fair\" \"delicious\" when he heard it in 1931. Also in that year he heard Stravinsky's \"The Rite of Spring\", which he found \"bewildering and terrifying\", yet at the same time \"incredibly marvellous and arresting\". The same composer's \"Symphony of Psalms\", and \"Petrushka\" were lauded in similar terms. He and Stravinsky later developed a mutual antipathy informed by jealousy and mistrust.\nBesides his growing attachments to the works of 20th century masters, Britten \u2013 along with his contemporary Michael Tippett \u2013 was devoted to the English music of the late 17th and early 18th centuries, in particular the work of Purcell. In defining his mission as a composer of opera, Britten wrote: \"One of my chief aims is to try to restore to the musical setting of the English Language a brilliance, freedom and vitality that have been curiously rare since the death of Purcell.\" Among the closest of Britten's kindred composer spirits \u2013 even more so than Purcell \u2013 was Mahler, whose Fourth Symphony Britten heard in September 1930. At that time Mahler's music was little regarded and rarely played in English concert halls. Britten later wrote of how the scoring of this work impressed him: \"...\u00a0entirely clean and transparent\u00a0... the material was remarkable, and the melodic shapes highly original, with such rhythmic and harmonic tension from beginning to end.\" He soon discovered other Mahler works, in particular \"Das Lied von der Erde\"; he wrote to a friend about the concluding \"Abschied\" of \"Das Lied\": \"It is cruel, you know, that music should be so beautiful.\" Apart from Mahler's general influence on Britten's compositional style, the incorporation by Britten of popular tunes (as, for example, in \"Death in Venice\") is a direct inheritance from the older composer.\nOperas.\nThe Britten-Pears Foundation considers the composer's operas \"perhaps the most substantial and important part of his compositional legacy.\" Britten's operas are firmly established in the international repertoire: according to Operabase, they are performed worldwide more than those of any other composer born in the 20th century, and only Puccini and Richard Strauss come ahead of him if the list is extended to all operas composed after 1900.\nThe early operetta \"Paul Bunyan\" stands apart from Britten's later operatic works. Philip Brett calls it \"a patronizing attempt to evoke the spirit of a nation not his own by W. H. Auden in which Britten was a somewhat dazzled accomplice.\" The American public liked it, but the critics did not, and it fell into neglect until interest revived near the end of the composer's life.\nBritten's subsequent operas range from large-scale works written for full-strength opera companies, to chamber operas for performance by small touring opera ensembles or in churches and schools. In the large-scale category are \"Peter Grimes\" (1945), \"Billy Budd\" (1951), \"Gloriana\" (1953), \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (1960) and \"Death in Venice\" (1973). Of the remaining operas, \"The Rape of Lucretia\" (1946), \"Albert Herring\" (1947), \"The Little Sweep\" (1949) and \"The Turn of the Screw\" (1954) were written for small opera companies. \"Noye's Fludde\" (1958), \"Curlew River\" (1964), \"The Burning Fiery Furnace\" (1966) and \"The Prodigal Son\" (1968) were for church performance, and had their premieres at St Bartholomew's Church, Orford. The secular \"The Golden Vanity\" was intended to be performed in schools. \"Owen Wingrave\", written for television, was first presented live by the Royal Opera at Covent Garden in 1973, two years after its broadcast premiere.\nMusic critics have frequently commented on the recurring theme in Britten's operas from \"Peter Grimes\" onward of the isolated individual at odds with a hostile society. The extent to which this reflected Britten's perception of himself, pacifist and homosexual, in the England of the 1930s, 40s and 50s is debated. Another recurrent theme is the corruption of innocence, most sharply seen in \"The Turn of the Screw\".\nOver the 28 years between \"Peter Grimes\" and \"Death in Venice\" Britten's musical style changed, as he introduced elements of atonalism \u2013 though remaining essentially a tonal composer \u2013 and of eastern music, particularly gamelan sounds but also eastern harmonies. In \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" the orchestral scoring varies to fit the nature of each set of characters: \"the bright, percussive sounds of harps, keyboards and percussion for the fairy world, warm strings and wind for the pairs of lovers, and lower woodwind and brass for the mechanicals.\" In \"Death in Venice\" Britten turns Tadzio and his family into silent dancers, \"accompanied by the colourful, glittering sounds of tuned percussion to emphasize their remoteness.\"\nAs early as 1948 the music analyst Hans Keller, summarising Britten's impact on 20th-century opera to that date, compared his contribution to that of Mozart in the 18th century: \"Mozart may in some respects be regarded as a founder (a 'second founder') of opera. The same can already be said today, as far as the modern British \u2013 perhaps not only British \u2013 field goes, of Britten.\" In addition to his own original operas, Britten, together with Imogen Holst, extensively revised Purcell's \"Dido and Aeneas\" (1951) and \"The Fairy-Queen\" (1967). Britten's Purcell realizations brought Purcell, who was then neglected, to a wider public, but have themselves been neglected since the dominance of the trend to authentic performance practice. His 1948 revision of \"The Beggar's Opera\" amounts to a wholesale recomposition, retaining the original melodies but giving them new, highly sophisticated orchestral accompaniments.\nSong cycles.\nThroughout his career Britten was drawn to the song cycle form. In 1928, when he was 14, he composed an orchestral cycle, \"Quatre chansons fran\u00e7aises\", setting words by Victor Hugo and Paul Verlaine. Brett comments that though the work is much influenced by Wagner on the one hand and French mannerisms on the other, \"the diatonic nursery-like tune for the sad boy with the consumptive mother in 'L'enfance' is entirely characteristic.\" After he came under Auden's influence Britten composed \"Our Hunting Fathers\" (1936), ostensibly a protest against fox-hunting but which also alludes allegorically to the contemporary political state of Europe. The work has never been popular; in 1948 the critic Colin Mason lamented its neglect and called it one of Britten's greatest works. In Mason's view the cycle is \"as exciting as \"Les Illuminations\", and offers many interesting and enjoyable foretastes of the best moments of his later works.\"\nThe first of Britten's song cycles to gain widespread popularity was \"Les Illuminations\" (1940), for high voice (originally soprano, later more often sung by tenors) with string orchestra accompaniment, setting words by Arthur Rimbaud. Britten's music reflects the eroticism in Rimbaud's poems; Copland commented of the section \"Antique\" that he did not know how Britten dared to write the melody. \"Antique\" was dedicated to \"K.H.W.S.\", or Wulff Scherchen, Britten's first romantic interest. Matthews judges the piece the crowning masterpiece of Britten's early years. By the time of Britten's next cycle, \"Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo\" (1942) for tenor and piano, Pears had become his partner and muse; in Matthews's phrase, Britten wrote the cycle as \"his declaration of love for Peter\". It too finds the sensuality of the verses it sets, though in its structure it resembles a conventional 19th-century song cycle. Mason draws a distinction between this and Britten's earlier cycles, because here each song is self-contained, and has no thematic connection with any of the others.\nThe \"Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings\" (1943) sets verses by a variety of poets, all on the theme of night-time. Though Britten described the cycle as \"not important stuff, but quite pleasant, I think\", it was immediately greeted as a masterpiece, and together with \"Peter Grimes\" it established him as one of the leading composers of his day. Mason calls it \"a beautifully unified work on utterly dissimilar poems, held together by the most superficial but most effective, and therefore most suitable symphonic method. Some of the music is pure word-painting, some of it mood-painting, of the subtlest kind.\" Two years later, after witnessing the horrors of Belsen, Britten composed \"The Holy Sonnets of John Donne\". Britten's technique in this cycle ranges from atonality in the first song to firm tonality later, with a resolute B major chord at the climax of \"Death, be not proud\".\n\"Nocturne\" (1958) is the last of the orchestral cycles. As in the \"Serenade\", Britten set words by a range of poets, who here include Shakespeare, Coleridge, Keats, Shelley, Tennyson and Wilfred Owen. The whole cycle is darker in tone than the \"Serenade\", with pre-echoes of the \"War Requiem\". All the songs have subtly different orchestrations, with a prominent obbligato part for a different instrument in each.\nAmong Britten's later song cycles with piano accompaniment is the \"Songs and Proverbs of William Blake\", composed for the baritone Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau. This presents all its poems in a continuous stream of music; Brett writes that it \"interleaves a ritornello-like setting of the seven proverbs with seven songs that paint an increasingly sombre picture of human existence.\" A Pushkin cycle, \"The Poet's Echo\" (1965), was written for Galina Vishnevskaya, and shows a more robust and extrovert side of the composer. Though written ostensibly in the tradition of European song cycles, it draws atmospherically on the polyphony of south-east Asian music. \"Who Are These Children?\" (1969), setting 12 verses by William Soutar, is among the grimmest of Britten's cycles. After he could no longer play the piano, Britten composed a cycle of Robert Burns settings, \"A Birthday Hansel\" (1976), for voice and harp.\nOther vocal works.\nNicholas Maw said of Britten's vocal music: \"His feeling for poetry (not only English) and the inflexions of language make him, I think, the greatest musical realizer of English.\" One of the best-known works in which Britten set poetry was the \"War Requiem\" (1962). It intersperses the Latin requiem mass, sung by soprano and chorus, with settings of works by the First World War poet Wilfred Owen, sung by tenor and baritone. At the end the two elements are combined, as the last line of Owen's \"Strange meeting\" mingles with the \"In paradisum\" of the mass. Matthews describes the conclusion of the work as \"a great wave of benediction [which] recalls the end of the \"Sinfonia da Requiem\", and its similar ebbing away into the sea that symbolises both reconciliation and death.\" The same year, he composed \"A Hymn of St Columba\" for choir and organ, setting a poem by the 6th-century saint. Other works for voices and orchestra include the \"Missa Brevis\" and the \"Cantata academica\" (both 1959) on religious themes, \"Children's Crusade\" to a text by Bertolt Brecht about a group of children in wartime Poland, to be performed by children (1969), and the late cantata \"Phaedra\" (1975), a story of fated love and death modelled on Handel's Italian cantatas.\nSmaller-scale works for accompanied voice include the five \"Canticles\", composed between 1947 and 1974. They are written for a variety of voices (tenor in all five; counter-tenor or alto in II and IV and baritone in IV) and accompaniments (piano in I to IV, horn in III and harp in V). The first, ', is a setting of Francis Quarles's 17th-century poem \"A Divine Rapture\", and according to Britten was modelled on Purcell's \"Divine Hymns\". Matthews describes it as one of the composer's most serene works, which \"ends in a mood of untroubled happiness that would soon become rare in Britten's music.\" The was written in 1952, between \"Billy Budd\" and \"Gloriana\", on the theme of Abraham's obedience to Divine Authority in the proffered sacrifice of his son Isaac. from 1954 is a setting of Edith Sitwell's wartime poem \"Still Falls the Rain\", composed just after \"The Turn of the Screw\" with which it is structurally and stylistically associated. The twelve-note cycle in the first five bars of the piano part of the Canticle introduced a feature that became thereafter a regular part of Britten's compositional technique. ', premiered in 1971, is based on T. S. Eliot's poem \"Journey of the Magi\". It is musically close to \"The Burning Fiery Furnace\" of 1966; Matthews refers to it as a \"companion piece\" to the earlier work. The final \"\" was another Eliot setting, his juvenile poem \"Death of Saint Narcissus\". Although Britten had little idea of what the poem was about, the musicologist Arnold Whittall finds the text \"almost frighteningly apt\u00a0... for a composer conscious of his own sickness.\" Matthews sees Narcissus as \"another figure from [Britten's] magic world of dreams and ideal beauty.\"\nOrchestral works.\nThe Britten scholar Donald Mitchell has written, \"It is easy, because of the scope, stature, and sheer volume of the operas, and the wealth of vocal music of all kinds, to pay insufficient attention to the many works Britten wrote in other, specifically non-vocal genres.\" Maw said of Britten, \"He is one of the 20th century's great orchestral composers\u00a0... His orchestration has an individuality, incisiveness and integration with the musical material only achieved by the greatest composers.\" Among Britten's best-known orchestral works are the \"Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge\" (1937), the \"Sinfonia da Requiem\" (1940), the \"Four Sea Interludes\" (1945) and \"The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra\" (1945). The Variations, an affectionate tribute to Britten's teacher, range from comic parodies of Italian operatic clich\u00e9s and Viennese waltzes to a strutting march, reflecting the rise of militarism in Europe, and a Mahlerian funeral march; the piece ends with an exuberant fugal finale. The Sinfonia moves from an opening \"Lacrymosa\" filled with fear and lamentation to a fierce Dies irae and then to a final \"Requiem aeternam\", described by the critic Herbert Glass as \"the most uneasy 'eternal rest' possible\". Mason considers the Sinfonia a failure: \"less entertaining than usual, because its object is not principally to entertain but to express symphonically. It fails because it is neither picturesquely nor formally symphonic.\" The \"Sea Interludes\", adapted by Britten from the full score of \"Peter Grimes\", make a concert suite depicting the sea and the Borough in which the opera is set; the character of the music is strongly contrasted between \"Dawn\", \"Sunday Morning\", \"Moonlight\" and \"Storm\". The commentator Howard Posner observes that there is not a bar in the interludes, no matter how beautiful, that is free of foreboding. \"The Young Person's Guide\", based on a theme by Purcell, showcases the orchestra's individual sections and groups, and gained widespread popularity from the outset. Christopher Headington calls the work \"exuberant and uncomplicated music, scored with clarity and vigour [that] fits well into Britten's \"oeuvre\".\" David Matthews calls it \"a brilliant educational exercise.\"\nUnlike his English predecessors such as Elgar and Vaughan Williams, and composers from mainland Europe whom he admired, including Mahler and Shostakovich, Britten was not a classical symphonist. His youthful \"jeux d'esprit\" the \"Simple Symphony\" (1934) is in conventional symphonic structure, observing sonata form and the traditional four-movement pattern, but of his mature works his \"Spring Symphony\" (1949) is more a song cycle than a true symphony, and the concertante Cello Symphony (1963) is an attempt to balance the traditional concerto and symphony. During its four movements the Cello Symphony moves from a deeply pessimistic opening to a finale of radiant happiness rare for Britten by this point. The composer considered it \"the finest thing I've written.\"\nThe Piano Concerto (1938) was at first criticised for being too light-hearted and virtuoso. In 1945 Britten revised it, replacing a skittish third movement with a more sombre passacaglia that, in Matthews's view, gives the work more depth, and makes the apparent triumph of the finale more ambivalent. The Violin Concerto (1939), finished in the first weeks of the World War, has virtuoso elements, but they are balanced by lyrical and elegiac passages, \"undoubtedly reflecting Britten's growing concern with the escalation of world hostilities.\" Neither concerto is among Britten's most popular works, but in the 21st century the Violin Concerto, which is technically difficult, has been performed more frequently than before, both in the concert hall and on record, and has enthusiastic performers and advocates, notably violinist Janine Jansen.\nBritten's incidental music for theatre, film and radio, much of it unpublished, was the subject of an essay by William Mann, published in 1952 in the first detailed critical assessment of Britten's music to that date. Of these pieces the music for a radio play, \"The Rescue\", by Edward Sackville-West, is praised by the musicologist Lewis Foreman as \"of such stature and individual character as to be worth a regular place alongside [Britten's] other dramatic scores.\" Mann finds in this score pre-echoes of the second act of \"Billy Budd\", while Foreman observes that Britten \"appears to have made passing allusions to \"The Rescue\" in his final opera, \"Death in Venice\".\nChamber and instrumental works.\nBritten's close friendship with Rostropovich inspired the Cello Sonata (1961) and three suites for solo cello (1964\u201371). String quartets featured throughout Britten's composing career, from a student work in 1928 to his Third String Quartet (1975). The Second Quartet, from 1945, was written in homage to Purcell; Mason considered it Britten's most important instrumental work to that date. Referring to this work, Keller writes of the ease with which Britten, relatively early in his compositional career, solves \"the modern sonata problem \u2013 the achievement of symmetry and unity within an extended ternary circle based on more than one subject.\" Keller likens the innovatory skill of the Quartet to that of Walton's Viola Concerto. The third Quartet was Britten's last major work; the critic Colin Anderson said of it in 2007, \"one of Britten's greatest achievements, one with interesting allusions to Bart\u00f3k and Shostakovich, and written with an economy that opens out a depth of emotion that can be quite chilling. The \"Gemini Variations\" (1965), for flute, violin and piano duet, were based on a theme of Zolt\u00e1n Kod\u00e1ly and written as a virtuoso piece for the 13-year-old Jeney twins, musical prodigies whom Britten had met in Budapest in the previous year. For Osian Ellis, Britten wrote the Suite for Harp (1969), which Joan Chissell in \"The Times\" described as \"a little masterpiece of concentrated fancy\". \"Nocturnal after John Dowland\" (1963) for solo guitar was written for Julian Bream and has been praised by Benjamin Dwyer for its \"semantic complexity, prolonged musical argument, and philosophical depth\".\nLegacy.\nBritten's fellow composers had divided views about him. To Tippett he was \"simply the most musical person I have ever met\", with an \"incredible\" technical mastery; some contemporaries, however, were less effusive. In Tippett's view, Walton and others were convinced that Britten and Pears were leaders of a homosexual conspiracy in music, a belief Tippett dismisses as ridiculous, inspired by jealousy of Britten's postwar successes. Leonard Bernstein considered Britten \"a man at odds with the world\", and said of his music: \"[I]f you hear it, not just listen to it superficially, you become aware of something very dark.\" The tenor Robert Tear, who was closely associated with Britten in the latter part of the composer's career, made a similar point: \"There was a great, huge abyss in his soul\u00a0... He got into the valley of the shadow of death and couldn't get out.\"\nIn the decade after Britten's death, his standing as a composer in Britain was to some extent overshadowed by that of the still-living Tippett. The film-maker Tony Palmer thought that Tippett's temporary ascendancy might have been a question of the two composers' contrasting personalities: Tippett had more warmth and had made fewer enemies. In any event this was a short-lived phenomenon; Tippett adherents such as the composer Robert Saxton soon rediscovered their enthusiasm for Britten, whose audience steadily increased during the final years of the 20th century. Britten has had few imitators; Brett describes him as \"inimitable, possessed of\u00a0... a voice and sound too dangerous to imitate.\" Nevertheless, after his death Britten was lauded by the younger generation of English composers to whom, in the words of Oliver Knussen, he became \"a phenomenal father-figure\". Brett believes that he affected every subsequent British composer to some extent: \"He is a key figure in the growth of British musical culture in the second half of the 20th century, and his effect on everything from opera to the revitalization of music education is hard to overestimate.\"\nWhittall believes that one reason for Britten's enduring popularity is the \"progressive conservatism\" of his music. He generally avoided the avant-garde, and did not challenge the conventions in the way that contemporaries such as Tippett did. Perhaps, says Brett, \"the tide that swept away serialism, atonality and most forms of musical modernism and brought in neo-Romanticism, minimalism and other modes of expression involved with tonality carried with it renewed interest in composers who had been out of step with the times.\" Britten defined his mission as a composer in very simple terms: composers should aim at \"pleasing people today as seriously as we can\".\nPianist and conductor.\nBritten, though a reluctant conductor and a nervous pianist, was greatly sought after in both capacities. The piano accompanist Gerald Moore wrote in his memoirs about playing at all the main music festivals except for Aldeburgh, because \"as the presiding genius there is the greatest accompanist in the world, my services are not needed.\" Britten's recital partnership with Pears was his best-known collaboration, but he also accompanied Kathleen Ferrier, Rostropovich, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, James Bowman and John Shirley-Quirk, among others. Though usually too nervous to play piano solos, Britten often performed piano duets with Clifford Curzon or Richter, and chamber music with the Amadeus Quartet. The composers whose works, other than his own, he most often played were Mozart and Schubert; the latter, in Murray Perahia's view, was Britten's greatest idol. As a boy and young man, Britten had intensely admired Brahms, but his admiration waned to nothing, and Brahms seldom featured in his repertory.\nSingers and players admired Britten's conducting, and David Webster rated it highly enough to offer him the musical directorship of the Covent Garden Opera in 1952. Britten declined; he was not confident of his ability as a conductor and was reluctant to spend too much time performing rather than composing. As a conductor, Britten's repertory included Purcell, Bach, Haydn, Mozart and Schubert, and occasional less characteristic choices including Schumann's \"Scenes from Goethe's Faust\"; Elgar's \"The Dream of Gerontius\" and \"Introduction and Allegro\"; Holst's \"Egdon Heath\" and short pieces by Percy Grainger.\nRecordings.\nBritten, like Elgar and Walton before him, was signed up by a major British recording company, and performed a considerable proportion of his output on disc. For the Decca Record Company he made some monaural records in the 1940s and 1950s, followed, with the enthusiastic support of the Decca producer John Culshaw, by numerous stereophonic versions of his works. Culshaw wrote, \"The happiest hours I have spent in any studio were with Ben, for the basic reason that it did not seem that we were trying to make records or video tapes; we were just trying to make music.\"\nIn May 1943 Britten made his debut in the Decca studios, accompanying Sophie Wyss in five of his arrangements of French folk songs. The following January he and Pears recorded together, in Britten's arrangements of British folk songs, and the following day, in duet with Curzon he recorded his \"Introduction and Rondo alla burlesca\" and \"Mazurka elegiaca\". In May 1944 he conducted the Boyd Neel string orchestra, Dennis Brain and Pears in the first recording of the \"Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings\", which has frequently been reissued, most recently on CD.\nBritten's first operatic recording was \"The Turn of the Screw\", made in January 1955 with the original English Opera Group forces. In 1957 he conducted \"The Prince of the Pagodas\" in an early stereo recording, supervised by Culshaw. Decca's first major commercial success with Britten came the following year, with \"Peter Grimes\", which has, at 2013, never been out of the catalogues since its first release. From 1958 Britten conducted Decca recordings of many of his operas and vocal and orchestral works, including the \"Nocturne\" (1959), the \"Spring Symphony\" (1960) and the \"War Requiem\" (1963). The last sold in unexpectedly large numbers for a classical set, and thereafter Decca unstintingly made resources available to Culshaw and his successors for Britten recordings. The album eventually reached No. 68 on the US charts. Sets followed of \"Albert Herring\" (1964), the \"Sinfonia da Requiem\" (1964), \"Curlew River\" (1965), \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (1966), \"The Burning Fiery Furnace\" (1967), \"Billy Budd\" (1967) and many of the other major works. In 2013, to mark the anniversary of Britten's birth, Decca released a set of 65 CDs and one DVD, \"Benjamin Britten \u2013 Complete Works\". Most of the recordings were from Decca's back catalogue, but in the interests of comprehensiveness a substantial number of tracks were licensed from 20 other companies including EMI, Virgin Classics, Naxos, Warner and NMC.\nAs a pianist and conductor in other composers' music, Britten made many recordings for Decca. Among his studio collaborations with Pears are sets of Schubert's \"Winterreise\" and \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\", Schumann's \"Dichterliebe\", and songs by Haydn, Mozart, Bridge, Ireland, Holst, Tippett and Richard Rodney Bennett. Other soloists whom Britten accompanied on record were Ferrier, Rostropovich and Vishnevskaya. As a conductor he recorded a wide range of composers, from Purcell to Grainger. Among his best-known Decca recordings are Purcell's \"The Fairy-Queen\", Bach's \"Brandenburg Concertos\", Cantata 151, Cantata 102 and \"St John Passion\", Elgar's \"The Dream of Gerontius\" and Mozart's last two symphonies.\nHonours, awards and commemorations.\nState honours awarded to Britten included appointment as a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (United Kingdom) in 1953; Commander of the Royal Order of the Polar Star (Sweden) in 1962; the Order of Merit (United Kingdom) in 1965; and a life peerage (United Kingdom) in July 1976, he took the title \"Baron Britten, of Aldeburgh in the County of Suffolk\". He received honorary degrees and fellowships from 19 conservatories and universities in Europe and America. His awards included the Hanseatic Goethe Prize (1961); the Aspen Award, Colorado (1964); the Royal Philharmonic Society's Gold Medal (1964); the Wihuri Sibelius Prize (1965); the Mahler Medal (Bruckner and Mahler Society of America, 1967); the L\u00e9onie Sonning Music Prize (Denmark, 1968); the Ernst von Siemens Music Prize (1974); and the Ravel Prize (1974). Prizes for individual works included UNESCO's International Rostrum of Composers 1961 for \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\"; and Grammy Awards in 1963 and 1977 for the \"War Requiem\".\nThe Red House, Aldeburgh, where Britten and Pears lived and worked together from 1957 until Britten's death in 1976, is now the home of the Britten-Pears Foundation, established to promote their musical legacy. In Britten's centenary year his studio at the Red House was restored to the way it was in the 1950s and opened to the public. The converted hayloft was designed and built by H T Cadbury Brown in 1958 and was described by Britten as a \"magnificent work\". In June 2013 Dame Janet Baker officially opened the Britten-Pears archive in a new building in the grounds of the Red House. The Benjamin Britten Music Academy in Lowestoft, founded in the composer's honour, was completed in 1979; it is an 11\u201318 co-educational day school, with ties to the Britten-Pears Foundation.\nA memorial stone to Britten was unveiled in the north choir aisle of Westminster Abbey in 1978. There are memorial plaques to him at three of his London homes: 173 Cromwell Road, 45a St John's Wood High Street, and 8 Halliford Street in Islington. In April 2013 Britten was honoured by the Royal Mail in the UK, as one of ten people selected as subjects for the \"Great Britons\" commemorative postage stamp issue.\nOther creative artists have celebrated Britten. In 1970 Walton composed \"Improvisations on an Impromptu of Benjamin Britten\", based on a theme from Britten's Piano Concerto. Works commemorating Britten include \"Cantus in Memoriam Benjamin Britten\" an orchestral piece written in 1977 by Arvo P\u00e4rt, and Sally Beamish's \"Variations on a Theme of Benjamin Britten\", based on the second Sea Interlude from \"Peter Grimes\"; she composed the work to mark Britten's centenary. Alan Bennett depicts Britten in a 2009 play \"The Habit of Art\", set while Britten is composing \"Death in Venice\" and centred on a fictional meeting between Britten and Auden. Britten was played in the premiere production by Alex Jennings.\nTony Palmer made three documentary films about Britten: \"Benjamin Britten &amp; his Festival\" (1967); \"A Time There Was\" (1979); and \"Nocturne\" (2013). In 2019, Britten's \"War Requiem\" was selected by the U.S. Library of Congress for preservation in the National Recording Registry for being \"culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant\".\nIn April 2022 a project to commemorate Britten in Lowestoft was launched by the broadcaster and children's author Zeb Soanes. A maquette of the intended full-sized statue of Britten as a boy was unveiled by the sculptor Ian Rank-Broadley. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], \u00a389,000 of \u00a3110,000 target had been raised. The statue, \"Britten as a Boy\", will be unveilled in October 2025.\nCentenary.\nIn September 2012, to mark the composer's forthcoming centenary, the Britten-Pears Foundation launched \"Britten 100\", a collaboration of leading organisations in the performing arts, publishing, broadcasting, film, academia and heritage. Among the events were the release of a feature film \"Benjamin Britten \u2013 Peace and Conflict\", and a centenary exhibition at the British Library. The Royal Mint issued a 50-pence piece, to mark the centenary \u2013 the first time a composer has featured on a British coin.\nCentenary performances of the \"War Requiem\" were given at eighteen locations in Britain. Opera productions included \"Owen Wingrave\" at Aldeburgh, \"Billy Budd\" at Glyndebourne, \"Death in Venice\" by English National Opera, \"Gloriana\" by The Royal Opera, and \"Peter Grimes\", \"Death in Venice\" and \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" by Opera North. \"Peter Grimes\" was performed on the beach at Aldeburgh, opening the 2013 Aldeburgh Festival in June 2013, with Steuart Bedford conducting and singers from the Chorus of Opera North and the Chorus of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, described by \"The Guardian\" as \"a remarkable, and surely unrepeatable achievement.\"\nInternationally, the anniversary was marked by performances of the \"War Requiem\", \"Peter Grimes\" and other works in four continents. In the US the centennial events were described as \"coast to coast\", with a Britten festival at Carnegie Hall, and performances at the New York Philharmonic, the Metropolitan Opera and Los Angeles Opera.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64454", "revid": "49829305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64454", "title": "Thomas Keneally", "text": "Australian novelist (born 1935)\nThomas Michael Keneally (born 7 October 1935) is an Australian novelist, playwright, essayist, and actor. He is best known for his historical fiction novel \"Schindler's Ark\", the story of Oskar Schindler's rescue of Jews during the Holocaust, which won the Booker Prize in 1982. The book would later be adapted into Steven Spielberg's 1993 film \"Schindler's List\", which won seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture.\nEarly life.\nBoth Keneally's parents (Edmund Thomas Keneally and Elsie Margaret Coyle) were born to Irish fathers in the timber and dairy town of Kempsey, New South Wales, and although he was born in Sydney, he too spent his early years in Kempsey. His father, Edmund Thomas Keneally, flew for the Royal Australian Air Force in World War II, then returned to work in a small business in Sydney. By 1942, the family had moved to 7 Loftus Crescent, Homebush, a suburb in the Inner West of Sydney and Keneally was enrolled at Christian Brothers St Patrick's College, Strathfield. Shortly after, his brother John was born. Keneally studied Honours English for his Leaving Certificate in 1952, under Brother James Athanasius McGlade, and won a Commonwealth scholarship.\nKeneally then entered St Patrick's Seminary, Manly, to train as a Catholic priest. Although he was ordained as a deacon while at the seminary, after six years there he left in a state of depression and without ordination in the priesthood. He worked as a Sydney schoolteacher before his success as a novelist and was a lecturer at the University of New England (1968\u201370).\nKeneally was known as \"Mick\" until 1964 but began using the name Thomas when he started publishing, after advice from his publisher to use his real first name.\nCareer.\nKeneally's first story was published in \"The Bulletin\" magazine in 1962 under the pseudonym Bernard Coyle. By February 2014, he had written over 50 books, including 30 novels. He is particularly famed for his \"Schindler's Ark\" (1982) (later republished as \"Schindler's List\"), the first novel by an Australian to win the Booker Prize and is the basis of the film \"Schindler's List\". He had already been shortlisted for the Booker three times prior to that: 1972 for \"The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith\", 1975 for \"Gossip from the Forest\", and 1979 for \"Confederates\".\nMany of his novels are reworkings of historical material, although modern in their psychology and style.\nPremi\u00e8red at London's Royal Court Theatre, the play \"Our Country's Good\" by Timberlake Wertenbaker is based on Keneally's book \"The Playmaker\". In it, convicts deported from Britain to the Empire's penal colony of Australia perform George Farquhar's Restoration comedy \"The Recruiting Officer\" set in the English town of Shrewsbury. Artistic Director Max Stafford-Clark wrote about his experiences of staging the plays in repertoire in his book \"Letters to George\". \nKeneally has also acted in a handful of films. He had a small role in Fred Schepisi's \"The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith\" (1978) (based on his own novel) and played Father Marshall in the award-winning film \"The Devil's Playground\" (1976), also by Schepisi.\nKeneally was a member of the Literature Board of the Australia Council from 1985 to 1988 and President of the National Book Council from 1985 to 1989.\nKeneally was a visiting professor at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) where he taught the graduate fiction workshop for one quarter in 1985. From 1991 to 1995, he was a visiting professor in the writing program at UCI.\nIn 2006, Peter Pierce, Professor of Australian Literature, James Cook University, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Keneally can sometimes seem the nearest that we have to a Balzac of our literature; he is in his own rich and idiosyncratic ways the author of an Australian 'human comedy'.\nThe Tom Keneally Centre opened in August 2011 at the Sydney Mechanics' School of Arts, housing Keneally's books and memorabilia. The site is used for book launches, readings and writing classes.\nKeneally is an ambassador of the Asylum Seekers Centre, a not-for-profit that provides personal and practical support to people seeking asylum in Australia.\nPersonal life.\nKeneally married Judy Martin, then a nurse, in 1965, and they had two daughters, Margaret and Jane.\nKeneally was the founding chairman (1991\u201393) of the Australian Republic Movement and published a book on the subject \"Our Republic\" in 1993. Several of his Republican essays appear on the website of the movement. He is also a keen supporter of rugby league football, in particular the Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles club of the NRL. In 2004, he gave the sixth annual Tom Brock Lecture. He made an appearance in the 2007 rugby league drama film \"The Final Winter\".\nIn March 2009, the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd, gave an autographed copy of Keneally's biography \"Lincoln\" to President Barack Obama as a state gift.\nKeneally's nephew Ben is married to the former senior Australian Labor Party Senator, Kristina Keneally. She is also a former Premier of New South Wales and Sky News Australia newscaster.\n\"Schindler's Ark\".\nKeneally wrote the Booker Prize-winning novel in 1982, inspired by the efforts of Poldek Pfefferberg, a Holocaust survivor. In 1980, Keneally met Pfefferberg in the latter's shop, and learning that Keneally was a novelist, Pfefferberg showed him his extensive files on Oskar Schindler, including the original list itself. Keneally was interested, and Pfefferberg became an advisor for the book, accompanying Keneally to Poland where they visited Krak\u00f3w and the sites associated with the Schindler story. Keneally dedicated \"Schindler's Ark\" to Pfefferberg: \"who by zeal and persistence caused this book to be written.\" He said in an interview in 2007 that what attracted him to Oskar Schindler was that \"it was the fact that you couldn't say where opportunism ended and altruism began. And I like the subversive fact that the spirit breatheth where it will. That is, that good will emerge from the most unlikely places\". The book was later made into the movie \"Schindler's List\" (1993) directed by Steven Spielberg, earning his first Best Director Oscar. Keneally's meeting with Pfefferberg and their research tours are detailed in the book \"Searching for Schindler: A Memoir\".&lt;ref name=\"publishersweekly/9780385526173\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"kirkusreviews/searching-for-schindler\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn 1996,&lt;ref name=\"jornada/a09n2esp\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; the State Library of New South Wales, in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, purchased some of the Pfefferberg documents that inspired Keneally, from a private collector, and they are now housed there.\nHonours.\nKeneally was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1973.\nIn 1983, he was made an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO). He is an Australian Living Treasure. Keneally has stated that he was once offered the title of Commander of the Order of the British Empire, and that he refused it. \"I said I pitied any empire of which I was a commander\".\nIn 2010 the Australian postal service issued a stamp in his honour.\nKeneally has been awarded honorary doctorates including one from the National University of Ireland.\nBibliography.\nScreenplays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64458", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64458", "title": "Christina Stead", "text": "Australian writer\nChristina Stead (17 July 1902\u00a0\u2013 31 March 1983) was an Australian novelist and short-story writer acclaimed for her satirical wit and penetrating psychological characterisations. Christina Stead was a committed Marxist, although she was never a member of the Communist Party. She spent much of her life outside Australia, although she returned before her death.\nBiography.\nChristina Stead's father was the marine biologist and pioneer conservationist David George Stead; her mother was his first wife Ellen Butters, who died in 1904. She was born in the Sydney suburb of Rockdale. They lived in Rockdale at Lydham Hall, now operating as a museum.\nStead later moved with her family to the suburb of Watsons Bay in 1917. She was the only child of her father's first marriage, and had five half-siblings from his second marriage. He also married a third time, to Yolette Thistle Harris, the Australian botanist, educator, author, and conservationist. According to some, this house was a hellhole for her because of her \"domineering\" father. Stead attended Sydney Girls' High School, to 1919, and went on to Sydney Teachers' College, leaving in 1922 and becoming a teacher, which did not suit her. In 1925 she determined to become a writer, and worked as a secretary.\nIn 1928 Stead left Australia, finding work in the London grain company Strauss &amp; Co. managed by Edward Strauss; the American manager William James Blech, later Blake, became an important figure in her life, and they married in 1952. She worked in a Parisian bank from 1930 to 1935. She travelled to Spain with Blake, leaving at the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, and to the USA. After Blake's death from stomach cancer in 1968, she returned to Australia.\nWorks.\nStead wrote 12 novels and published a large number of articles on different subjects in her lifetime. A volume of short stories was published after her death. She taught \"Workshop in the Novel\" at New York University in 1943 and 1944, and also worked as a Hollywood screenwriter in the 1940s, contributing to the \"Madame Curie\" biopic and the John Ford and John Wayne war movie, \"They Were Expendable\". Her first novel, \"Seven Poor Men of Sydney\" (1934), dealt with the lives of radicals and dockworkers, but she was not a practitioner of social realism. Stead's best-known novel, titled \"The Man Who Loved Children,\" is largely based on her own childhood, and was first published in 1940. It was not until the poet Randall Jarrell wrote the introduction for a new American edition in 1965 and her New York publisher convinced her to change the setting from Sydney to Washington, that the novel began to receive a larger audience. In 2005, the magazine \"Time\" included this work in their \"100 Best Novels from 1923\u20132005\", and in 2010 American author Jonathan Franzen hailed the novel as a \"masterpiece\" in the \"New York Times\". Stead's \"\", often regarded as an equally fine novel, was officially banned in Australia for several years because it was considered amoral and salacious.\nStead set one of her two British novels, \"Cotters' England,\" partly in Gateshead (called Bridgehead in the novel). She was in Newcastle upon Tyne in the summer of 1949, accompanied by her friend Anne Dooley (n\u00e9e Kelly), a local woman, who was the model for Nellie Cotter, the extraordinary heroine of the book. Anne was no doubt responsible for Stead's reasonable attempt at conveying the local accent. Her letters indicate that she had taken on Tyneside speech and become deeply concerned with the people around her. The American title of the book is \"Dark Places of the Heart\".\nDeath and legacy.\nStead died in hospital at Balmain, Sydney, in 1983, aged 80.\nHer former home in Pacific Street, Watsons Bay, was the first site chosen for the Woollahra Council Plaque Scheme, which was launched in 2014 with the aim of honouring significant people who had lived in the area covered by Woollahra Council. A plaque was installed on the footpath outside that home. Another Plaque was installed as part of Sydney Writers Walk as part of a series of 60 circular metal plaques embedded in the footpath between Overseas Passenger Terminal on West Circular Quay and the Sydney Opera House forecourt on East Circular Quay.\nThe Christina Stead Prize for Fiction has been awarded since 1979 as part of the New South Wales Premier's Literary Awards.\nQuotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'How suburban!' cried Elvira. I was in Hampstead the other day: in front of one of the richest houses was a crazy pavement: they paid about \u00a335 for it, doubtless. The man who would have done it best was in an asylum : he would have done it for nothing, happy to do it, and the more there is of it, the more dull and plain it looks, just an expanse of conventional craziness, looking as stupid as a neanderthal skull. That's the suburbs all over. That's what we are, you see: suburban, however wild we run. You know quite well, in yourself, don't you, two people like us can't go wild? Still, it's nice to pretend to, for a while.'\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They went on playing quietly and waiting for Sam (who had gone back to the bedroom to seek Tommy) and for their turns to see Mother. Bonnie meanwhile, with a rueful expression, was leaning out the front window, and presently she could not help interrupting them, 'Why is my name Mrs Cabbage, why not Mrs Garlic or Mrs Horse Manure?' They did not hear her, so intent were they, visiting each other and inquiring after the health of their respective new babies. They did not hear her complaining to Louie that, instead of being Mrs Grand Piano or Mrs Stair Carpet, they called her Garbage, 'Greta Garbage, Toni Toilet,' said she laughing sadly, 'because they always see me out there with the garbage can and the wet mop; association in children's na\u00efve innocent minds you see!'\n'Oh no, it isn't that, protested Louie, Garbage is just a funny word: they associate you with singing and dancing and all those costumes you have in your trunk!'\n'Do you think so?' Bonnie was tempted to believe. 'Mrs Strip Tease?'\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And Nelly turned to her and laughed a horrible laugh. She startled herself. She paused to light another cigarette, choking, blowing a cloud to hide her face; and when she could, continued in a gentle voice:\n\"You will do me a favour? Save me from disillusionment. Let the man coming back with you on Wednesday be a sensible man, who admits it all, defeat and hopelessness and the bitterness; but sanity.\"\n\"But I don't know why I should,\" said Camilla, seriously.\n\"Won't you do what I ask, love? I know him, poor lad. I know what's best. I don't want him roaming the countryside, footloose and aimless and perhaps in some pub, on some roadside pick up some other harpy, instead of swallowing the bitter pill and facing the lonely road.\"\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "64460", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64460", "title": "San Andreas Fault", "text": "Geologic feature in California\nThe San Andreas Fault is a continental right-lateral strike-slip transform fault that extends roughly through the U.S. state of California. It forms part of the tectonic boundary between the Pacific plate and the North American plate. Traditionally, for scientific purposes, the fault has been classified into three main segments (northern, central, and southern), each with different characteristics and a different degree of earthquake risk. The average slip rate along the entire fault ranges from per year.\nIn the north, the fault terminates offshore near Eureka, California, at the Mendocino triple junction, where three tectonic plates meet. The Cascadia subduction zone intersects the San Andreas fault at the Mendocino triple junction. It has been hypothesized that a major earthquake along the Cascadia subduction zone could trigger a rupture along the San Andreas Fault.\nIn the south, the fault terminates near Bombay Beach, California, in the Salton Sea. Here, the plate motion transitions from right-lateral to divergent, characteristic of the East Pacific Rise further south. In this region, the Salton Trough, the plate boundary has been rifting and pulling apart, creating a new mid-ocean ridge that is an extension of the Gulf of California. Sediment deposited by the Colorado River is preventing the trough from being filled in with sea water from the gulf.\nThe fault was first identified in 1895 by Professor Andrew Lawson of UC Berkeley. In the wake of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, Lawson was tasked with deciphering the origin of the earthquake. He began by surveying and mapping offsets (such as fences or roads that had been sliced in half) along surface ruptures. When the location of these offsets were plotted on a map, he noted that they made a near perfect line on top of the fault he previously discovered. He concluded that the fault must have been the origin of the earthquake.\nThis line ran through San Andreas Lake, a sag pond. The lake was created from an extensional step over in the fault, which created a natural depression where water could settle. A common misconception is that Lawson named the fault after this lake. However, according to some of his reports from 1895 and 1908, he actually named it after the surrounding San Andreas Valley. Following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, Lawson also concluded that the fault extended all the way into Southern California. In 1953, geologist Thomas Dibblee concluded that hundreds of miles of lateral movement could occur along the fault.\nA National Science Foundation funded project called the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD) near Parkfield, California, involved drilling through the fault from 2004 to 2007. The aim was to collect core samples and make direct geophysical and geochemical observations to better understand fault behavior at depth.\nFault zones.\nSouthern.\nThe southern segment (also known as the Mojave segment) begins near Bombay Beach, California. Box Canyon, near the Salton Sea, contains upturned strata associated with that section of the fault. The fault then runs along the southern base of the San Bernardino Mountains, crosses through Cajon Pass and continues northwest along the northern base of the San Gabriel Mountains. These mountains are a result of movement along the San Andreas Fault and are commonly called the Transverse Range. In Palmdale, a portion of the fault is easily examined at a roadcut for the Antelope Valley Freeway. The fault continues northwest alongside the Elizabeth Lake Road to the town of Elizabeth Lake. As it passes the towns of Gorman, Tejon Pass and Frazier Park, the fault begins to bend northward, forming the \"Big Bend\". This restraining bend is thought to be where the fault locks up in Southern California, with an earthquake-recurrence interval of roughly 140\u2013160 years. Northwest of Frazier Park, the fault runs through the Carrizo Plain, a long, treeless plain where much of the fault is plainly visible. The Elkhorn Scarp defines the fault trace along much of its length within the plain.\nThe southern segment, which stretches from Parkfield in Monterey County all the way to the Salton Sea, is capable of an 8.1-magnitude earthquake. At its closest, this fault passes about to the northeast of Los Angeles. Such a large earthquake on this southern segment would kill thousands of people in Los Angeles, San Bernardino, Riverside, and surrounding areas, and cause hundreds of billions of dollars in damage.\nCentral.\nThe central segment of the San Andreas Fault runs in a northwestern direction from Parkfield to Hollister. While the southern section of the fault and the parts through Parkfield experience earthquakes, the rest of the central section of the fault exhibits a phenomenon called aseismic creep, where the fault slips continuously without causing earthquakes. It was formed by a transform boundary.\nNorthern.\nThe northern segment of the fault runs from Hollister, through the Santa Cruz Mountains, epicenter of the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, then up the San Francisco Peninsula, where it was first identified by Professor Lawson in 1895, then offshore at Daly City near Mussel Rock. This is the approximate location of the epicenter of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. The fault returns onshore at Bolinas Lagoon just north of Stinson Beach in Marin County. It returns underwater through the linear trough of Tomales Bay that separates the Point Reyes Peninsula from the mainland, runs just east of Bodega Head through Bodega Bay and back underwater, and returns onshore at Fort Ross. (In this region around the San Francisco Bay Area several significant \"sister faults\" run more-or-less parallel, and each of these can create significantly destructive earthquakes.) From Fort Ross, the northern segment continues overland, forming in part a linear valley through which the Gualala River flows. It goes back offshore at Point Arena. After that, it runs underwater along the coast until it nears Cape Mendocino, where it begins to bend to the west, terminating at the Mendocino triple junction.\nPlate boundaries.\nThe Pacific plate, to the west of the fault, is moving in a northwest direction while the North American plate to the east is moving toward the southwest, but relatively southeast under the influence of plate tectonics. The rate of slippage averages about a year across California.\nThe southwestward motion of the North American plate towards the Pacific is creating compressional forces along the eastern side of the fault. The effect is expressed as the Coast Ranges. The northwest movement of the Pacific plate is also creating significant compressional forces that are especially pronounced where the North American plate has forced the San Andreas to jog westward. This has led to the formation of the Transverse Ranges in Southern California, and to a lesser but still significant extent, the Santa Cruz Mountains (the location of the Loma Prieta earthquake in 1989).\nStudies of the relative motions of the Pacific and North American plates have shown that only about 75 percent of the motion can be accounted for in the movements of the San Andreas and its various branch faults. The rest of the motion has been found in an area east of the Sierra Nevada mountains called the Walker Lane or Eastern California Shear Zone. The reason for this is not clear. Several hypotheses have been offered and research is ongoing. One hypothesis \u2013 which gained interest following the Landers earthquake in 1992 \u2013 suggests the plate boundary may be shifting eastward away from the San Andreas towards Walker Lane.\nAssuming the plate boundary does not change as hypothesized, projected motion indicates that the landmass west of the San Andreas Fault, including Los Angeles, will eventually slide past San Francisco, then continue northwestward toward the Aleutian Trench, over a period of perhaps twenty million years.\nFormation.\nThe San Andreas began to form in the mid-Cenozoic about 30 Mya (million years ago). At this time, a spreading center between the Pacific plate and the Farallon plate (which is now mostly subducted, with remnants including the Juan de Fuca plate, Rivera plate, Cocos plate, and the Nazca plate) was beginning to reach the subduction zone off the western coast of North America. As the relative motion between the Pacific and North American plates was different from the relative motion between the Farallon and North American plates, the spreading ridge began to be \"subducted\", creating a new relative motion and a new style of deformation along the plate boundaries. These geological features are what are chiefly seen along San Andreas Fault. It also includes a possible driver for the deformation of the Basin and Range, separation of the Baja California peninsula, and rotation of the Transverse Range.\nThe main southern section of the San Andreas Fault proper has only existed for about 5 million years. The first known incarnation of the southern part of the fault was Clemens Well-Fenner-San Francisquito fault zone around 22\u201313 Ma. This system added the San Gabriel Fault as a primary focus of movement between 10\u20135 Ma. Currently, it is believed that the modern San Andreas will eventually transfer its motion toward a fault within the eastern California shear zone. This complicated evolution, especially along the southern segment, is mostly caused by either the \"Big Bend\" and/or a difference in the motion vector between the plates and the trend of the fault and its surrounding branches.\nStudy.\nEarly years.\nThe fault was first identified in Northern California by UC Berkeley geology professor Andrew Lawson in 1895 and named by him after the surrounding San Andreas valley. Eleven years later, Lawson discovered that the San Andreas Fault stretched southward into southern California after reviewing the effects of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. Large-scale (hundreds of miles) lateral movement along the fault was first proposed in a 1953 paper by geologists Mason Hill and Thomas Dibblee. This idea, which was considered radical at the time, has since been vindicated by modern plate tectonics.\nCurrent research.\nSeismologists discovered that the San Andreas Fault near Parkfield in central California consistently produces a magnitude 6.0 earthquake approximately once every 22 years. Following recorded seismic events in 1857, 1881, 1901, 1922, 1934, and 1966, scientists predicted that another earthquake should occur in Parkfield in 1993. It eventually occurred in 2004. Due to the frequency of predictable activity, Parkfield has become one of the most important areas in the world for large earthquake research.\nIn 2004, work began just north of Parkfield on the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD). The goal of SAFOD is to drill a hole nearly into the Earth's crust and into the San Andreas Fault. An array of sensors will be installed to record earthquakes that happen near this area.\nA 2023 study found a link between the water level in Lake Cahuilla (now the Salton Sea) and seismic activity along the southern San Andreas Fault. The study suggests that major earthquakes along this section of the fault coincided with high water levels in the lake. The hydrological load caused by high water levels can more than double the stress on the southern San Andreas Fault, which is likely sufficient for triggering earthquakes. This may explain the abnormally long period of time since the last major earthquake in the region since the lake has dried up.\nThe San Andreas Fault System has been the subject of a flood of studies. In particular, scientific research performed during the last 23 years has given rise to about 3,400 publications.\nThe next \"Big One\".\nA study published in 2006 in the journal \"Nature\" by Yuri Fialko, an associate professor at the Cecil H. and Ida M. Green Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, found that the San Andreas fault has reached a sufficient stress level for an earthquake of magnitude greater than 7.0 on the moment magnitude scale to occur.\nThis study also found that the risk of a large earthquake may be increasing more rapidly than scientists had previously believed. Moreover, the risk is currently concentrated on the southern section of the fault, i.e. the region around Los Angeles, because strong earthquakes have occurred relatively recently on the central (1857) and northern (1906) segments of the fault, while the southern section has not seen any similar rupture for at least 300 years. According to this study, a major earthquake on that southern section of the San Andreas fault would result in major damage to the Palm Springs\u2013Indio metropolitan area and other cities in San Bernardino, Riverside and Imperial counties in California, and Mexicali Municipality in Baja California. It would be strongly felt (and potentially cause significant damage) throughout much of Southern California, including densely populated areas of Los Angeles County, Ventura County, Orange County, San Diego County, Ensenada Municipality and Tijuana Municipality, Baja California, San Luis Rio Colorado in Sonora and Yuma, Arizona. Older buildings would be especially prone to damage or collapse, as would buildings built on unconsolidated gravel or in coastal areas where water tables are high (and thus subject to soil liquefaction). Of the study, Fialko stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNevertheless, in the years since that publication there has not been a substantial quake in the Los Angeles area, and two major reports issued by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) have made variable predictions as to the risk of future seismic events. The ability to predict major earthquakes with sufficient precision to warrant increased precautions has remained elusive.\nThe U.S. Geological Survey's most recent forecast, known as UCERF3 (Uniform California Earthquake Rupture Forecast 3), released in November 2013, estimated that an earthquake of magnitude 6.7 M or greater (i.e. equal to or greater than the 1994 Northridge earthquake) occurs about once every 6.7 years statewide. The same report also estimated there is a 7% probability that an earthquake of magnitude 8.0 or greater will occur in the next 30 years somewhere along the San Andreas Fault. A different USGS study in 2008 tried to assess the physical, social and economic consequences of a major earthquake in southern California. That study predicted that a magnitude 7.8 earthquake along the southern San Andreas Fault could cause about 1,800 deaths and $213\u00a0billion in damage.\nThe HayWired Scenario.\nThis scenario hypothesizes the potential effects of a 7.0 magnitude earthquake on the San Andreas Fault in the San Francisco Bay Area. It aims to estimate the impacts on urban infrastructures along with the rebuilding efforts to both the landscape and economy. This study combines not only the geological impacts/effects of the event, but also the societal impacts such as property damage, economic rebuilding, and aims at estimating damages if cities increased risk-reduction. It was developed for preparedness geared towards Bay Area residents and as a warning with an attempt to encourage local policy makers to create infrastructure and protections that would further risk reduction and resilience-building. This study is a combined effort from experts in the physical sciences, social sciences, and engineering both in the public and private sectors- ranging from urban planners to economists/business professionals. Not only does this study aim to estimate the impacts of the event, but aims to estimate the years of rebuilding and funding needed to recover communities from a potential disaster such as the HayWired Scenario.\nThe first volume of the HayWired Scenario study was released in 2017, with consistent continuations and contributions by engineers. This continuation was published in the second volume, Engineering Implications, in 2018.\nEstimating damages.\nAs of the 2021 Fact sheet update, there are several estimates on damages ranging from the approximate people affected at home, work, effects of lifeline infrastructures such as telecommunications, and more. This group of scientists have worked together to create estimates of how hazards such as liquefaction, landslides, and fire ignition will impact access to utilities, transportation, and general emergency services.\nThis study goes into detail about the specific populations to be hardest impacted by a potential earthquake of a 7.0 magnitude, specifically in the San Francisco Bay Area. This includes intensified hardships for those with low-income, racially and culturally-diverse populations, and people with literacy hardships that would significantly \"increase their risk of displacement and add to recovery challenges\" (Wein et al.).\nScientific and economic involvement.\nIn addition to societal and landscape impacts, this study looks at potential business interruptions. This portion estimates impacts to the California economy within the first 6 months post-recovery from the event through estimates of \"utility outages, property damages, and supply chain disruptions resulting in an estimated $44 billion of gross state product (GSP) losses, or translated at 4% of the California economy\"(Wein et al.). This study also projects the recovery of jobs lost in highly impacted areas, such as Alameda County, could take up to 10 years to fully recover job losses and possible economic recession. Trajectories for economic recovery are improved by reconstruction but also delayed with impacts to the construction industry.\nCascadia connection.\nA 2008 paper, studying past earthquakes along the Pacific coastal zone, found a correlation in time between seismic events on the northern San Andreas Fault and the southern part of the Cascadia subduction zone (which stretches from Vancouver Island to Northern California). Scientists believe quakes on the Cascadia subduction zone may have triggered most of the major quakes on the northern San Andreas within the past 3,000 years. The evidence also shows the rupture direction going from north to south in each of these time-correlated events. However the 1906 San Francisco earthquake seems to have been the exception to this correlation because the plate movement was mostly from south to north and it was not preceded by a major quake in the Cascadia zone.\nEarthquakes.\nThe San Andreas Fault has had some notable earthquakes in historic times:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64464", "revid": "32589484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64464", "title": "Joris-Karl Huysmans", "text": "French novelist and art critic (1848\u20131907)\nCharles-Marie-Georges Huysmans (, ; 5 February 1848 \u2013 12 May 1907) was a French novelist and art critic who published his works as Joris-Karl Huysmans (, abbreviated as J.\u00a0K. or J.-K.). He is most famous for the novel (1884, published in English as \"Against the Grain\" and as \"Against Nature\"). He supported himself by way of a 30-year career in the French civil service.\nHuysmans's work is considered remarkable for its idiosyncratic use of the French language, large vocabulary, descriptions, satirical wit and far-ranging erudition. First considered part of Naturalism, he became associated with the Decadent movement with his publication of \"\u00c0 rebours\". His work expressed his deep pessimism, which had led him to the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer. In later years, his novels reflected his study of Catholicism, religious conversion, and becoming an oblate. He discussed the iconography of Christian architecture at length in \"La cath\u00e9drale\" (1898), set at Chartres and with its cathedral as the focus of the book.\nHuysmans' novel \"L\u00e0-bas\" (1891) concerns the novelist Durtal, who researches Satanism and the 15th-century child-murderer Gilles de Rais. It was followed by the Durtal trilogy, comprising \"En route\" (1895), \"La cath\u00e9drale\" (1898), and \"L'Oblat\" (1903), in which Durtal takes a spiritual journey and eventually converts to Catholicism; in \"L'Oblat\", he becomes an oblate in a monastery, as Huysmans himself was in the Benedictine Abbey at Ligug\u00e9, near Poitiers, in 1901. \"La cath\u00e9drale\" was his most commercially successful work. Its profits enabled Huysmans to retire from his civil service job and live on his royalties.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nHuysmans was born in Paris, France, in 1848. \"His young mother, \u00c9lisabeth-Malvina Badin Huysmans, had been a schoolteacher before she married, and his father, Victor-Godfried-Jan Huysmans [Dutch: Huijsmans], was a Dutch immigrant who worked in Paris as a commercial artist.\" Huysmans's father (1815-1856) died when Huysmans was eight years old. Constant Cornelis Huijsmans, the Dutch painter and art teacher (including of Vincent van Gogh), was his uncle. Huysmans mother quickly remarried, and Huysmans resented his stepfather, Jules Og, a Protestant who, with Huysmans's mother, purchased a bookbindery on the ground floor of the building where they lived.\nDuring his childhood, Huysmans turned away from the Roman Catholic Church. He was unhappy at school but completed his coursework and earned a .\nCivil service career.\nFor 32 years, Huysmans worked as a civil servant for the French Ministry of the Interior, a job he found tedious. The young Huysmans was called up to fight in the Franco-Prussian War, but was invalided out with dysentery. He used this experience in an early story, \"Sac au dos\" (Backpack) (later included in his collection, \"Les Soir\u00e9es de M\u00e9dan\").\nAfter his retirement from the Ministry in 1898, made possible by the commercial success of his novel, \"La cath\u00e9drale\", Huysmans planned to leave Paris and move to Ligug\u00e9. He intended to set up a community of Catholic artists, including Charles-Marie Dulac (1862-1898). He had praised the young painter in \"La cath\u00e9drale\". Dulac died a few months before Huysmans completed his arrangements for the move to Ligug\u00e9, and he decided to stay in Paris.\nIn 1905 Huysmans was diagnosed with cancer of the mouth. He died in 1907 and was interred in the cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse, Paris.\nWriting career.\nHe used the name Joris-Karl Huysmans when he published his writing, as a way of honoring his father's ancestry. His first major publication was a collection of prose poems, \"Le drageoir aux \u00e9pices\" (1874), which were strongly influenced by Baudelaire. They attracted little attention but revealed flashes of the author's distinctive style.\nHuysmans followed it with the novel, \"Marthe, Histoire d'une fille\" (1876). The story of a young prostitute, it was closer to Naturalism and brought him to the attention of \u00c9mile Zola. His next works were similar: sombre, realistic and filled with detailed evocations of Paris, a city Huysmans knew intimately. \"Les S\u0153urs Vatard\" (1879), dedicated to Zola, deals with the lives of women in a bookbindery. \"En m\u00e9nage\" (1881) is an account of a writer's failed marriage. The climax of his early work is the novella \"\u00c0 vau-l'eau\" (1882) (translated as \"With the Flow\", \"Downstream\", and \"Drifting\"), the story of a downtrodden clerk, Monsieur Folantin, and his quest for a decent meal.\nHuysmans's 1884 novel (\"Against the Grain\" or \"Against Nature\" or \"Wrong Way\") became his most famous, or notorious. It featured the character of an aesthete, des Esseintes, and decisively broke from Naturalism. It was seen as an example of \"decadent\" literature. The description of des Esseintes's \"alluring liaison\" with a \"cherry-lipped youth\" was believed to have influenced other writers of the decadent movement, including Oscar Wilde.\nHuysmans began to drift away from the Naturalists and found new friends among the Symbolist and Catholic writers whose work he had praised in \"\u00c0 rebours.\" They included Jules Barbey d'Aurevilly, Villiers de L'Isle Adam, and L\u00e9on Bloy. St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9 was so pleased with the publicity his verse had received from the novel that he dedicated one of his most famous poems, \"Prose pour des Esseintes\", to its hero. Barbey d'Aurevilly told Huysmans that after writing \"\u00c0 rebours,\" he would have to choose between \"the muzzle of a pistol and the foot of the Cross.\" Huysmans, who had received a secular education and abandoned his Catholic religion in childhood, returned to the Catholic Church eight years later.\nHuysmans's next book after \"\u00c1 rebours\" was the novella \"Un dilemme\", which tells \"the story of a poor working-class woman who gives birth out of wedlock. When her bourgeois lover, the father of the baby, dies, his heartless family members refuse to help, leaving the mother and her child destitute.\" Huysmans's next novel, \"En rade\", an unromantic account of a summer spent in the country, did not sell as well as its predecessor. \"The novel's originality lies in its abrupt juxtaposition of real life and dreams.\"\nHis \"L\u00e0-bas\" (1891) attracted considerable attention for its portrayal of Satanism in France in the late 1880s. He introduced the character Durtal, a thinly disguised self-portrait, who is writing a biography of the notorious 15th-century child-murderer and torturer Gilles de Rais. The later Durtal novels, \"En route\" (1895), \"La cath\u00e9drale\" (1898) and \"L'oblat\" (1903), explore Durtal/Huysmans's conversion to Roman Catholicism. \"En route\" depicts Durtal's spiritual struggle during his stay at a Trappist monastery. In \"La cath\u00e9drale\" (1898), the protagonist is at Chartres, intensely studying the cathedral and its symbolism. The commercial success of this book enabled Huysmans to retire from the civil service and live on his royalties. In \"L'Oblat\", Durtal becomes a Benedictine oblate. He finally learns to accept the world's suffering.\nHuysmans was a founding member of the Acad\u00e9mie Goncourt.\nHuysmans's work was known for his idiosyncratic use of the French language, extensive vocabulary, detailed and sensuous descriptions, and biting, satirical wit. It also displays an encyclopaedic erudition, ranging from the catalogue of decadent Latin authors in \"\u00c0 rebours\" to the discussion of the iconography of Christian architecture in \"La cath\u00e9drale\". Huysmans expresses a disgust with modern life and a deep pessimism. This had led him first to the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer. Later he returned to the Catholic Church, as he described in his Durtal novels.\nArt criticism.\nIn addition to his novels, Huysmans was known for his art criticism, collected in his books \"L'Art Moderne\" (1883) and \"Certains\" (1889), both recently translated into English by Brendan King. In 1905, Huysmans published his third and last book on art, \"\"Trois primitifs\" ('Three Primitive Painters'), his studies of Matthias Gr\u00fcnewald, the 'Master of Fl\u00e9malle' (now generally considered to be Robert Campin), and the unknown artist of a painting in the Frankfurt Museum.\" \nHuysmans \"was a perceptive and talented art critic who was among the first to recognize the genius of Degas and the Impressionists.\" Huysmans became so associated with the Impressionists \"that one critic, the journalist F\u00e9lix F\u00e9n\u00e9on, referred to Huysmans as 'the inventor of impressionism.'\" Robert Baldick wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Huysmans' great achievement as an art-critic was, of course, his staunch championship of the Impressionists. . . . [P]osterity has ratified nearly all his critical judgements on the Impressionists themselves. He did more than any other man to establish their reputations. But after Huysmans sent a copy of \"L'Art Moderne\" to Camille Pissarro, Pissarro wrote to him, \"How is it that you don't say one word about C\u00e9zanne, whom not one of us has failed to acknowledge as one of the most singular temperaments of our time, and one who has had a very great influence on modern art? I was extremely surprised by your articles on Monet. How can such astonishing vision, such phenomenal execution and such rare and extensive decorative feeling not have struck you back in 1870 ...?\"\nStyle and influence.\n\"It takes me two years to 'document' myself for a novel\u00a0\u2013 two years of hard work. That is the trouble with the naturalistic novel\u00a0\u2013 it requires so much documentary care. I never make, like Zola, a plan for a book. I know how it will begin and how it will end\u00a0\u2013 that's all. When I finally get to writing it, it goes along rather fast\u00a0\u2013 \"assez vite.\"\"\n\"Barbaric in its profusion, violent in its emphasis, wearying in its splendor, it is\u00a0\u2014 especially in regard to things seen\u00a0\u2013 extraordinarily expressive, with all the shades of a painter's palette. Elaborately and deliberately perverse, it is in its very perversity that Huysmans's work \u2014 so fascinating, so repellent, so instinctively artificial \u2014 comes to represent, as the work of no other writer can be said to do, the main tendencies, the chief results, of the Decadent movement in literature.\" (Arthur Symons, \"The Decadent Movement in Literature\")\n\"Continually dragging Mother Image by the hair or the feet down the worm-eaten staircase of terrified Syntax.\" (L\u00e9on Bloy, quoted in Robert Baldick, \"The Life of J.-K. Huysmans\"). Critical reviews by L\u00e9on Bloy of \"\u00c0 rebours\", \"En rade\", and \"L\u00e0-bas\" published contemporaneously, in various journals or reviews, as Huysmans's novels came out over the years, in 1884, 1887, 1891, can be found, collected and published six years after Huysmans's death, in book form, in \"On Huysmans' Tomb.\"\n\"It is difficult to find a writer whose vocabulary is so extensive, so constantly surprising, so sharp and yet so exquisitely gamey in flavour, so constantly lucky in its chance finds and in its very inventiveness.\" (Julien Gracq)\n\"In short, he kicks the oedipal to the curb\" (M. Quaine, \"Heirs and Graces\", 1932, Jowett / Arcana)\nHuysmans's novel, \"Against the Grain\", has more discussions of sound, smell, and taste than perhaps any other work of literature. For example, one chapter consists entirely of smell hallucinations so vivid that they exhaust the book's central character, Des Esseintes, a bizarre, depraved aristocrat. A student of the perfumer's art, Esseintes has developed several devices for titillating his jaded senses. Besides special instruments for re-creating any conceivable odour, he has constructed a special \"mouth organ\" designed to stimulate his palate rather than his ears. The organ's regular pipes have been replaced by rows of little barrels, each containing a different liqueur. In Esseintes's mind, the taste of each liqueur corresponded to the sound of a particular instrument:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dry cura\u00e7ao, for example, was like the clarinet, with its penetrating and velvety note: k\u00fcmmel matched the oboe with its sonorous nasal resonance; menthe and anisette were like the flute, at once honeyed and peppery, whimpering but muted; whereas kirsch, to complete the orchestra, is a wild trumpet blast; gin and whisky assault the palate with the strident blare of their cornets and trombones; marc-brandy raises the roof with its deafening hubbub of tubas.\"\nBy careful and persistent experimentation, Esseintes learned to \"execute on his tongue a succession of voiceless melodies; noiseless funeral marches, solemn and stately; could hear in his mouth solos of cr\u00e8me de menthe, duets of vespertro and rum.\"\nThe protagonist of \"Submission\" (2015), a novel by Michel Houellebecq, is a literary scholar specializing in Huysmans and his work; Huysmans's relation to Catholicism serves as a foil for the book's treatment of Islam in France.\nPersonal life.\nHuysmans never married or had children. He had a long-term, on-and-off relationship with Anna Meunier, a seamstress.\nHuysmans was made a \"Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur\" in 1892 for his work with the civil service. In 1905, his admirers persuaded the French government to promote him to \"Officier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur\" for his literary achievements.\nWorks.\nCurrent editions:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64468", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64468", "title": "Parkville, California", "text": ""}
{"id": "64474", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64474", "title": "Concatenation", "text": "Joining of strings in a programming language\nIn formal language theory and computer programming, string concatenation is the operation of joining character strings end-to-end. For example, the concatenation of \"snow\" and \"ball\" is \"snowball\". In certain formalizations of concatenation theory, also called string theory, string concatenation is a primitive notion.\nSyntax.\nIn many programming languages, string concatenation is a binary infix operator, and in some it is written without an operator. This is implemented in different ways:\nIn many scientific publications or standards the concatenation operator notation used is codice_6.\nImplementation.\nIn programming, string concatenation generally occurs at run time, as string values are typically not known until run time. However, in the case of string literals, the values are known at compile time, and thus string concatenation can be done at compile time either via string literal concatenation or via constant folding, a potential run-time optimization.\nConcatenation of sets of strings.\nIn formal language theory and pattern matching (including regular expressions), the concatenation operation on strings is generalised to an operation on sets of strings as follows:\nFor two sets of strings \"S\"1 and \"S\"2, the \"concatenation\" \"S\"1\"S\"2 consists of all strings of the form \"vw\" where \"v\" is a string from \"S\"1 and \"w\" is a string from \"S\"2, or formally \"S\"1\"S\"2 = {\"vw\" : \"v\" \u2208 \"S\"1, \"w\" \u2208 \"S\"2}. Many authors also use concatenation of a string set and a single string, and vice versa, which are defined similarly by \"S\"1\"w\" = {\"vw\" : \"v\" \u2208 \"S\"1} and \"vS\"2 = {\"vw\" : \"w\" \u2208 \"S\"2}. In these definitions, the string \"vw\" is the ordinary concatenation of strings \"v\" and \"w\" as defined in the introductory section.\nFor example, if \"F\" = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h}, and \"R\" = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}, then \"FR\" denotes the set of all chess board coordinates in algebraic notation, while e\"R\" denotes the set of all coordinates of the kings' file.\nIn this context, sets of strings are often referred to as formal languages. The concatenation operator is usually expressed as simple juxtaposition (as with multiplication).\nAlgebraic properties.\nThe strings over an alphabet, with the concatenation operation, form an associative algebraic structure called a free monoid. The identity element is the null string.\nSets of strings with concatenation and alternation form a semiring, with concatenation distributing over alternation. The identity for alternation (the 0 element) is the empty set and identity for concatenation (the 1 element) is the set containing just the null string.\nApplications.\nAudio and telephony.\nIn programming for telephony, concatenation is used to provide dynamic audio feedback to a user. For example, in a \"time of day\" speaking clock, concatenation is used to give the correct time by playing the appropriate recordings concatenated together. For example: \"at the tone, the time will be\", \"eight\", \"thirty\", \"five\", \"and\", \"twenty\", \"five\", \"seconds\".\nThe recordings themselves exist separately, but playing them one after the other provides a grammatically correct sentence to the listener.\nThis technique is also used in number change announcements, voice mail systems, or most telephony applications that provide dynamic feedback to the caller (e.g. moviefone, tellme, and others).\nProgramming for any kind of computerised public address system can also employ concatenation for dynamic public announcements (for example, flights in an airport). The system would archive recorded speech of numbers, routes or airlines, destinations, times, etc. and play them back in a specific sequence to produce a grammatically correct sentence that is announced throughout the facility.\nDatabase theory.\nOne of the principles of relational database design is that the fields of data tables should reflect a single characteristic of the table's subject, which means that they should not contain concatenated strings. When concatenation is desired in a report, it should be provided at the time of running the report. For example, to display the physical address of a certain customer, the data might include building number, street name, building sub-unit number, city name, state/province name, postal code, and country name, e.g., \"123 Fake St Apt 4, Boulder, CO 80302, USA\", which combines seven fields. However, the customers data table should not use one field to store that concatenated string; rather, the concatenation of the seven fields should happen upon running the report. The reason for such principles is that without them, the entry and updating of large volumes of data becomes error-prone and labor-intensive. Separately entering the city, state, ZIP code, and nation allows data-entry validation (such as detecting an invalid state abbreviation). Then those separate items can be used for sorting or indexing the records, such as all with \"Boulder\" as the city name.\nRecreational mathematics.\nIn recreational mathematics, many problems concern the properties of numbers under concatenation of their numerals in some base. Examples include home primes (primes obtained by repeatedly factoring the increasing concatenation of prime factors of a given number), Smarandache\u2013Wellin numbers (the concatenations of the first prime numbers), and the Champernowne and Copeland\u2013Erd\u0151s constants (the real numbers formed by the decimal representations of the positive integers and the prime numbers, respectively).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64477", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64477", "title": "Ulrich of Augsburg", "text": "Bishop of Augsburg from 923 to 973\nUlrich of Augsburg (890 \u2013 4 July 973), sometimes spelled \"Uodalric\" or \"Odalrici\", was Prince-Bishop of Augsburg in the Holy Roman Empire. He was the first saint to be canonised not by a local authority but by a Pope.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nMuch of the information concerning Ulrich is derived from the \"Life of St Ulrich\" written by Gerhard of Augsburg sometime between 982 and 993. Ulrich was born in 890 at Kyburg in present-day canton of Z\u00fcrich in Switzerland. He was the son of Hupald, Count of Dillingen (d. 909) and Dietpirch of Swabia (also known as Theoberga). His maternal grandfather was Adalbert II the Illustrious, Count of Thurgau. His family was connected with the dukes of Alamannia and the Ottonian dynasty. An unnamed sister served as a nun in Buchau.\nAs was customary, his parents presented him as an oblate to the church while he was still a child. A sickly child, at the age of seven he was sent to the monastery of St. Gall, where he proved to be an excellent scholar. While there, he became friends with Wiborada \u2013 a recluse living near the monastery \u2013 who then foretold that her young friend was destined to become a bishop. He resolved to enter the priesthood but was in doubt whether to enter the Benedictine Abbey of St. Gall or to become a secular priest. Sometime before April 910, he was sent for further training to a kinsman, Adalbero von Augsburg, Bishop of Augsburg, who made him chamberlain. Upon Adalbero's death (28 April 910) Ulrich returned home. The Duke of Swabia presented him at the court of Henry the Fowler, where Ulrich became one of the household retainers.\nBishop of Augsburg.\nThrough the influence of his maternal uncle, Burchard II, Duke of Swabia, and other relatives, Ulrich was appointed bishop of Augsburg by Henry the Fowler and was consecrated on 28 December 923. He sought to improve the low moral and social condition of the clergy. The See of Augsburg reached the period of its greatest splendor under Ulrich; he raised the standard of training and discipline among the clergy by the reformation of existing schools and the establishment of new ones, and by canonical visitations and synods; he provided for the poor, and rebuilt decayed churches and monasteries. He built churches in honor of St. Afra and St. John and founded the monastery of St. Stephen for Benedictine nuns. For purposes of obtaining relics he went on two journeys to Rome, in 910, and in 952 or 953. German emperor Otto the Great granted Ulrich the right to mint coins.\nDuring the struggle between Otto and his son Liudolf, Duke of Swabia, Ulrich remained loyal to Otto, holding for him the castle of Schwabm\u00fcnchen, which was within the territorial jurisdiction of the Bishop of Augsburg. When in the summer of 954 father and son were ready to attack each other at Illertissen in Swabia, at the last moment Ulrich and Bishop Hartbert of Chur were able to mediate between Otto and Liudolf. Ulrich succeeded in persuading Liudolf and Conrad, Duke of Lorraine, Otto's son-in-law, to ask the king's pardon on 17 December 954.\nAgainst the Magyars.\nMagyars repeatedly attacked in the territories of Bavaria and Swabia. Ulrich served as general in the defense of Augsburg. He built a stone wall fortification around the city. During these attacks many churches and buildings were destroyed, which Ulrich later rebuilt. Ulrich attended several imperial meetings and synods, such as at Ingelheim in 948, Augsburg in 952, Rome in 972 and again at Ingelheim in 972.\nSoon after, the Magyars entered Germany, plundering and burning as they went, and in 955 advanced as far as Augsburg, which they besieged. It was due to Ulrich's ability and courage that Augsburg was able to hold out against the besiegers until Emperor Otto arrived. According to his biographer Gerhard, Bishop Ulrich took the lead in the defense of the city. On the first day of the attack, Bishop Ulrich rode out to encourage the towns' soldiers in their defense of the city's gate. While the battle raged, the bishop, dressed in his ecclesiastical robes, inspired his men, with the 23rd Psalm (\"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death\"). While this defense was going on, the King was raising an army to march south. The fiercest fighting probably took place on 8 August 955 at the eastern gate, which the Hungarians tried to storm in large numbers. The Bishop's men defended the gate bravely and killed the leader of the attack, forcing the Hungarians to withdraw. That evening Ulrich returned to the city to direct throughout the night the repair and strengthening of its walls. The next day the Hungarians launched a wider general attack. During the battle, Berchtold of Risinesburg arrived, which heralded the approach of the German army. At the end of the day, the siege was suspended. Ulrich's ability to hold out during the siege bought precious time for the emperor.\nUlrich subsequently contributed much to the decisive victory at the Battle of Lechfeld (10 August 955), where the invaders were finally defeated. However, Ulrich Schmid maintains that \"The later assertion that Ulrich himself took part in the battle is incorrect\".\nHis character.\nUlrich demanded a high moral standard of himself and others. A hundred years after his death, a letter apparently written by him, which opposed celibacy, and supported the marriage of priests, suddenly appeared. The forger of the letter counted on the opinion of the common people, who would regard celibacy as unjust if Ulrich, known for the rigidity of his morals, upheld the marriage of priests. Ulrich was also steadfastly loyal, as a prince of the empire, to the emperor. He was one of the most important props of the Ottonian policy, which rested mainly upon the ecclesiastical princes. He constantly attended the judicial courts held by the king and in the Imperial Diets.\nLater life.\nUlrich took part in the Diet held on 20 September 972, when he defended himself against the charge of nepotism in regard to his nephew Adalbero, whom he had appointed his coadjutor on account of his own illness and desire to retire to a Benedictine abbey. Ulrich did, in fact, resign as prince-bishop and retired to Ottobeuren Abbey, where he became abbot.\nAs morning dawned on 4 July 973, Ulrich had ashes strewn on the ground in the shape of a cross; the cross sprinkled with holy water, and he was placed upon it. His nephew Richwin came with a message and greeting from Emperor Otto II as the sun rose, and immediately upon this, while the clergy sang the Litany, Ulrich died. He was buried at the St. Afra church he had rebuilt in Augsburg; the burial was performed by Bishop Wolfgang of Regensburg. Later the St. Ulrich and Afra church was built in the same spot. He was succeeded by Bishop Henry I.\nThe maniple of Ulrich was woven in red and white silk using tablet weaving and Ulrich's relic was later analyzed by Peter Collingwood in his \"The Techniques of Tablet Weaving\"; Collingwood regarded it as a \"masterpiece\".\nVeneration.\nWhen Ulrich was too old and weak to say Mass, angels are said to have come to him to assist him. Places that were named after him are said to be host to healing abilities. Attesting to his early cultus, there is a miniature from the tenth century in a manuscript now in the library of Einsiedeln. Other miniatures are at the Bavarian State Library, in manuscripts dating from the year 1454.\nMany miracles are said to have been wrought at his grave; only 20 years after his death, Ulrich was canonised by Pope John XV on 4 July 993. He was the first saint to be canonised by a Pope, rather than by a local authority. Walter of Pontoise was the last saint in Western Europe to have been canonised by an authority other than the Pope; he was canonised by Hugh of Amiens, the Archbishop of Rouen in 1153.\nPatronage.\nAlong with Afra and Simpert, Ulrich is a patron saint of Augsburg. Legend held that pregnant women who drank from his chalice had easy deliveries, and thus developed his patronage of pregnant women and easy births. The touch of his pastoral cross was used to heal people bitten by rabid dogs.\nThe veneration of Ulrich was carried to the Western Hemisphere by the German Catholic peasant pioneers whom Francis Xavier Pierz persuade to settle in central Minnesota following the Treaty of Traverse des Sioux in 1851. Along with Magnus of F\u00fcssen, Ulrich's intercession was credited with the defeat of the 1856\u20131857 Rocky Mountain locust plague, and both saints continued afterwards to be venerated in and around Stearns County, Minnesota, with pilgrimages and religious processions. (See also Assumption Chapel).\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "64480", "revid": "34327716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64480", "title": "Hilt", "text": "Handle of a sword or similar weapon\nThe hilt (rarely called a haft or shaft) is the handle of a knife, dagger, sword, or bayonet, consisting of a guard, grip, and pommel. The guard may contain a crossguard or quillons. A tassel or sword knot may be attached to the guard or pommel.\nPommel.\nThe pommel (Anglo-Norman \"little apple\") is an enlarged fitting at the top of the handle. They were originally developed to prevent the sword from slipping from the hand. From around the 11th century in Europe, they became heavy enough to be a counterweight to the blade. This gave the sword a point of balance not too far from the hilt, allowing a more fluid fighting style. Depending on sword design and swordsmanship style, the pommel may also be used to strike the opponent (e.g. using the Mordhau technique).\nPommels have appeared in a wide variety of shapes, including oblate spheroids, crescents, disks, wheels, and animal or bird heads. They are often engraved or inlayed with various designs and occasionally gilt and mounted with jewels.\nEwart Oakeshott introduced a system of classification of medieval pommel forms in his \"The Sword in the Age of Chivalry\" (1964) to stand alongside his blade typology. Oakeshott pommel types are enumerated with capital letters A\u2013Z, with subtypes indicated by numerals.\nGrip.\nThe grip is the handle of the sword. It is usually made of wood or metal and often covered with shagreen (untanned tough leather or shark skin). Shark skin proved to be the most durable in temperate climates but deteriorates in hot climates. Consequently, rubber became popular in the latter half of the 19th century. Many sword types alternatively opt for ray skin, referred to in katana construction as . Whatever material covers the grip, it is usually both glued on and wrapped with wire in a helix.\nGuard.\nThe guard is just above the grip. It is a common misconception that the \"cross-guard\" protects the wielder's entire hand from the opposing sword; only with the abandonment of the shield and then the armoured gauntlet did a full hand guard become necessary. The crossguard still protected the user from a blade that was deliberately slid down the length of the blade to cut off or injure the hand.\nEarly swords do not have true guards but simply a form of \"stop\" to prevent the hand slipping up the blade when thrusting, as they were invariably used in conjunction with a shield.\nFrom the 11th century, European sword guards took the form of a straight crossbar (later called \"quillon\") perpendicular to the blade.\nBeginning in the 16th century in Europe, guards became more and more elaborate, with additional loops and curved bars or branches to protect the hand. A single curved piece alongside the fingers (roughly parallel with the handle/blade and perpendicular to any crossguards) was referred to as a knuckle-bow.\nUltimately, the bars could be supplemented or replaced with metal plates that could be ornamentally pierced. The term \"basket hilt\" eventually came into vogue to describe such designs, and there are a variety of basket-hilted swords.\nSimultaneously, emphasis upon the thrust attack with rapiers and smallswords revealed a vulnerability to thrusting. By the 17th century, guards were developed that incorporated a solid shield that surrounded the blade out to a diameter of up to two inches or more. Older forms of this guard retained the quillons or a single quillon, but later forms eliminated the quillons, altogether being referred to as a cup-hilt. This latter form is the basis of the guards of modern foils and \u00e9p\u00e9es.\nRicasso.\nThe ricasso is a blunt section of blade just above the guard. On developed hilts it is protected by an extension of the guard. On two-handed swords, the ricasso provided a third hand position above the guard, permitting the user's hands to be placed further apart for better leverage while sacrificing the protection of the crossguard.\nSword knot.\nThe sword knot or sword strap, sometimes called a tassel, is a lanyard\u2014usually of leather but sometimes of woven gold or silver bullion, or more often metallic lace\u2014looped around the hand to prevent the sword being lost if it is dropped. Although they have a practical function, sword knots often had a decorative design. For example, the British Army generally adopted a white leather strap with a large acorn knot made out of gold wire for infantry officers at the end of the 19th century. Such acorn forms of tassels were called 'boxed', which was the way of securing the fringe of the tassel along its bottom line such that the strands could not separate and become entangled or lost. Many sword knots were also made of silk with a fine, ornamental alloy gold or silver metal wire woven into it in a specified pattern.\nThe art and history of tassels are known by its French name, , or as it was called in German. The military output of the artisans called (ornamental braid, lace, cord, or trimmings makers) is evident in catalogs of various military uniform and regalia makers of centuries past. The broader art form of , with its divisions of decor, clergy and nobility, upholstery, coaches and livery, and military, is covered in a few books on that subject, none of which are in English.\nIndian swords had the tassel attached through an eyelet at the end of the pommel.\nChinese swords, both \"jian\" and \"dao\", often have lanyards or tassels attached. As with Western sword knots, these serve both decorative and practical functions, and the manipulation of the tassel is a part of some \"jian\" performances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64485", "revid": "47039290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64485", "title": "New Spain", "text": "Kingdom of the Spanish Empire (1521\u20131821)\nNew Spain, officially the Viceroyalty of New Spain ( ; Nahuatl: \"Yankwik Kaxtillan Birreiyotl\"), originally the Kingdom of New Spain, was an integral territorial entity of the Spanish Empire, established by Habsburg Spain. It was one of several domains established during the Spanish conquest of the Americas, and had its capital in Mexico City. Its jurisdiction comprised a large area of the southern and western portions of North America, mainly what became Mexico and the Southwestern United States, but also California, Florida and Louisiana; Central America (as part of Mexico); the Caribbean like Hispaniola and Martinique, and northern parts of South America, even Colombia; several Pacific archipelagos, including the Philippines and Guam. Additional Asian colonies included \"Spanish Formosa\", on the island of Taiwan.\nAfter the 1521 Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, conqueror Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s named the territory New Spain, and established the new capital, Mexico City, on the site of Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec Empire. Central Mexico became the base of expeditions of exploration and conquest, expanding the territory claimed by the Spanish Empire. With the political and economic importance of the conquest, the crown asserted direct control over the densely populated realm. The crown established New Spain as a viceroyalty in 1535, appointing as viceroy Antonio de Mendoza, an aristocrat loyal to the monarch rather than the conqueror Cort\u00e9s. New Spain was the first of the viceroyalties that Spain created, the second being Peru in 1542, following the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire. Both New Spain and Peru had dense indigenous populations at conquest as a source of labor and material wealth in the form of vast silver deposits, discovered and exploited beginning in the mid-1600s.\nNew Spain developed strong regional divisions based on local climate, topography, distance from the capital and the Gulf Coast port of Veracruz, size and complexity of indigenous populations, and the presence or absence of mineral resources. Central and southern Mexico had dense indigenous populations, each with complex social, political, and economic organization, but no large-scale deposits of silver to draw Spanish settlers. By contrast, the northern area of Mexico was arid and mountainous, a region of nomadic and semi-nomadic indigenous populations, which do not easily support human settlement. In the 1540s, the discovery of silver in Zacatecas attracted Spanish mining entrepreneurs and workers, to exploit the mines, as well as crown officials to ensure the crown received its share of revenue. Silver mining became integral not only to the development of New Spain, but also to the enrichment of the Spanish crown, which marked a transformation in the global economy. New Spain's port of Acapulco became the New World terminus of the transpacific trade with the Philippines via the Manila galleon. New Spain became a vital link between Spain's New World empire and its East Indies empire.\nFrom the beginning of the 19th century, the kingdom fell into crisis, aggravated by the 1808 Napoleonic invasion of Iberia and the forced abdication of the Bourbon monarch, Charles IV. This resulted in a political crisis in New Spain and much of the Spanish Empire in 1808, which ended with the government of Viceroy Jos\u00e9 de Iturrigaray. Conspiracies of American-born Spaniards sought to take power, leading to the Mexican War of Independence, 1810\u20131821. At its conclusion in 1821, the viceroyalty was dissolved and the Mexican Empire was established. Former royalist military officer turned insurgent for independence Agust\u00edn de Iturbide would be crowned as emperor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Crown and the Viceroyalty of New Spain.\nThe Kingdom of New Spain was established on 18 August 1521, following the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, as a New World kingdom ruled by the Crown of Castile. The initial funds for exploration came from Queen Isabella. Although New Spain was a dependency of Castile, it (Mexico) was a kingdom and not a colony, subject to the presiding monarch on the Iberian Peninsula.\nThe monarch had sweeping power in the overseas territories, with not just sovereignty over the realm but also property rights. All power over the state came from the monarch. The crown had sweeping powers over the Catholic Church in its overseas territories, and via the Patronato real, a grant by the papacy to the crown to oversee the Church in all aspects save doctrine. The Viceroyalty of New Spain was created by royal decree on 12 October 1535, in the Kingdom of New Spain with a viceroy appointed as the king's \"deputy\" or substitute. This was the first New World viceroyalty and one of only two that the Spanish Empire administered in the continent until the 18th-century Bourbon Reforms.\nTerritorial extent of the overseas Spanish Empire.\nAt its greatest extent, the Spanish crown claimed on the mainland of the Americas much of North America south of Canada, that is: all of modern Mexico and Central America except Panama; most of the United States west of the Mississippi River, plus the Floridas. The Spanish West Indies, settled prior to the conquest of the Aztec Empire, also came under New Spain's jurisdiction: Cuba, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, Trinidad, Martinica and the Bay Islands. New Spain also claimed jurisdiction over the overseas territories of the Spanish East Indies in Asia and Oceania: the Philippine Islands, the Mariana Islands, the Caroline Islands, parts of Taiwan, and parts of the Moluccas. Although asserting sovereignty over this vast realm, it did not effectively control large swaths. Other European powers, including England, France, and the Netherlands established colonies in territories Spain claimed.\nMuch of what was called in the United States the \"Spanish borderlands\" is territory that attracted few Spanish settlers, with less dense indigenous populations and apparently lacking in mineral wealth. Huge deposits of gold in California were discovered immediately after it was incorporated into the U.S. following the Mexican\u2013American War (1846\u20131848). The northern region of New Spain in the colonial era was considered marginal to Spanish interests compared to the most densely populated and lucrative areas of central Mexico. To shore up its claims in North America in the eighteenth century as other powers encroached on its claims, the crown sent expeditions to the Pacific Northwest, which explored and claimed the coast of British Columbia and Alaska.\nReligious missions and fortified presidios were established to shore up Spanish control on the ground. On the mainland, the administrative units included Las Californias, that is, the Baja California peninsula, still part of Mexico and divided into Baja California and Baja California Sur; Alta California (modern Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah, western Colorado, and southern Wyoming); (from the 1760s) Louisiana (including the western Mississippi River basin and the Missouri River basin); Nueva Extremadura (the modern states of Coahuila and Texas); and Santa Fe de Nuevo M\u00e9xico (parts of Texas and New Mexico).\nGovernment.\nViceroyalty.\nThe Viceroyalty was administered by a viceroy residing in Mexico City and appointed by the Spanish monarch, who had administrative oversight of all of these regions, although most matters were handled by the local governmental bodies, which ruled the various regions of the viceroyalty. First among these were the \"audiencias\", which were primarily superior tribunals, but which also had administrative and legislative functions. Each of these was responsible to the Viceroy of New Spain in administrative matters (though not in judicial ones), but they also answered directly to the Council of the Indies.\nCaptaincies general and governorates.\nThe Captaincy Generals were the second-level administrative divisions and these were relatively autonomous from the viceroyalty. The viceroy was captain-general of those provinces that remained directly under his command. Santo Domingo (1535); Philippines (1565); Puerto Rico (1580); Cuba (1608); Guatemala (1609); Yucat\u00e1n (1617); Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas (1776) (analogous to a dependent captaincy general). Two governorates, third-level administrative divisions, were established, the Governorate of Spanish Florida (Spanish: \"La Florida\") and the Governorate of Spanish Louisiana (Spanish: \"Luisiana\").\nCartography.\nSpanish officials in New Spain used cartography as a tool to assert political authority. Maps served to define territorial claims and impose order on Indigenous communities, as mapmaking became closely tied to imperial governance. This shaped how land was conceptualized and controlled across the colony.\nHigh courts.\nThe high courts, or \"audiencias\", were established in major areas of Spanish settlement. In New Spain the high court was established in 1527, prior to the establishment of the viceroyalty. The First Audiencia was headed by Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s's rival Nu\u00f1o de Guzm\u00e1n, who used the court to deprive Cort\u00e9s of power and property. The crown dissolved the First Audiencia and established the Second Audiencia.\nThe audiencias of New Spain were Santo Domingo (1511, effective 1526, predated the Viceroyalty); Mexico (1527, predated the Viceroyalty); Panama (1st one, 1538\u20131543); Guatemala (1543); Guadalajara (1548); Manila (1583). \nAudiencia districts further incorporated the older, smaller divisions known as governorates (\"gobernaciones\", roughly equivalent to provinces), which had been originally established by conquistador-governors known as \"adelantados\". Provinces which were under military threat were grouped into captaincies general, such as the Captaincies General of the Philippines (established 1574) and Guatemala (established in 1609), which were joint military and political commands with a certain level of autonomy. The viceroy was captain-general of those provinces that remained directly under his command.\nLocal-level administration.\nAt the local level there were over two hundred districts, in both indigenous and Spanish areas, which were headed by either a \"corregidor\" (also known as an \"alcalde mayor\") or a \"cabildo\" (town council), both of which had judicial and administrative powers. In the late 18th century the Bourbon dynasty began phasing out the \"corregidores\" and introduced intendants, whose broad fiscal powers cut into the authority of the viceroys, governors and \"cabildos\". Despite their late creation, these intendancies so affected the formation of regional identity that they became the basis for the nations of Central America and the first Mexican states after independence.\nIntendancies of the 1780s.\nAs part of the sweeping eighteenth-century administrative and economic changes known as the Bourbon Reforms, the Spanish crown created new administrative units called intendancies, to strengthen central control over the viceroyalty. Some measures aimed to break the power of local elites in order to improve the economy of the empire. Reforms included the improvement of public participation in communal affairs, distribution of undeveloped lands to the indigenous and Spaniards, ending the corrupt practices of local crown officials, encouraging trade and mining, and establishing a system of territorial division similar to the model created by the government of France, already adopted in Spain.\nThe establishment of intendancies was strongly resisted by the viceroyalties and general captaincies similar to the opposition in the Iberian Peninsula when the reform was adopted. Royal audiencias and ecclesiastical hierarchs opposed the reform for its intervention in economic issues, for its centralist politics, and the forced ceding of many of their functions to the intendants. In New Spain, these units generally corresponded to the regions or provinces that had developed earlier in the center, South, and North.\nMany of the intendancy boundaries became Mexican state boundaries after independence. The intendancies were created between 1764 and 1789, with the greatest number in the mainland in 1786: 1764 La Habana (later subdivided); 1766 Nueva Orleans; 1784 Puerto Rico; 1786 M\u00e9xico, Veracruz, Puebla de Los \u00c1ngeles, Guadalajara, Guanajuato, Zacatecas, San Luis Potos\u00ed, Sonora, Durango, Oaxaca, Guatemala, San Salvador, Comayagua, Le\u00f3n, Santiago de Cuba, Puerto Pr\u00edncipe; 1789 M\u00e9rida.\nSocial Hierarchy.\nThe social structure of New Spain was organized around a hierarchy that placed peninsulares and criollos at the top, while Indigenous peoples, Africans, and mixed-race groups faced restrictions on mobility and rights. Over time, there were demographic shifts and economic changes that challenged the hierarchy and created new opportunities for social advancement among certain groups. \nLegal Culture.\nBy the eighteenth century, New Spain had developed a distinctive legal culture that blended Spanish judicial traditions with local practices and regional autonomy. Courts relied on a wide array of legal documents and negotiations that allowed Indigenous communities and settlers to assert rights and/or resolve conflicts.\nHistory of New Spain.\nThe history of mainland New Spain spans three hundred years from the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519\u20131521) to the collapse of Spanish rule in the Mexican War of Independence (1810\u20131821).\nBeginning with the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire in 1521 by Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, Spanish rule was established, leading to the creation of governing bodies like the Council of the Indies and the Audiencia to maintain control. It involved the forced conversion of indigenous populations to Catholicism and the blending of Spanish and indigenous cultures in both the mainland and the Caribbean islands of Martinica and Hispaniola.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries Spanish settlers founded major cities such as Mexico City, Puebla, and Guadalajara, turning New Spain into a vital part of the Spanish Empire. The discovery of silver in Zacatecas and Guanajuato significantly boosted the economy, leading to conflicts like the Chichimeca War. Missions and presidios were established in northern frontiers, aiding in the expansion and control of territories that later became part of the southwestern United States. The 18th century saw the implementation of the Bourbon Reforms, which aimed to modernize and strengthen the colonial administration and economy. These reforms included the creation of intendancies, increased military presence, and the centralization of royal authority. The expulsion of the Jesuits and the establishment of economic societies, were part of the efforts to enhance efficiency and revenue for the crown.\nThe decline of New Spain culminated in the early 19th century with the Mexican War of Independence. Following Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla's 1810 Cry of Dolores, the insurgent army waged an eleven-year war against Spanish rule. The eventual alliance between royalist military officer Agust\u00edn de Iturbide and insurgent leader Vicente Guerrero led to the successful campaign for independence. In 1821, New Spain officially became the independent nation of Mexico, ending three centuries of Spanish colonial rule. During a period that was especially important to the social development of America, the movement to expel the Moors and Jews from Spain stirred up a previously dormant aspect of Spanish social structure.\nEconomy.\nDuring the era of the conquest, to pay off the debts incurred by the conquistadors and their companies, the new Spanish governors awarded their men grants of native tribute and labor, known as encomiendas. The encomienda became one of the defining institutions of early Spanish rule in New Spain, thus formalizing the right of colonists to Indigenous labor. While some supporters justified the system as a means of \"protecting\" native communities, in practice, it often intensified the already present exploitation. New Spain, these grants were modeled after the tribute and corvee labor that the Mexica rulers had demanded from native communities. This system came to signify the oppression and exploitation of natives, although its originators may not have set out with such intent. In short order, the upper echelons of patrons and priests in the society lived off the work of the lower classes. Due to some horrifying instances of abuse against the indigenous peoples, Bishop Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas suggested bringing black slaves to replace them. Fray Bartolom\u00e9 later repented when he saw the even worse treatment given to the black slaves.\nIn colonial Mexico, Encomenderos de Negros were specialized middlemen during the first half of the seventeenth century. While encomendero (alternatively, \"encomenderos de indios)\" generally refers to men granted the labor and tribute of a particular indigenous group in the immediate post-conquest era, encomenderos de negros were Portuguese slave dealers who were permitted to operate in Mexico for the slave trade.\nIn Peru, the other discovery that perpetuated the system of forced labor, the mit'a, was the enormously rich single silver mine discovered at Potos\u00ed, but in New Spain, labor recruitment differed significantly. Except silver mines worked in the Aztec period at Taxco, southwest of Tenochtitlan, Mexico's mining region was outside the area of dense indigenous settlement. Labor for the mines in the north of Mexico had a workforce of black slave labor and indigenous wage labor, not draft labor. Indigenous who were drawn to the mining areas were from different regions of the center of Mexico, with a few from the north itself. With such diversity, they did not have a common ethnic identity or language and rapidly assimilated into Hispanic culture. Although mining was difficult and dangerous, the wages were good, which is what drew the indigenous labor.\nThe Viceroyalty of New Spain was the principal source of income for Spain in the eighteenth century, with the revival of mining under the Bourbon Reforms. Important mining centers like Zacatecas, Guanajuato, San Luis Potos\u00ed and Hidalgo had been established in the sixteenth century and suffered a decline for a variety of reasons in the seventeenth century, but silver mining in Mexico out-performed all other Spanish overseas territories in revenues for the royal coffers.\nThe fast red dye cochineal was an important export in areas such as central Mexico and Oaxaca in terms of revenues to the crown and stimulation of the internal market of New Spain. \"Cacao\" and indigo were also important exports for the New Spain, but was used through rather the vice royalties rather than contact with European countries due to piracy, and smuggling. The indigo industry in particular also helped to temporarily unite communities throughout the Kingdom of Guatemala due to the smuggling.\nThere were two major ports in New Spain, Veracruz the viceroyalty's principal port on the Atlantic, and Acapulco on the Pacific, the terminus of the Manila galleon. In the Philippines Manila near the South China Sea was the main port. The ports were fundamental for overseas trade, stretching a trade route from Asia, through the Manila galleon to the Spanish mainland.\nThese were ships that made voyages from the Philippines to Mexico, whose goods were then transported overland from Acapulco to Veracruz and later reshipped from Veracruz to C\u00e1diz in Spain. So then, the ships that set sail from Veracruz were generally loaded with merchandise from the East Indies originating from the commercial centers of the Philippines, plus the precious metals and natural resources of Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. During the 16th century, Spain held the equivalent of US$1.5\u00a0trillion (1990 terms) in gold and silver received from New Spain.\nHowever, these resources did not translate into development for the Metropolis (mother country) due to the Spanish Roman Catholic Monarchy's frequent preoccupation with European wars (enormous amounts of this wealth were spent hiring mercenaries to fight the Protestant Reformation), as well as the incessant decrease in overseas transportation caused by assaults from companies of British buccaneers, Dutch corsairs and pirates of various origins. These companies were initially financed by, at first, by the Amsterdam stock market, the first in history and whose origin is owed precisely to the need for funds to finance pirate expeditions, as later by the London market. The above is what some authors call the \"historical process of the transfer of wealth from the south to the north\".\nRegions of mainland New Spain.\nIn the colonial period, basic patterns of regional development emerged and strengthened. European settlement and institutional life was built in the Mesoamerican heartland of the Aztec Empire in Central Mexico. The South (Oaxaca, Michoac\u00e1n, Yucat\u00e1n, and Central America) was a region of dense indigenous settlement of Mesoamerica, but without exploitable resources of interest to Europeans, the area attracted few Europeans, while the indigenous presence remained strong. \nThe North was outside the area of complex indigenous populations, inhabited primarily by nomadic and hostile northern indigenous groups. With the discovery of silver in the north, the Spanish sought to conquer or pacify those peoples in order to exploit the mines and develop enterprises to supply them. Nonetheless, much of northern New Spain had sparse indigenous population and attracted few Europeans. The Spanish crown and later the Republic of Mexico did not effectively exert sovereignty over the region, leaving it vulnerable to the expansionism of the United States in the nineteenth century.\nRegional characteristics of colonial Mexico have been the focus of considerable study. For those based in the vice-regal capital of Mexico City, everywhere else were the \"provinces\". Even in the modern era, \"Mexico\" for many refers solely to Mexico City, with the pejorative view that anywhere outside the capital is a hopeless backwater. \"Fuera de M\u00e9xico, todo es Cuauhtitl\u00e1n\" (\"outside of Mexico City, it's all Podunk\"), that is, poor, marginal, and backward, in short, the periphery. \nThe picture is far more complex, however; while the capital is enormously important as the center of institutional, economic, and social power, the provinces played a significant role in colonial Mexico. Regions (provinces) developed and thrived to the extent that they became sites of economic production and tied into networks of trade. \"Spanish society in the Indies was import-export oriented at the very base and in every aspect,\" and the development of many regional economies was typically centered on support of that export sector.\nCentral region.\nMexico City, capital of the viceroyalty.\nMexico City was the center of the Central region, and the hub of New Spain. The development of Mexico City itself was vitally important to the development of New Spain as a whole. It was the seat of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, the Archdiocese of the Catholic Church, the Holy Office of the Inquisition, the merchants' guild (\"consulado\"), and home of the most elite families in the Kingdom of New Spain. Mexico City was the single most populous city, not just in New Spain, but for many years the entire Western Hemisphere, with a high concentration of mixed-race castas.\nVeracruz to Mexico City.\nSignificant regional development grew along the main transportation route from the capital east to the port of Veracruz. Alexander von Humboldt called this area, \"Mesa de Anahuac\", which can be defined as the adjacent valleys of Puebla, Mexico, and Toluca, enclosed by high mountains, along with their connections to the Gulf Coast port of Veracruz and the Pacific port of Acapulco, where over half the population of New Spain lived. These valleys were linked trunk lines, or main routes, facilitating the movement of vital goods and people to get to key areas. \nEven in the relatively richly endowed region of Mexico, the difficulty of transit of people and goods in the absence of rivers and level terrain remained a major challenge to the economy of New Spain. This challenge persisted during the post-independence years until the late nineteenth-century construction of railroads. In the colonial era and up until the railroads were built in key areas in post-independence in the late nineteenth century, mule trains were the main mode of transporting goods. Pack mules were used because unpaved roads, mountainous terrain, and seasonal flooding could not generally accommodate carts.\nIn the late eighteenth century, the crown devoted some resources to study and remedy the poor roads. The \"Camino Real\" (royal road) between the port of Veracruz and the capital had some short sections paved and bridges constructed. The construction was done despite protests from some indigenous settlements when the infrastructure improvements, which sometimes included rerouting the road through communal lands. The Spanish crown finally decided that road improvement was in the interests of the state for military purposes, as well as for fostering commerce, agriculture, and industry, but the lack of state involvement in the development of physical infrastructure was to have lasting effects, constraining development until the late nineteenth century. Despite the road improvements, transit was still difficult, particularly for heavy military equipment.\nAlthough the crown had ambitious plans for both the Toluca and Veracruz portions of the king's highway, improvements were limited to a localized network. Even where infrastructure was improved, transit on the Veracruz-Puebla main road had other obstacles, with wolves attacking mule trains, killing animals, and rendering some sacks of foodstuffs unsellable because they were smeared with blood. The north-south Acapulco route remained a mule track through mountainous terrain.\nVeracruz, port city and province.\nVeracruz was the first Spanish settlement founded in what became New Spain, and it endured as the only viable Gulf Coast port, the gateway for Spain to New Spain. The difficult topography around the port affected local development and New Spain as a whole. Going from the port to the central plateau entailed a daunting 2000 meter climb from the narrow tropical coastal plain in just over a hundred kilometers. The narrow, slippery road in the mountain mists was treacherous for mule trains, and in some cases mules were hoisted by ropes. Many tumbled with their cargo to their deaths. \nGiven the transport constraints, only high-value, low-bulk goods continued to be shipped in the transatlantic trade, which stimulated local production of foodstuffs, rough textiles, and other products for a mass market. Although New Spain produced considerable sugar and wheat, these were consumed exclusively in the colony even though there was demand elsewhere. Philadelphia, not New Spain, supplied Cuba with wheat.\nThe Caribbean port of Veracruz was small, with its hot, pestilential climate not a draw for permanent settlers: its population never topped 10,000. Many Spanish merchants preferred living in the pleasant highland town of Jalapa (1,500 m). For a brief period (1722\u201376) the town of Jalapa became even more important than Veracruz, after it was granted the right to hold the royal trade fair for New Spain, serving as the entre for goods from Asia via Manila galleon through the port of Acapulco and European goods via the flota (convoy) from the Spanish port of C\u00e1diz. \nSpaniards also settled in the temperate area of Orizaba, east of the Citlaltepetl volcano. Orizaba varied considerably in elevation from to (the summit of the Citlaltepetl volcano), but \"most of the inhabited part is temperate\". Some Spaniards lived in semitropical C\u00f3rdoba, which was founded as a villa in 1618, to serve as a Spanish base against runaway slave (cimarr\u00f3n) predations on mule trains traveling the route from the port to the capital. Some cimarr\u00f3n settlements sought autonomy, such as one led by Gaspar Yanga, with whom the crown concluded a treaty leading to the recognition of a largely black town, San Lorenzo de los Negros de Cerralvo, later called the municipality of Yanga.\nEuropean diseases immediately affected the multiethnic Indian populations in the Veracruz area and for that reason Spaniards imported black slaves as either an alternative to indigenous labor or its complete replacement in the event of a repetition of the Caribbean die-off. A few Spaniards acquired prime agricultural lands left vacant by the indigenous demographic disaster. Portions of the province could support sugar cultivation and as early as the 1530s sugar production was underway. New Spain's first viceroy, Don Antonio de Mendoza established an hacienda on lands taken from Orizaba.\nIndians resisted cultivating sugarcane themselves, preferring to tend their subsistence crops. As in the Caribbean, black slave labor became crucial to the development of sugar estates. During the period 1580\u20131640 when Spain and Portugal were ruled by the same monarch and Portuguese slave traders had access to Spanish markets, African slaves were imported in large numbers to New Spain and many of them remained in the region of Veracruz. But even when that connection was broken and prices rose, black slaves remained an important component of C\u00f3rdoba's labor sector even after 1700. Rural estates in C\u00f3rdoba depended on African slave labor, who were 20% of the population there, a far greater proportion than any other area of New Spain, and greater than even nearby Jalapa.\nIn 1765 the crown created a monopoly on tobacco, which directly affected agriculture and manufacturing in the Veracruz region. Tobacco was a valuable, high-demand product. Men, women, and even children smoked, something commented on by foreign travelers and depicted in eighteenth-century casta paintings. The crown calculated that tobacco could produce a steady stream of tax revenues by supplying the huge Mexican demand, so the crown limited zones of tobacco cultivation. It also established a small number of factories of finished products, and licensed distribution outlets (\"estanquillos\"). The crown also set up warehouses to store up to a year's worth of supplies, including paper for cigarettes, for the factories. With the establishment of the monopoly, crown revenues increased and there is evidence that despite high prices and expanding rates of poverty, tobacco consumption rose while at the same time, general consumption fell.\nIn 1787 during the Bourbon Reforms Veracruz became an intendancy, a new administrative unit.\nValley of Puebla.\nFounded in 1531 as a Spanish settlement, Puebla de los Angeles quickly rose to the status of Mexico's second-most important city. Its location on the main route between the viceregal capital and the port of Veracruz, in a fertile basin with a dense indigenous population, largely not held in encomienda, made Puebla a destination for later arriving Spaniards. If there had been significant mineral wealth in Puebla, it could have been even more prominent a center for New Spain, but its first century established its importance. In 1786 it became the capital of an intendancy of the same name.\nIt became the seat of the richest diocese in New Spain in its first century, with the seat of the first diocese, formerly in Tlaxcala, moved there in 1543. Bishop Juan de Palafox asserted that the income from the diocese of Puebla was twice that of the archbishopic of Mexico, due to the tithe income derived from agriculture. In its first hundred years, Puebla was prosperous from wheat farming and other agriculture, as the ample tithe income indicates, plus manufacturing woolen cloth for the domestic market. Merchants, manufacturers, and artisans were important to the city's economic fortunes, but its early prosperity was followed by stagnation and decline in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.\nThe foundation of the town of Puebla was a pragmatic social experiment to settle Spanish immigrants without encomiendas to pursue farming and industry. Puebla was privileged in a number of ways, starting with its status as a Spanish settlement not founded on existing indigenous city-state, but with a significant indigenous population. It was located in a fertile basin on a temperate plateau in the nexus of the key trade triangle of Veracruz\u2013Mexico City\u2013Antequera (Oaxaca). Although there were no encomiendas in Puebla itself, encomenderos with nearby labor grants settled in Puebla. And despite its foundation as a Spanish city, sixteenth-century Puebla had Indians resident in the central core.\nAdministratively Puebla was far enough from Mexico City (approximately ) so as not to be under its direct influence. Puebla's Spanish town council (cabildo) had considerable autonomy and was not dominated by encomenderos. The administrative structure of Puebla \"may be seen as a subtle expression of royal absolutism, the granting of extensive privileges to a town of commoners, amounting almost to republican self-government, in order to curtail the potential authority of encomenderos and the religious orders, as well as to counterbalance the power of the viceregal capital.\"\nDuring the \"golden century\" from its founding in 1531 until the early 1600s, Puebla's agricultural sector flourished, with small-scale Spanish farmers plowing the land for the first time, planting wheat and vaulting Puebla to importance as New Spain's breadbasket, a role assumed by the Baj\u00edo (including Quer\u00e9taro) in the seventeenth century, and Guadalajara in the eighteenth. Puebla's wheat production was the initial source of its prosperity, but it emerged as a manufacturing and commercial center, \"serving as the inland port of Mexico's Atlantic trade\". Economically, the city was exempted from the \"alcabala\" (sales tax) and \"almojarifazgo\" (import/export duties) for its first century (1531\u20131630), which helped promote commerce.\nPuebla built significant textile production in workshops (obrajes) supplying New Spain and markets as far away as Guatemala and Peru. Transatlantic ties between a particular Spanish town, Brihuega, and Puebla demonstrated the close connection between the two settlements. The growth in Puebla's manufacturing sector did not simply coincide with immigration from Brihuega but was crucial to \"shaping and driving Puebla's economic development\". \nBrihuega immigrants came to Mexico with expertise in textile production, and the transplanted briocenses provided capital to create large-scale obrajes. Although obrajes in Brihuega were small-scale enterprises, quite a number of them in Puebla employed up to 100 workers. Supplies of wool, water for fulling mills, and labor (free indigenous, incarcerated Indians, black slaves) were available. Although much of Puebla's textile output was rough cloth, it also produced higher quality dyed cloth with cochineal from Oaxaca and indigo from Guatemala. But by the eighteenth century, Quer\u00e9taro had displaced Puebla as the mainstay of woolen textile production.\nIn 1787, Puebla became an intendancy as part of the new administrative structuring of the Bourbon Reforms.\nValley of Mexico.\nMexico City dominated the Valley of Mexico, but the valley continued to have dense indigenous populations challenged by growing, increasingly dense Spanish settlement. The Valley of Mexico had many former Indian city-states that became Indian towns in the colonial era. These towns continued to be ruled by indigenous elites under the Spanish crown, with an indigenous governor and a town councils. The Indian towns close to the capital were the most desirable ones for encomenderos to hold and for the friars to evangelize.\nThe capital was provisioned by the indigenous towns, and its labor was available for enterprises that ultimately created a colonial economy. The gradual drying up of the central lake system created more dry land for farming, but the sixteenth-century population declines allowed Spaniards to expand their acquisition of land. One region that retained strong Indian land holding was the southern fresh water area, with important suppliers of fresh produce to the capital. The area was characterized by intensely cultivated chinampas, human-made extensions of cultivable land into the lake system. These chinampa towns retained a strong indigenous character, and Indians continued to hold the majority of that land, despite its closeness to the Spanish capital. A key example is Xochimilco.\nTexcoco in the pre-conquest period was one of the three members of the Aztec Triple Alliance and the cultural center of the empire. It fell on hard times in the colonial period as an economic backwater. Spaniards with any ambition or connections would be lured by the closeness of Mexico City, so that the Spanish presence was minimal and marginal.\nTlaxcala, the major ally of the Spanish against the Aztecs of Tenochtitlan, also became something of a backwater, but like Puebla it did not come under the control of Spanish encomenderos. No elite Spaniards settled there, but like many other Indian towns in the Valley of Mexico, it had an assortment of small-scale merchants, artisans, farmers and ranchers, and textile workshops (obrajes).\nNorth.\nSince portions of northern New Spain became part of the United States' Southwest region, there has been considerable scholarship on the Spanish borderlands in the north. The motor of the Spanish colonial economy was the extraction of silver. In Bolivia, it was from the single rich mountain of Potos\u00ed; but in New Spain, there were two major mining sites, one in Zacatecas, the other in Guanajuato.\nThe region farther north of the main mining zones attracted few Spanish settlers. Where there were settled indigenous populations, such as in the present-day state of New Mexico and in coastal regions of Baja and Alta California, indigenous culture retained considerable integrity.\nBaj\u00edo, Mexico's breadbasket.\nThe Baj\u00edo, a rich, fertile lowland just north of central Mexico, was nonetheless a frontier region between the densely populated plateaus and valleys of Mexico's center and south and the harsh northern desert controlled by nomadic Chichimeca. Devoid of settled indigenous populations in the early sixteenth century, the Baj\u00edo did not initially attract Spaniards, who were much more interested in exploiting labor and collecting tribute whenever possible. The region did not have indigenous populations that practiced subsistence agriculture. The Baj\u00edo developed in the colonial period as a region of commercial agriculture.\nThe discovery of mining deposits in Zacatecas and Guanajuato in the mid-sixteenth century and later in San Luis Potos\u00ed stimulated the Baj\u00edo's development to supply the mines with food and livestock. A network of Spanish towns was established in this region of commercial agriculture, with Quer\u00e9taro also becoming a center of textile production. Although there were no dense indigenous populations or network of settlements, Indians migrated to the Baj\u00edo to work as resident employees on the region's haciendas and ranchos or rented land (terrasguerros). From diverse cultural backgrounds and with no sustaining indigenous communities, these indios were quickly hispanized, but largely remained at the bottom of the economic hierarchy. Although Indians migrated willingly to the region, they did so in such small numbers that labor shortages prompted Spanish hacendados to provide incentives to attract workers, especially in the initial boom period of the early seventeenth century. Land owners lent workers money, which could be seen as a perpetual indebtedness, but it can be seen not as coercing Indians to stay but a way estate owners sweetened their terms of employment, beyond their basic wage labor. For example, in 1775 the Spanish administrator of a San Luis Potos\u00ed estate \"had to scour both Mexico City and the northern towns to find enough blue French linen to satisfy the resident employees\". Other types of goods they received on credit were textiles, hats, shoes, candles, meat, beans, and a guaranteed ration of maize. However, where labor was more abundant or market conditions depressed, estate owners paid lower wages. The more sparsely populated northern Baj\u00edo tended to pay higher wages than the southern Baj\u00edo, which was increasingly integrated in the economy of central Mexico. The credit-based employment system often privileged those holding higher ranked positions on the estate (supervisors, craftsmen, other specialists) who were mostly white, and the estates did not demand repayment.\nIn the late colonial period, renting complemented estate employment for many non-Indians in more central areas of the Baj\u00edo with access to markets. As with hacendados, renters produced for the commercial market. While these Baj\u00edo renters could prosper in good times and achieved a level of independence, drought and other disasters made their choice more risky than beneficial.\nMany renters retained ties to the estates, diversifying their household's sources of income and level of economic security. In San Luis Potos\u00ed, rentals were fewer and estate employment the norm. After a number of years of drought and bad harvests in the first decade of the nineteenth century Hidalgo's 1810 grito appealed more in the Baj\u00edo than in San Luis Potos\u00ed. In the Baj\u00edo estate owners were evicting tenants in favor of renters better able to pay more for land, there was a disruption of previous patterns of mutual benefit between estate owners and renters.\nSpanish borderlands.\nAreas of northern Mexico were incorporated into the United States in the mid-nineteenth century, following Texas independence and the Mexican\u2013American War (1846\u201348) and generally known as the \"Spanish Borderlands\". Scholars in the United States have extensively studied this northern region, which became the states of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California. During the period of Spanish rule, this area was sparsely populated even by indigenous peoples.\nThe Presidios (forts), pueblos (civilian towns) and the misiones (missions) were the three major agencies employed by the Spanish crown to extend its borders and consolidate its colonial holdings in these territories.\nReligion.\nReligion in New Spain influenced governance, social identity, and cultural life. Missionary efforts were aimed at converting Indigenous populations and restructuring local traditions. This resulted in fused religious practices across various regions.\nMissions and the northern frontier.\nThe town of Albuquerque (modern Albuquerque, New Mexico) was founded in 1706. Other Mexican towns in the region included Paso del Norte (modern Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez), founded in 1667; Santiago de la Monclova in 1689; Panzacola, Tejas in 1681; and San Francisco de Cu\u00e9llar (modern city of Chihuahua) in 1709. From 1687, Father Eusebio Francisco Kino, with funding from the Marqu\u00e9s de Villapuente, founded over twenty missions in the Sonoran Desert (in modern Sonora and Arizona). \nFrom 1697, Jesuits established eighteen missions throughout the Baja California peninsula. Between 1687 and 1700 several missions were founded in Trinidad, but only four survived as Amerindian villages throughout the 18th century. In 1691, explorers and missionaries visited the interior of Texas and came upon a river and Amerindian settlement on 13 June, the feast day of St. Anthony, and named the location and river San Antonio in his honor.\nNew Mexico.\nDuring the term of viceroy Don Luis de Velasco, marqu\u00e9s de Salinas the crown ended the long-running Chichimeca War by making peace with the semi-nomadic Chichimeca indigenous tribes of northern M\u00e9xico in 1591. This allowed expansion into the 'Province of New Mexico' or \"Provincia de Nuevo M\u00e9xico\". In 1595, Don Juan de O\u00f1ate, son of one of the key figures in the silver remining region of Zacatecas, received official permission from the viceroy to explore and conquer New Mexico. As was the pattern of such expeditions, the leader assumed the greatest risk but would reap the largest rewards, so that O\u00f1ate would become \"capit\u00e1n general\" of New Mexico and had the authority to distribute rewards to those in the expedition. \nO\u00f1ate pioneered 'The Royal Road of the Interior Land' or \"El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro\" between Mexico City and the Tewa village of Ohkay Owingeh, or San Juan Pueblo. He also founded the Spanish settlement of San Gabriel de Yungue-Ouinge on the Rio Grande near the Native American Pueblo, located just north of the modern city of Espa\u00f1ola, New Mexico. O\u00f1ate eventually learned that New Mexico, while it had a settled indigenous population, had little arable land, no silver mines, and possessed few other resources to exploit that would merit large scale colonization. He resigned as governor in 1607 and left New Mexico, having lost much of his personal wealth on the enterprise.\nIn 1610, Pedro de Peralta, a later governor of the Province of New Mexico, established the settlement of Santa Fe near the southern end of the Sangre de Cristo mountain range. Missions were established to convert the indigenous peoples and manage the agricultural industry. The territory's indigenous population resented their forced conversion to Catholicism and suppression of their religion, and the imposition of encomienda system of forced labor. The unrest led to the Pueblo Revolt in 1680, expelling the Spanish, who retreated to Paso del Norte, modern-day Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez.\nAfter the return of the Spanish in 1692, the final resolution included a marked reduction of Spanish efforts to eradicate native culture and religion, the issuing of substantial communal land grants to each Pueblo, and a public defender of their rights and for their legal cases in Spanish courts. In 1776 the New Mexico came under the new Provincias Internas jurisdiction. In the late 18th century the Spanish land grant encouraged the settlement by individuals of large land parcels outside Mission and Pueblo boundaries, many of which became ranchos.\nCalifornia.\nIn 1602, Sebasti\u00e1n Vizca\u00edno, the first Spanish presence in the 'New California' (\"Nueva California\") region of the frontier Las Californias province since Cabrillo in 1542, sailed as far north up the Pacific Coast as present-day Oregon, and named California coastal features from San Diego to as far north as the Bay of Monterrey.\nNot until the eighteenth century was California of much interest to the Spanish crown, since it had no known rich mineral deposits or indigenous populations sufficiently organized to render tribute and do labor for Spaniards. The discovery of huge deposits of gold in the Sierra Nevada foothills did not come until after the U.S. had added California following the Mexican\u2013American War (1846\u201348).\nBy the middle of the 1700s, the Catholic order of Jesuits had established a number of missions on the \"Baja\" (lower) California peninsula. Then, in 1767, King Charles III ordered all Jesuits expelled from all Spanish possessions, including New Spain. New Spain's Visitador General Jos\u00e9 de G\u00e1lvez replaced them with the Dominican Order in Baja California, and the Franciscans were chosen to establish new northern missions in \"Alta\" (upper) California.\nIn 1768, G\u00e1lvez received the order to \"Occupy and fortify San Diego and Monterey for God and the King of Spain\". The Spanish colonies there, having far fewer known natural resources and less cultural development than Mexico or Peru, were to combine establishing posts to defend the territory with a perceived responsibility to convert the indigenous people to Catholicism.\nThe method used to \"occupy and fortify\" was the established Spanish colonial system: missions (\"misiones\", between 1769 and 1833 twenty-one missions were established) aimed at converting the Native Californians to Catholicism, forts (\"presidios\", four total) to protect the missionaries, and secular municipalities (\"pueblos\", three total). Due to the region's great distance from supplies and support in M\u00e9xico, the system had to be largely self-sufficient. As a result, the colonial population of California remained small, widely scattered and near the coast.\nIn 1776, the north-western frontier areas came under the administration of the new 'Commandancy General of the Internal Provinces of the North' \"(Provincias Internas)\", designed to streamline administration and invigorate growth. The crown created two new provincial governments from the former Las Californias in 1804; the southern peninsula became Baja California, and the ill-defined northern mainland frontier area became Alta California.\nOnce missions and protective presidios were established in an area, large land grants encouraged settlement and establishment of California ranchos. The Spanish system of land grants was not very successful; however, because the grants were merely royal concessions\u2014not actual land ownership. Under later Mexican rule, land grants conveyed ownership, and were more successful at promoting settlement.\nRancho activities centered on cattle-raising; many grantees emulated the Dons of Spain, with cattle, horses and sheep the source of wealth. The work was usually done by Native Americans, sometimes displaced and/or relocated from their villages. Native-born descendants of the resident Spanish-heritage rancho grantees, soldiers, servants, merchants, craftsmen and others became the Californios. Many of the less-affluent men took native wives, and many daughters married later English, French and American settlers.\nAfter the Mexican War of Independence (1821) and subsequent secularization (\"disestablishment\") of the missions (1834), Mexican land grant transactions increased the spread of the rancho system. The land grants and ranchos established mapping and land-ownership patterns that are still recognizable in present-day California and New Mexico.\nSouth.\nYucat\u00e1n.\nThe Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula can be considered a cul-de-sac, and it has unique features, but it also has strong similarities to other areas in the South. The Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula extends into the Gulf of Mexico and was connected to Caribbean trade routes and Mexico City, far more than some other southern regions, such as Oaxaca. The main Spanish settlements included the inland city of M\u00e9rida, where Spanish civil and religious officials had their headquarters and where the many Spaniards in the province lived. The \"villa\" of Campeche was the peninsula's port, the key gateway for the whole region. A merchant group developed and expanded dramatically as trade flourished during the seventeenth century. Although that period was once characterized as New Spain's \"century of depression\", for Yucat\u00e1n this was certainly not the case, with sustained growth from the early seventeenth century to the end of the colonial period.\nWith dense indigenous Maya populations, Yucat\u00e1n's encomienda system was established early and persisted far longer than in central Mexico, since fewer Spaniards migrated to the region than in the center. Although Yucat\u00e1n was a more peripheral area to the colony, since it lacked rich mining areas and no agricultural or other export product, it did have a complex of Spanish settlement, with a whole range of social types in the main settlements of M\u00e9rida and the villas of Campeche and Valladolid. There was an important sector of mixed-race \"castas\", some of whom were fully at home in both the indigenous and Hispanic worlds. Blacks were an important component of Yucatecan society. The largest population in the province was indigenous Maya, who lived in their communities, but which were in contact with the Hispanic sphere via labor demands and commerce.\nIn Yucat\u00e1n, Spanish rule was largely indirect, allowing these communities considerable political and cultural autonomy. The Maya community, the \"cah\", was the means by which indigenous cultural integrity was maintained. In the economic sphere, unlike many other regions and ethnic groups in Mesoamerica, the Yucatec Maya did not have a pre-conquest network of regular markets to exchange different types of food and craft goods. Perhaps because the peninsula was uniform in its ecosystem local niche production did not develop. Production of cotton textiles, largely by Maya women, helped pay households' tribute obligations, but basic crops were the basis of the economy. The cah retained considerable land under the control of religious brotherhoods or confraternities (\"cofrad\u00edas\"), the device by which Maya communities avoided colonial officials, the clergy, or even indigenous rulers (\"gobernadores\") from diverting of community revenues in their \"cajas de comunidad\" (literally community-owned chests that had locks and keys). \"Cofrad\u00edas\" were traditionally lay pious organizations and burial societies, but in Yucat\u00e1n they became significant holders of land, a source of revenue for pious purposes kept under cah control. \"[I]n Yucat\u00e1n the \"cofrad\u00eda\" in its modified form was the community.\" Local Spanish clergy had no reason to object to the arrangement since much of the revenue went for payment for masses or other spiritual matters controlled by the priest.\nA limiting factor in Yucat\u00e1n's economy was the poor quality of the limestone soil, which could only support crops for two to three years with land cleared through slash-and-burn agriculture. Access to water was also a limiting factor on agriculture, with the limestone escarpment giving way in water filled sinkholes (locally called \"cenotes\"), but rivers and streams were generally absent on the peninsula. Individuals had rights to land so long as they cleared and tilled them and when the soil was exhausted, they repeated the process. In general, the Indians lived in a dispersed pattern, which Spanish \"congregaci\u00f3n\" or forced resettlement attempted to alter. Collective labor cultivated the confraternities' lands, which included raising the traditional maize, beans, and cotton. But confraternities also later pursued cattle ranching, as well as mule and horse breeding, depending on the local situation. There is evidence that \"cofrad\u00edas\" in southern Campeche were involved in inter-regional trade in cacao as well as cattle ranching. Although generally the revenues from crops and animals were devoted to expenses in the spiritual sphere, \"cofrad\u00edas\"' cattle were used for direct aid to community members during droughts, stabilizing the community's food supply.\nIn the seventeenth century, patterns shifted in Yucat\u00e1n and Tabasco, as the English took territory the Spanish claimed but did not control, especially what became British Honduras (now Belize) and in Laguna de T\u00e9rminos (Isla del Carmen) where they cut logwood. In 1716\u201317 viceroy of New Spain organized a sufficient ships to expel the foreigners, where the crown subsequently built a fortress at Isla del Carmen. But the British held onto their territory in the eastern portion of the peninsula into the twentieth century. In the nineteenth century, the enclave supplied guns to the rebellious Maya in the Caste War of Yucatan.\nValley of Oaxaca.\nSince Oaxaca was lacking in mineral deposits and it had an abundant sedentary indigenous population, it developed without European or mixed-race population and large-scale Spanish haciendas, so the indigenous communities retained their land, indigenous languages, and distinct ethnic identities. Antequera (Oaxaca City) was a Spanish settlement founded in 1529, but the rest of Oaxaca consisted of indigenous towns. Despite its remoteness from Mexico City, \"throughout the colonial era, Oaxaca was one of Mexico's most prosperous provinces\". In the eighteenth century, the value of crown offices (alcalde mayor or corregidor) were the highest for two Oaxaca jurisdictions, with Jicayan and Villa Alta each worth 7,500 pesos, Cuicatlan-Papalotipac, 4,500; Teposcolula and Chichicapa, each 4,200 pesos.q\nThe most important commodity for Oaxaca was cochineal red dye. Cochineal's commodity chain is interesting, with indigenous peasants in the remote areas of Oaxaca ultimately linked to Amsterdam and London commodity exchanges and the European production of luxury cloth. The most extensive study of Oaxaca's eighteenth-century economy deals with the nexus between the local crown officials (alcaldes mayores), merchant investors (\"aviadores\"), the repartimiento (forced labor), and indigenous products, particularly cochineal. The rich, color-fast red dye produced from insects, was harvested from nopal cacti. Cochineal was a high-value, low-volume product that became the second-most valuable Mexican export after silver. Although it could be produced elsewhere in central and southern Mexico, its main region of production was Oaxaca. For the indigenous in Oaxaca, cochineal was the only one \"with which the [tributaries] maintain themselves and pay their debts\" but it also had other advantages. Producing cochineal was time-consuming labor, but it was not particularly difficult and could be done by the elderly, women, and children. It was also important to households and communities because it initially did not require the indigenous to displace their existing crops or migrate elsewhere.\nAlthough the repartimiento has historically been seen as an imposition on the indigenous, forcing them into economic relations they would rather have avoided and maintained by force, recent work on eighteenth-century Oaxaca analyzes the nexus of crown officials (the alcaldes mayores) and Spanish merchants, and indigenous via the repartimiento. cash loaned by local crown officials (the alcalde mayor and his teniente), usually to individual Indians but sometimes to communities, in exchange for a fixed amount of a good (cochineal or cotton mantles) at a later date. Indigenous elites were an integral part of the repartimiento, often being recipients of large extensions of credit. As authority figures in their community, they were in a good position to collect on the debt, the most risky part of the business from the Spanish point of view.\nTehuantepec.\nThe Isthmus of Tehuantepec region of Oaxaca was strategically important for its short transit between the Gulf Coast and the Pacific, facilitating both overland and sea trade. The province of Tehuantepec was the Pacific side of the isthmus and the headwaters of the Coatzacoalcos River. Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s acquired holdings for his entailed estate including Huatulco, once the main Pacific Coast port before Acapulco replaced it in 1563.\nGold mining was an early draw for Spaniards, who directed indigenous labor to its extraction, but did not continue beyond the mid-sixteenth century. Over the long run, ranching and commerce were the most important economic activities, with the settlement of Tehuantepec becoming the hub. The region's history can be divided into three distinct periods, an initial period of engagement with Spanish colonial rule to 1563, during which there was a working relationship with the Zapotec ruling line and the establishment of Cort\u00e9s's economic enterprises. This early period came to a close with the death of the last native king in 1562 and the escheatment of Cort\u00e9s's Tehuantepec encomiendas to the crown in 1563. The second period of approximately a century (1563\u20131660) saw the decline of the indigenous entailed estate (\"cacicazgo\") and indigenous political power and development of the colonial economy and imposition of Spanish political and religious structures. The final period is the maturation of these structures (1660\u20131750). The 1660 rebellion can be a dividing line between the two later periods.\nThe Villa of Tehuantepec, the largest settlement on the isthmus, was an important prehispanic Zapotec trade and religious center, which was not under the jurisdiction of the Aztecs. The early colonial history of Tehuantepec and the larger province was dominated by Cort\u00e9s and the Marquesado, but the crown realized the importance of the area and concluded an agreement in 1563 with the second Marqu\u00e9s by which the crown took control of the Tehuantepec encomienda. The Marquesado continued to have major private holdings in the province. The Villa of Tehuantepec became a center of Spanish and mixed-race settlement, crown administration, and trade.\nThe Cort\u00e9s haciendas in Tehuantepec were key components of the province's economy, and they were directly linked to other Marquesado enterprises in greater Mexico in an integrated fashion. The Dominicans also had significant holdings in Tehuantepec, but there has been little research on these. However important the Marquesado and the Dominican enterprises were, there were also other economic players in the region, including individual Spaniards as well as existing indigenous communities. Ranching emerged as the dominant rural enterprise in most of Tehuantepec with a ranching boom in the period 1580\u20131640. Since Tehuantepec experienced significant indigenous population loss in the sixteenth century conforming to the general pattern, ranching made possible for Spaniards to thrive in Tehuantepec because ranching was not dependent on significant amounts of indigenous labor.\nThe most detailed economic records for the region are of the Marquesado's ranching haciendas, which produced draft animals (horses, mules, burros, and oxen) and sheep and goats, for meat and wool. Cattle ranching for meat, tallow, and leather were also important. Tallow for candles used in churches and residences and leather used in a variety of ways (saddles, other tack, boots, furniture, machinery) were significant items in the larger colonial economy, finding markets well beyond Tehuantepec. Since the Marquesado operated as an integrated enterprise, draft animals were used in other holdings for transport, agriculture, and mining in Oaxaca, Morelos, Toluca, and Mexico City as well as sold. Raised in Tehuantepec, the animals were driven to other Marquesado holdings for use and distribution.\nAlthough colonial population decline affected the indigenous in Tehuantepec, their communities remained important in the colonial era and remain distinctly Indian to the current era. There were differences in the three distinct linguistic and ethnic groups in colonial Tehuantepec, the Zapotec, the Zoque, and the Huave. The Zapotecs concluded an alliance with the Spaniards at contact, and they had already expanded their territory into Zoque and Huave regions.\nUnder Spanish rule, the Zapotecs not only survived, but flourished, unlike the other two. They continued to pursue agriculture, some of it irrigated, which was not disrupted by the growing ranching economy. Generally Zapotec elites protected their communities from Spanish incursions and community cohesion remained strong as shown in members' performance of regular community service for social ends. Zapotec elites engaged in the market economy early on, which undermined to an extent the bonds between commoners and elites who colluded with the Spanish. In contrast to the Zapotecs, the Zoque generally declined as a group during the ranching boom, with interloping animals eating their maize crops. Zoque response was to take up being vaqueros themselves. They had access to the trade to Guatemala. Of the three indigenous groups, the Huave were the most isolated from the Spanish ranching economy and labor demands. With little arable or grazing land, they exploited the lagoons of the Pacific coast, using shore and beach resources. They traded dried shrimp and fish, as well as purple dye from shells to Oaxaca, likely acquiring foodstuffs that they were unable to cultivate themselves.\nNot well documented is the number of African slaves and their descendants, who were artisans in urban areas and did hard manual labor in rural areas. In a pattern recognizable elsewhere, coastal populations were mainly African, including an unknown number of cimarr\u00f3n (runaway slave) settlements, while inland the indigenous communities were more prominent. On the Cort\u00e9s haciendas, blacks and mulattoes were essential to the profitability of the enterprises.\nIn general, Tehuantepec was not a site of major historical events, but in 1660\u201361, there was a significant rebellion stemming from increased repartimiento Spanish demands.\nCentral America.\nWith the growth of a sufficient Spanish population and the crown's desire to better govern the area, it established the Captaincy General of Guatemala, which had primary jurisdiction over what became Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. The region was diverse, and outlying provinces were resentful for elites in the capital of Antigua Guatemala, which was destroyed by an earthquake in 1773. There was a high court Audiencia in the Kingdom of Guatemala. Given the region's distance from major centers of power in New Spain and Spain itself, local strongmen in the early colonial era were only nominally subject to Spanish authority. The indigenous population was very large in comparison to the Spanish, and there were relatively few Africans. Spaniards continued to employ forced labor and exact tributes from the natives in the region, which started during the conquest era. Compared to the mines of the New Spanish North, Central America was generally poor in mineral resources (although Honduras had a brief boom in gold mining in the colonial period), and had little potential to develop an export product except for cacao and the blue dye indigo. \nCacao had been cultivated in the prehispanic period. Orchards of cacao trees, which took a number of years to come to maturity and produce fruit. Cacao boomed in the late sixteenth century, and then was displaced by indigo as the most important export product. Indigo, like cacao, was native to the region, and the indigenous peoples gathered wild indigo, used for dying cloth and as a trade good. After the arrival of the Spanish, they domesticated indigo and created plantations for its cultivation in Yucatan, El Salvador, and Guatemala. The indigo industry thrived, since there was high demand in Europe for a high quality, color-fast blue dye. In the region, cultivation and processing was done by indigenous workers, but the owners of plantations, \"a\u00f1ileros\", were Spanish. \nIt was a dangerous work environment, with toxins in the indigo plants that sickened and sometimes killed workers. It was profitable, especially following the Bourbon Reforms, which allowed trade within the Spanish empire. In the late eighteenth century, indigo growers organized in a trade organization, the \"Consulado de Comercio\". There were regions that were not subjugated to Spanish rule, such as the Pet\u00e9n and the Mosquito Coast, and the English took advantage of weak Spanish control to establish a commercial presence on the Gulf Coast, later seizing Belize. An American-born Spanish elite (\"criollos\") accumulated land and built fortunes on wheat, sugar, and cattle, all of which were consumed within the region.\nDemographics.\nThe role of epidemics.\nSpanish settlers brought to the American continent smallpox, measles, typhoid fever, and other infectious diseases. Most of the Spanish settlers had developed an immunity to these diseases from childhood, but the indigenous peoples lacked the needed antibodies since these diseases were totally alien to the native population. There were at least three separate, major epidemics that devastated the population: smallpox (1520\u20131521), measles (1545\u20131548) and typhus (1576\u20131581). \nAt least 12 epidemics are attributed to \"cocoliztli\", with the largest occurring in 1545, 1576, 1736, and 1813. \nDuring the 16th century, the native population of Mexico fell from an estimated pre-Columbian population of 8 to 20\u00a0million to less than two million. Therefore, at the start of the 17th century, continental New Spain was a depopulated region with abandoned cities and maize fields. These diseases did not affect the Philippines in the same way because they were already present; Pre-Hispanic Filipinos had contact with other foreign nationalities prior to the arrival of the Spaniards.\nPopulation in early 1800s.\nWhile different intendancies would conduct censuses to get insights into their inhabitants (namely occupation, number of persons per household, ethnicity etc.), it was not until 1793 that the results of the first national census would be published. That census is known as the \"Revillagigedo census\" because its creation was ordered by the Count of the same name. Most of the census' original datasets have reportedly been lost; thus most of what is known about it comes from essays and field investigations made by academics who had access to the census data and used it as reference for their works, such as Prussian geographer Alexander von Humboldt. Each author gives different estimates for the total population, ranging from 3,799,561 to 6,122,354 (more recent data suggest that the population of New Spain in 1810 was 5 to 5.5\u00a0million individuals) and not much variation in ethnic composition, with Europeans ranging from 18% to 23% of New Spain's population, Mestizos ranging from 21% to 25%, Amerindians ranging from 51% to 61% and Africans being between 6,000 and 10,000. It is concluded then, that across nearly three centuries of colonization, the population growth trends of Europeans and Mestizos were steady, while the percentage of the indigenous population decreased at a rate of 13%\u201317% per century. The authors assert that rather than Europeans and Mestizos having higher birthrates, the reason for the indigenous population's decrease lies with their higher mortality, due to living in remote locations rather than in cities and towns founded by the Spanish colonists, or being at war with them. It is also for these reasons that the number of indigenous Mexicans presents a greater variation between publications, with their numbers in a given location estimated rather than counted, leading to possible overestimations in some provinces and underestimations in others.\n~\nRegardless of the imprecision related to the counting of indigenous peoples living outside of the colonized areas, the effort that New Spain's authorities put into considering them as subjects is worth mentioning, as censuses made by other colonial or post-colonial countries did not consider American Indians to be citizens/subjects. For example the censuses made by the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata would only count the inhabitants of the colonized settlements. Another example would be the censuses made by the United States, that did not count Indigenous peoples living among the general population until 1860, and indigenous peoples as a whole until 1900.\nOnce New Spain achieved independence, the legal basis of the colonial caste system was abolished and mentions of a person's caste in official documents was also abandoned, which led to the exclusion of racial classification from future censuses, and made it difficult to track demographic development of each ethnicity in the country. More than a century would pass before Mexico conducted a new census on which a person's race was listed, in 1921, but even then, due to its huge inconsistencies with other official registers as well as its historic context, modern investigators have deemed it inaccurate. Almost a century after the 1921 census, Mexico's government has begun to conduct ethno-racial surveys again, with results suggesting that the population growth trends for each major ethnic group haven't changed significantly since the 1793 census.\nCulture, art, and architecture.\nThe capital of Viceroyalty of New Spain, Mexico City, was one of the principal centers of European cultural expansion in the Americas. Some of the most important early buildings in New Spain were churches and other religious architecture. Civil architecture included the viceregal palace, now the National Palace, and the Mexico City town council (\"cabildo\"), both located on the main square in the capital.\nThe first printing press in the New World was brought to Mexico in 1539, by printer Juan Pablos (Giovanni Paoli). The first book printed in Mexico was entitled \"La escala espiritual de San Juan Cl\u00edmaco\". In 1568, Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo finished \"La Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espa\u00f1a\". Figures such as Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz, Juan Ruiz de Alarc\u00f3n, and don Carlos de Sig\u00fcenza y G\u00f3ngora, stand out as some of the viceroyalty's most notable contributors to Spanish literature. In 1693, Sig\u00fcenza y G\u00f3ngora published \"El Mercurio Volante\", the first newspaper in New Spain.\nArchitects Pedro Mart\u00ednez V\u00e1zquez and Lorenzo Rodriguez produced some visually frenetic architecture known as churrigueresque in the capital, Ocotlan, Puebla and some remote silver-mining towns. Composers including Manuel de Zumaya, Juan Guti\u00e9rrez de Padilla, and Antonio de Salazar were active from the early 1500s through the Baroque period of music.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64486", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64486", "title": "! (disambiguation)", "text": "! is a punctuation mark, called an exclamation mark, exclamation point, ecphoneme, or bang.\n! or exclamation point may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "64487", "revid": "3606755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64487", "title": "Tour Montparnasse", "text": "Office skyscraper in Paris, France\nTour Maine-Montparnasse (Maine-Montparnasse Tower), also commonly named Tour Montparnasse, is a office skyscraper in the Montparnasse area of Paris, France. Constructed from 1969 to 1973, it was the tallest skyscraper in France until 2011, when it was surpassed by the Tour First in the La D\u00e9fense business district west of Paris's city limits. It remains the tallest building in Paris proper and the third tallest in France, behind Tour First and Tour Hekla. As of July\u00a02023[ [update]], it is the 53rd-tallest building in Europe.\nThe tower was designed by architects Eug\u00e8ne Beaudouin, Urbain Cassan, and Louis de Ho\u00ffm de Marien and built by Campenon Bernard. On 21 September 2017, Nouvelle AOM won a competition to redesign the building's fa\u00e7ade.\nDescription.\nThe building has 59 floors and is built on top of the Montparnasse\u2013Bienven\u00fce station of the Paris M\u00e9tro.\nThere is an observation deck, branded as Paris Montparnasse, located on the 56th floor, above the ground. The same floor hosts a restaurant called . There is also a rooftop terrace. On a clear day, the view from the observation deck extends for ; aircraft can be seen taking off from Orly Airport. The guard rail, to which various antennae are attached, can be pneumatically lowered.\nHistory.\nThe project.\nIn 1934, the old Montparnasse station located on the edges of the similarly named boulevard, opposite the Rue de Rennes, appeared ill-suited to traffic. The city of Paris planned to reorganise the district and build a new station. But the project, entrusted to Raoul Dautry (who would give his name to the square of the tower), met strong opposition and was cancelled.\nIn 1956, on the occasion of the adoption of the new master plan for the Paris traffic plan, the ' () was created, as well as the ' (). Their mission was to redevelop the neighbourhood, which required razing many streets, often dilapidated and unsanitary. The site then occupied up to .\nIn 1958, the first studies of the tower were well launched, but the project was strongly criticised because of the height of the building. A controversy ensued, led by the Minister of Public Works Edgard Pisani, who obtained the support of Andr\u00e9 Malraux, then Minister of Culture under General de Gaulle which led to slowdowns in the project.\nHowever, the reconstruction of the Montparnasse station a few hundred metres south of the old one and the destruction of the Gare du Maine, which was included in the real estate project of the AOM, a joint agency which brought together the four architects: Urbain Cassan, Eug\u00e8ne Beaudouin and Louis de Ho\u00ffm de Marien, was carried out from June 1966 to the spring of 1969 with the assistance of the architect Jean Saubot.\nIn 1968, Andr\u00e9 Malraux granted the building permit for the Tower to the AOM and work began that same year. The project was spearheaded by the American real estate developer Wylie Tuttle, who enlisted a consortium of 17 French insurance companies and seven banks in the $140\u00a0million multiple-building project, but later distanced himself from the project until his 2002 obituary revealed that the building was his original \"brainchild\".\nIn 1969, the decision to build a shopping centre was finally made, and Georges Pompidou, then President of the Republic, wanted to provide the capital with modern infrastructure. Despite a major controversy, the construction of the tower was started.\nFor geographer Anne Clerval, this construction symbolises the service economy of Paris in the 1970s resulting from deindustrialisation policies which, from the 1960s, favoured \"bypassing by space the most working class strongholds at the time\".\nConstruction.\nThe Tour Montparnasse was built between 1969 and 1973 on the site of the old Montparnasse station. The first stone was laid in 1970 and the inauguration took place in 1973.\nThe foundations of the tower are made up of 56 reinforced concrete pillars sinking underground. For urban planning reasons, the tower had to be built just above a Metro line; and to avoid using the same support and weakening it, the Metro structures were protected by a reinforced concrete shield. Long horizontal beams were installed in order to free up the space needed in the basement to fit out the tracks for trains.\nOccupation.\nThe tower is mainly occupied by offices. Various companies and organisations have settled in the tower:\nThe 56th floor, with its terrace, bars and restaurant, has been used for private or public events. During the 1980s and 1990s, the live National Lottery was cast on TF1 from the 56th floor.\nClimbing the tower.\nFrench urban climber Alain Robert scaled the building's exterior glass and steel wall to the top twice, in 1995 and in 2015, both times using no equipment or safety devices. The feat was also undertaken by Polish climber Marcin Banot in 2020 and 2023.\nCriticism.\nThe tower's simple architecture, large proportions and monolithic appearance have been often criticised by Parisians for being out of place in Paris's cityscape. As a result, two years after its completion the construction of buildings over seven storeys tall in the city centre was banned in Paris. This ban was lifted in 2015.\nThe design of the tower predates architectural trends of more modern skyscrapers today that are often designed to provide a window for every office. Only the offices around the perimeter of each floor of Tour Montparnasse have windows.\nIt is said as a joke among Parisians that the tower's observation deck enjoys the most beautiful view in all of Paris because it is the only place from which the tower cannot be seen.\nA 2008 poll of editors on Virtualtourist voted the building the second-ugliest building in the world, behind Boston City Hall in the United States.\nAsbestos contamination.\nIn 2005, studies showed that the tower contained asbestos material. When inhaled, for instance during repairs, asbestos is a carcinogen. Monitoring revealed that legal limits of fibres per litre were surpassed and, on at least one occasion, reached 20 times the legal limit. Due to health and legal concerns, some tenants abandoned their offices in the building.\nRemoval of the asbestos was originally expected to take three years. After a nearly three-year delay, removal began in 2009 alongside regular operation of the building. In 2012, it was reported the tower was 90% free of asbestos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64488", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64488", "title": "Carlos Salinas de Gortari", "text": "President of Mexico from 1988 to 1994\nCarlos Salinas de Gortari (; born 3 April 1948) is a Mexican economist, historian and former politician who served as the 60th president of Mexico from 1988 to 1994. He is considered the frontman of Mexican Neoliberalism, responsible for formulating, promoting, signing and implementing the North American Free Trade Agreement. Affiliated with the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), earlier in his career he worked in the Secretariat of Programming and Budget, eventually becoming Secretary. He secured the party's nomination for the 1988 general election and was elected amid widespread accusations of electoral fraud.\nAn economist, Salinas de Gortari was the first Mexican president since 1946 who was not a law graduate. His presidency was characterized by the entrenchment of the neoliberal, free trade economic policies initiated by his predecessor Miguel de la Madrid in observance of the Washington Consensus, mass privatizations of state-run companies and the reprivatization of the banks, Mexico's entry into NAFTA, negotiations with the right-wing opposition party PAN to recognize their victories in state and local elections in exchange for supporting Salinas' policies, normalization of relations with the Catholic clergy, and the adoption of a new currency. From the beginning of his administration, Salinas de Gortari was criticized by the Mexican left, who considered him an illegitimate president whose neoliberal policies led to higher unemployment and were perceived as giving away the wealth of the nation to foreign ownership, whereas he was praised by the right wing and the international community, who considered him a leading figure of globalization and credited him with modernizing the country. Salinas was also backed by the United States government in his bid for Director-General of the newly created World Trade Organization (WTO).\nAfter years of economic recovery during his presidency, a series of mismanagement and corruption scandals during his last year in office crumbled his public image domestically and internationally. These events included the Zapatista uprising and the assassinations of Luis Donaldo Colosio (Salinas's hand-picked successor and PRI candidate for the 1994 presidential election) and Jos\u00e9 Francisco Ruiz Massieu (Salinas's brother-in-law and PRI Secretary-General). This surge of political violence led to economic uncertainty. Facing pressures to devalue the peso, Salinas refused, opting for a strategy he believed would help his candidacy to be the inaugural president of the WTO. As a consequence, less than a month after Salinas left office, his successor Ernesto Zedillo was forced to devalue the peso and Mexico entered into one of the worst economic crises of its history. Shortly after, his brother Ra\u00fal Salinas de Gortari was arrested for ordering the assassination of Ruiz Massieu and was subsequently indicted on charges of drug trafficking. Salinas then left the country, returning in 1999.\nSalinas is often referred to as the most unpopular former president of Mexico. A 2005 nationwide poll conducted by Parametr\u00eda found that 73% of the respondents had a negative image of him, while only 9% stated that they had a positive image of the former president. He has been regarded as the most influential and controversial Mexican politician since the 1990s.\nEarly life and education.\nCarlos Salinas de Gortari was born on 3 April 1948 in Mexico City, the second son and one of five children of economist and government official Ra\u00fal Salinas Lozano and Margarita de Gortari Carvajal. Salinas's father served as President Adolfo L\u00f3pez Mateos's minister of industry and commerce, but was passed over as the PRI's presidential candidate in favor of Gustavo D\u00edaz Ordaz (1964\u201370). When Carlos Salinas was chosen the PRI's presidential candidate for the 1988 election, he told his father, \"It took us more than 20 years, but we made it.\"\nOn 18 December 1951, when he was three years old, he was playing with his older brother Ra\u00fal, then five, and an eight-year-old friend when they found a loaded rifle, and one of them shot and killed the Salinas family's twelve-year-old maid, Manuela. It was never determined which of the three boys pulled the trigger, and the incident was declared an accident; it was given newspaper coverage in \"Exc\u00e9lsior\" and \"La Prensa\" at the time. A judge blamed Salinas' parents for leaving a loaded weapon accessible to their small children. The Salinas family did not know the last name of their 12-year-old maid Manuela\u2014only that she came from San Pedro Azcapotzaltongo\u2014and it is unknown whether her family claimed her body. They were exonerated with the assistance of Gilberto Bola\u00f1os Cacho, nephew to Gustavo D\u00edaz Ordaz, who became president of Mexico in 1964. Salinas has never commented publicly on this incident.\nSalinas attended the National Autonomous University of Mexico as an undergraduate, studying economics. He was an undergraduate when the student movement in Mexico organized against the 1968 Summer Olympics, but there is no evidence of his participation. He was an active member of the PRI youth movement and a political club, the Revolutionary Policy and Professional Association, whose members continued to be his close friends when he was president. Salinas was a skilled dressage horseman, and was a member of the Mexico national team at the Pan-American Games in Cali, Colombia, in 1971.\nSalinas was one of the Mexicans of his generation who studied at elite foreign universities. He earned a master's degree in Public Administration from Harvard University in 1973 and went on to earn a PhD from Harvard Kennedy School in 1978. His doctoral dissertation was published as \"Political Participation, Public Investment and Support for the System: A Comparative Study of Rural Communities in Mexico\".\nPersonal life.\nSalinas met his future first wife, Cecilia Yolanda Occelli Gonz\u00e1lez (born 1950), who was two years his junior, in 1958 when he was just ten years old whilst she was only eight. They began dating in 1965 when he was 17-years old and she was 15-years old. However, the relationship ended in 1968 when Salinas moved to the United States to study economics.\nIn 1970, Salinas and Occelli reconnected in Williamsburg, Virginia, in the United States. They were engaged soon after and married on 15 April 1972, in a ceremony in Mexico City. They moved to Boston, where Salinas was completing his master's and doctorate at Harvard University. The couple discovered that Occelli was pregnant with their first child during Salinas' first semester at Harvard. Their oldest daughter, Cecilia Salinas Occelli, was born on 22 January 1974. Occelli and Salinas had two more children: Emiliano, who was born on 19 February 1976, and Juan Cristobal, who was born in 1978.\nCecilia Occelli Gonz\u00e1lez served as First Lady of Mexico from 1988 to 1994 during the Salinas presidency. Soon after leaving office, Salinas traveled to New York City to take a break from Mexican politics. He returned to Mexico from the United States in 1995, where he immediately asked his wife for a divorce. The couple divorced later in 1995.\nSalinas married his second wife, Ana Paula Gerard Rivero, shortly after his divorce from Occelli. It is believed that Salinas originally met Gerard in 1983 at the Instituto Tecnol\u00f3gico Aut\u00f3nomo de M\u00e9xico, where he was teaching at the time, though that story remains unconfirmed. Gerard later worked as a technical secretary for the Economic Cabinet of the Salinas administration. The couple had three children. Gerard gave birth to their eldest daughter, Ana Emilia Margarita, in January 1996. followed by a son, Patricio Ger\u00f3nimo Gerardo who was born two years later in 1998, while their youngest son, Mateo, was born in 2006.\nIn early 2021, he obtained Spanish nationality through the procedure that grants it to descendants of Sephardic Jews.\nEarly political career.\nSalinas was tapped by President Miguel de la Madrid to serve as Minister of Planning and Budget in 1982, a position that De la Madrid himself had previously held. It was a key cabinet position since Mexico was in dire financial circumstances following the presidency of Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Portillo, who as a desperate measure had nationalized the banks in Mexico and expropriated dollar-denominated savings accounts. The country held no hard currency reserves, exhaustion of foreign credit, and soaring interest rates. the Ministries of Finance and Planning and Budget became the most powerful positions to deal with the economic crisis. In the cabinet, Salinas's main rival was Jes\u00fas Silva Herzog, Minister of Finance. In the internecine politics that would decide who would succeed De la Madrid as president, Salinas sought to destroy the reputation of Silva Herzog. Another key figure in the cabinet was Manuel Bartlett, Minister of the Interior, with whom Salinas forged a non-compete alliance. Salinas also forged other alliances within the circles of power and did not directly compete with De la Madrid for public attention. Silva Herzog made missteps in his ministry, which Salinas capitalized on, forcing his resignation.\nPresidential election 1988.\nAccording to historian Enrique Krauze, \"Not in their worst nightmares could the lords of the PRI have imagined what would happen to them on the sixth of July 1988. As they had done six years before, the electorate came out to vote, but not in support of the official candidate. They came to the voting booths to punish him.\" Salinas had become presidential candidate in a difficult time for the PRI which for the first time was faced by significant opposition from the left (National Democratic Front) and from the right (National Action Party, PAN). The candidate of the PAN was Manuel Clouthier.\nCuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas, son of President L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas, registered as an opposing candidate from a left-wing coalition called \"Frente Democr\u00e1tico Nacional\". He rapidly became a popular figure, and became the first opposing candidate to fill the \"Z\u00f3calo\" with sympathizers and to seriously threaten the PRI, which had won all presidential elections since its inception in 1929. The Ministry of the Interior (Secretar\u00eda de Gobernaci\u00f3n), through its Federal Electoral Commission, was the institution in charge of the electoral process, and installed a modern computing system to count the votes. On election day 6 July 1988, the system \"crashed\", and when it was finally restored, Carlos Salinas was declared the official winner. Even though the elections are extremely controversial, and some maintain that Salinas won legally, the expression \"se cay\u00f3 el sistema\" (\"the system crashed\") became a colloquial euphemism for electoral fraud. As one observer put it, \"For the ordinary citizen, it was not the computer network but the Mexican political system that had crashed.\"\nThe process involved two suspicious shutdowns of the computer system used to keep track of the number of votes. Suspicions later grew as Congress voted (with support from the Revolutionary Institutional and National Action parties) to destroy without opening the electoral documentation. Other people believed that Salinas, in fact, won the ballot, albeit probably not with an absolute majority as the official figures suggested, although that is not required under Mexican election law.\nIn the following years, comments made by former president Miguel de la Madrid in a 2004 autobiography and during a television interview in 2005 were taken as an admission that the 1988 election had been rigged and that the PRI lost the 1988 elections. However, what he actually observed in his autobiography was that initial results \"showed that Mr. Salinas was losing badly to the opposition leader Cuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas\" in areas around the capital, where there was overwhelming support for C\u00e1rdenas; and in the 2005 interview, his actual words were that \"the PRI lost the '88 elections, or at least lost a significant number of voters\". Asked for comment on De la Madrid's statements following the 2005 television interview, Senator Manuel Bartlett, who was the president of the Federal Electoral Commission (\"Comisi\u00f3n Federal Electoral\") during the De la Madrid administration, declared Salinas won the election albeit with the smallest margin of any PRI candidate before him. He attributed De la Madrid's remarks to his old age (71 years old as of 2005[ [update]]) and the remarks being taken out of context by journalist Carlos Loret de Mola.\nPresidency 1988\u20131994.\nCabinet.\nSalinas assumed the presidency on 1 December 1988 at the Legislative Palace of San L\u00e1zaro. There he took oath before the Congress of the Union. As the declared winner of a highly contested election, he had the task of restoring his own legitimacy and that of his party when he took office. The election had shown that much of the public desired reform, but Salinas appointed PRI hard-liners (\"dinosaurs\") to his cabinet, including Fernando Guti\u00e9rrez Barrios to the Ministry of the Interior; Manuel Bartlett to the Ministry of Education; and Carlos Hank Gonz\u00e1lez to Agriculture. The cabinet was cohesive in support of Salinas's neoliberal policies. Many ministers were technocrats with graduate academic degrees, a profile similar to Salinas's. Although there was opposition to many of Salinas's policies, it came from outside the cabinet. Over the course of his presidency, he moved or replaced a number of . A key replacement in January 1994 immediately after the Chiapas conflict was at the Ministry of the Interior (\"Gobernaci\u00f3n\"), appointing Jorge Carpizo, who had been head of the government National Human Rights Commission and previously was rector of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. When the PRI candidate in the 1994 elections, Luis Donaldo Colosio was assassinated in March 1994, new restrictions barring cabinet ministers who had not resigned in the six months previous to the election date from being candidates for the presidency meant that Salinas had a small pool of eligible choices.\nDomestic issues.\nIn his inaugural address in December 1988, he outlined an ambitious and important goal of \"modernizing\" Mexico.\" He contended that \"The modernization of Mexico is essential if we are to meet the demands of the 85 million Mexicans of today... In brief, we need to modernize politics, the economy, and society. The modernization of Mexico is, moreover, an absolute imperative. This is the only way we will be able to affirm our sovereignty in a world undergoing profound transformation.\"\nDuring his six-year term in office (\"sexenio\") major changes were made to the Constitution of 1917 that affected political reform; church-state relations, ending many aspects of anticlericalism restricting the Catholic Church and other religious organizations; agrarian reform, ending redistribution of land under Article 27; and policy changes on \"indigenous peoples, human rights, economic activities of the state, [and] criminal due process.\"\nFirst steps.\nImmediately upon his inauguration, he arrested prominent union leaders, many of whom were his opponents in the PRI, among other measures to demonstrate his determination to set his own course. His government privatized state-run companies, including Tel\u00e9fonos de M\u00e9xico, sold to PRI-insider Carlos Slim, as well as re-privatizing banks that President Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Portillo had nationalized at the end of his term. The funds from these sales of state assets helped pay off Mexico's internal debt. However, there were also bailouts for banks and the Mexican toll roads that became scandals.\nEconomic policy.\nSalinas continued with the neoliberal economic policy of his predecessor Miguel de la Madrid and converted Mexico into a regulatory state. During his presidential term, he aggressively privatized hundreds of state-run companies, including telecommunications, steel, and mining. The banking system (that had been nationalized by Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Portillo) was privatized.\nHis National Development Plan (\"Plan Nacional de Desarrollo\") published in 1989 had 4 objectives:\nBy the end of his term, inflation had been reduced to 7% in 1994, the lowest figure in 22 years. Shortly after leaving office, due to the so-called December Mistake, inflation rose again to 51%.\nDuring his term, the peso devalued from 2.65 MXP to 3.60 MXN per U.S. dollar by 30 November 1994, the last day of his term; thus the peso devalued far less than it had in the two previous terms. (The peso was later devalued from 4 per dollar to 7.2 in a single week due to the \"December Mistake.\")\nPoverty alleviation.\nSalinas established the National Solidarity Program (PRONASOL), a social welfare program, as a way to directly aid poor Mexicans, but also create a network of support for Salinas. It was his first official act as president. The program channeled public funds, which the administration said came largely from privatization of state-owned companies, into impoverished areas to improve roads, the electrical grid, schools, and clinics in order to raise levels of education and health and link remote areas, with lack of oversight in its spending. The program was similar to those in other countries to manage the disruption and political costs of macroeconomic adjustment. Salinas's Harvard doctoral dissertation had examined the relationship between social programs and political support for the government. Given the Salinas's questionable legitimacy as the winner of the 1988 election, PRONASOL was seen as a way for Salinas to deliver immediate benefits to the poor and avert their turning to other political parties or worse. It did not prioritize funding for Mexico's poorest states, but rather to states with middle-income populations where elections were most contested and where the PRI had lost. Politically, the program sought to undermine the appeal of leftists, especially Cuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas. In Chiapas, PRONASOL channeled increased funds in 1993 and 1994, but it did not prevent the Zapatista uprising, which showed that the program had only a limited impact.\nChurch\u2013State relations.\nThe Catholic Church and the Mexican government has had a historically fraught relationship, with restrictions on the church's role in national life. In the 1980s, the church saw electoral participation reform and fighting electoral fraud as an issue. Sometime during the presidential campaign, the PRI had indicated to the Church that a Salinas victory would be beneficial to the Church. It has been considered a quid pro quo agreement.\nA delegation of the leadership of the episcopal hierarchy attended the inauguration of Salinas on 1 December 1988. After the 1988 election the Mexican bishops did not make public statements about the election results. Behind the scenes the apostolic delegate to Mexico, the Vatican's representative, Mexican bishops, and government officials had a series of secret meetings that hammered out the outlines of a new Church-State relationship. In his inaugural address, Salinas de Gortari announced a program to \"modernize\" Mexico via structural transformation. \"The modern state is a state which ... maintains transparency and updates its relation with political parties, entrepreneurial groups, and the church.\" His declaration was more an articulation of the direction of change, but not list of specifics.\nThe implementation of reforms entailed amending the 1917 constitution, but before that overcoming opposition on the Left but also in the Catholic Church itself. After considerable debate, the Mexican legislature voted for fundamental revisions in Church-State policy.\nElectoral reform.\nIn the wake of the highly controversial 1988 election results, the government initiated a series of electoral reforms. A major change was the creation of the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) in October 1990, taking elections out of the hands of the Ministry of the Interior to create an independent entity.\nThe 1994 elections were the first to have international observers, and were considered, at that time, the fairest elections in the century, although not free of controversy. For the first time, the PRI lost its two-thirds majority in Congress, which is necessary to conduct constitutional reforms.\nHuman rights.\nIn 1990, the National Human Rights Commission (\"Comisi\u00f3n Nacional de los Derechos Humanos\") was created. Initially a government agency, it became a separate entity,\nEducation.\nIn 1992, Salinas and his Secretary of Education, Ernesto Zedillo introduced new compulsory history texts in Mexican schools, part of the Mexican Free-Textbook Program. Authored by and H\u00e9ctor Aguilar Cam\u00edn, the new textbooks set off a storm of controversy. Shifts in emphasis concerned the Porfiriato and the role of foreign investment, Emiliano Zapata, lauding him as a hero despite his having opposed every government in power; U.S.-Mexico relations, avoiding negative treatment of the history; and the Catholic Church in Mexico, treating it dispassionately. The government was compelled to withdraw them in January 1993. According to one assessment, \"While the 1992 textbook controversy disclosed new support for the regime from the right, it also revealed an erosion of support and discipline within officialdom.\"\nNorth American Free Trade Agreement.\nThe centerpiece of Salinas's presidency was his successful negotiation with the U.S. and Canada to create the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which came into effect on 1 January 1994. The agreement was a reversal of Mexico's longstanding policies of economic nationalism and anti-Americanism and was intended to create a single market. Mexican proponents of NAFTA saw it in a way to secure markets for its exports and attract foreign investment, and create jobs, help the government to be able to service its foreign debt, and overall, promote economic recovery. In Mexico, the reversal was controversial, opposed by organized labor, many academics, and nongovernmental organizations.\nDrug trafficking and corruption.\nAn issue of importance both domestic and foreign policy is drug trafficking. In the 1980s and early 1990s, Mexico was a transit country for cocaine produced in Colombia and destined for consumers in the United States. President De la Madrid considered drug trafficking a national security issue and devoted government funding to it. Salinas expanded this funding, but neither president stemmed the growth of trafficking and its impact on Mexico. Drug trafficking is highly lucrative for those involved with it, and Mexico's weak law enforcement and judicial system could not prevent the wide-scale involvement of Mexico's poorly-paid police from being corrupted. The Mexican military to a lesser extent was corrupted, along with politicians, and some journalists. Such corruption undermined the possibility of rule of law and it prevented Mexicans from having trust in the state. A rising level of violence by drug traffickers against the state, witnesses, journalists, and bystanders. The Mexican government did capture and jail some high-level drug mafia leaders, including Miguel \u00c1ngel F\u00e9lix Gallardo in 1989, whose arrest made visible the extent of law enforcement collusion.\nForeign policy.\nSalinas negotiated the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), with the United States and Canada. Salinas also renegotiated Mexico's foreign debt. In 1990, Salinas had traveled to Europe to attract non-North American capital investment, but dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc opened them to foreign investment; Mexico was less attractive to them and Salinas turned to North America. Critics say that NAFTA has had mixed results for Mexico: while there has been huge increase in commerce and foreign investment, this has not been at all the case for employment and salaries.\nIn 1992, Mexico hosted the Chapultepec Peace Accords, a venue where the parties in the civil war in El Salvador signed an accord ending the long conflict.\nMexico reestablished diplomatic relations with the Vatican. Moreover, Mexico became member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The First Ibero-American Summit was held and the Chapultepec Peace Accords, a peace agreement for El Salvador, were signed.\nSalinas in 1991 visited United States to help convince the Illinois Governor, James R. Thompson to pardon four Mexican citizens from a quadruple murder known as the Milwaukee Ave Massacre, that took place in 1981 in Chicago, Illinois. With the help of Carlos Salinas de Gortari the four men, Joaquin Varela, Rogelio Arroyo, Ignacio Varela, and Isauro Sanchez, had their sentences commuted, later pardoned by Governor Jim Edgar.\n1994 election year.\nAs the 1994 presidential election approached, Salinas had the crucial decision to designate the candidate for the PRI; that person had always gone on to win the presidential election. \"The shipwreck of the 1988 succession should have sufficed to teach Salinas to prevent another disaster from befalling the system he had inherited.\" At the time Salinas made the choice, popularity and credibility was high over the course of his presidency, but a series of events in the final year of his presidency changed that.\nChoosing the PRI nominee.\nThe \"unveiling\" of the PRI candidate for the presidency was on 28 November 1993, with Salinas choosing Luis Donaldo Colosio. Those considered for the position were Manuel Camacho and Colosio, with earlier contenders, such as Jes\u00fas Silva Herzog and Pedro Aspe being eliminated. Aspe, a graduate of MIT had a high international profile, but was considered unlikely to actually attract voters. The changed circumstances of the Mexican political system, as demonstrated by Salinas's own election to the presidency, meant that being designated the PRI did not guarantee election. Aspe was not a charismatic prospect as a candidate who could energize and charm voters. With the potential that Cuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas was likely to run again for the presidency, the PRI needed to field someone who could garner votes.\nZapatista rebellion.\nThe uprising in Chiapas on 1 January 1994 coincided with the date that the NAFTA came into effect. The Zapatista Army of National Liberation (\"Ej\u00e9rcito Zapatista de Liberaci\u00f3n Nacional\", EZLN) issued their first declaration from the state of Chiapas in southern Mexico. Salinas's immediate response was to find for a peaceful solution: offering pardon to deposed arms, ordering a cease fire, appointing a peace negotiator, and sending the Mexican Congress a General Amnesty Law. Salinas' presidential successor took a harder line when he was inaugurated. Salinas' more peaceful solution to the uprising was legal and politically pragmatic, likely saving many lives in Mexico. The Zapatista rebellion spread regionally, not nationwide, but the fact that it happened and that international attention was drawn to this poor region of Mexico just as NAFTA was implemented meant that Salinas' careful plans for a peaceful political transition with his legacy intact were obliterated. Salinas appointed Manuel Camacho, Minister of Foreign Affairs, as the government's peace mediator. For Salinas, this had political benefits, since Camacho, having been passed over as the PRI presidential candidate, could have bolted from the party. With this important appointment, he was in the public limelight again.\nAssassination of Colosio and the new PRI candidate.\nA spectacular political event in 1994 was the assassination of Salinas's handpicked PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio in March 1994, upending the already complex electoral situation with elections scheduled for August of that year. The Zapatista uprising had ruined Salinas's plans for a peaceful transition of Mexico in the elections. There is evidence that Salinas and Colosio began to disagree, not unusual after the electoral transfer, but this occurred prior to it. His campaign languished with lack of funding, and Colosio had problems getting media coverage, given the high-profile events in Chiapas. Salinas prevented Colosio from going to Chiapas, with the explanation that his presence there would complicate the situation. There was the impression that Salinas would reverse his decision for Colosio, substituting someone else, perhaps Manuel Camacho. Camacho was a politically savvy former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Head of Government of Mexico City, as well as Peace Commissioner in Chiapas. Salinas made a public statement on 17 January 1994, affirming his choice as candidate, but this was at the insistence of Colosio. Salinas extracted a pledge from Camacho that he had no designs on the presidency, which he renounced the day before Colosio's assassination in Tijuana on 23 March 1994. After a few days of weighing his options, Salinas chose Colosio's campaign manager, Ernesto Zedillo, former Minister of Education, as the new PRI candidate for the presidency. Zedillo had been Secretary of Education, a relatively unimportant ministry; he had resigned to run the campaign of Colosio. Zedillo had never held elective office, sharing that trait with De la Madrid and Salinas, and was not otherwise experienced politically. He was perceived as a weak candidate. There is speculation that Salinas wished to perpetuate his power as Plutarco El\u00edas Calles had in the wake of the 1928 assassination of president-elect Alvaro Obreg\u00f3n, controlling successor presidents.\n1994 general election.\nAfter considering whether to postpone the general election scheduled for 21 August 1994, Salinas chose Zedillo to run as the PRI candidate for the presidency and the elections took place as scheduled. Voters came out in large numbers to choose between three main candidates, Zedillo for the PRI, C\u00e1rdenas for the Party of Democratic Revolution, and Diego Fern\u00e1ndez de Cevallos for the PAN. Zedillo won a clear victory, in what was considered by foreign observers as a free and fair election. In results published by the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE), Zedillo got 48.7%, Cevallos 25.9%, and C\u00e1rdenas 16.6%.\nAnother political assassination.\nFollowing the election in September 1994, Secretary General of the PRI Jos\u00e9 Francisco Ruiz Massieu, Salinas' former brother-in-law, was assassinated in downtown Mexico City in broad daylight. The murder was not solved during Salinas's presidency, even when Mario Ruiz Massieu (Francisco's brother) was the attorney general and in charge of the investigation.\nEconomic issues.\nThe economic bubble gave Mexico a prosperity not seen in a generation. This period of rapid growth coupled with low inflation prompted some political thinkers and the media to state that Mexico was on the verge of becoming a \"First World nation\". In fact, it was the first of the \"newly industrialized nations\" to be admitted into the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in May 1994. It was known that the peso was overvalued, but the extent of the Mexican economy's vulnerability was either not well known or downplayed by both the Salinas administration and the media. This vulnerability was further aggravated by several unexpected events and macroeconomic mistakes made in the last year of his administration.\nSeveral economists and historians have analyzed some of the events and policy mistakes that precipitated the crisis of December 1994. In keeping with the PRI election-year practices, Salinas launched a spending spree to finance popular projects, which translated into a historically high deficit. This budget deficit was coupled with a current account deficit, fueled by excessive consumer spending as allowed by the overvalued peso. In order to finance this deficit, the Salinas administration issued \"tesobonos\", an attractive debt instrument that insured payment in dollars instead of pesos.\nIncreasing current account deficit fostered by government spending, caused alarm among Mexican and foreign T-bill (\"tesobono\") investors, who sold them rapidly, thereby depleting the already-low central bank reserves (which eventually hit a record low of $9\u00a0billion). The economically orthodox thing to do, in order to maintain the fixed exchange rate (at 3.3 pesos per dollar, within a variation band), would have been to sharply increase interest rates by allowing the monetary base to shrink, as dollars were being withdrawn from the reserves. Given the fact that it was an election year, whose outcome might have changed as a result of a pre-election-day economic downturn, the Bank of Mexico decided to buy Mexican Treasury Securities in order to maintain the monetary base, and thus prevent the interest rates from rising. This, in turn, caused an even more dramatic decline in the dollar reserves. These decisions aggravated the already delicate situation, to a point at which a crisis became inevitable and devaluation was only one of many necessary adjustments.\nSuccessor first days crises.\nPeso devaluation.\nSoon after taking office, Zedillo announced that his government would let the fixed exchange rate band increase 15 percent (up to 4 pesos per US$), by stopping the unorthodox measures employed by the previous administration to keep it at the previous fixed level (e.g.,\u00a0by selling dollars, assuming debt, and so on). This measure, however, was not enough, and the government was unable to hold this line, and decided to let the exchange rate float. While experts agree that devaluation was necessary, some critics of Zedillo's 22-day-old administration argue that, although economically coherent, the way the crisis was handled was a political mistake. By having announced its plans for devaluation, they argue that many foreigners withdrew their investments, thus aggravating the effects. Whether the effects were aggravated further or not, the result was that the peso crashed under a floating regime from four pesos to the dollar (with the previous increase of 15%) to 7.2 to the dollar in the space of a week.\nMexican businesses with debts to be paid in dollars, or that relied on supplies bought from the United States, suffered an immediate hit, with mass industrial lay-offs and several suicides. To make matters worse, the devaluation announcement was made mid-week, on a Wednesday, and for the remainder of the week foreign investors fled the Mexican market without any government action to prevent or discourage the flight until the following Monday, when it was too late.\nSalinas faced widespread criticism in Mexico. He was widely blamed for the collapse of the economy and his privatization of several government-run businesses such as Telmex. With respect to the collapse of the economy, he rapidly responded by blaming Zedillo's \"inept\" handling of the situation, coining the term \"December mistake\" to refer to the crisis and Zedillo's mistakes. He then argued that he had talked to Zedillo of a possibility of \"sharing the burden\" of the devaluation by allowing the peso to devaluate a certain percent before his term was over, and the rest of the necessary devaluation would have been done during Zedillo's administration.\nZapatista Crisis.\nInitially the Zedillo administration followed Salinas's policies regarding the negotiations with the Zapatistas, pledging to reach a peaceful resolution to the Chiapas crisis. Zedillo then reversed course and on 9 February 1995, identifying Subcomandante Marcos to be Rafael Sebasti\u00e1n Guill\u00e9n Vicente, and pursued military intervention. He abandoned that unsuccessful strategy and peace talks were subsequently re-established. Zedillo's zigzag policies in Chiapas were consistent with some others of his administration.\nBreak with Zedillo, Ra\u00fal Salinas arrest and self-exile.\nErnesto Zedillo had been an accidental presidential candidate who had no political experience or independent base of power. There was a perception that Salinas wanted to follow the precedent of Plutarco El\u00edas Calles who wielded tremendous power over three successor presidents following the 1928 assassination of president-elect Alvaro Obreg\u00f3n. However, this changed when by order of president Zedillo Salinas's older brother Ra\u00fal Salinas was arrested on 28 February 1995 under charges of orchestrating the assassination of Ruiz Massieu; the arrest dramatically shifted the political situation. Since 1940 when president L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas left the presidency and turned power over to his successor, Mexican former presidents had not directly intervened in politics. After the arrest of his brother, Salinas went on television, expressing his outrage at Zedillo. In the broadcast he placed the blame for the December peso crisis on Zedillo, resulting in the loss of Mexican jobs, bankruptcies, and the tarnishing of Mexico's image.\nSalinas abandoned his campaign\u2014which had been backed by the United States\u2014to become the Director-General of the World Trade Organization and left Mexico City, going to Monterrey where he staged a publicized hunger strike in the home of a PRI supporter. Arturo Warman, Minister of Agrarian Reform, was sent to Monterrey to persuade Salinas to return to Mexico City. Salinas demanded that the government issue a statement clearing him of responsibility for the Colosio case and the 20 December devaluation. Salinas returned to Mexico City and he and Zedillo met. Zedillo's government issued a statement absolving Salinas of the Colosio murder and tempered his criticism of Salinas in the peso crisis. Salinas left Mexico for self-imposed exile and settled in Ireland for a period.\nPost-Presidential years.\nSalinas's reputation was to be further clouded by a series of controversies involving close family members. His brother Ra\u00fal had been arrested in February 1995. In November 1995, Ra\u00fal's wife, , and his brother-in-law, Antonio Casta\u00f1\u00f3n, were arrested in Geneva, Switzerland, after attempting to withdraw US$84 million from an account owned by Ra\u00fal Salinas under an alias. Their capture led to the unveiling of a vast fortune spread around the world and amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars, even though Ra\u00fal Salinas had never officially received an annual income of more than $190,000. A report by the U.S. General Accounting Office indicated that Ra\u00fal Salinas had transferred over $90 million out of Mexico into private bank accounts in London and Switzerland through a complex set of transactions between 1992 and 1994. In 2008, the government of Switzerland turned over $74 million, out of the $110 million in frozen bank accounts held by Ra\u00fal Salinas, to the government of Mexico. The Swiss Justice Ministry indicated that the Mexican government had demonstrated that $66 million of the funds had been misappropriated, and the funds, with interest, were returned to Mexico. The Salinas family would not receive back any of the frozen funds.\nIn 1997, while Salinas was in exile and his brother Ra\u00fal in jail, their father, Ra\u00fal Salinas Lozano was accused in a U.S court of being connected to drug dealing by a convicted Mexican trafficker, Magdalena Ruiz Pelayo; the senior Salinas denied the charges.\nSalinas divorced his first wife, Cecilia Occelli Gonz\u00e1lez, in 1995 soon after leaving office. That same year he married his second wife, Ana Paula Gerard.\nIn January 1999, after a four-year trial, Salinas' older brother Ra\u00fal was convicted of ordering the murder of the PRI official (and Salinas' brother-in-law) Jos\u00e9 Francisco Ruiz Massieu and sentenced to 50 years in prison. In July 1999, an appeals court cut the sentence to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;27+1\u20442 years. In June 2005, the conviction was overturned, and Ra\u00fal Salinas was freed.\nOn 6 December 2004, Salinas's youngest brother, Enrique, was found dead in Huixquilucan, Estado de M\u00e9xico, inside his car with a plastic bag strapped around his head. The case remains unsolved.\nIn the last years of Zedillo's term, Carlos Salinas returned to Mexico to announce the publication of his book, \"Mexico: The Policy and the Politics of Modernization\". Written during his stay in Ireland and full of quotations from press articles and political memoirs, it defended his achievements and blamed Zedillo for the crisis that followed his administration.\nAs of May 2010, Salinas was still living in Dublin, Ireland. Salinas also attended his son's civil wedding in Mexico City and promised to attend the subsequent religious wedding in late September.\nSalinas returned to Mexico in the late 1990s and has continued to influence Mexican politics since then. In April 2018, he celebrated his 70th birthday with a party attended by a number of political elites. On 5 December 2018, he attended George H. W. Bush's funeral.\nPublic opinion and legacy.\nDuring his presidential administration, allegedly, he was part of an embezzlement scandal of public funds and drug-related funds along with his brother Raul Salinas de Gortari.\nSalinas de Gortari remains a highly controversial figure in Mexican history. In a 2005 national survey conducted by Parametr\u00eda, 73% of the respondents had a negative image of Salinas de Gortari, 9% had a positive opinion, and 18% had no opinion about him.\nIn another national survey conducted in 2012 by BGC-Excelsior about former Presidents, Salinas de Gortari by far received the worst rating: 20% of the respondents considered that his administration was \"very good\" or \"good\", 13% of the responded considered that it was an \"average\" administration, and 66% of the respondents considering that it was a \"bad\" or \"very bad\" administration.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the Netflix series \"\" (2018), \"the President-elect\", a character based on Salinas, is portrayed by actor Adolfo Madera. Season 2 episode 6 depicts two young boys playing war and shooting a maid and episodes 7 and 8 depict the 1988 Mexican Presidential election.\nSalinas was prominently featured in two Netflix series released in 2019, pertaining to the Colosio assassination: as an interviewee in the documentary series \"1994\", and portrayed by Ari Brickman in the drama series \"\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64489", "revid": "45277892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64489", "title": "Purchasing power parity", "text": "Measure of prices in different countries\nPurchasing power parity (PPP) is a measure of the price of specific goods in different countries and is used to compare the absolute purchasing power of the countries' currencies. PPP is effectively the ratio of the price of a market basket at one location divided by the price of the basket of goods at a different location. The PPP inflation and exchange rate may differ from the market exchange rate because of tariffs, and other transaction costs.\nThe purchasing power parity indicator can be used to compare economies regarding their gross domestic product (GDP), labour productivity and actual individual consumption, and in some cases to analyse price convergence and to compare the cost of living between places. The calculation of the PPP, according to the OECD, is made through a \"basket of goods\" that contains a \"final product list [that] covers around 3,000 consumer goods and services, 30 occupations in government, 200 types of equipment goods and about 15 construction projects\". \nConcept.\nPurchasing power parity (PPP) is an economic term for measuring prices at different locations. It is based on the law of one price, which says that, if there are no transaction costs nor trade barriers for a particular good, then the price for that good should be the same at every location. Ideally, a computer in New York and in Hong Kong should have the same price. If its price is 500 US dollars in New York and the same computer costs 2000 HK dollars in Hong Kong, PPP theory says the exchange rate should be 4 HK dollars for every 1 US dollar.\nThis makes PPP similar to the consumer price index (CPI). Per D. S. Prasada Rao, an economics professor at the University of New England (Australia), \"The CPI measures differences in levels of prices of goods and services over time within a country, whereas PPPs measure the change in levels of prices across regions within a country.\"\nPoverty, tariffs, transportation, and other frictions prevent the trading and purchasing of various goods, so measuring a single good can cause a large error. The PPP term accounts for this by using a basket of goods, that is, many goods with different quantities. PPP then computes an inflation and exchange rate as the ratio of the price of the basket in one location to the price of the basket in the other location. For example, if a basket consisting of 1 computer, 1 ton of rice, and half a ton of steel was 1000 US dollars in New York and the same goods cost 6000 HK dollars in Hong Kong, the PPP exchange rate would be 6 HK dollars for every 1 US dollar.\nThe name \"purchasing power parity\" comes from the idea that, with the right exchange rate, consumers in every location will have the same purchasing power.\nThe value of the PPP exchange rate is very dependent on the basket of goods chosen. In general, goods are chosen that might closely obey the law of one price. Thus, one attempts to select goods which are traded easily and are commonly available in both locations. Organizations that compute PPP exchange rates use different baskets of goods and can come up with different values.\nThe PPP exchange rate may not match the market exchange rate. The market rate is more volatile because it reacts to changes in demand at each location. Also, tariffs and differences in the price of labour (see Balassa\u2013Samuelson theorem) can contribute to longer-term differences between the two rates. One use of PPP is to predict longer-term exchange rates.\nBecause PPP exchange rates are more stable and are less affected by tariffs, they are used for many international comparisons, such as comparing countries' GDPs or other national income statistics. These numbers often come with the label \"PPP-adjusted,\" or are expressed in 'PPP' currencies, etc. \nThere can be marked differences between purchasing power adjusted incomes and those converted via market exchange rates. A well-known purchasing power adjustment is the Geary\u2013Khamis dollar (the \"GK dollar\" or \"international dollar\"). The World Bank's \"World Development Indicators 2005\" estimated that in 2003, one Geary\u2013Khamis dollar was equivalent to about 1.8 Chinese yuan by purchasing power parity\u2014considerably different from the nominal exchange rate. This discrepancy has large implications; for instance, when converted via the nominal exchange rates, GDP per capita in India is about US$1,965 while on a PPP basis, it is about Int$7,197. At the other extreme, Denmark's nominal GDP per capita is around US$53,242, but its PPP figure is Int$46,602, in line with other developed nations.\nVariations.\nThere are variations in calculating PPP. The EKS method (developed by \u00d6. \u00c9ltet\u0151, P. K\u00f6ves and B. Szulc) uses the geometric mean of the exchange rates computed for individual goods. The EKS-S method (by \u00c9ltet\u0151, K\u00f6ves, Szulc, and Sergeev) uses two different baskets, one for each country, and then averages the result. While these methods work for 2 countries, the exchange rates may be inconsistent if applied to 3 countries, so further adjustment may be necessary so that the rate from currency A to B times the rate from B to C equals the rate from A to C.\nRelative PPP.\nRelative PPP is a weaker statement based on the law of one price, covering changes in the exchange rate and inflation rates. It seems to mirror the exchange rate closer than PPP does.\nUsage.\nConversion.\nPurchasing power parity exchange rate is used when comparing national production and consumption and other places where the prices of non-traded goods are considered important. (Market exchange rates are used for individual goods that are traded). PPP rates are more stable over time and can be used when that attribute is important.\nPPP exchange rates help costing but exclude profits and above all do not consider the different quality of goods among countries. The same product, for instance, can have a different level of quality and even safety in different countries, and may be subject to different taxes and transport costs. Since market exchange rates fluctuate substantially, when the GDP of one country measured in its own currency is converted to the other country's currency using market exchange rates, one country might be inferred to have higher real GDP than the other country in one year but lower in the other. Both of these inferences would fail to reflect the reality of their \"relative levels of production\".\nIf one country's GDP is converted into the other country's currency using PPP exchange rates instead of observed market exchange rates, the false inference will not occur. Essentially GDP measured at PPP controls for the different costs of living and price levels, usually relative to the United States dollar, enabling a more accurate estimate of a nation's level of production.\nThe exchange rate reflects transaction values for traded goods \"between\" countries in contrast to non-traded goods, that is, goods produced for home-country use. Also, currencies are traded for purposes other than trade in goods and services, \"e.g.\", to buy capital assets whose prices vary more than those of physical goods. Also, different interest rates, speculation, hedging or interventions by central banks can influence the purchasing power parity of a country in the international markets.\nThe PPP method is used as an alternative to correct for possible statistical bias. The Penn World Table is a widely cited source of PPP adjustments, and the associated Penn effect reflects such a systematic bias in using exchange rates to outputs among countries.\nFor example, if the value of the Mexican peso falls by half compared to the US dollar, the Mexican gross domestic product measured in dollars will also halve. However, this exchange rate results from international trade and financial markets. It does not necessarily mean that Mexicans are poorer by a half; if incomes and prices measured in pesos stay the same, they will be no worse off assuming that imported goods are not essential to the quality of life of individuals.\nMeasuring income in different countries using PPP exchange rates helps to avoid this problem, as the metrics give an understanding of relative wealth regarding local goods and services at domestic markets. On the other hand, it is poor for measuring the relative cost of goods and services in international markets. The reason is it does not take into account how much US$1 stands for in a respective country. Using the above-mentioned example: in an international market, Mexicans can buy less than Americans after the fall of their currency, though their GDP PPP changed a little.\nExchange rate prediction.\nPPP exchange rates are never valued because market exchange rates tend to move in their general direction, over a period of years. There is some value to knowing in which direction the exchange rate is more likely to shift over the long run.\nIn neoclassical economic theory, the \"purchasing power parity theory\" assumes that the exchange rate between two currencies actually observed in the different international markets is the one that is used in the purchasing power parity comparisons, so that the same amount of goods could actually be purchased in either currency with the same beginning amount of funds. Depending on the particular theory, purchasing power parity is assumed to hold either in the long run or, more strongly, in the short run. Theories that invoke purchasing power parity assume that in some circumstances a fall in either currency's purchasing power (a rise in its price level) would lead to a proportional decrease in that currency's valuation on the foreign exchange market.\nIdentifying manipulation.\nPPP exchange rates are especially useful when official exchange rates are artificially manipulated by governments. Countries with strong government control of the economy sometimes enforce official exchange rates that make their own currency artificially strong. By contrast, the currency's black market exchange rate is artificially weak. In such cases, a PPP exchange rate is likely the most realistic basis for economic comparison. Similarly, when exchange rates deviate significantly from their long term equilibrium due to speculative attacks or carry trade, a PPP exchange rate offers a better alternative for comparison.\nIn 2011, the Big Mac Index (see below) was used to identify manipulation of inflation numbers by Argentina.\nIssues.\nThe PPP exchange-rate calculation is controversial because of the difficulties of finding comparable baskets of goods to compare purchasing power across countries.\nEstimation of purchasing power parity is complicated by the fact that countries do not simply differ in a uniform price level; rather, the difference in food prices may be greater than the difference in housing prices, while also less than the difference in entertainment prices. People in different countries typically consume different baskets of goods. It is necessary to compare the cost of baskets of goods and services using a price index. This is a difficult task because purchasing patterns and even the goods available to purchase differ across countries.\nThus, it is necessary to make adjustments for differences in the quality of goods and services. Furthermore, the basket of goods representative of one economy will vary from that of another: Americans eat more bread; Chinese more rice. Hence a PPP calculated using the US consumption as a base will differ from that calculated using China as a base. Additional statistical difficulties arise with multilateral comparisons when (as is usually the case) more than two countries are to be compared.\nVarious ways of averaging bilateral PPPs can provide a more stable multilateral comparison, but at the cost of distorting bilateral ones. These are all general issues of indexing; as with other price indices there is no way to reduce complexity to a single number that is equally satisfying for all purposes. Nevertheless, PPPs are typically robust in the face of the many problems that arise in using market exchange rates to make comparisons.\nFor example, in 2005 the price of a gallon of gasoline in Saudi Arabia was US$0.91, and in Norway the price was US$6.27. The significant differences in price would not contribute to accuracy in a PPP analysis, despite all of the variables that contribute to the significant differences in price. More comparisons have to be made and used as variables in the overall formulation of the PPP.\nWhen PPP comparisons are to be made over some interval of time, proper account needs to be made of inflationary effects.\nIn addition to methodological issues presented by the selection of a basket of goods, PPP estimates can also vary based on the statistical capacity of participating countries. The International Comparison Program (ICP), which PPP estimates are based on, require the disaggregation of national accounts into production, expenditure or (in some cases) income, and not all participating countries routinely disaggregate their data into such categories.\nSome aspects of PPP comparison are theoretically impossible or unclear. For example, there is no basis for comparison between the Ethiopian labourer who lives on teff with the Thai labourer who lives on rice, because teff is not commercially available in Thailand and rice is not in Ethiopia, so the price of rice in Ethiopia or teff in Thailand cannot be determined. As a general rule, the more similar the price structure between countries, the more valid the PPP comparison.\nPPP levels will also vary based on the formula used to calculate price matrices. Possible formulas include GEKS-Fisher, Geary-Khamis, IDB, and the superlative method. Each has advantages and disadvantages.\nLinking regions presents another methodological difficulty. In the 2005 ICP round, regions were compared by using a list of some 1,000 identical items for which a price could be found for 18 countries, selected so that at least two countries would be in each region. While this was superior to earlier \"bridging\" methods, which do not fully take into account differing quality between goods, it may serve to overstate the PPP basis of poorer countries, because the price indexing on which PPP is based will assign to poorer countries the greater weight of goods consumed in greater shares in richer countries.\nThere are a number of reasons that different measures do not perfectly reflect standard of living. In 2011, interviewed by the \"Financial Times\", a spokesperson for the IMF declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The IMF considers that GDP in purchase-power-parity (PPP) terms is not the most appropriate measure for comparing the relative size of countries to the global economy, because PPP price levels are influenced by nontraded services, which are more relevant domestically than globally. The IMF believes that GDP at market rates is a more relevant comparison.\u2014\u200a\nRange and quality of goods.\nThe goods that the currency has the \"power\" to purchase are a basket of goods of different types:\nThe more that a product falls into category 1, the further its price will be from the currency exchange rate, moving towards the PPP exchange rate. Conversely, category 2 products tend to trade close to the currency exchange rate. (See also Penn effect).\nMore processed and expensive products are likely to be tradable, falling into the second category, and drifting from the PPP exchange rate to the currency exchange rate. Even if the PPP \"value\" of the Ethiopian currency is three times stronger than the currency exchange rate, it will not buy three times as much of internationally traded goods like steel, cars and microchips, but non-traded goods like housing, services (\"haircuts\"), and domestically produced crops. The relative price differential between tradables and non-tradables from high-income to low-income countries is a consequence of the Balassa\u2013Samuelson effect and gives a big cost advantage to labour-intensive production of tradable goods in low income countries (like Ethiopia), as against high income countries (like Switzerland).\nThe corporate cost advantage is nothing more sophisticated than access to cheaper workers, but because the pay of those workers goes farther in low-income countries than high, the relative pay differentials (inter-country) can be sustained for longer than would be the case otherwise. (This is another way of saying that the wage rate is based on average local productivity and that this is below the per capita productivity that factories selling tradable goods to international markets can achieve.) An equivalent cost benefit comes from non-traded goods that can be sourced locally (nearer the PPP-exchange rate than the nominal exchange rate in which receipts are paid). These act as a cheaper factor of production than is available to factories in richer countries. It is difficult by GDP PPP to consider the different quality of goods among the countries.\nThe Bhagwati\u2013Kravis\u2013Lipsey view provides a somewhat different explanation from the Balassa\u2013Samuelson theory. This view states that price levels for nontradables are lower in poorer countries because of differences in endowment of labor and capital, not because of lower levels of productivity. Poor countries have more labor relative to capital, so marginal productivity of labor is greater in rich countries than in poor countries. Nontradables tend to be labor-intensive; therefore, because labor is less expensive in poor countries and is used mostly for nontradables, nontradables are cheaper in poor countries. Wages are high in rich countries, so nontradables are relatively more expensive.\nPPP calculations tend to overemphasise the primary sectoral contribution, and underemphasise the industrial and service sectoral contributions to the economy of a nation.\nTrade barriers and nontradables.\nThe law of one price is weakened by transport costs and governmental trade restrictions, which make it expensive to move goods between markets located in different countries. Transport costs sever the link between exchange rates and the prices of goods implied by the law of one price. As transport costs increase, the larger the range of exchange rate fluctuations. The same is true for official trade restrictions because the customs fees affect importers' profits in the same way as shipping fees. According to Krugman and Obstfeld, \"Either type of trade impediment weakens the basis of PPP by allowing the purchasing power of a given currency to differ more widely from country to country.\" They cite the example that a dollar in London should purchase the same goods as a dollar in Chicago, which is certainly not the case.\nNontradables are primarily services and the output of the construction industry. Nontradables also lead to deviations in PPP because the prices of nontradables are not linked internationally. The prices are determined by domestic supply and demand, and shifts in those curves lead to changes in the market basket of some goods relative to the foreign price of the same basket. If the prices of nontradables rise, the purchasing power of any given currency will fall in that country.\nDepartures from free competition.\nLinkages between national price levels are also weakened when trade barriers and imperfectly competitive market structures occur together. Pricing to market occurs when a firm sells the same product for different prices in different markets. This is a reflection of inter-country differences in conditions on both the demand side (\"e.g.\", virtually no demand for pork in Islamic states) and the supply side (\"e.g.\", whether the existing market for a prospective entrant's product features few suppliers or instead is already near-saturated). According to Krugman and Obstfeld, this occurrence of product differentiation and segmented markets results in violations of the law of one price and absolute PPP. Over time, shifts in market structure and demand will occur, which may invalidate relative PPP.\nDifferences in price level measurement.\nMeasurement of price levels differ from country to country. Inflation data from different countries are based on different commodity baskets; therefore, exchange rate changes do not offset official measures of inflation differences. Because it makes predictions about price changes rather than price levels, relative PPP is still a useful concept. However, change in the relative prices of basket components can cause relative PPP to fail tests that are based on official price indexes.\nGlobal poverty line.\nThe global poverty line is a worldwide count of people who live below an international poverty line, referred to as the dollar-a-day line. This line represents an average of the national poverty lines of the world's poorest countries, expressed in international dollars. These national poverty lines are converted to international currency and the global line is converted back to local currency using the PPP exchange rates from the ICP. PPP exchange rates include data from the sales of high end non-poverty related items which skews the value of food items and necessary goods which is 70 percent of poor peoples' consumption. Angus Deaton argues that PPP indices need to be reweighted for use in poverty measurement; they need to be redefined to reflect local poverty measures, not global measures, weighing local food items and excluding luxury items that are not prevalent or are not of equal value in all localities.\nHistory.\nThe idea can be traced to the 16th-century School of Salamanca. In 1802, Henry Thornton \"was the first economist to clearly explain the operation of the self-adjusting mechanism that keeps the exchange rate close to its purchasing power par\" in his book \"Paper Credit\". In 1807, John Wheatley \"extended\" Thornton's analysis, producing an \"extreme monetarist version of the PPP doctrine\", which was \"adhered to\" by David Ricardo, Walter Boyd, and the \"famous \"Bullion Report\" (1810)\". In 1912, Ludwig von Mises \"provided a modern 'purchasing power parity' theory of exchange rates\" in his book \"The Theory of Money and Credit\". In 1913, Ralph Hawtrey gave \"a terse, and precise, statement of the purchasing-power-parity doctrine.\"\nIn spite of the above antecedents, Gustav Cassel is often credited for developing the idea of PPP, especially in his two 1916 \"Economic Journal\" papers, both titled \"The Present Situation of the Foreign Exchanges\". In 1918, he introduced the phrase \"purchasing power parity\" in a paper titled \"Abnormal Deviations in International Exchanges\" (which was also published in \"The Economic Journal\"). While Cassel's use of PPP concept has been traditionally interpreted as his attempt to formulate a positive theory of exchange rate determination, the policy and theoretical context in which Cassel wrote about exchange rates suggests different interpretation. In the years immediately preceding the end of WWI and following it economists and politicians were involved in discussions on possible ways of restoring the gold standard, which would automatically restore the system of fixed exchange rates among participating nations.\nThe stability of exchange rates was widely believed to be crucial for restoring the international trade and for its further stable and balanced growth. Nobody then was mentally prepared for the idea that flexible exchange rates determined by market forces do not necessarily cause chaos and instability in the peaceful time (and that is what the abandoning of the gold standard during the war was blamed for). Cassel supported the idea of restoring the gold standard, although with some alterations. The question, which Cassel tried to answer in his works written during that period, was not how exchange rates are determined in the free market, but rather how to determine the appropriate level at which exchange rates were to be fixed during the restoration of the system of fixed exchange rates.\nHis recommendation was to fix exchange rates at the level corresponding to the PPP, as he believed that this would prevent trade imbalances between trading nations. Thus, PPP doctrine proposed by Cassel was not really a positive (descriptive) theory of exchange rate determination (as Cassel was perfectly aware of numerous factors that prevent exchange rates from stabilizing at PPP level if allowed to float), but rather a normative (prescriptive) policy advice, formulated in the context of discussions on returning to the gold standard.\nCalculating PPP factors.\nProfessional.\nOECD comparative price levels.\nEach month, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) measures the differences in price levels between its member countries by calculating the ratios of PPPs for private final consumption expenditure to exchange rates. The OECD table below indicates the number of US dollars needed in each of the countries listed to buy the same representative basket of consumer goods and services that would cost US$100 in the United States.\nAccording to the table, an American living or travelling in Switzerland on an income denominated in US dollars would find that country to be the most expensive of the group, having to spend 27% more US dollars to maintain a standard of living comparable to the US in terms of consumption.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nExtrapolating PPP rates.\nSince global PPP estimates\u2014such as those provided by the ICP\u2014are not calculated annually, but for a single year, PPP exchange rates for years other than the benchmark year need to be extrapolated. One way of doing this is by using the country's GDP deflator. To calculate a country's PPP exchange rate in Geary\u2013Khamis dollars for a particular year, the calculation proceeds in the following manner:\nformula_1\nWhere PPPrateX,i is the PPP exchange rate of country X for year i, PPPrateX,b is the PPP exchange rate of country X for the benchmark year, PPPrateU,b is the PPP exchange rate of the United States (US) for the benchmark year (equal to 1), GDPdefX,i is the GDP deflator of country X for year i, GDPdefX,b is the GDP deflator of country X for the benchmark year, GDPdefU,i is the GDP deflator of the US for year i, and GDPdefU,b is the GDP deflator of the US for the benchmark year.\nUBS.\nThe bank UBS produces its \"Prices and Earnings\" report every three years. The https:// says, \"Our reference basket of goods is based on European consumer habits and includes 122 positions\".\nSimplified.\nTo teach the intuition and calculation of PPP factors, the basket of goods is often simplified to a single good.\nBig Mac Index.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Big Mac Index is a simple implementation of PPP where the basket contains a single good: a Big Mac burger from McDonald's restaurants. The index was created and popularized by \"The Economist\" in 1986 as a way to teach economics and to identify over- and under-valued currencies.\nThe Big Mac has the value of being a relatively standardized consumer product that includes input costs from a wide range of sectors in the local economy, such as agricultural commodities (beef, bread, lettuce, cheese), labor (blue and white collar), advertising, rent and real estate costs, transportation, etc.\nThere are some problems with the Big Mac Index. A Big Mac is perishable and not easily transported. That means the law of one price is not likely to keep prices the same in different locations. McDonald's restaurants are not present in every country, which limits the index's comprehensiveness globally. Also, Big Macs are not sold at every McDonald's store (notably in India), which limits its usage further.\nIn the white paper, \"Burgernomics\", the authors computed a correlation of 0.73 between the Big Mac Index's prices and prices calculated using the Penn World Tables. This single-good index captures most, but not all, of the effects captured by more professional (and more complex) PPP measurement.\n\"The Economist\" uses The Big Mac Index to identify overvalued and undervalued currencies. That is, ones where the Big Mac is expensive or cheap, when measured using current exchange rates. The January 2019 article states that a Big Mac costs HK$20.00 in Hong Kong and US$5.58 in the United States. The implied PPP exchange rate is 3.58 HK$ per US$. The difference between this and the actual exchange rate of 7.83 suggests that the Hong Kong dollar is 54.2% undervalued. That is, it is cheaper to convert US dollars into Hong Kong dollars and buy a Big Mac in Hong Kong than it is to buy a Big Mac directly in US dollars.\nKFC Index.\nSimilar to the Big Mac Index, the KFC Index measures PPP with a basket that contains a single item: a KFC Original 12/15 pc. bucket. The Big Mac Index cannot be used for most countries in Africa because most do not have a McDonald's restaurant. Thus, the KFC Index was created by Sagaci Research (a market research firm focusing solely on Africa) to identify over- and under-valued currencies in Africa.\nFor example, the average price of KFC's Original 12 pc. Bucket in the United States in January 2016 was $20.50; while in Namibia it was only $13.40 at market exchange rates. Therefore, the index states the Namibian dollar was undervalued by 33% at that time.\niPad Index.\nLike the Big Mac Index, the iPad index (elaborated by CommSec) compares an item's price in various locations. Unlike the Big Mac, however, each iPad is produced in the same place (except for the model sold in Brazil) and all iPads (within the same model) have identical performance characteristics. Price differences are therefore a function of transportation costs, taxes, and the prices that may be realized in individual markets. In 2013, an iPad cost about twice as much in Argentina as in the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64490", "revid": "21916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64490", "title": "Double quote", "text": ""}
{"id": "64491", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64491", "title": "Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov", "text": "Russian astrophysicist (born 1935)\nIgor Dmitriyevich Novikov (; born November 10, 1935) is a Russian theoretical astrophysicist and cosmologist.\nNovikov put forward the idea of white holes in 1964. He also formulated the Novikov self-consistency principle in the mid-1980s, a contribution to the theory of time travel.\nNovikov moved to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he worked and taught at the Niels Bohr Institute. He returned to Russia in 2001.\nBiography.\nNovikov gained his PhD degree in astrophysics in 1965 and the Russian D.Sc. degree in astrophysics in 1970. From 1974 to 1990 he was head of the Department of Relativistic Astrophysics at the Russian Space Research Institute in Moscow. Before 1991 he was head of the Department of Theoretical Astrophysics at the Lebedev Physical Institute in Moscow and has been a professor at Moscow State University. Since 1994 he has been director of the Theoretical Astrophysics Center (TAC) of the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. He is currently also a professor of astrophysics at the Observatory of the University of Copenhagen, where he has been since 1991. Since 1998 he has been a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society.\nHe is awarded the First John Archibald Wheeler Prize (2020), together with physicist Kip Thorne (Caltech) and Oxford University professor Roger Penrose. This award is presented for his contribution to the development of the general theory of relativity and the physics of black holes. The prize is awarded by the President of the Italian Physical Society at the official awards ceremony in Rome on May 22, 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64492", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64492", "title": "%", "text": ""}
