{"id": "59704", "revid": "16446116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59704", "title": "Tarragona", "text": "Tarragona (; ; ) is a coastal city and municipality in Catalonia (Spain). It is the capital and largest town of Tarragon\u00e8s county, the Camp de Tarragona region and the province of Tarragona. Geographically, it is located on the Costa Daurada area on the Mediterranean shore.\nDuring the period of the Roman Empire, Tarraco was one of the most prominent cities of Hispania, as the capital, successively, of the Roman provinces of Hispania Citerior and Hispania Tarraconensis.\nThe Archaeological Complex of T\u00e0rraco is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nHistory.\nPunic Etymology.\nTa-Aragona in Phoenician language means \"the Aragona\", the native Iberian term for the Ebro Valley.\nMythical Origins.\nOne Catalan legend holds that Tarragona was named for \"Tarraho\", eldest son of Tubal in c. 2407 BC; another (derived from Strabo and Megasthenes) attributes the name to 'Tearcon the Ethiopian', a seventh-century BC pharaoh who campaigned in Spain. The real founding date of Tarragona is unknown.\nTheories of Origin.\nThe city's origins trace back to a possible Iberian settlement known as Kesse or Kosse, named after the local Iberian tribe, the Cossetans. However, the exact connection of Tarragona to Kesse remains uncertain. Scholars such as William Smith suggest that the city may have been established by the Phoenicians, who referred to it as . According to Samuel Bochart, signifies a citadel. The moniker likely stemmed from its location atop a high rock, approximately above sea level; earning it the epithet . It was seated on the river Sulcis or Tulcis (modern Francol\u00ed), on a bay of the Mare Internum (Mediterranean), between the Pyrenees and the River Iberus (modern Ebro). Livy mentions a ; and according to Eratosthenes it had a naval station or roads (); but Artemidorus Ephesius says with more probability that it had none, and scarcely even an anchoring place; and Strabo himself refers to it as \"harbourless\" ().\nRome.\nTarraco lies on the main road along the northeastern coast of the Iberian Peninsula. During the Roman Republic, the city was fortified and much enlarged as a Roman colony by the brothers Publius Cornelius Scipio and Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus, who converted it into a fortress and arsenal against the Carthaginians. The city was first named Colonia Iulia Urbs Triumphalis Tarraco and was capital of the province of Hispania Citerior. Subsequently, it became the capital (\"conventus iuridicus\") of the province named after it, Hispania Tarraconensis.\nAugustus wintered at Tarraco after his Cantabrian campaign, and bestowed many marks of honour on the city, among which were its honorary titles of \"Colonia Victrix Togata\" and \"Colonia Julia Victrix Tarraconensis\".\nAccording to Mela, it was the richest town on the coast, and Strabo represents its population as equal to that of Carthago Nova (now Cartagena). Its fertile plain and sunny shores are celebrated by Martial and other poets; and its neighbourhood is described as producing good wine and flax. The city also minted coins.\nAn inscribed stone base for a now lost statue of Tiberius Claudius Candidus was found in Tarragona during the nineteenth century. The 24-line Latin inscription describes the governor and senator's career as an ally of the future Roman emperor Septimius Severus, who fought in the civil war following the assassination of Commodus in 192 AD. This important marble block was purchased by the British Museum in 1994.\nFrom the demise of the Roman empire to the Union of Spain.\nAfter the demise of the Western Roman Empire, the city was captured by the Vandals and the Visigoths. The Visigothic Kingdom's rule of Tarracona was ended by the Umayyad conquest of Hispania in 714. It was an important border city of the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba between 750 and 1013. After the demise of the Caliphate, it was part of the Taifa of Zaragoza between 1013 and 1110 and under the control of the Almoravid dynasty between 1110 and 1117. It was taken by the County of Barcelona in 1117. From 1129 to 1173 Tarragona was the capital of the short lived Principality of Tarragona, under the Norman-influence. After the dynastic union of Aragon and Barcelona, it was part of the Principality of Catalonia within the Crown of Aragon from 1164 to 1714. After dynastic union of Aragon and the Crown of Castile, it remained a part of the Crown of Aragon until the foundation of the Spanish Empire in 1516.\nDuring the Reapers' War, Tarragona was captured by Catalan insurgents with French support in 1641, but it was retaken by Spanish troops in 1644. It was captured by allied Portuguese, Dutch, and British troops in 1705 during the War of the Spanish Succession and remained in their hands until the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. During the war, the Catalans supported the unsuccessful claim of Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen against the victorious Bourbon Duke of Anjou, who became Philip V of Spain. He signed the Nueva Planta decrees, which abolished the Crown of Aragon, as well as the Catalan institutions and prohibited the administrative use of Catalan language on 16 January 1716.\nJewish History.\nThe Jewish community in Tarragona was established during the Roman era, making it one of the most ancient Jewish communities in Spain. A \"laver\", possibly used by the Jews for ritual purification found in Tarragona bears the inscription \"peace over Israel, over ourselves, and our children.\" Coins with Hebrew inscriptions have also been found, dating to the Visigoth period. During Muslim rule, Jews in Tarragona prospered; Muhammad al-Idrisi nicknamed Tarragona \"the city of the Jews.\"\nAfter the Christian reconquest, the Jews of Tarragona faced institutional persecution and anti-semitic restrictions until the community's destruction in 1492, during the expulsion of the Jews.\nPeninsular War.\nDuring the Peninsular War, in the first siege of Tarragona from 5 May to 29 June 1811, Louis-Gabriel Suchet's Army of Aragon of the First French Empire laid siege to a Spanish garrison led by Lieutenant General Juan de Contreras. A British naval squadron commanded by Admiral Edward Codrington harassed the French besiegers with cannon fire and transported large numbers of reinforcements into the city by sea. Nevertheless, Suchet's troops stormed into the defences and killed or captured almost all the defenders. It became a subprefecture centre in Bouches-de-l'\u00c8bre department of French empire.\nIn the second siege of Tarragona (3\u201311 June 1813), an overwhelming Anglo-Spanish force under the command of Lieutenant general John Murray, 8th Baronet failed to wrest Tarragona from a small Franco-Italian garrison led by Brigadier general Antoine Marc Augustin Bertoletti. Murray was subsequently removed from command for his indecisive and contradictory leadership. The Anglo-Spanish forces finally captured Tarragona on 19 August.\nSpanish Civil War.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, Tarragona was in the hands of the Second Spanish Republic until captured by Franco's Nationalist troops on 15 January 1939 during the Catalonia Offensive.\nMain sights.\nAncient remains.\nThe Roman ruins of Tarraco have been designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.\nPart of the bases of large Cyclopean walls near the Cuartel de Pilatos are thought to pre-date the Romans. The building just mentioned, a prison in the 19th century, is said to have been the palace of Augustus. The second century Tarragona Amphitheatre near the seashore was extensively used as a quarry after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, and but few vestiges of it now remain. A circus c. long, was built over in the area now called \"Pla\u00e7a de la Font\", though portions of it are still to be traced. Throughout the town Latin, and even apparently Phoenician, inscriptions on the stones of the houses mark the material used for buildings in the town.\nTwo ancient monuments, at some little distance from the town, have, however, fared rather better. The first of these is Les Ferreres Aqueduct, which spans a valley about north of the city. It is in length, and the loftiest arches, of which there are two tiers, are high. There is a monument about along the coast road east of the city, commonly called the \"Tower of the Scipios\"; but there is no authority for assuming that they were buried here.\nOther Roman buildings include:\nThe city is also home to the National Archaeological Museum of Tarragona.\nReligious buildings.\nThe seminary of Sant Pau and Santa Tecla was founded in 1570 by the cardinal archbishop, Gaspar Cervantes de Gaeta, and was the first to comply with the decrees of the Council of Trent. In 1858 Archbishop Jos\u00e9 Domingo Costa y Borr\u00e1s built a fourth wing. Benito Villamitjana built a new seminary behind the cathedral in 1886, in the courtyard of which stands the old chapel of Sant Pau. Pope Leo XIII raised this to the rank of a pontifical university.\n north of the city is Poblet Monastery, founded in 1151 by Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, which was used for sepultures of the kings.\nEconomy.\nTarragona is home to one of the largest ports in Spain, which is an export hub for the Spanish car industry.\nMuch of its economic activity comes from a number of chemical industries located west of the city. One quarter of all the chemical production in Spain is found in Tarragona. In 2025 this industry employed some 5,800 people. The industrial park is home to, amongst others, Ercros.\nRovira i Virgili University is here.\nThe most significant living heritage is the Popular Retinue, a great parade of dances, bestiary and spoken dances, as well as the building of human towers called castells. These cultural traditional are especially visible during the Santa Tecla Festival, and are so popular in Tarragona that they have their own home called the \"Casa de la Festa\", Festivities House, which can be visited all year.\nA number of beaches, some awarded a Blue Flag designation, line the Mediterranean coast near the city.\nTarragona is located near the resort of Salou and the PortAventura World (PortAventura Park, the most visited theme park in Spain, Ferrari Land and also the PortAventura Caribe Aquatic Park).\nThe city is served by Camp de Tarragona high-speed railway station, and is located a few kilometres away from Reus Airport, which offers low-cost charter-flights (over a million passengers per year).\nReus is the second city of the Tarragona area (101,767 inhabitants in 2006), known by its commercial activity and for being the place where the architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed was born.\nThe city hosted the 2018 Mediterranean Games, one year later than planned, because of political and economical instability.\nTourism.\nTarragona is one of the World Heritage Journeys in the European Union. Tourism is focused on the main sites of Mercat Central de Tarragona (Central Market of Tarragona), La Rambla Nova (the main shopping street), El Serrallo fishing village, the surrounding beaches of the golden coast, the key plazas (Pla\u00e7a de la Font, Pla\u00e7a del F\u00f2rum, Pla\u00e7a del Rei), Balc\u00f3 del Mediterrani, Praetorium and Roman Circus, Roman Amphitheatre, Model of Roman Tarraco, and the cathedral. PortAventura World theme park resort complex is nearby.\nThe GR 92 long-distance footpath, which roughly follows the length of the Mediterranean coast of Spain, has a staging point at Tarragona. Stage 25 links northwards to Torredembarra, a distance of , whilst stage 26 links southwards to Cambrils, a distance of .\nCuisine.\nTarragona contains a number of small bars, restaurants, and cafes serving tapas and sandwiches, and local seafood and Catalan dishes like \"pa amb tom\u00e0quet\" or \"neules i torrons\". Many such outlets are found in the historic centre, including those at the Pla\u00e7a de la Font, Pla\u00e7a del Rei and Pla\u00e7a del F\u00f2rum. The neighborhood of El Serrallo, at the harbour, specialises in seafood cuisine.\nChartreuse liqueur is a famous local drink of Tarragona. Originally created in 1605, it was considered by monks to be an \"elixir for long life\". It is produced in yellow, with an alcohol content of 40\u00ba, as well as green, with a content of 55\u00ba. Between 1903 and 1989, the Chartreuse liqueur made by the French Carthusian Monks was distilled in Tarragona, following the monks' expulsion from France. Chartreuse is now a key part of the Feast of Santa Tecla. This traditional festival of national interest celebrates the patroness saint of the city.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Tarragona can be described as a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csa\") bordering on a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). Despite its location in the Mediterranean region, August tends to have more precipitation than February, which is unusual for the Mediterranean climate. Winters are mildly cool and summers are warm and sultry, while the wettest seasons are spring and autumn, which receive around in May and September.\nEvents.\nTarragona was also a candidate to be the Spanish representative as European Capital of Culture in 2016.\nPolitics.\nThe local mayor is elected by the members of the plenary from among its members the day the new municipal corporation is formed after the local election. The officeholder has a mandate for the 4-year duration of the elected body. If the mayor leaves office ahead of time a new voting may take place among the plenary members in order to invest a new mayor (meanwhile, another local councillor, conventionally the first deputy mayor may act as acting mayor). Since 15 June 2019 the mayor is Pau Ricom\u00e0. The opening session in which the mayor is invested is traditionally held at the \"Sal\u00f3 de Plens\".\nSince the first democratic election after the Francoist dictatorship, Tarragona has had four democratically elected mayors:\nThe local is the body formed by the elected councillors of the \"Ajuntament\". The plenary meetings (\"Ple\") are held at the Sal\u00f3 de Plens. It is formed by the municipal councillors, elected through closed party list proportional representation and 27 councillors are currently elected on the basis of the population of the municipality. Councillors are grouped in municipal groups on the basis of their political filiation. It has a government commission (\"Comissi\u00f3 de Govern\"; also \"Junta de Govern\" or \"Junta de Gobierno\") is formed by the mayor, the deputy mayors, and a number of appointed councillors.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nTarragona is twinned with:\nTarragona had partnerships with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59705", "revid": "16408943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59705", "title": "Messina", "text": "Messina ( , ; ; ; ) is a harbour city and the capital of the Italian Metropolitan City of Messina. It is the third largest city on the island of Sicily, and the 13th largest city in Italy, with a population of 216,918 inhabitants in the city proper and 595,948 in the metropolitan city as of 2025. It is located near the northeast corner of Sicily, at the Strait of Messina and it is an important access terminal to Calabria region, Villa San Giovanni, Reggio Calabria on the mainland. \nFounded by the Sicels with the name of \"Zancle\" in 757 BC, which in their language meant sickle, it was repopulated by Greek colonists of Magna Graecia and renamed \"Messana\". The city was renamed \"Messina\" in the Byzantine age. It was an important Roman, and then Greek-Byzantine city, but in 843 it was completely destroyed by the Arabs. Almost abandoned during the Islamic period, it rose again in the Norman era and reached the height of its grandeur between the late Middle Ages and the mid-17th century, when it competed with Palermo for the role of capital of the Kingdom of Sicily. \nPut to fire and sword in 1678 after a historic anti-Spanish revolt that led to the annihilation of its ruling class, it was seriously damaged by an earthquake in 1783. In 1908, another earthquake destroyed the city almost entirely, causing the death of about half the population. Rebuilding started in 1912, largely in the Liberty style, and an orderly and regular network of wide and straight streets in a north-south direction was built. Being a strategic target, the city of the strait was heavily bombed by the Allies of World War II in 1943 during the landing in Sicily, being hit by about 6,500 tons of explosives in about 2,800 air raids and four naval bombardments. This event earned the city the Gold Medal of Military Valor. Winston Churchill visited Messina after the bombing. He came to the city in July 1943, during the time when the Allies were executing the invasion of Sicily.\nIts port, for thousands of years has been one of the main commercial crossroads of the Mediterranean and only recently becoming a port of call for ferries to the continent, is the first in Italy in terms of number of passengers in transit. According to Eurostat the FUA of the metropolitan area of Messina has, in 2014, 277,584 inhabitants. The city's main resources are its seaports (commercial and military shipyards), cruise tourism, commerce, and agriculture (wine production and cultivating lemons, oranges, mandarin oranges, and olives). The city has been a Roman Catholic Archdiocese and Archimandrite seat since 1548 and is home to a locally important international fair. The city has the University of Messina, founded in 1548 by Pope Paul III.\nHistory.\nFounded by Greek colonists of Magna Graecia in the 8th century BC, Messina was originally called \"Zancle\" (), from the Greek meaning \"scythe\" because of the shape of its natural harbour (though a legend attributes the name to King Zanclus). A \"comune\" of its Metropolitan City, located at the southern entrance of the Strait of Messina, is to this day called 'Scaletta Zanclea'. Solinus wrote that the city of Metauros was established by people from Zancle.\nIn the early 5th century BC Anaxilas of Rhegium renamed it \"Messene\" () in honour of the Greek city Messene (See also List of traditional Greek place names). Later, Micythus was the ruler of Rhegium and Zancle, and he also founded the city of Pyxus. The city was sacked in 397 BC by the Carthaginians and then reconquered by Dionysius I of Syracuse.\nIn 288 BC the Mamertines seized the city by treachery, killing all the men and taking the women as their wives. The city became a base from which they ravaged the countryside, leading to a conflict with the expanding regional empire of Syracuse. Hiero II, tyrant of Syracuse, defeated the Mamertines near Mylae on the Longanus River and besieged Messina. Carthage assisted the Mamertines because of a long-standing conflict with Syracuse over dominance in Sicily. When Hiero attacked a second time in 264 BC, the Mamertines petitioned the Roman Republic for an alliance, hoping for more reliable protection. Although initially reluctant to assist lest it encourage other mercenary groups to mutiny, Rome was unwilling to see Carthaginian power spread further over Sicily and encroach on Italy. Rome, therefore, entered into an alliance with the Mamertines. In 264 BC, Roman troops were deployed to Sicily, the first time a Roman army acted outside the Italian Peninsula. At the end of the First Punic War it was a free city allied with Rome. In Roman times Messina, then known as \"Messana\", had an important pharos (lighthouse). Messana was the base of Sextus Pompeius, during his war against Octavian.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire the city was successively ruled by Goths from 476, then by the Byzantine Empire in 535, by the Arabs in 842, and in 1061 by the Norman brothers Robert Guiscard and Roger Guiscard (later count Roger I of Sicily). In 1189 the English King Richard I (\"The Lionheart\") stopped at Messina en route to the Holy Land for the Third Crusade and briefly occupied the city after a dispute over the dowry of his sister, who had been married to William the Good, King of Sicily. \nOne of the major cities on Sicily, Messina was heavily involved in the rivalry between the Anjou dynasty in Naples and the Aragonese House of Barcelona. Initially a stronghold of Anjou support on Sicily, in 1282 the city joined the revolt of the Sicilian Vespers, resulting in the city being subjected to a major siege by Charles I of Anjou. Messina remained a major naval base for the remainder of the ensuing twenty-year War of the Sicilian Vespers, and was besieged a second time in 1301. \nIn 1345 Orlando d'Aragona, the illegitimate son of Frederick II of Sicily was the \"strategos\" of Messina.\nIn 1347 Messina was one of the first points of entry for the black death into Western Europe. Genoese galleys travelling from the infected city of Kaffa carried plague into the Messina ports. Kaffa had been infected via Asian trade routes and the siege of Kaffa from infected Mongol armies led by Janibeg; it was a departure point for many Italian merchants who fled the city to Sicily. Contemporary accounts from Messina tell of the arrival of \"Death Ships\" from the East, which floated to shore with all the passengers on board already dead or dying of plague. Plague-infected rats probably also came aboard these ships. The black death ravaged Messina and rapidly spread northward into mainland Italy from Sicily in the following few months.\nIn 1548 St. Ignatius founded there the first Jesuit college in the world, which later gave birth to the \"Studium Generale\" (the current University of Messina). The Christian ships that won the Battle of Lepanto (1571) left from Messina: the Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes, who took part in the battle, recovered for some time in the \"Grand Hospital\". The city reached the peak of its splendour in the early 17th century, under Spanish domination: at the time it was one of the ten greatest cities in Europe.\nIn 1674 the city rebelled against the foreign garrison. It managed to remain independent for some time, thanks to the help of the French king Louis XIV, but in 1678, with the Peace of Nijmegen, it was reconquered by the Spaniards and sacked: the university, the senate and all the privileges of autonomy it had enjoyed since the Roman times were abolished. A massive fortress was built by the occupants and Messina decayed steadily. In 1743, 48,000 died of a second wave of plague in the city.\nIn 1783 an earthquake devastated much of the city, and it took decades to rebuild and rekindle the cultural life of Messina. In 1847 it was one of the first cities in Italy where Risorgimento riots broke out. In 1848 it rebelled openly against the reigning Bourbons, but was heavily suppressed again. Only in 1860, after the Battle of Milazzo, the Garibaldine troops occupied the city. One of the main figures of the unification of Italy, Giuseppe Mazzini, was elected deputy at Messina in the general elections of 1866. Another earthquake of less intensity damaged the city on 16 November 1894. The city was almost entirely destroyed by an earthquake and associated tsunami on the morning of 28 December 1908, killing about 100,000 people and destroying most of the ancient architecture. The city was largely rebuilt in the following year. However, thousands of residents displaced by the earthquake lived in shanty towns outside the city until the late 1930s, when further reconstruction finally commenced.\nIt incurred further damage from the massive Allied air bombardments of 1943; before and during the Allied invasion of Sicily. Messina, owing to its strategic importance as a transit point for Axis troops and supplies sent to Sicily from mainland Italy, was a prime target for the British and American air forces, which dropped some 6,500 tons of bombs in the span of a few months. These raids destroyed one-third of the city, and caused 854 deaths among the population. The city was awarded a Gold Medal of Military Valor and one for Civil Valor by the Italian government in memory of the event and the subsequent effort of reconstruction.\nIn June 1955 Messina was the location of the Messina Conference of Western European foreign ministers which led to the creation of the European Economic Community. The conference was held mainly in Messina's City Hall building (), and partly in nearby Taormina.\nThe city is home to a small Greek-speaking minority, which arrived from the Peloponnese between 1533 and 1534 when fleeing the expansion of the Ottoman Empire. They were officially recognised in 2012.\nGeography.\nTerritory.\nLocated in the north-eastern corner of Sicily, on the western shore of the Strait of Messina (Ionian Sea)\u2014 altitude above sea level\u2014 it extends for of municipal surface. Its extension on the coast ( from the coast of Giampilieri to the south to that of Orto Liuzzo to the north), which makes it the \"longest\" and most maritime city in Italy.\nThe municipality is located from Catania and from Palermo, squeezed between the Ionian and Tyrrhenian coasts and the Peloritani mountains, it overlooks with its large natural, military and commercial port, closed by the sickle-shaped peninsula of San Raineri, in front of Villa San Giovanni and a little further north than Reggio Calabria. Cape Peloro, in the northern part of the city, is instead opposite Scylla. In these waters is located the myth of Scylla and Charybdis, whose whirlpools are compared to the punishment of the souls of hell that go round and round and collide eternally (\"qui la gente riddi\" in Sicilian).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As the wave over Charybdis, / that breaks with the one it bumps into, / so must people laugh here.\u2014\u200a\nAn era of the Neogene, a fraction of the upper Miocene, a period known as the one in which the Mediterranean increased its salinity following the closing of the Strait of Gibraltar, takes the name of Messinian from the discovery in Messina of its characteristic rocks, the evaporites.\nFrom sea level, within the same municipality, it is possible to climb up to above sea level, via the hills overlooking the city, to Mount Dinnammare, from the Latin \"bimaris\", two seas. From here the view extends over the two seas of the city, the Ionian, the Strait of Messina and the Tyrrhenian. To the east, the entire city of Messina can be seen, while across the sea Calabria from its southernmost point to Capo Vaticano, in the province of Vibo Valentia. To the south, the imposing view of Mount Etna is clearly visible. To the northwest, the Aeolian Islands and the Tyrrhenian coast with Capo Milazzo, Capo Tindari and Capo Calav\u00e0 in Gioiosa Marea.\nThe city develops mainly in a longitudinal direction along the coast of the strait without interruption from Giampilieri Marina to Capo Peloro for in the Ionian strip. The Tyrrhenian strip, long, extends from Capo Peloro to Ponte Gallo. The central urban area, which can be enclosed between the Annunziata and San Filippo streams, now covered by the road surface, is about long, with little inclination towards the west due to the hilly buttresses of the Peloritani, which prevent the development of a large geometric urban network in that direction. The extreme proximity of the mountains gives the western part of the city a certain slope, overcome with steps and crossed by the panoramic ring road located upstream. There are numerous \"urban intrusions\" towards the interior, corresponding to the short plains of the streams, which tend to incorporate as districts some of the oldest farmhouses in the city territory, the so-called \"Villaggi\", currently 48.\nClimate.\nMessina has a subtropical Mediterranean climate with long, hot summers with low diurnal temperature variation and consistently dry weather. In winter, Messina is rather wet and mild. Diurnals remain low and remain averaging above lows even during winter. It is rather rainier than Reggio Calabria on the other side of the Messina Strait, a remarkable climatic difference for such a small distance.\nThe winter, short, presents rare episodes of cold that in rare cases can also bring snow in the hinterland of the city. The last snowy episode occurred on 7 January 2017, preceded by the event of 31 December 2014 and even before that by that of 30 January 1999.\nThe summer, hot, but due to the sea breezes, is not particularly muggy. The average humidity value tends to be lower during the hottest hours of the day. Furthermore, the presence of the sea tends to contain the maximum temperature values; only in the presence of southern winds (during the major heat waves) do reach , and in these cases the humidity levels are very high, reaching over 80%.\nPrecipitation is consistent as Messina is among the medium-large municipalities of the island, the rainiest coastal city in Sicily. An average annual rainfall of places the city of the strait above the Italian average. Precipitation is concentrated mainly between autumn and winter but in the summer season there are some thunderstorms. The abundant rainfall in Messina derives from various factors and in particular from the relatively high reliefs close to the area on which the city stands, in Sicily the eastern Nebrodi and the Peloritani, in Calabria the Aspromonte, reliefs that cause frequent orographic lift phenomena and the presence of two seas, the Ionian and the Tyrrhenian, which create frequent conditions favorable to precipitation.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMessina has 216,918 residents as of 2025. The city's population reached a peak of 260,118 inhabitants in 1981, after which it decreased at a rate of about 1,000 inhabitants per year. The first reason for this phenomenon is the chronic employment crisis, the second the transfer to neighbouring municipalities. The 1911 census recorded a drastic contraction due to the 1908 Messina earthquake. The victims were actually much more numerous than would appear from a simple subtraction between the data of that census and the previous one, because the city, almost entirely depopulated, was repopulated by inhabitants from other areas of Sicily and Calabria, attracted by the reconstruction and by the large gaps that opened up in public employment and trade. The families from Messina who had lived in the city since before 1908 are now very few.\nGovernment.\nMunicipal administration.\nThe Mayor of Messina is an elected politician who, along with the Messina's City Council, is accountable for the strategic government of Messina. According to the Italian Constitution, the Mayor of Messina is member of the City Council. The Mayor is elected by the population of Messina, who also elects the members of the City Council, controlling the Mayor's policy guidelines and is able to enforce his resignation by a motion of no confidence. The Mayor is entitled to appoint and release the members of his government.\nSince 1994 the Mayor is elected directly by Messina's electorate: in all mayoral elections in Italy in cities with a population higher than 15,000 the voters express a direct choice for the mayor or an indirect choice voting for the party of the candidate's coalition. If no candidate receives at least 50% of votes, the top two candidates go to a second round after two weeks. The election of the City Council is based on a direct choice for the candidate with a preference vote: the candidate with the majority of the preferences is elected. The number of the seats for each party is determined proportionally.\nAdministrative subdivisions.\nThe territory of the municipality of Messina is divided into six districts, which are in turn divided into dozens of \"frazioni\", almost all ancient villages, called \"casali\". For this reason, the city can be considered polycentric, because beyond the historic center of the city itself, there are many historic centers in the suburbs, namely the 48 \"frazioni\" of Messina, located along the valleys and on the hills.\nMetropolitan area of Messina.\nThe metropolitan area of Messina, still unimplemented to date, was established in 1986 by the Sicily region and delimited by a decree of 1995. It would include 51 municipalities on a surface of and would be characterized by an uninterrupted ribbon-like coastal conurbation of between Furnari on the Tyrrhenian Sea and the Alcantara River on the Ionian Sea, passing through Milazzo, Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto, Lipari, Taormina and Giardini Naxos.\nCulture.\nLiterature.\nMessina has provided the setting for two of William Shakespeare's plays, \"Much Ado About Nothing\" and \"The Winter's Tale\". In August 2011, the city council of Messina voted to grant honorary citizenship posthumously to William Shakespeare. In the science fiction novel \"The Condemned of Messina\" by the American writer Ben Bova, the city of Messina is the seat of the world government.\nCuisine.\nThe specialities of Messina's cuisine are fish and seafood dishes: swordfish, stockfish, mussels, saury, neonata and tuna. Meat-based dishes include braciole (a unique cut different from the rest of Italy) and \"falsomagro\". Typical Messina desserts include: pignolata glazeata, \"bianco e nero\", ricotta, cannoli with a chocolate variant, and cassata siciliana. Also typical are focaccia messinese (curly escarole, desalted anchovies, black pepper and tuma cheese), \"pane alla disgraziata\" \"rustici\" (arancini, pidoni, mozzarella in carrozza and puff pastry) and granita, in various flavours (strawberry, lemon, almond, mulberry, chocolate, pistachio and, very popular, coffee granita with cream) accompanied by the traditional brioche.\nThe traditional dishes linked to the various liturgical celebrations are: pidoni (a type of calzone filled with curly white escarole, salted anchovies and scamorza cheese, prepared on the Feast of the Annunciation, 25 March, but also on many other occasions, for example, St. Joseph's Day, Easter Monday, the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, Christmas Eve, St. Stephen's Day). \"U ciusceddu\" (a dish made with minced beef, veal bones, fresh ricotta, eggs, breadcrumbs, Majorcan cheese, tomatoes, onion, celery and parsley), was usually prepared on Easter Sunday and \"pasta 'ncaciata\" (the ingredients for the preparation are: beef, a young chicken, livers, minced lean beef, eggs, Sant'Angelo di Brolo salami, scamorza, mature pecorino cheese, breadcrumbs, aubergines, tomato sauce, onion, short smooth pasta, parsley, basil, lard, salt and ground black pepper). This typical dish was usually prepared on 15 August, the feast of the Assumption, a very popular celebration in the city of Messina where the Vara is carried in procession, a majestic votive machine in the shape of a pyramid, about high and weighing about 8 tons.\nUniversities.\nThe University of Messina (Latin: \"Studiorum Universitas Messanae\"), known colloquially as UniME, is a state university located in Messina. Founded in 1548 by Pope Paul III, it was the world's first Jesuit college, and today it is counted among the oldest universities in Italy. It is organized in 12 departments offering more than 80 Graduate and Undergraduate Degrees, over 20 Master's Degrees and 13 PhD Programmes. Among them, 7 are English-taught. The University counts more than 23.000 students distributed in the 4 campus facilities spread across the city.\nOver the centuries the University of Messina has been a centre of attraction for esteemed scholars and historical figures, such as Giovanni Pascoli, Marcello Malpighi, Gaetano Salvemini and Vittorio Emanuele Orlando. The Central Administration Buildings and the Faculties of Economics, Political Science, Law and Education are located in the centre of Messina in the historical site of the University or \"Polo Centrale\".\nThe Faculty of Medicine is held in the main hospital of the city, \"Policlinico G. Martino\", situated in the southern area of Messina. The Faculties of Sciences and Engineering are located inside \"Polo Papardo\", overlooking the famous Strait of Messina. The Faculties of Veterinary Medicine, Pharmacy and Humanities are established in the \"Polo Annunziata\" facility, which is also the Sport Centre of the University.\nTraditions and folklore.\nThe Good Friday celebrations wind through the main streets of the city with the procession of the Barette (Varette), dating back to 1610 and composed of eleven groups of statues depicting episodes of the Passion of Christ. This procession has taken place several times for more than 150 years and owes its name of Barette to the fact that in the first editions there was only the simulacrum of the Madonna Addolorata and a fercolo with the dead Christ and five barette representing the mysteries. Among the last interruptions was that which lasted a few years due to the earthquake of 1908 and the period of the Second World War. Over the years other simulacra have been gradually added until there are twenty-one today. The barette remain kept in the Oratory of Peace which has a portal dating back to the pre-earthquake period.\nOn the feast day of Corpus Christi, a long procession begins from the Cathedral, preceded by hooded Catholic believers called \"Babaluci\" and by all the religious associations, congregations and archconfraternities of the city. Together with the monstrance with the Blessed Sacrament, carried under a rich silk canopy by the Archbishop, the \"Vascelluzzo\" (small vessel) is carried on the shoulders, a fercolo in chiseled silver adorned with small red drapes and ears of wheat. The work is an ex voto made by the people of Messina as a sign of thanks to the Madonna della Lettera who, according to legend, during various famines, brought several vessels loaded with wheat to the city's port. The Vascelluzzo is kept at the Church of the Sailors and is displayed behind safety glass in addition to two heavy iron grates overexposed. On the morning of Corpus Christi it is carried on the shoulders of 16 people, with a pace that makes it seem as if the Vascelluzzo is sailing on the sea, and enters the Cathedral at the stroke of midday. Once it has arrived at the main altar, the relic of the Lock of Hair of the Madonna is placed in the centre of the Vascelluzzo. In the evening, after Holy Mass, the Vascelluzzo without the relic is brought back in procession to the Church of the Sailors where it is welcomed with the setting off of fireworks.\nThe most important Catholic celebration, however, is the one that takes place on 15 August every year, the Ferragosto procession: an ancient votive machine is carried in procession by thousands of faithful, dressed in white and blue and barefoot: the Vara, depicting the phases of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary into heaven. The Vara, about 13 and a half meters high, rests on large metal slides and features numerous figures in different materials of angels, the two large rotating spheres of the Sun and the Moon and, at the top, the statue of Christ who, with one hand, supports Mary, in the act of carrying her to the Empyrean; the faithful drag it by pulling the long ropes ( each, thick) that are attached to the base along the previously wet pavement of Corso Garibaldi, from Piazza Castronovo to Via I Settembre and then from Via I Settembre, the historic artery of the city, to Piazza Duomo, where the procession ends in the evening. \nIn the days leading up to August 15, the streets of the city are filled with the festive procession of the two Giants and the Camel, along with numerous folk groups. In particular, the two colossal statues on horseback represent the legendary founders of the city, the Messina native Mata and the Moor Grifone (known as \"u giganti e a gigantissa\"). The statues derive from the processional giants of the ancient Catalan tradition, still present today in many areas of Catalonia and used during various festivities, such as Tarragona for the feast of Santa Tecla, or during the fiesta Mayor de Reus which takes place on the day of San Pietro Reus. Contact with the Catalan domination brought the tradition of processional giants which also spread to Sicily and today is linked to the cult of the Virgin Mary, as in the case of the giants Mata and Grifone of the feast of the Assumption in Messina and the giants Kronos and Mytia of the feast of the Madonna della luce in Mistretta, while the Camel recalls the triumphal entry into Messina, at the beginning of the conquest of Sicily taken from the Arabs, of the Norman Count Roger I of Hauteville, which according to tradition took place on the back of a camel.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture, fishing and livestock.\nParticularly important in the past, when it included highly prized derivative products such as silk and citrus products, agriculture still plays an important role in the economy of Messina today.\nAgricultural and livestock activities are still practiced today in the countryside of the villages of the municipality of Messina. Among the agricultural products, the following stand out:\nAlso widespread is the breeding of various types of red meat animals, especially sheep, whose meat is traditionally eaten in the city cooked in a wood oven, but above all cattle whose entrails are roasted on the grill and also sold on the street, a dish that in the Messina dialect is called: taiuni, virina and paddi i boi. Fresh milk is used for the production of:\nCrafts and industry.\nThe secondary sector is not particularly developed in the city, where it is (and was) focused on medium-sized industries, in various locations:\nRegional Industrial Zone (ZIR), in the southern part of the city, there were activities such as grain milling, production of food products, prefabricated buildings, furniture, etc.\nThe hub for the artisanal development of Larderia, also in the southern part of the city. Numerous medium-sized artisanal activities are based there, with high-quality production (companies in the food sector, furniture, prefabricated and building materials).\nA separate chapter is instead the shipbuilding sector, alive and present in the sickle-shaped area of the city port, home to the Rodriquez shipyards (now Intermarine) and the Palumbo shipyards\nTertiary.\nThe tertiary sector is, historically, the \"driving sector\" of the city's economy. This is partly due to the presence of the Port of Messina, which in the past was an important export hub for local products (wine, silk, and above all, citrus products) and is still today an important goods hub (in particular, raw materials and materials processed by/for the processing industries of the area).\nTourism.\nThe tourism sector has developed with the annual presence of cruise passengers in the city, reviving Messina from a serious crisis in the sector due to the proximity of the major attractions of Taormina and the Aeolian Islands (which make the metropolitan city the second most visited in Southern Italy after Naples and the first in Sicily). In 2017, 367,269 cruise passengers disembarked at the city's port, in 2024 650,000.\nWith the necessary distinctions between tourists and non-tourists, the statistics show the tourism sector in clear growth compared to past years, especially with regard to the presence of foreign tourists, thanks to the artistic attractions (historical center and monuments, Regional Museum with works by Antonello and Caravaggio) and naturalistic attractions (Capo Peloro, Lake Ganzirri, Peloritani mountains).\nThe seaside sector is particularly lively, especially along the coasts of the northern area, around Capo Peloro (the closest point to the Calabrian coast, where the lighthouse stands), which overlook the Ionian Sea (and therefore the Strait) and the Tyrrhenian Sea. In 2025, Messina received the recognition of Blue Flag beach, the international eco-label awarded by the Foundation for Environmental Education for the quality of beaches and coastal services, with over 11 km of its coastline included in the award.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nThe Messina motorway ring road is part of the Autostrada A20 Messina-Palermo which crosses the urban area from the south to the central-northern area. There are 7 junctions: Messina sud Tremestieri, Messina San Filippo, Messina Gazzi, Messina Centro, Messina Boccetta, Messina Giostra-Annunziata, Messina nord Villafranca. The city is also served by the Autostrada A18 Messina-Catania.\nRailways.\nThe new Messina Centrale station building was projected following the modern criteria of the futurist architect Angiolo Mazzoni, and is extended through the stations square. It is at almost contiguous with Messina Marittima station, located by the port and constituting a Ferry transport in the Strait of Messina to Villa San Giovanni station across the Strait of Messina. In 2021 the harbor of Messina was the busiest passenger port in Europe with over 8,232,000 passenger crossings in one year.\nThe station is electrified and served by regional trains. For long-distance transport it counts some InterCity and ICN night trains to Rome, linking it also with Milan, Turin, Venice, Genoa, Bologna, Florence, and other cities. It is also part of the projected Berlin\u2013Palermo railway axis.\nSince 2010, a suburban train service has been carried out along the Messina-Catania-Syracuse railway with routes serving the stations of Fiumara Gazzi, Contesse, Tremestieri, Mili Marina, Galati, Ponte Santo Stefano, Ponte Schiavo, San Paolo and Giampilieri.\nBus and tram.\nMessina's public bus system is operated by ATM Messina: starting from 8 October 2018, has reorganized the offer of public transport, introducing a bus line (line 1 - Shuttle 100) which with a frequency of approx. 15 minutes, it crosses 38 of the total 50\u00a0km of the coast of the City of Messina. Thus, a comb service is created, with interchange stops at which the buses to and from the villages terminate, and with the tram which reaches a frequency of about 20 minutes. About 36 different routes reach every part of the city and also the modern Messina tramway (at \"Repubblica\" stop, on station's square), opened in 2003. This line is and links the city's central railway station with the city centre and harbour.\nThe industrial plan provides for the purchase of about 66 buses in the three-year period 2020\u20132022 to improve the environmental performance and comfort of the fleet. Furthermore, the resources equal to 1.82 million euros, coming from the PON Metro 2014-2020 will allow:\nStrait of Messina Bridge.\nThe Strait of Messina Bridge is a proposed suspension bridge across the Strait of Messina, connecting Torre Faro in Sicily with Villa San Giovanni on the Italian peninsula.\nWhile a bridge across the Strait of Messina had been proposed since ancient times, the first detailed plan was made in the 1990s for a suspension bridge. The project was cancelled in 2006 under prime minister Romano Prodi. On 6 March 2009, as part of a massive new public works programme, prime minister Silvio Berlusconi's government announced that construction of the Messina Bridge would indeed go ahead, pledging \u20ac1.3\u00a0billion as a contribution to the total cost, estimated at \u20ac6.1\u00a0billion. The project was cancelled again on 26 February 2013, by prime minister Mario Monti's government, due to budget constraints. A decade later, the project was revived again with a decree by Giorgia Meloni's government, on 16 March 2023, which received presidential approval on 31 March 2023.\nIf fully approved and built, it will be the longest suspension bridge in the world. The bridge would be part of the Berlin\u2013Palermo railway axis (Line 1) of the Trans-European Transport Networks (TEN-T). Construction is set to begin in April 2025, with completion expected in 2032.\nReligion.\nAccording to Catholic tradition, Saint Paul, during his wanderings across the Mediterranean to Rome to spread the Good News, landed in the year 41 AD in Messina, a city that was already very prosperous from an economic point of view thanks to its port.\nHere, by preaching the Christian doctrine, he immediately inflamed the hearts of many people from Messina and, among them, the Senators of the city of the time, who, having learned from the Apostle of the Gentiles of the existence of the Mother of the Lord in Jerusalem, immediately decided to go there to ask for her blessing on the City.\nThe Madonna wrote in her own hand and delivered to the ambassadors from Messina a Letter, in which she blessed the City and its inhabitants and established herself as its perpetual Protector. On 8 September 42 AD the ship brought the ambassadors to the city of the Strait with the Letter of Mary, which the same Celeste sender had rolled up and tied with some of her hair. This letter is said to be preserved in the Vatican Museums in Rome. According to a legend, Mary chose to be the patron saint of the people of Messina and not the other way around. This tradition contributed greatly to rooting the Marian cult in the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We bless you and your City.\u2014\u200a\nSince then, Messina became a Marian city par excellence for Catholics, boasting as a credential that it had been chosen \"directly by its Patron Saint\". This choice would be attested by a statement by Nummius Aemilianus Dexter, from the 2nd century. The Cathedral houses the relic of the Madonna's hair, which is carried in procession on an artistic silver vessel on Corpus Domini day. It is said that following a plague, the population of Palmi was significantly reduced and the Senate of Messina decided to carry part of the Lock of Hair in procession to Palmi, when they arrived at the gates of the Calabrian town the plague ended immediately. In gratitude, on the Sunday after 15 August, the procession of the Vara (Mary's Assumption into Heaven) is repeated in Palmi.\nCatholics celebrate the feast of the Madonna della Lettera on June 3, with a popular procession of the engraved silver fercolo with the silver statuette of the Madonna, modeled by Lio Gangeri in 1902 and the relic of the Hair of Mary contained in a precious monstrance (the Letter was lost in one of the many fires that devastated the Cathedral during its troubled history).\nThe city of Messina is home to many religious minorities: Pentecostals are the most numerous, there are also Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Waldensians and a strong Islamic concentration due to strong immigration.\nSport.\nAssociazioni Calcio Riunite Messina is a football club based in Messina, that competes in the Serie C, the third tier of the Italian football league system. The origins of the team go back to 1900, when Messina F.C. was founded in the city. The club has spent most of its existence in the lower Italian football leagues. They last competed in Serie B in 2007\u201308, which followed three consecutive seasons in Serie A. In July 2008, Messina were excluded from professional football due to financial issues, being later registered into amateur Serie D. The farthest Messina has reached in the Coppa Italia is the last 16. This was achieved in the 2000s decade. In the past, they have also reached the semi-finals in the Coppa Italia Serie C. Messina have appeared in the Italy's top league, Serie A, for a total of five seasons. The club's first spell in the league was in the 1960s; the second began in the 2000s decade. The highest ever position they have finished is 7th, which happened during the 2004\u201305 season.\nPallacanestro Messina was an Italian professional basketball team based in Messina. Established in 1976, the club was admitted to the first division Serie A for the 2003-04 season after Virtus Bologna was excluded for financial irregularities.\nMessina struggled on every front during that season, finishing dead last in the league whilst suffering from financial problems and a lack of interest from the public.\nWith debts too big to allow the club to even take part in other divisions and scaring off clubs that wanted to buy the side's sporting rights, Messina went bankrupt a few months after the season.\nInternational Rally of Messina was a former rally competition that was held in Messina. The event was held for 26 editions, from 1979 to 2004 and was part of the European Rally Championship schedule and the Italian national rally championship. Many of Italian top drivers for several years fought for the Italian title, because the rally was one of the last race of the season, and often decisive. Among the winners are remembered Andrea Aghini, Franco Cunico and Piero Liatti.\nNotable people.\nList of notable people from Messina or connected to Messina, listed by career and then in alphabetical order by last name.\nLiterary references.\nNumerous writers set their works in Messina, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59706", "revid": "274482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59706", "title": "Messina, South Africa", "text": ""}
{"id": "59707", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59707", "title": "1930 FIFA World Cup", "text": "Association football tournament in Uruguay\nInternational football competition\nThe 1930 FIFA World Cup was the 1st FIFA World Cup, the world championship for men's national football teams. It took place in Uruguay from 13 to 30 July 1930. FIFA, football's international governing body, selected Uruguay as the host nation, as the country would be celebrating the centenary of its first constitution and the Uruguay national football team had retained their football title at the 1928 Summer Olympics. All matches were played in the Uruguayan capital, Montevideo, the majority at the purpose built Estadio Centenario.\nThirteen teams (seven from South America, four from Europe, and two from North America) entered the tournament. Only a handful of European teams chose to participate because of the difficulty of traveling to South America due to the Great Depression. The teams were divided into four groups, with the winner of each group progressing to the semi-finals. The first two World Cup matches took place simultaneously and were won by France and the United States, who defeated Mexico 4\u20131 and Belgium 3\u20130, respectively. Lucien Laurent of France scored the first goal in World Cup history, while United States goalkeeper Jimmy Douglas posted the first clean sheet in the tournament the same day.\nArgentina, Uruguay, the United States, and Yugoslavia won their respective groups to qualify for the semi-finals. In the final, hosts and pre-tournament favourites Uruguay defeated Argentina 4\u20132 in front of 68,346\u00a0people to become the first nation to win the World Cup. Francisco Varallo from Argentina was the last surviving player from this World Cup. He died in 2010 at the age of 100. The 2030 FIFA World Cup opening match to be played at Estadio Centenario will honor the centennial anniversary of the World Cup.\nThe 1930 FIFA World Cup final is the first and only one to date to have been contested between two Spanish-speaking sides. It is also the only one that was contested between two South American nations, as the 1950 match between Brazil and Uruguay was technically the deciding match of the final group stage rather than an actual cup final.\nParticipants.\nFIFA, the governing body of world football, had been discussing the creation of a competition for national teams for several years prior to 1930. The organisation had managed the football segment of the Summer Olympics on behalf of the International Olympic Committee since the early 20th century and the success of the competition at the 1924 and 1928 Olympic Games led to the formation of the FIFA World Cup. At the 17th FIFA congress, held in Amsterdam in May 1928, the competition was proposed by president Jules Rimet and accepted by the organisation's board, with vice-president Henri Delaunay proclaiming \"international football can no longer be held within the confines of the Olympics\".\nThe first World Cup was the only one without qualification. Every country affiliated with FIFA was invited to compete and given a deadline of 28 February 1930 to accept. The competition was originally planned as a 16-team knockout tournament with a potential second division if enough teams entered; however, the number of teams failed to reach 16, so there were no qualifications. Plenty of interest was shown by nations in the Americas; Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and the United States all entered. A total of seven South American teams participated, more than in any subsequent World Cup Finals. However, because of the long, costly trip by ship across the Atlantic Ocean and the length of absence required for players, very few European teams were inclined to take part as the effects of the Great Depression set in across the continent. Some refused to countenance travel to South America in any circumstances, and no European entries were received before the February deadline. In an attempt to gain some European participation, the Uruguayan Football Association sent a letter of invitation to The Football Association, even though the British Home Nations (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales) had resigned from FIFA at the time. This was rejected by the FA Committee on 18 November 1929. Out of the two Asian countries affiliated to FIFA at the time, Japan and Siam (modern-day Thailand), neither elected to enter the competition, while Egypt, the lone African team to enter, was delayed due to a storm in the Mediterranean, and the ship intended to take them to Uruguay departed without them.\nTwo months before the start of the tournament, no team from Europe had officially entered. FIFA president Rimet intervened and four European teams eventually made the trip by sea: Belgium, France, Romania and Yugoslavia. The Romanians, managed by Constantin R\u0103dulescu and coached by their captain Rudolf Wetzer and Octav Luchide, entered the competition following the intervention of the newly crowned King Carol\u00a0II. He selected the squad personally and negotiated with employers to ensure that the players would still have jobs upon their return. The French entered at the personal intervention of Rimet, but neither France's star defender Manuel Anatol nor the team's regular coach Gaston Barreau could be persuaded to make the trip. The Belgians participated at the instigation of German-Belgian FIFA vice-president Rodolphe Seeldrayers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe were 15 days on the ship \"Conte Verde\" getting out there. We embarked from Villefranche-sur-Mer in the company of the Belgians and the Yugoslavians. We did our basic exercises down below and our training on deck. The coach never spoke about tactics at all\u00a0...\n Lucien Laurent\nThe Romanians boarded the SS \"Conte Verde\" at Genoa, Italy; the French and Yugoslavs were picked up at Villefranche-sur-Mer, France, on 21 June 1930; and the Belgians embarked at Barcelona, Spain. The \"Conte Verde\" carried Rimet, the trophy and the three designated European referees: Belgians John Langenus and Henri Christophe, along with Thomas Balvay, a Parisian who may have been English. The Brazilian team were picked up when the boat docked in Rio de Janeiro on 29 June before arriving in Uruguay on 4 July. The official ball used for the tournament was the T-Model.\nList of invited teams.\nThe following 16 teams planned to compete at the final tournament. However, 13 teams participated due to withdrawals of Egypt, Japan and Siam.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVenues.\nItaly, Sweden, the Netherlands, Spain, Hungary, and Uruguay all lodged applications to host the event. Uruguay's bid became the clear selection after all the other countries withdrew their bids.\nAll matches took place in Montevideo. Three stadiums were used: Estadio Centenario, Estadio Pocitos, and Estadio Gran Parque Central. The Estadio Centenario was built both for the tournament and as a celebration of the centenary of Uruguayan independence. Designed by Juan Scasso, it was the primary stadium for the tournament, referred to by Rimet as a \"temple of football\". With a capacity of 90,000, it was the largest football stadium outside the British Isles. The stadium hosted 10 of the 18\u00a0matches, including both semi-finals and the final. However, the construction schedule was rushed and delayed by a rainy winter, therefore the Centenario was not ready for use until five days into the tournament. Early matches were played at smaller stadiums usually used by Montevideo football clubs Nacional and Pe\u00f1arol, the 20,000 capacity Gran Parque Central and the Pocitos.\nMatch officials.\nFifteen referees participated in the tournament: four Europeans \u2013 two Belgians (Henri Christophe and John Langenus), a Frenchman (Thomas Balvay) and a Romanian (Constantin R\u0103dulescu, also the Romanian team coach), and eleven from the Americas \u2013 among them six Uruguayans. To eliminate differences in the application of the Laws of the Game, the referees were invited to one short meeting to iron out the most conflicting issues that could arise.\nOf all the refereeing appointments, the two that attracted the most attention were that of Gilberto de Almeida R\u00eago in the match between Argentina and France, in which the Brazilian referee blew for full-time six minutes early, and that of the Bolivian Ulises Saucedo's Argentina and Mexico encounter, which Argentina won 6\u20133. During the game, Saucedo, who was also the coach of Bolivia, awarded three penalties.\nThe following is the list of officials to serve as referees and linesmen. Officials in italics were only employed as linesmen during the tournament.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormat and draw.\nThe 13 teams were drawn into four groups, with Group 1 containing four teams and the others containing three. Each group played a round-robin format, with the four group winners progressing to the knockout semi-final stage.\nUruguay, Argentina, Brazil, and the United States were seeded and kept apart in the draw; which took place in Montevideo once all the teams arrived.\nSince there were no qualifying games, the opening two matches of the tournament were the first World Cup games ever played, taking place simultaneously on 13 July 1930; France beat Mexico 4\u20131 at the Estadio Pocitos, while the United States defeated Belgium 3\u20130 at the same time at the Estadio Gran Parque Central. France's Lucien Laurent was the scorer of the first World Cup goal.\nTournament summary.\nGroup 1.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe were playing Mexico and it was snowing, since it was winter in the southern hemisphere. One of my teammates centred the ball and I followed its path carefully, taking it on the volley with my right foot. Everyone was pleased but we didn't all roll around on the ground\u00a0\u2013 nobody realised that history was being made. A quick handshake and we got on with the game. And no bonus either; we were all amateurs in those days, right to the end.\nThe first group was the only one to contain four teams: Argentina, Chile, France, and Mexico. Two days after France's victory over Mexico, they faced group favourites Argentina. Injuries hindered France; goalkeeper Alex Th\u00e9pot had to leave the field after 20\u00a0minutes and Laurent, after a fierce tackle by Luis Monti, spent most of the match limping. However, they held out for most of the match, only succumbing to an 81st-minute goal scored from a Monti free kick. The game featured an officiating controversy when referee Almeida R\u00eago erroneously blew the final whistle six minutes early, with Frenchman Marcel Langiller clear on goal; play resumed only after protests from the French players. Although France had played twice in 48 hours, Chile had yet to play their first match. They faced Mexico the following day, gaining a comfortable 3\u20130 win.\nFrance's final match, against Chile, featured the first penalty kick of the World Cup. The first goalkeeper to save a penalty was Th\u00e9pot of France on 19 July 1930, saving from Chile's Carlos Vidal in the 30th minute of the match. In Argentina's second match, against Mexico, three penalty kicks were awarded. During the same match on 19 July 1930, Mexico's \u00d3scar Bonfiglio saved another penalty in the 23rd minute of the match against Argentina's Fernando Paternoster. Guillermo St\u00e1bile scored a hat-trick in his international debut as Argentina won 6\u20133, despite the absence of their captain Manuel Ferreira, who had returned to Buenos Aires to take a law exam. Qualification was decided by the group's final match, contested by Argentina and Chile, who had beaten France and Mexico, respectively. The game was marred by a brawl sparked by a foul on Arturo Torres by Monti. Argentina won 3\u20131 against their neighbours and advanced to the semi-finals.\nGroup 2.\nThe second group contained Brazil, Bolivia, and Yugoslavia. Brazil, the group seeds, were expected to progress, but in the group's opening match, unexpectedly lost 2\u20131 to Yugoslavia. Going into the tournament Bolivia had never previously won an international match. For their opener they paid tribute to the hosts by wearing shirts each emblazoned with a single letter, spelling \"Viva Uruguay\" as the team lined up. Both of Bolivia's matches followed a similar pattern, a promising start gradually transformed into heavy defeat. Against Yugoslavia, they held out for an hour before conceding but were four goals down by the final whistle. Misfortune played its part; several Bolivian goals were disallowed. Against Brazil, when both teams had only pride to play for, the score was 1\u20130 to Brazil at half-time. Brazil added three more in the second half, two of them scored by the multi-sportsman Preguinho. Yugoslavia qualified for the semi-finals.\nGroup 3.\nHosts Uruguay were in a group with Peru and Romania. The opening match in this group saw the first player expulsion from the competition when Pl\u00e1cido Galindo of Peru was sent off against Romania. The Romanians made their man advantage pay; their 3\u20131 win included two late goals and the fastest goal of the tournament; Adalbert De\u0219u opened the scoring after just 50 seconds. This match had the smallest crowd of any in World Cup history. The official attendance was 2,459, but the actual figure is generally accepted to be around 300.\nDue to construction delays at Estadio Centenario, Uruguay's first match was not played until five days into the tournament. The first to be held at the Centenario, it was preceded by a ceremony in honour of the Uruguayan centenary celebrations. The Uruguayan team spent the four weeks preceding the match in a training camp, at which strict discipline was exercised. Goalkeeper Andr\u00e9s Mazali was dropped from the squad for breaking a curfew to visit his wife. One hundred years from the day of the creation of Uruguay's first constitution, the hosts won a tight match against Peru. The result was viewed as a poor performance by the Uruguayan press. Performance of the Peruvian goalkeeper Jorge Pardon drew particular praise from neutral observers. Uruguay subsequently defeated Romania with ease, scoring four first-half goals to win 4\u20130.\nGroup 4.\nThe fourth group comprised Belgium, Paraguay, and the United States. The American team, which contained a significant number of new caps, were reputedly nicknamed \"the shot-putters\" by an unnamed source in the French contingent. They beat their first opponent, Belgium, 3\u20130. Both sides struggled early on due to heavy rain and snowfall before the U.S. took control. Belgian reports bemoaned the state of the pitch and refereeing decisions, claiming that the second goal was offside. The group's second match, played in windy conditions, witnessed the first tournament hat-trick, scored by Bert Patenaude of the United States against Paraguay. Until 10 November 2006, the first hat-trick that FIFA acknowledged had been scored by St\u00e1bile of Argentina, two days after Patenaude; however, in 2006 FIFA announced that Patenaude's claim to being the first hat-trick scorer was valid, as a goal previously assigned to teammate Tom Florie was reattributed to Patenaude. With the United States having secured qualification, the final match in the group was a dead rubber. Paraguay beat Belgium by a 1\u20130 margin.\nSemi-finals.\nThe four group winners, Argentina, Yugoslavia, Uruguay and the United States, moved to the semi-finals. The two semi-final matches saw identical scores. The first semi-final was played between the United States and Argentina on a rain-drenched pitch. The United States team, which featured six British-born players, lost midfielder Raphael Tracey after 10 minutes to a broken leg as the match became violent. A Monti goal halfway through the first half gave Argentina a 1\u20130 half-time lead. In the second half, the strength of the United States team was overwhelmed by the pace of the Argentinian attacks, the match finishing 6\u20131 to Argentina.\nIn the second semi-final, there were shades of the 1924 Summer Olympics match between Yugoslavia and Uruguay. Here, though, Yugoslavia took a surprise lead through \u0110or\u0111e Vujadinovi\u0107. Uruguay then took a 2\u20131 lead. Then shortly before half-time, Yugoslavia had a goal disallowed by a controversial offside decision. The hosts scored three more in the second half to win 6\u20131, Pedro Cea completing a hat-trick.\nThird and fourth place.\nThe now-traditional third-place play-off was not established until 1934, so the format of the 1930 World Cup is unique in not distinguishing between the third and fourth-placed teams. Occasional sources, notably a FIFA Bulletin from 1984, incorrectly imply that a third-place match occurred and was won 3\u20131 by Yugoslavia. Accounts differ as to whether a third-place match was originally scheduled. According to a 2009 book by Hyder Jawad, Yugoslavia refused to play a third-place match because they were upset with the refereeing in their semi-final against Uruguay.\nAt the end of the championship, the captains of the United States team (Tom Florie) and Yugoslavia (Milutin Ivkovi\u0107) both received bronze medals. Yet a FIFA technical committee report on the 1986 World Cup included full retrospective rankings of all teams at all previous World Cup finals; this report ranked the United States third and Yugoslavia fourth, due to a better goal difference on otherwise identical records, a practice since continued by FIFA. In 2010, the son of Kosta Had\u017ei, the chief of the Yugoslav delegation at the 1930 World Cup and the vice-president of the Football Association of Yugoslavia at the time, claimed that Yugoslavia, as a team, has been awarded one bronze medal, which has been kept by Had\u017ei himself and his family for the following 80 years. According to this source, Yugoslavia was placed third because of the semi-final loss to the eventual champions, Uruguay. The official recording however shows the United States team claiming third place.\nThe Yugoslavia team achieved the joint\u2013biggest success in both Yugoslav and Serbian subsequent World Cup footballing history, by earning fourth place, a result that would be repeated in 1962.\nFinal.\nThe resounding wins for Uruguay and Argentina in the semi-finals meant the final was a repeat of the matchup in the 1928 Olympic final, which Uruguay had won 2\u20131 after a replay.\nThe final was played at the Estadio Centenario on 30 July. Feelings ran high around the La Plata Basin as the Argentine supporters crossed the river with the war cry \"Victoria o muerte\" (\"victory or death\"), dispelling any uncertainty as to whether the tournament had captured the imagination of the public. The ten boats earmarked to carry Argentine fans from Buenos Aires to Montevideo proved inadequate, and any number of assorted craft attempted the crossing. An estimated 10\u201315,000 Argentinians made the trip, but the port at Montevideo was so overwhelmed that many did not even make landfall before kick-off, let alone reach the stadium. At the stadium, supporters were searched for weapons. The gates were opened at eight o'clock, six hours before kick-off, and by noon the ground was full, with an official attendance of 93,000. A disagreement overshadowed the build-up to the match as the teams failed to agree on who should provide the match ball, forcing FIFA to intervene and decree that the Argentine team would provide the ball for the first half and the Uruguayans would provide their own for the second. Uruguay made one change from their semi-final line-up. Castro replaced Anselmo, who missed out due to illness. Monti played for Argentina despite receiving death threats on the eve of the match. The referee was Belgian John Langenus.\nThe hosts scored the opening goal through Pablo Dorado, a low shot from a position on the right. Argentina, displaying superior passing ability, responded strongly. Within eight minutes they were back on level terms; Carlos Peucelle received a Ferreira through-ball, beat his marker and equalised. Shortly before half-time leading tournament goalscorer Guillermo St\u00e1bile gave Argentina a 2\u20131 lead. Uruguay captain Nasazzi protested, maintaining that St\u00e1bile was offside but to no avail. In the second half Uruguay gradually became ascendant. Shortly after St\u00e1bile missed a chance to score again, Uruguay attacked in numbers and Pedro Cea scored an equaliser. Ten minutes later, a goal by Santos Iriarte gave Uruguay the lead, and just before full-time Castro made it 4\u20132 to seal the win. Langenus ended the match a minute later and Uruguay added the title of World Cup winner to their mantle of Olympic champions. Jules Rimet presented the World Cup Trophy, which was later named for him, to the head of the Uruguayan Football Association, Ra\u00fal Jude. The following day was declared a national holiday in Uruguay; in the Argentinian capital, Buenos Aires, a mob threw stones at the Uruguayan consulate. Francisco Varallo (who played as a forward for Argentina) was the last player in the final to die, on 30 August 2010.\nFrance, Yugoslavia and the United States all played friendlies in South America following the competition. Brazil played France on 1 August, Yugoslavia on 10 August and the United States on 17 August, while Argentina hosted Yugoslavia on 3 August.\nUruguay's aggregate goal difference of +12 over four games, at an average of +3 per match, remains the highest average goal difference per match of any World Cup champion and the second-highest of any World Cup finals participant, after Hungary in 1954.\nGoalscorers.\nThere are several goals for which the statistical details are disputed. The goalscorers and timings used here are those of FIFA, the official record. Some other sources, such as RSSSF, state a different scorer, timing, or both.\nFIFA retrospective ranking.\nIn 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition. The rankings for the 1930 tournament were as follows:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "59708", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59708", "title": "Hans Zwieidneck von Sudenhorst", "text": ""}
{"id": "59709", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59709", "title": "The state", "text": ""}
{"id": "59711", "revid": "48794015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59711", "title": "Messalina", "text": "Roman empress from AD 41 to 48\nValeria Messalina (; c.\u200917/20\u201348) was the third wife of Roman emperor Claudius. She was a paternal cousin of Emperor Nero, a second cousin of Emperor Caligula, and a great-grandniece of Emperor Augustus. A powerful and influential woman with a reputation for promiscuity, she allegedly conspired against her husband and was executed on the discovery of the plot. Her notorious reputation may have resulted from political bias, but works of art and literature have perpetuated it into modern times.\nEarly life.\nMessalina was the daughter of Domitia Lepida and her first cousin Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus. Her mother was the youngest child of the consul Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and Antonia Major. Her mother's brother, Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, had been the first husband of the future Empress Agrippina the Younger and the biological father of the future Emperor Nero, making Nero Messalina's first cousin despite a seventeen-year age difference. Messalina's grandmothers Claudia Marcella the Younger and Antonia the Elder were maternal half sisters. Claudia Marcella Minor, Messalina's paternal grandmother, was the daughter of Augustus' sister Octavia the Younger. Antonia Major was the elder daughter of Octavia by her marriage to Mark Antony, and was Claudius' maternal aunt. There was, therefore, a large amount of inbreeding in the family.\nLittle is known about Messalina's life prior to her marriage in 38 to Claudius, her first cousin once removed, who was then about 47 years old. Two children were born as a result of their union: a daughter Claudia Octavia (born 39 or 40), a future empress, stepsister, and first wife to the emperor Nero; and a son, Britannicus. When the Emperor Caligula was murdered in 41, the Praetorian Guard proclaimed Claudius the new emperor and Messalina became empress.\nMessalina's history.\nAfter her accession to power, Messalina enters history with a reputation as ruthless, predatory, and sexually insatiable, while Claudius is painted as easily led by her and unaware of her many adulteries. The historians who relayed such stories, principally Tacitus and Suetonius, wrote some 70 years after the events in an environment hostile to the imperial line to which Messalina had belonged. There was also the later Greek account of Cassius Dio who, writing a century and a half after the period described, was dependent on the received account of those before him. It has also been observed of his attitude throughout his work that he was \"suspicious of women\". Neither can Suetonius be regarded as trustworthy. \"Encyclopaedia Britannica\" suggests of his fictive approach that he was \"free with scandalous gossip,\" and that \"he used 'characteristic anecdote' without exhaustive inquiry into its authenticity.\" He manipulates the facts to suit his thesis.\nTacitus himself claimed to be transmitting \"what was heard and written by my elders\" but without naming sources other than the memoirs of Agrippina the Younger, who had arranged to displace Messalina's children in the imperial succession and was therefore particularly interested in sullying her predecessor's name. Examining his narrative style and comparing it to that of the satires of Juvenal, another critic remarks on \"how the writers manipulate it in order to skew their audience's perception of Messalina\". Indeed, Tacitus seems well aware of the impression he is creating when he admits that his account may seem fictional, if not melodramatic (\"fabulosus\"). It has therefore been argued that the chorus of condemnation against Messalina from these writers is largely a result of the political sanctions that followed her death, although some authors have still seen \"something of substance beyond mere invention\".\nMessalina's victims.\nThe accusations against Messalina center largely on three areas: her treatment of other members of the imperial family; her treatment of members of the senatorial order; and her unrestrained sexual behaviour. Her husband's family, especially female, seemed to be specially targeted by Messalina. Within the first year of Claudius' reign, his niece Julia Livilla, only recently recalled from banishment upon the death of her brother Caligula, was exiled again on charges of adultery with Seneca the Younger. Claudius ordered her execution soon after, while Seneca was allowed to return seven years later, following the death of Messalina. Another niece, Julia Livia, was attacked for immorality and incest by Messalina in 43\u00a0\u2013 possibly because she feared Julia's son Rubellius Plautus as a rival claimant to the imperial succession,\u00a0\u2013 with the result that Claudius ordered her execution.\nIn the final two years of her life, she also intensified her attacks on her husband's only surviving niece, Agrippina the Younger, and Agrippina's young son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (the later Emperor Nero). The public sympathized with Agrippina, who had twice been exiled and was the only surviving daughter of Germanicus after Messalina secured the execution of Julia Livilla. Agrippina was implicated in the alleged crimes of Statilius Taurus, whom it was alleged she directed to partake in \"magical and superstitious practices\". Taurus committed suicide, and, according to Tacitus, Messalina was only prevented from further persecuting Agrippina because she was distracted by her new lover, Gaius Silius.\nAccording to Suetonius, Messalina realized early on that the young Nero could be a potential rival to her own son, who was three years younger. He repeated a tale that Messalina sent several assassins into Nero's bedchamber to murder him, but they were frightened off by what they thought was a snake slithering out from under his bed. In the Secular Games of 48, Nero won greater applause from the crowd than did Messalina's own son Britannicus, something which scholars have speculated led Messalina to plot to destroy Nero and his mother once and for all.\nTwo very prominent senators, Appius Silanus and Valerius Asiaticus, also met their death on the instigation of Messalina. The former was married to Messalina's mother Domitia Lepida, but according to Dio and Tacitus, Messalina coveted him for herself. In 42, Messalina and the freedman Narcissus devised an elaborate ruse, whereby they each informed Claudius that they had had identical dreams during the night portending that Silanus would murder Claudius. When Silanus arrived that morning (after being summoned by either Messalina or Narcissus), he confirmed their portent and Claudius had him executed.\nValerius Asiaticus was one of Messalina's final victims. Asiaticus was immensely rich and incurred Messalina's wrath because he owned the Gardens of Lucullus, which she desired for herself, and because he was the lover of her hated rival Poppaea Sabina the Elder, with whom she was engaged in a fierce rivalry over the affections of the actor Mnester. In 46, she convinced Claudius to order his arrest on charges of failing to maintain discipline amongst his soldiers, adultery with Sabina, and for engaging in homosexual acts. Although Claudius hesitated to condemn him to death, he ultimately did so on the recommendation of Messalina's ally, and Claudius' partner in the consulship for that year, Lucius Vitellius. The murder of Asiaticus, without notifying the senate and without trial, caused great outrage amongst the senators, who blamed both Messalina and Claudius. Despite this, Messalina continued to target Poppaea Sabina until she committed suicide.\nThe same year as the execution of Asiaticus, Messalina ordered the poisoning of Marcus Vinicius\u00a0\u2013 because he refused to sleep with her according to gossip. About this time she also arranged for the execution of one of Claudius' freedmen secretaries, Polybius. According to Dio, this murder of one of their own turned the other freedmen, previously her close allies, against Messalina for good.\nDownfall.\nIn the year 48, Claudius went to Ostia to visit the new harbor he was constructing and was informed while there that Messalina had gone so far as to marry her latest lover, Senator Gaius Silius in Rome. It was only when Messalina held a costly wedding banquet in Claudius' absence that the freedman Narcissus decided to inform him. The exact motivations for Messalina's actions are unknown\u00a0\u2013 it has been interpreted as a move to overthrow Claudius and install Silius as Emperor, with Silius adopting Britannicus and thereby ensuring her son's future accession. Other historians have speculated that Silius convinced Messalina that Claudius' overthrow was inevitable, and her best hopes of survival lay in a union with him. Tacitus stated that Messalina hesitated even as Silius insisted on marriage, but ultimately conceded because \"she coveted the name of wife\", and because Silius had divorced his own wife the previous year in anticipation of a union with Messalina. Another theory is that Messalina and Silius merely took part in a sham marriage as part of a Bacchic ritual as they were in the midst of celebrating the Vinalia, a festival of the grape harvest.\nTacitus and Dio state that Narcissus convinced Claudius that it was a move to overthrow him and persuaded him to appoint the deputy Praetorian Prefect, Lusius Geta, to the charge of the Guard because the loyalty of the senior Prefect Rufrius Crispinus was in doubt. Claudius rushed back to Rome, where he was met by Messalina on the road with their children. The leading Vestal Virgin, Vibidia, came to entreat Claudius not to rush to condemn Messalina. He then visited the house of Silius, where he found a great many heirlooms of his Claudii and Drusii forebears, taken from his house and gifted to Silius by Messalina. When Messalina attempted to gain access to her husband in the palace, she was repulsed by Narcissus and shouted down with a list of her various offences compiled by the freedman. Despite the mounting evidence against her, Claudius's feelings were softening and he asked to see her in the morning for a private interview. Narcissus, pretending to act on Claudius' instructions, ordered an officer of the Praetorian Guard to execute her. When the troop of guards arrived at the Gardens of Lucullus, where Messalina had taken refuge with her mother, she was given the honorable option of taking her own life. Unable to muster the courage to slit her own throat, she was run through with a sword by one of the guards. Upon hearing the news, the Emperor did not react and simply asked for another chalice of wine. The Roman Senate then ordered a \"damnatio memoriae\" so that Messalina's name would be removed from all public and private places and all statues of her would be taken down.\nErasure from memory.\nIn Messalina's time, the condemnation of \"damnatio memoriae\" followed on an offence within the context of the Roman imperial cult. The cult was directed from above by members of the imperial circle through official initiatives within the pro-imperial power structure. It was effective among the wider public, however, only insofar as there was personal assent. Theoretically the sentence of \"damnatio memoriae\" was supposed to erase all mention of the offender from the public sphere. The person's name was gouged from inscriptions and even from coinage. Sculptures might be smashed or at the very least would be dismounted and stored away out of sight.\nSuch measures were not totally effective and several images of Messalina have survived for one reason or another. One such is the doubtfully ascribed bust in the Uffizi Gallery that may in fact be of Agrippina, Messalina's successor as wife of Claudius (see above). Another in the Louvre is thought to be of Messalina holding her child Britannicus. In fact it is based on a famous Greek sculpture by Cephisodotus the Elder of Eirene carrying the child Ploutos, of which there were other Roman imitations.\nSome of the surviving engraved gems that feature Messalina were also indebted to ancient Greek models. They include the carved sardonyx of Messalina accompanied by Claudius in a dragon chariot, which commemorated his part in the Roman conquest of Britain. This was modelled on depictions of Dionysus and Ariadne after his Indian victory and is now in the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France (Cabinet des M\u00e9dailles). In its Roman adaptation, Messalina is in front guiding the chariot while Claudius stands behind her steadying his flying robe. The piece was once in the collection of Peter Paul Rubens, who made an ink sketch of it, although identifying the woman erroneously as Agrippina. However, there is another version of this victory celebration known as the Hague cameo, which may be a later imitation. In a chariot drawn by centaurs, the laurel-wreathed Messalina reclines in the post of honour, bearing the attributes of Ceres. Beside her sits Claudius with one arm about her neck and Jupiter's thunderbolt in his other hand. In front stands the child Britannicus in complete armour, with his elder sister Octavia next to him.\nYet another carved sardonyx now in the national library of France represents a bust of the laureled Messalina, with on either side of her the heads of her son and daughter emerging from a cornucopia. This too once belonged to Rubens and a Flemish engraving after his drawing of it is in the British Museum. A simple white portrait bust of the empress is also held by the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale. A portrait oval in yellow carnelian was once recorded as being in the collection of Lord Montague; another in sardonyx once belonged to the Antikensammlung Berlin.\nTwo authors especially supplemented the gossip and officially dictated versions recorded by later historians and added to Messalina's notoriety. One such story is the account of her all-night sex competition with a prostitute in Book X of Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History\", according to which the competition lasted \"night and day\" and Messalina won with a score of 25 partners.\nThe poet Juvenal mentions Messalina twice in his satires. As well as the story in his tenth satire that she compelled Gaius Silius to divorce his wife and marry her, the sixth satire contains the notorious description of how the Empress used to work clandestinely all night in a brothel under the name of the She-Wolf. In the course of that account, Juvenal coined the phrase frequently applied to Messalina thereafter, \"meretrix augusta\" (the imperial whore). In so doing, he coupled her reputation with that of Cleopatra, another victim of imperially directed character assassination, whom the poet Propertius had earlier described as \"meretrix regina\" (the harlot queen).\nThe earlier propaganda against Cleopatra is described as \"rooted in the hostile Roman literary tradition\". Similar literary tactics, including the suggestive mingling of historical fact and gossip in the officially approved annals, is what has helped prolong the scandalous reputation of Messalina as well.\nMessalina in the arts.\nTo call a woman \"a Messalina\" indicates a devious and sexually voracious personality. The historical figure and her fate were often used in the arts to make a moral point, but there was often as well a prurient fascination with her sexually liberated behaviour. In modern times, that has led to exaggerated works which have been described as romps.\nThe ambivalent attitude to Messalina can be seen in the late mediaeval French prose work in the J. Paul Getty Museum illustrated by the Master of Boucicaut, \"Tiberius, Messalina, and Caligula reproach one another in the midst of flames\". It recounts a dialogue that takes place in hell between the three characters from the same imperial line. Messalina wins the debate by demonstrating that their sins were far worse than hers and suggests that they repent of their own wickedness before reproaching her as they had done.\nWhile Messalina's wicked behavior towards others is given full emphasis, and even exaggerated in early works, her sexual activities have been treated more sympathetically. In the 1524 illustrations of 16 sexual positions known as \"I Modi\", each was named after a couple from Classical history or myth, which included \"Messalina in the Booth of Lisisca\". Although early editions were destroyed by religious censorship, Agostino Caracci's later copies have survived (see above).\nOther artistic illustrations of Messalina's reported depravity, supposedly based on ancient medals and cameos, appear in the works of Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Hugues d'Hancarville. His main account, padded with more general quotations condemning the laxity of the times, takes up three chapters of his \"Monuments of the Private Lives of the Twelve Caesars\" (1780). Chapter 29 deals with Messalina's public marriage to Gaius Silius. The following chapters are illustrated by cameos ascribed to a certain Pythodorus of Trall\u00e8s. In the first, Messalina sits naked while a maid dresses her hair in preparation for taking up her role as the courtesan Lisisica; in the other she offers fourteen myrtle wreaths to Priapus following her triumph in exhausting as many fit young men in a sexual contest. She also sits before a private shrine to Priapus in an illustration for the author's other pornographic work, \"Monuments of the Secret Cult of Roman Women\" (1787).\nLater painting and sculpture.\nOne of the avenues to drawing a moral lesson from the story of Messalina in painting was to picture her violent end. An early example was Francesco Solimena's \"The Death of Messalina\" (1708). In this scene of vigorous action, a Roman soldier pulls back his arm to stab the Empress while fending off her mother. A witness in armour observes calmly from the shadows in the background. Georges Rochegrosse's painting of 1916 is a reprise of the same scene. A mourning woman dressed in black leaves with her face covered as a soldier drags back Messalina's head, watched by a courtier with the order for execution in his hand. The Danish royal painter Nicolai Abildgaard, however, preferred to feature \"The Dying Messalina and her Mother\" (1797) in a quieter setting. The mother weeps beside her daughter as she lies extended on the ground in a garden setting.\nIn 1870 the French committee for the Prix de Rome set Messalina's death as the competition subject for that year. The winning entry by Fernand Lematte, \"The Death of Messalina\", is based on the description of the occasion by Tacitus. Following the decision that she must die, \"Evodus, one of the freedmen, was appointed to watch and complete the affair. Hurrying on before with all speed to the gardens, he found Messalina stretched upon the ground, while by her side sat Lepida, her mother, who, though estranged from her daughter in prosperity, was now melted to pity by her inevitable doom, and urged her not to wait for the executioner\". In Messalina's hand is the thin dagger that she dare not use, while Evodus bends over her threateningly and Lepida tries to fend him off. In an earlier French treatment by Victor Biennoury, the lesson of poetic justice is made plainer by specifically identifying the scene of Messalina's death as the garden which she had obtained by having its former owner executed on a false charge. Now she crouches at the foot of a wall carved with the name of Lucullus and is condemned by the dark-clothed intermediary as a soldier advances on her drawing his sword.\nTwo Low Countries painters emphasised the behaviour of Messalina that led up to her end by picturing her wedding with Gaius Silius. The one by Nicolaus Kn\u00fcpfer, dated about 1650, is so like contemporary brothel scenes that its subject is ambiguous and has been disputed. A richly dressed drunkard lies back on a bed between two women while companions look anxiously out of the window and another struggles to draw his sword. The later \"Landscape with Messalina's Wedding\" by Victor Honor\u00e9 Janssens pictures the seated empress being attired before the ceremony. Neither scene looks much like a wedding, but rather they indicate the age's sense of moral outrage at this travesty of marriage. That was further underlined by a contemporary Tarot card in which card 6, normally titled \"The Lover(s)\", has been retitled \"Shameless\" (\"impudique\") and pictures Messalina leaning against a carved chest. Beneath is the explanation that \"she reached such a point of insolence that, because of the stupidity of her husband, she dared to marry a young Roman publicly in the Emperor's absence\".\nThe wild scenes following the wedding that took place in Rome are dramatised by Tacitus. \"Messalina meanwhile, more wildly profligate than ever, was celebrating in mid-autumn a representation of the vintage in her new home. The presses were being trodden; the vats were overflowing; women girt with skins were dancing, as Bacchanals dance in their worship or their frenzy. Messalina with flowing hair shook the thyrsus, and Silius at her side, crowned with ivy and wearing the buskin, moved his head to some lascivious chorus\". Such was the scene of drunken nudity painted by in 1905.\nOther artists show similar scenes of debauchery or, like the Italian A. Pigma in \"When Claudius is away, Messalina will play\" (1911), hint that it will soon follow. What was to follow is depicted in Federico Faruffini's \"The orgies of Messalina\" (1867\u20131868). A more private liaison is treated in Joaqu\u00edn Sorolla's \"Messalina in the Arms of the Gladiator\" (1886). This takes place in an interior, with the empress reclining bare breasted against the knees of a naked gladiator.\nJuvenal's account of her nights spent in the brothel is commonly portrayed. Gustave Moreau painted her leading another man onto the bed while an exhausted prostitute sleeps in the background, while in Paul Rouffio's painting of 1875 she reclines bare-breasted as a slave offers grapes. The Dane Peder Severin Kr\u00f8yer depicted her standing, her full body apparent under the thin material of her dress. The ranks of her customers are just visible behind the curtain against which she stands (see above). Two drawings by Aubrey Beardsley were produced for a private printing of Juvenal's satires (1897). The one titled \"Messalina and her companion\" showed her on the way to the brothel, while a rejected drawing is usually titled \"Messalina returning from the bath\". About that period, too, Roman resident Pavel Svedomsky reimagined the historical scene. There the disguised seductress is at work in a light-suffused alley, enticing a passer-by into the brothel from which a maid looks out anxiously.\nAlternatively, artists drew on Pliny's account of her sex competition. The Brazilian Henrique Bernardelli (1857\u20131936) showed her lying across the bed at the moment of exhaustion afterwards. So also did Eug\u00e8ne Cyrille Brunet's dramatic marble sculpture, dating from 1884 (see above), while in the Czech Jan \u0160tursa's standing statue of 1912 she is holding a last piece of clothing by her side at the outset.\nDrama and spectacle.\nOne of the earliest stage productions to feature the fall of the empress was \"The Tragedy of Messalina\" (1639) by Nathanael Richards, where she is depicted as a monster and used as a foil to attack the Roman Catholic wife of the English king Charles I. She is treated as equally villainous in the Venetian Pietro Zaguri's \"La Messalina\" (1656). This was a 4-act prose tragedy with four songs, described as an \"opera scenica\", that revolved around the affair with Gaius Silius that brought about her death. Carlo Pallavicino was to follow with a full blown Venetian opera in 1679 that combined eroticism with morality.\nDuring the last quarter of the 19th century the idea of the femme fatale came into prominence and encouraged many more works featuring Messalina. 1874 saw the Austrian verse tragedy \"Arria und Messalina\" by Adolf Wilbrandt which was staged with success across Europe for many years. It was followed in 1877 by Pietro Cossa's Italian verse tragedy, where Messalina figures as a totally unrestrained woman in pursuit of love. Another 5-act verse tragedy was published in Philadelphia in 1890, authored by Algernon Sydney Logan (1849\u20131925), who had liberal views on sex.\nAs well as plays, the story of Messalina was adapted to ballet and opera. The 1878 ballet by Luigi Danesi (1832\u20131908) to music by Giuseppe Giaquinto (d. 1881) was an Italian success with several productions. On its arrival in France in 1884 it was made a fantastical spectacle at the \u00c9den-Th\u00e9\u00e2tre, with elephants, horses, massive crowd scenes and circus games in which rows of bare-legged female gladiators preceded the fighters. Isidore de Lara's opera \"Messaline\", based on a 4-act verse tragedy by Armand Silvestre and Eug\u00e8ne Morand, centred upon the love of the empress for a poet and then his gladiator brother. It opened in Monte Carlo in 1899 and went on to Covent Garden. The ailing Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec saw the Bordeaux production and was inspired to paint six scenes from it, including Messalina descending a staircase, seated while a bearded character in a dark tunic stands to one side, or the same character stands and kneels before her, as well as resting extras. Later there was also an Italian production of the opera in translation.\nIn 2009 the theme was updated by Benjamin Askew in his UK play \"In Bed With Messalina\", which features her final hours.\nStars of stage and screen.\nFrom the last quarter of the 19th century onwards, the role of Messalina has been as much about the stardom of those who played her as about the social message of the works in which she appeared. The star's name appeared in large print on the posters of the works in which she played. She was constantly featured in the gossip columns. Her role was iconised photographically, copies of which she often inscribed for her admirers. Pictures of her as Messalina adorned the theatre magazines and were sold in their thousands as postcards. This was as true in drama and opera as it was of those who portrayed the empress in movies and television films or miniseries. The role itself added to or established their reputations. And, with the growing permissiveness of modern times, that might rather amount to notoriety for those adult films in which athletic stamina was more of a requirement than acting ability.\nWilbrandt's \"Arria und Messalina\" was specially written for Charlotte Wolter, who was painted in her role by Hans Makart in 1875. There she reclines on a chaise-longue as the lights of Rome burn in the background. As well as a preparatory photograph of her dressed as in the painting, there were also posed cabinet photos of her in a plainer dress. Other stars were involved when the play went on tour in various translations. Lilla Bulyovszkyn\u00e9 (1833\u20131909) starred in the Hungarian production in 1878 and Irma Temesv\u00e1ryn\u00e9-Farkas in that of 1883; Louise Fahlman (1856\u20131918) played in the 1887 Stockholm production, Marie Posp\u00ed\u0161ilov\u00e1 (1862\u20131943) in the 1895 Czech production.\nIn Italy, Cossa's drama was acted with Virginia Marini in the role of Messalina.\nBoth the Parisian leads in Danesi's ballet were photographed by Nadar: Elena Cornalba in 1885 and Mlle Jaeger later. During its 1898 production in Turin, Anita Grassi was the lead.\nMeyriane H\u00e9glon starred in the Monte Carlo and subsequent London productions of De Lara's \"Messaline\", while Emma Calv\u00e9 starred in the 1902 Paris production, where she was succeeded by C\u00e9cile Th\u00e9venet. Others who sang in the role were Maria Nencioni in 1903, Jeanne Dhasty in the Nancy (1903) and Algiers (1907) productions, Charlotte Wyns (1868\u2013c.\u20091917) in the 1904 Aix les Bains production, and Claire Croiza, who made her debut in the 1905 productions in Nancy and Lille.\nFilms.\nAfter a slow start in the first half of the 20th century, the momentum of films about or featuring Messalina increased with censorship's decline. The following starred in her part:\nFiction.\nAn early fiction concerning the Empress, \"La Messalina\" by Francesco Pona, appeared in Venice in 1633. This managed to combine a high degree of eroticism with a demonstration of how private behavior has a profound effect on public affairs. Nevertheless, a passage such as\nMessalina tossing in the turbulence of her thoughts did not sleep at night; and if she did sleep, Morpheus slept at her side, prompting stirrings in her, robing and disrobing a thousand images that her sexual fantasies during the day had suggested\nhelps explain how the novel was at once among the most popular, and the most frequently banned, books of the century, despite its moral pretensions.\nMuch the same point about the catastrophic effect of sexuality was made by Gregorio Leti's political pamphlet, \"The amours of Messalina, late queen of Albion, in which are briefly couch'd secrets of the imposture of the Cambrion prince, the Gothick league, and other court intrigues of the four last years reign, not yet made publick\" (1689). This was yet another satire on a Stuart Queen, Mary of Modena in this case, camouflaged behind the character of Messalina.\nA very early treatment in English of Messalina's liaison with Gaius Silius and her subsequent death appeared in the fictionalised story included in the American author Edward Maturin's \"Sejanus And Other Roman Tales\" (1839). But the part she plays in Robert Graves' novels, \"I, Claudius\" and \"Claudius the God\" (1934\u201335), is better known. In it she is portrayed as a teenager at the time of her marriage but credited with all the actions mentioned in the ancient sources. An attempt to create a film based on them in 1937 failed, but they were adapted into a very successful TV series in 1976.\nIn 19th century France, the story of Messalina was subject to literary transformation. It underlaid \"La femme de Claude\" (Claudius' wife, 1873), the novel by Alexandre Dumas fils, where the hero is Claude Ruper, an embodiment of the French patriotic conscience after the country's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. In contrast, his wife C\u00e9sarine (the female Caesar) is a creature totally corrupt at all levels, who sells her husband's work to the enemy and is eventually shot by him. Alfred Jarry's 'pataphysical' novel \"Messaline\" of 1901 (titled \"The Garden of Priapus\" in Louis Colman's English translation), though lightly based on the historical account, is chiefly the product of the author's fanciful and extravagant imagination and has been compared with the treatment of Classical themes by Art Nouveau artists.\nIn fact, Jarry's was just one of five contemporary French novels treating Messalina in a typically fin de si\u00e8cle manner. They also included Prosper Castanier's \"L'Orgie Romaine\" (Roman Orgy, 1897), Nonce Casanova's \"Messaline, roman de la Rome imp\u00e9riale\" (Mesalina, a novel of imperial Rome, 1902) and Louis Dumont's \"La Chim\u00e8re, Pages de la D\u00e9cadence\" (The Chimaera, Decadent Pages, 1902). However, the most successful and inventive stylistically was Felicien Champsaur's novel \"L'Orgie Latine\" (1903) Although Messalina is referenced throughout its episodic coverage of degenerate times, she features particularly in the third section, \"The Naked Empress\" (\"L'imp\u00e9ratice nue\"), dealing with her activities in the brothel, and the sixth, \"Messalina's End\", beginning with her wedding to Silius and ending with her enforced death.\nSensational fictional treatments have persisted, as in Vivian Crockett's \"Messalina, the wickedest woman in Rome\" (1924), Alfred Schirokauer's \"Messalina \u2013 Die Frau des Kaisers\" (Caesar's wife, 1928), Marise Querlin's \"Messaline, imp\u00e9ratrice du feu\" (The fiery empress, 1955), Jack Oleck's \"Messalina: a novel of imperial Rome\" (1959) and Siegfried Obermeier's \"Messalina, die lasterhafte Kaiserin\" (The empress without principle, 2002). Oleck's novel went through many editions and was later joined by Kevin Matthews' \"The Pagan Empress\" (1964). Both have since been included under the genre \"toga porn\". They are rivalled by Italian and French adult comics, sometimes of epic proportions, such as the 59 episodes devoted to Messalina in the Italian Venus of Rome series (1967\u201374). More recent examples include Jean-Yves Mitton's four-part series in France (2011\u201313) and Thomas Mosdi's \"Messaline\" in the Succubus series (#4, 2014), in which \"a woman without taboos or scruples throws light on pitiless ancient Rome\".\nContrasting views have lately been provided by two French biographies. Jacqueline Dauxois gives the traditional picture in her lurid biography in Pygmalion's Legendary Queens series (2013), while the historian Jean-No\u00ebl Castorio (b. 1971) seeks to uncover the true facts of the woman behind Juvenal's 6th satire in his revisionist \"Messaline, la putain imp\u00e9riale\" (The imperial whore, 2015).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59713", "revid": "40043980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59713", "title": "Mediterranean seas", "text": "Mostly enclosed sea with limited exchange with outer oceans\nIn oceanography, a mediterranean sea ( ) is a mostly enclosed sea that has limited exchange of water with outer oceans and whose water circulation is dominated by salinity and temperature differences rather than by winds or tides. The eponymous Mediterranean Sea, for example, is almost completely enclosed by Africa, Asia, and Europe.\nList of mediterranean seas by type.\nThere are two types of mediterranean sea.\nConcentration basin.\nA concentration basin has a higher salinity than the outer ocean due to evaporation, and its water exchange consists of inflow of the fresher oceanic water in the upper layer and outflow of the saltier mediterranean water in the lower layer of the connecting channel.\nDilution basin.\nA dilution basin has a lower salinity due to freshwater gains such as rainfall and rivers, and its water exchange consists of outflow of the fresher mediterranean water in the upper layer and inflow of the saltier oceanic water in the lower layer of the channel. Renewal of deep water may not be sufficient to supply oxygen to the bottom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59714", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59714", "title": "Gauss elimination method", "text": ""}
{"id": "59715", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59715", "title": "Scientific notation", "text": "Concise notation for large or small numbers\nScientific notation is a way of expressing numbers that are too large or too small to be conveniently written in decimal form, since to do so would require writing out an inconveniently long string of digits. It may be referred to as scientific form or standard index form, or standard form in the United Kingdom. This base ten notation is commonly used by scientists, mathematicians, and engineers, in part because it can simplify certain arithmetic operations. On scientific calculators, it is usually known as \"SCI\" display mode.\nIn scientific notation, nonzero numbers are written in the form \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"m\" \u00d7 10\"n\"\nor \"m\" times ten raised to the power of \"n\", where \"n\" is an integer, and the coefficient \"m\" is a nonzero real number (usually between 1 and 10 in absolute value, and nearly always written as a terminating decimal). The integer \"n\" is called the exponent and the real number \"m\" is called the \"significand\" or \"mantissa\". The term \"mantissa\" can be ambiguous where logarithms are involved, because it is also the traditional name of the fractional part of the common logarithm. If the number is negative then a minus sign precedes \"m\", as in ordinary decimal notation. In normalized notation, the exponent is chosen so that the absolute value (modulus) of the significand \"m\" is at least 1 but less than 10.\nDecimal floating point is a computer arithmetic system closely related to scientific notation.\nHistory.\nFor performing calculations with a slide rule, standard form expression is required. Thus, the use of scientific notation increased as engineers and educators used that tool. See Slide rule#History.\nStyles.\nNormalized notation.\nAny real number can be written in the form in many ways: for example, 350 can be written as or or .\nIn \"normalized\" scientific notation (called \"standard form\" in the United Kingdom), the exponent \"n\" is chosen so that the absolute value of \"m\" remains at least one and less than ten (). Thus 350 is written as . This form allows easy comparison of numbers: numbers with bigger exponents are (due to the normalization) larger than those with smaller exponents, and subtraction of exponents gives an estimate of the number of orders of magnitude separating the numbers. It is also the form that is required when using tables of common logarithms. In normalized notation, the exponent \"n\" is negative for a number with absolute value between 0 and 1 (e.g. 0.5 is written as ). The 10 and exponent are often omitted when the exponent is 0. For a series of numbers that are to be added or subtracted (or otherwise compared), it can be convenient to use the same value of \"m\" for all elements of the series.\nNormalized scientific form is the typical form of expression of large numbers in many fields, unless an unnormalized or differently normalized form, such as engineering notation, is desired. Normalized scientific notation is often called exponential notation \u2013 although the latter term is more general and also applies when \"m\" is not restricted to the range 1 to 10 (as in engineering notation for instance) and to bases other than 10 (for example, ).\nEngineering notation.\nEngineering notation (often named \"ENG\" on scientific calculators) differs from normalized scientific notation in that the exponent \"n\" is restricted to multiples of 3. Consequently, the absolute value of \"m\" is in the range 1 \u2264 |\"m\"| &lt; 1000, rather than 1 \u2264 |\"m\"| &lt; 10. Though similar in concept, engineering notation is rarely called scientific notation. Engineering notation allows the numbers to explicitly match their corresponding SI prefixes, which facilitates reading and oral communication. For example, can be read as \"twelve-point-five nanometres\" and written as , while its scientific notation equivalent would likely be read out as \"one-point-two-five times ten-to-the-negative-eight metres\".\nE notation.\nCalculators and computer programs typically present very large or small numbers using scientific notation, and some can be configured to uniformly present all numbers that way. Because superscript exponents like 107 can be inconvenient to display or type, the letter \"E\" or \"e\" (for \"exponent\") is often used to represent \"times ten raised to the power of\", so that the notation \"m\"&amp;hairsp;E&amp;hairsp;\"n\" for a decimal significand \"m\" and integer exponent \"n\" means the same as \"m\" \u00d7 10\"n\". For example is written as or , and is written as or . While common in computer output, this abbreviated version of scientific notation is discouraged for published documents by some style guides.\nMost popular programming languages \u2013 including Fortran, C/C++, Python, and JavaScript \u2013 use this \"E\" notation, which comes from Fortran and was present in the first version released for the IBM 704 in 1956. The E\u00a0notation was already used by the developers of SHARE Operating System (SOS) for the IBM 709 in 1958. Later versions of Fortran (at least since FORTRAN IV as of 1961) also use \"D\" to signify double precision numbers in scientific notation, and newer Fortran compilers use \"Q\" to signify quadruple precision. The MATLAB programming language supports the use of either \"E\" or \"D\".\nThe ALGOL 60 (1960) programming language uses a subscript ten \"10\" character instead of the letter \"E\", for example: codice_1. This presented a challenge for computer systems which did not provide such a character, so ALGOL W (1966) replaced the symbol by a single quote, e.g. codice_2, and some Soviet ALGOL variants allowed the use of the Cyrillic letter \"\u044e\", e.g. . Subsequently, the ALGOL 68 programming language provided a choice of characters: , , , , or codice_3. The ALGOL \"10\" character was included in the Soviet GOST 10859 text encoding (1964), and was added to Unicode 5.2 (2009) as .\nSome programming languages use other symbols. For instance, Simula uses (or for long), as in . Mathematica supports the shorthand notation (reserving the letter for the mathematical constant \"e\").\nThe first pocket calculators supporting scientific notation appeared in 1972. To enter numbers in scientific notation calculators include a button labeled \"EXP\" or \"\u00d710\"x\"\", among other variants. The displays of pocket calculators of the 1970s did not display an explicit symbol between significand and exponent; instead, one or more digits were left blank (e.g. codice_4, as seen in the HP-25), or a pair of smaller and slightly raised digits were reserved for the exponent (e.g. codice_4, as seen in the Commodore PR100). In 1976, Hewlett-Packard calculator user Jim Davidson coined the term \"decapower\" for the scientific-notation exponent to distinguish it from \"normal\" exponents, and suggested the letter \"D\" as a separator between significand and exponent in typewritten numbers (for example, ); these gained some currency in the programmable calculator user community. The letters \"E\" or \"D\" were used as a scientific-notation separator by Sharp pocket computers released between 1987 and 1995, \"E\" used for 10-digit numbers and \"D\" used for 20-digit double-precision numbers. The Texas Instruments TI-83 and TI-84 series of calculators (1996\u2013present) use a small capital codice_6 for the separator.\nIn 1962, Ronald O. Whitaker of Rowco Engineering Co. proposed a power-of-ten system nomenclature where the exponent would be circled, e.g. 6.022\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0103 would be written as \"6.022\u2462\".\nSignificant figures.\nA significant figure is a digit in a number that adds to its precision. This includes all nonzero numbers, zeroes between significant digits, and zeroes indicated to be significant. Leading and trailing zeroes are not significant digits, because they exist only to show the scale of the number. Unfortunately, this leads to ambiguity. The number is usually read to have five significant figures: 1, 2, 3, 0, and 4, the final two zeroes serving only as placeholders and adding no precision. The same number, however, would be used if the last two digits were also measured precisely and found to equal 0 \u2013 seven significant figures.\nWhen a number is converted into normalized scientific notation, it is scaled down to a number between 1 and 10. All of the significant digits remain, but the placeholding zeroes are no longer required. Thus would become if it had five significant digits. If the number were known to six or seven significant figures, it would be shown as or . Thus, an additional advantage of scientific notation is that the number of significant figures is unambiguous.\nEstimated final digits.\nIt is customary in scientific measurement to record all the definitely known digits from the measurement and to estimate at least one additional digit if there is any information at all available on its value. The resulting number contains more information than it would without the extra digit, which may be considered a significant digit because it conveys some information leading to greater precision in measurements and in aggregations of measurements (adding them or multiplying them together).\nMore detailed information about the precision of a value written in scientific notation can be conveyed through additional notation. For instance, the accepted value of the mass of the proton can be expressed as , which is shorthand for . However, it is unclear whether an error expressed in this way ( in this case) is the maximum possible error, standard error, or some other confidence interval.\nUse of spaces.\nIn normalized scientific notation, in E notation, and in engineering notation, the space (which in typesetting may be represented by a normal width space or a thin space) that is allowed \"only\" before and after \"\u00d7\" or in front of \"E\" is sometimes omitted, though it is less common to do so before the alphabetical character.\nConverting numbers.\nConverting a number in these cases means to either convert the number into scientific notation form, convert it back into decimal form or to change the exponent part of the equation. None of these alter the actual number, only how it's expressed.\nDecimal to scientific.\nFirst, move the decimal separator point sufficient places, \"n\", to put the number's value within a desired range, between 1 and 10 for normalized notation. If the decimal was moved to the left, append codice_7; to the right, codice_8. To represent the number in normalized scientific notation, the decimal separator would be moved 6 digits to the left and codice_9 appended, resulting in . The number would have its decimal separator shifted 3 digits to the right instead of the left and yield as a result.\nScientific to decimal.\nConverting a number from scientific notation to decimal notation, first remove the codice_7 on the end, then shift the decimal separator \"n\" digits to the right (positive \"n\") or left (negative \"n\"). The number would have its decimal separator shifted 6 digits to the right and become , while would have its decimal separator moved 3 digits to the left and be .\nExponential.\nConversion between different scientific notation representations of the same number with different exponential values is achieved by performing opposite operations of multiplication or division by a power of ten on the significand and an subtraction or addition of one on the exponent part. The decimal separator in the significand is shifted \"x\" places to the left (or right) and \"x\" is added to (or subtracted from) the exponent, as shown below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;= = = 1234\nBasic operations.\nGiven two numbers in scientific notation,\nformula_1\nand\nformula_2\nMultiplication and division are performed using the rules for operation with exponentiation:\nformula_3\nand\nformula_4\nSome examples are:\nformula_5\nand\nformula_6\nAddition and subtraction require the numbers to be represented using the same exponential part, so that the significand can be simply added or subtracted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_7 and formula_8 with formula_9\nNext, add or subtract the significands:\nformula_10\nAn example:\nformula_11\nOther bases.\nWhile base ten is normally used for scientific notation, powers of other bases can be used too, base 2 being the next most commonly used one.\nFor example, in base-2 scientific notation, the number 1001b in binary (=9d) is written as 1.001b \u00d7 2d11b or 1.001b \u00d7 10b11b using binary numbers (or shorter 1.001 \u00d7 1011 if binary context is obvious). In E notation, this is written as 1.001bE11b (or shorter: 1.001E11) with the letter \"E\" now standing for \"times two (10b) to the power\" here. In order to better distinguish this base-2 exponent from a base-10 exponent, a base-2 exponent is sometimes also indicated by using the letter \"B\" instead of \"E\", a shorthand notation originally proposed by Bruce Alan Martin of Brookhaven National Laboratory in 1968, as in 1.001bB11b (or shorter: 1.001B11). For comparison, the same number in decimal representation: 1.125 \u00d7 23 (using decimal representation), or 1.125B3 (still using decimal representation). Some calculators use a mixed representation for binary floating point numbers, where the exponent is displayed as decimal number even in binary mode, so the above becomes 1.001b \u00d7 10b3d or shorter 1.001B3.\nThis is closely related to the base-2 floating-point representation commonly used in computer arithmetic, and the usage of IEC binary prefixes (e.g. 1B10 for 1\u00d7210 (kibi), 1B20 for 1\u00d7220 (mebi), 1B30 for 1\u00d7230 (gibi), 1B40 for 1\u00d7240 (tebi)).\nSimilar to \"B\" (or \"b\"), the letters \"H\" (or \"h\") and \"O\" (or \"o\", or \"C\") are sometimes also used to indicate \"times 16 or 8 to the power\" as in 1.25 = 1.40h \u00d7 10h0h = 1.40H0 = 1.40h0, or 98000 = 2.7732o \u00d7 10o5o = 2.7732o5 = 2.7732C5.\nAnother similar convention to denote base-2 exponents is using a letter \"P\" (or \"p\", for \"power\"). In this notation the significand is always meant to be hexadecimal, whereas the exponent is always meant to be decimal. This notation can be produced by implementations of the \"printf\" family of functions following the C99 specification and (Single Unix Specification) IEEE Std 1003.1 POSIX standard, when using the \"%a\" or \"%A\" conversion specifiers. Starting with C++11, C++ I/O functions could parse and print the P notation as well. Meanwhile, the notation has been fully adopted by the language standard since C++17. Apple's Swift supports it as well. It is also required by the IEEE 754-2008 binary floating-point standard. Example: 1.3DEp42 represents 1.3DEh \u00d7 242.\nEngineering notation can be viewed as a base-1000 scientific notation."}
{"id": "59716", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59716", "title": "Sixth Crusade", "text": "1228\u20131229 attempted conquest of the Holy Land\nThe Sixth Crusade (1228\u20131229), also known as the Crusade of Frederick II, was (like the other Crusades) a military expedition to recapture Jerusalem and the rest of the Holy Land. It began seven years after the failure of the Fifth Crusade and involved very little actual fighting. The diplomatic maneuvering of the Holy Roman emperor and king of Sicily, Frederick II, resulted in the Kingdom of Jerusalem regaining some control over Jerusalem for much of the ensuing fifteen years as well as over other areas of the Holy Land. Frederick II's negotiations and power-sharing agreement and negotiation with envoys from al-Malik Al-Kamil of Egypt, which led to a shared Christian-Muslim governance situation in Jerusalem, made this Crusade different from the others (and some call it the only successful one). Frederick II carried out his maneuvers in 1228 while under excommunication from the Church by Pope Gregory IX.\nWestern Europe after the Fifth Crusade.\nThe Fifth Crusade ended in 1221, having failed to gain any more influence in the Near East. Frederick II, Holy Roman emperor, never joined the campaign, despite his vow to do so. The forces he sent to Egypt arrived too late to make a difference in the debacle, partially due to the lack of effective leadership. They would have to wait for many more years for Frederick's actions. When Pope Innocent III died in 1216, his successor Honorius III did not immediately hold Frederick to his vow, but reminded him that the Christian world had waited for his action. However Gregory IX, the successor to Honorius, who became pope in March 1227, took a more hardline stance against the emperor. In Syria and Egypt, the Ayyubids were engaged in civil strife, in which the sultan al-Kamil fought against many of his brothers and other relatives. The sultan had yet to withdraw his offer of territory in exchange for peace that had been made during the Fifth Crusade, and Fredrick would eventually accept this deal.\nFrederick II and the Papacy.\nThe failure of the Fifth Crusade was a devastating blow to Christendom. Of all the European sovereigns, only Emperor Frederick II was in a position to regain Jerusalem after the loss. Frederick was, like many of the 13th-century rulers, a serial \"crucesignatus\". When he was formally crowned as King of Germany at Aachen on 15 July 1215, he astonished the crowd by taking the cross and calling upon the nobles present to do the same. Twenty years separated the crusader vows of Emperor Henry VI and his son Frederick and it is unclear whether the father's German Crusade of 1197 impacted the son's objectives for the Fifth Crusade.\nThe emperor again took the vow when he was re-crowned in Rome by the pope on 22 November 1220. At the same time, Frederick's oldest son, Henry, took the title of king of the Romans, and Frederick's wife, Constance of Aragon, was crowned empress. A year later, Honorius III reminded Frederick that he had not fulfilled his vow, and in December 1221, sent Nicola de Chiaromonte, cardinal-bishop of Tusculum, to confer with Frederick. They returned to Veroli in April 1222 to confer with the pontiff. A strategy meeting for the next Crusade did not happen until March 1223 at Ferentino and included the pope and emperor, plus John of Brienne, Latin patriarch Ralph of M\u00e9rencourt, the masters of the military orders, and many others. Frederick again vowed to go on Crusade in addition to signing an agreement with the errant Thomas of Celano, negotiated by Thomas of Aquino. But neither this nor the one signed two years later at San Germano assured Frederick's departure.\nA new date was set for the expedition of 24 June 1225. At the same time, Frederick, widowed since June 1222, planned a strategic wedding. After the retreat of the Crusaders from Egypt in 1221, John of Brienne returned to Acre. He hoped to find a suitable husband for his daughter Isabella II of Jerusalem, then just 9 years of age. Leaving Odo of Montb\u00e9liard as \"bailli\" of the kingdom, he travelled to Italy, accompanied by Patriarch Ralph and Hospitaller master Gu\u00e9rin de Montaigu. In Apulia, he met with Frederick II and arranged for the marriage of Isabella II to the emperor. The pope gave his blessing, and it was John's understanding that he remain regent until 1226. When John left Italy, marrying Berengaria of Le\u00f3n in 1224, he entrusted Hermann of Salza to conclude the arrangements for the wedding of his daughter.\nOnce again, preachers were sent throughout Europe to gain support for a new crusade, this time to be led by Frederick. Despite readying transport ships, the situation did not look good to meet the target date. Hermann of Salza and Ralph of M\u00e9rencourt were sent to the pope to apprise him of the situation. That would be one of the patriarch's last official acts, as he died in late 1224, succeeded by the bishop of Valence, G\u00e9rold of Lausanne. Honorius III sent cardinal bishop Conrad of Porto as papal legate to Germany, urging the clergy there to continue to pursue the crusade. The pope also urged Louis VIII of France to join Frederick, and to resolve his quarrel with Raymond VII of Toulouse. None of these efforts were fruitful and all were convinced that the timetable set at Ferentino was unachievable. The pope while at Rieti agreed to a delay on 18 July 1225, just days before the deadline and ten years after Frederick had originally committed to a crusade.\nAgreement of San Germano.\nThe Agreement of San Germano of 25 July 1225, signed at present day Cassino, was between Frederick II and Honorius III. A Dominican named Guala de Roniis was responsible for the negotiations. Frederick promised to depart on the Crusade by 15 August 1227 and remain for two years. During this period, he was to maintain 1000 knights in Syria, provide transport for additional forces, and provide Rome with 100,000 ounces in gold in the care of Hermann of Salza, John of Brienne and the patriarch. These funds would be returned to the emperor once he arrived at Acre. If, for any reason (including his death), he did not arrive, the money would be employed for the needs of the Holy Land. He also promised that if he went on Crusade that he would lead. After the agreement was signed, Guala became Bishop of Brescia. Based on the terms of the agreement, Frederick's forces ceased to occupy portions of the pontifical states. Moreover, all papal possessions in the Kingdom of Sicily were to be restored to the pope.\nFrederick attested to the terms at the high altar with his hand on the Gospels. Apostolic legate Rainald of Urslingen, the duke of Spoleto, swore \"on the soul of the emperor\" that the agreement would be upheld under the pain of excommunication. In a letter to the pope, Frederick reiterated the terms and accepted the ban in the event the Crusade did not happen. He had committed himself beyond all retreat.\nSituation in Italy.\nAfter agreeing with Honorius to launch a Crusade before 1228, Frederick summoned an imperial Diet at Cremona, the main pro-imperial city in Lombardy. The main arguments for holding the Diet would be to continue the struggle against heresy, to organize the crusade, and to restore the imperial power in northern Italy, long usurped by the numerous communes located there. Those assembled responded with the reformation of the Lombard League, which had already defeated the emperor Frederick I in the 12th century, and again Milan was chosen as the league's leader. The Diet was cancelled as well as the Truce of Constance. The situation was stabilized only through a compromise reached by Honorius between Frederick and the league. During his sojourn in northern Italy, Frederick also invested the Teutonic Knights with the territories in what would become East Prussia, starting what was later called the Northern Crusades.\nKing of Jerusalem.\nFrederick II desired to go to the Holy Land as king of Jerusalem. He married John of Brienne's daughter Isabella II by proxy in August 1225 at Acre, presided over by Giacomo, the bishop of Patti. In accordance with her father's wishes, she was crowned queen of Jerusalem a few days later at Tyre. Frederick sent fourteen galleys for her, under the command of admiral Henry of Malta, pardoned since his role at the disaster at Mansurah during the Fifth Crusade. They were formally married at Brindisi on 9 November 1227.\nJohn and Frederick's relationship became frayed, as Frederick claimed the kingship of Jerusalem. John had allegedly been given assurances that he would be king of Jerusalem for the rest of his life. According to one version, John got into a disagreement with his new son-in-law because Frederick seduced a niece of Isabella who was her lady-in-waiting. In the other version of the chronicle, John often chastised his son-in-law, concluding that John wanted to seize Sicily for his nephew Walter IV of Brienne. Frederick declared that John had lost his claim to the kingdom when Isabella married him. He proclaimed himself king of Jerusalem for the first time in December 1225, taking the crown at a special ceremony at Foggia.\nJohn of Brienne left for Rome, where Honorius sympathized with him, and ignored Frederick's claims. Balian of Sidon, Simon of Maugastel, the archbishop of Tyre, and the other Jerusalemite lords who had escorted Isabella to Brindisi acknowledged Frederick as their lawful king. Notably, these did not include the Ibelins. Nevertheless, the law\u2013\u2013the Assizes of Jerusalem\u2013\u2013required that the monarch be a resident of the kingdom. Frederick's first royal decree was to bestow new privileges upon Hermann of Salza and the Teutonic Knights, placing them on equal footing as the Templars and Hospitallers. Thomas of Aquino, the emperor's long-time advisor, replaced Odo of Montb\u00e9liard as \"bailli\" of the kingdom.\nFinancing the Crusade.\nIn November 1222, John of Brienne arrived at Brindisi, the first king of Jerusalem to visit Europe, with multiple objectives. The treasury of the kingdom was depleted and additional funds were badly needed. He also wanted to ensure that future crusades were not hampered by the divided leadership shown in Egypt, and that the kingdom would lead such efforts. John's pleas for support at the courts of England and Spain were for naught, and the pledge he received from Philip II of France on his death-bed was from an account already allocated to the Holy Land. Henry III of England did eventually implement a levy but it is not clear that much was made from the voluntary contributions.\nThe conciliar decree \"Ad Liberandam\" published at the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 formed a system of public financing of Crusades. The disbursements from the papal camera formed essential aid to the crusade movement, although the monies collected by individual \"crucesignati\" remained important. While some of these funds went directly to local Crusaders, by 1220, Innocent III had consolidated distribution. Frederick did not benefit from this, and from 1221 to 1228 there was limited ecclesiastical impost directed toward his planned Crusade. The funds for this imperial Sixth Crusade would have to be raised by the emperor. The gold sequestered after San Germano was quickly spent due to the delay of the crusade, and Frederick implemented a levy on Sicily beginning in 1228. He also gained financial support from Cyprus and as his new role as king of Jerusalem, but the lack of funds contributed to the small size of the Crusader army.\nAyyubids after 1221.\nThe defeat of the Crusaders in the Fifth Crusade was a joint effort of the brothers al-Kamil, al-Mu'azzam and al-Ashraf. After 1221, al-Mu'azzam returned to Damascus, suspicious of his brothers and their motivations. In June 1222, he conducted an expedition against Guy I Embriaco to enforce the truce, and unsuccessfully attacked his cousin al-Nasir Kilij Arslan, emir of Hama, and later occupying Ma'arrat al-Numan and Salamiyah. Al-Mu'azzam was forced to halt his siege of Hama and to surrender his other conquests by order of al-Kamil. He then formed an alliance with G\u00f6kb\u00f6ri, a former general of Saladin's, possibly at the request of the sultan al-Nasir, against his brother al-Ashraf.\nAnother brother, al-Muzaffar Ghazi, had been installed at Mayyafariqin and Akhlat, losing Akhlat to al-Ashraf after revolting against him. Ghazi joined the rebellion of al-Mu'azzam's, which was quickly suppressed by al-Ashraf and the Alleppine forces. Again attacking at Homs, al-Mu'azzam was restrained by threats from al-Kamil. Now opposing both of his well-positioned brothers, al-Mu'azzam reached out to disaffected members of the sultan's Egyptian forces, challenging the sultan to come to Syria if he dared. Against al-Ashraf, he enlisted the aid of the Khwarazmians under the shah Jalal al-Din Mangburni to attack Diyar Bakr.\nIn 1226, al-Mu'azzam again moved on Homs, while G\u00f6kb\u00f6ri attacked Mosul and al-Jazira. Al-Ashraf stopped his brother at Homs and called on the Seljuk Sultan of R\u00fbm, Kayqubad I, to help him with G\u00f6kb\u00f6ri. In the end, both al-Ashraf and Badr al-Din Lu'lu', ruler of Mosul, succumbed to al-Mu'azzam, but not before Jalal had invested himself in Akhlat and later Azerbaijan. His suzerainty over Akhlat was recognized by al-Mu'azzam, who also held al-Ashraf at Damascus. At this point, al-Kamil began exploring peace with the West, dispatching the emir Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh to meet Frederick II (see below).\nBy May 1227, al-Kamil was concerned for his sultanate, feeling increasingly boxed in. The arrival of the Crusaders began, and he was again considering his offer of Jerusalem made to Frederick II in 1226, that appearing to him as the only viable option. However, by May 1227, al-Ashraf had been released from Damascus, and the emirs al-Nasir Kilij Arslan at Hama and al-Mujahid at Homs turned against al-Mu'azzam. Fearing the Crusaders gathering at Acre, al-Mu'azzam began, as he did in the Fifth Crusade, to dismantle the defences of his fortresses, including Jerusalem.\nAl-Mu'azzam died on 12 November 1227, and was succeeded by his son an-Nasir D\u0101\u2019\u016bd, with al-Kamil's approval. Peace among the Ayyubids did not last long. D\u0101\u2019\u016bd refused his uncle's request to abandon Krak de Montreal. Then, yet another brother, al-Aziz Uthman of Banyas, attacked emir Bahram Shah of Baalbek. Ordered to stand down by D\u0101\u2019\u016bd, al-Aziz persisted and al-Kamil responded by taking Jerusalem and Nablus in July 1228. Al-Ashraf was summoned to Damascus and he met al-Kamil at Tall al-Ajul. There it was decided that al-Ashraf would take Damascus, leaving D\u0101\u2019\u016bd with al-Jazira. Al-Kamil remained in Jerusalem to conduct negotiations with Frederick II.\nCrusade begins.\nBy 1226, it was clear that the Sixth Crusade would, in fact, happen with an invasion of Syria and Palestine with the objective of conquering Jerusalem. Frederick II was to lead the Crusade, essentially boxed in by the terms of San Germano. After the death of Honorius III in 1227, the new pope Gregory IX entered the curia with determination to proceed and a long-held dislike for Frederick.\nOverview.\nThe initial phase of the Crusade was a complex endeavour involving multiple deployments, negotiations with the Ayyubids, a delay of the departure of Frederick due to illness, a subsequent excommunication, and, finally, arrival of the emperor at Acre. The key points in the timeline are:\nAfter a five-week stopover in Cyprus, in September 1228, Frederick arrived at Acre.\nGerman and Sicilian participation.\nThe new role of Frederick also affected the objective of the Crusade. In 1224, the plans to invade Egypt required suitable ships able to enter the Nile delta. Now, the emphasis was a campaign to focus on Jerusalem, with men from Germany and finance from Sicily. Oliver of Paderborn, so effective in recruiting for the Fifth Crusade, participated in the recruitment and even joined the army gathering in Italy, but was not as successful. His diminished role was replaced by bishop Conrad of Hildesheim. The landgrave Louis of Thuringia took the cross in 1226 and with Walran of Limburg inspired hundreds of Thuringian and Austrian knights to join. They also drew significant support from Cologne, L\u00fcbeck and Worms. Many prelates and \"ministeriales\" also joined, including the poet Freidank. The numbers and prowess of the German crusades provided hope to the expedition planners.\nEnglish participation.\nHenry III of England took the cross upon his coronation in May 1220 and had planned a crusade after Louis IX of France's failures. In 1223, Honorius III appealed to Henry to assist in the Holy Land. But, like his father John Lackland before him, crises closer to home took precedence. Nevertheless, there was to be significant English participation in the Sixth Crusade.\nWilliam Briwere, the bishop of Exeter, participated in the Crusade as a proxy for his uncle William Brewer, who died before he was able to fulfill his crusading vows. Brewer had taken the cross in 1189, but was excused because of administrative duties. Briwere went on the Crusade with Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester. An army of other Crusaders accompanied them to the Holy Land, although whether they were English or mercenaries recruited on the Continent is unclear. The contingent left from Brindisi in August 1227.\nThe bishops were influential advisors to Frederick II. As the pope had ordered that no one collaborate with the excommunicate Frederick, both bishops ignored the papal orders and worked closely with Frederick. The financial resources both bishops brought were especially appreciated by the crusaders. The fortifications of Caesarea and Jaffa were implemented with their money. Both witnessed the treaty signing in February 1229 with al-Kamil.\nNegotiations between the emperor and the sultan.\nAs described above, the sultan al-Kamil was in a desperate civil conflict in 1226. Having unsuccessfully tried negotiations with the West beginning in 1219, he again tried this approach. The sultan sent the emir Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh to Frederick asking him to come to Acre for discussions, offering return of much of the Holy Land to Christian control in exchange for military support against his brother al-Mu'azzam at Damascus. Fakhr ad-Din reportedly was somewhat amazed when he reached Palermo and discovered that Frederick spoke Arabic, had admiration for Muslim society and contempt for Rome.\nFrederick responded by sending his \"bailli\" and trusted advisor Thomas of Aquino and Berardus de Castacca, archbishop of Palermo, to meet with al-Kamil. Other than an exchange of gifts, nothing was accomplished. The bishop is reported to have continued on the Damascus to negotiate with al-Mu'azzam who, rejecting the overture, attempted to make peace with the younger Ayyubid brother al-Ashraf. The negotiations would continue in the autumn of 1227, after Frederick's excommunication, as described below.\nCrusaders depart.\nThe port of Brindisi was designated as the departure point and by mid-summer 1227, large numbers of Crusaders had arrived. The crowded conditions and high heat contributed to general discontent and disease among the assembled troops. Many returned home, leaving some transports unused. Others died, including Siegfried von Rechberg, the bishop of Augsburg.\nThe first contingents of Crusaders sailed August 1227 and arrived in Syria early October. They included Germans under the command of Thomas of Aquino and Henry of Limburg, and French and English under the command of the bishops Peter des Roches and William Briwere. Arriving at Acre, they joined with forces of the kingdom and fortified the coastal towns of Caesarea and Jaffa. They forced the Muslims of Damascus out of Sidon and fortified the island of Qal'at al-Bahr. The Germans rebuilt Montfort Castle, northeast of Acre, for the Teutonic Knights.\nThe emperor and his contingent were delayed while their ships were refitted. They sailed on 8 September 1227, but before they reached their first stop of Otranto many, including Frederick, were struck with the plague. Louis of Thuringia had, in fact, died. Frederick disembarked to secure medical attention. Resolved to keep his oath, he sent a fleet of twenty galleys on to Acre. This included Hermann of Salza, G\u00e9rold of Lausanne, Odo of Montb\u00e9liard and Balian of Sidon. The Crusade was now under the command of Henry IV, Duke of Limburg.\nIn February or March 1228, al-Aziz Uthman of Banyas ambushed a group of crusaders near Tyre, killing or capturing some seventy horsemen.\nFrederick's excommunication.\nFrederick II sent his emissaries to inform Gregory IX of the situation. These included Rainald of Spoleto, Nicol\u00f2 dei Maltraversi, Lando of Anagni, the archbishop of Reggio, and Marino Filangieri, the archbishop of Bari, but the pope refused to meet with them, and would not listen to Frederick's side of the story. Frederick II, the Holy Roman Emperor, was excommunicated on 29 September 1227.\nThe pope did not know, or care, about Frederick's illness, just that he had not lived up to his agreement. His letter to the emperor of 10 October 1227 laying out conditions for his rehabilitation referred less to the crusade than to infractions in Sicily. In his circular letter announcing the excommunication, Frederick was branded a wanton violator of his sacred oath taken many times, at Aachen, Veroli, Ferentino, and San Germano, and was held responsible for the deaths of Crusaders at Brindisi. He was accused of feigning his illness, relaxing at Pozzuoli, rather than in the Holy Land. Frederick's response was more factual, and included an appeal for more to take the cross.\nIn November 1227, the sultan's emissary Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh was again sent to meet with the emperor. It is here that it is believed the Fakhr ad-Din was knighted by Frederick, as described by Jean de Joinville, chronicler of the Seventh Crusade.\"\" The negotiations were conducted in secret, causing concern among the German Crusaders. Even the amiable poet Freidank, positively disposed towards the emperor, expressed his sorrow. Shortly after Fakhr ad-Din had departed, the emperor's negotiator Thomas of Aquino sent word that al-Mu'azzam had suddenly died on 12 November 1227. This revelation changed the balance of power, and Frederick dispatched Richard Filangieri, marshal of the Kingdom of Sicily, to Syria with 500 knights to augment to force already there as he prepared for a departure in the spring of 1228.\nThe Sixth Crusade.\nFrederick made his last effort to be reconciled with Gregory, sending Albert I of K\u00e4fernburg, the archbishop of Magdeburg, and two Sicilian justiciars to speak with the pope. It had no effect and Frederick sailed from Brindisi on 28 June 1228. The fleet was under the command of admiral Henry of Malta, and clergymen Berardus de Castacca, Nicol\u00f2 dei Maltraversi, Marino Filangieri, and Giacomo of Patti, now archbishop of Capua, accompanied him. He had only a small force with him, since the main force had sailed in August 1227 and reinforcements in April 1228. Gu\u00e9rin de Montaigu, master of the Hospitallers who had helped convince the pope to break the truce with the Muslims, refused to accompany Frederick as an excommunicate. He was replaced by Bertrand de Thessy, who embarked with the emperor.\nStopover in Cyprus.\nThe route of Frederick's fleet can be traced day-by-day. On 29 June 1228 it stopped in Otranto, whence it crossed the Adriatic Sea to the island of Othonoi on 30 June. It was in Corfu on 1 July, Porto Guiscardo in Cephalonia on 2 July, Methoni on 4 July, Portocaglie near Cape Matapan on 5 July, Cerigo on 6 July and it reached Souda Bay on Crete on 7 July. The fleet moved slowly along the Cretan coast, pausing for a whole day at Heraklion before crossing the Aegean Sea to Rhodes during 12\u201315 July. They sailed along the Anatolian coast to Phenika, where they stayed on 16\u201317 July replenishing their water supplies. The fleet then crossed the sea to Cyprus, arriving at Limassol on 21 July.\nThe Kingdom of Cyprus had been an imperial fief since the emperor Henry VI, Frederick's father, had accepted the homage of Aimery of Lusignan and made him king on the eve of the German Crusade in 1196. Hugh I of Cyprus had ruled the island kingdom since the death of his father Aimery in 1205. Upon his death, his wife Alice of Champagne became regent of the young king Henry I of Cyprus. Alice was the aunt of the empress Isabella II and had attended her coronation in Tyre. In the meantime, John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut, had been appointed regent without the knowledge of either Alice or Frederick.\nThe emperor arrived with the clear intent of stamping his authority on the kingdom and was treated cordially by the local barons. Frederick claimed that the regency of John of Ibelin was illegitimate and demanded the surrender of John's mainland fief of Beirut to the imperial throne. Here he erred, for John pointed out that the kingdoms of Cyprus and Jerusalem were constitutionally separate and he could not be punished for offences in Cyprus by seizure of Beirut. This would have important consequences for the crusade, as it alienated the powerful Ibelin faction, turning them against the emperor.\nFrederick sailed to Acre from Famagusta on 3 September 1228. He was accompanied by the king Henry I of Cyprus, John of Ibelin, and many Cypriote nobles. He left the Cypriote baron Amalric Barlais as \"bailli\" of Cyprus, supported by Gavin of Chenichy.\nIn the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nFrederick II arrived in Acre on 7 September 1228 and was received warmly by the Templars, Hospitallers and clergy, but denied the kiss of peace due to his excommunication. He yielded to pressure and made overtures to the pope, sending Henry of Malta and archbishop Marino Filangieri to announce his arrival in Syria and to request absolution. Rainald of Spoleto was named Frederick's regent in Sicily authorized to negotiate with Rome. But Gregory IX had already made up his mind, sending word to the Latin patriarch and masters of the military orders that the emperor's ban still held, despite his arrival.\nWhen Frederick and his companions arrived at Acre, John of Ibelin went immediately to Beirut to ensure that the city could withstand an imperial attack, returning to face the \"Haute Cour.\" Frederick did not immediately take action as Acre was split in its support for Frederick. Frederick's own army and the Teutonic Knights supported him, but the Templars, the patriarch and the Syrian clergy followed the hostile papal line. The Pisans and Genoese supported the emperor and the English vacillated, first for Frederick, shifting to the pope, then back. He gave nominal commands to faithful adherents\u2014Hermann of Salza, Odo of Montb\u00e9liard, Richard Filangieri\u2014in order for Crusaders to avoid jeopardizing their positions in the eyes of the curia. Once news of Frederick's excommunication had spread, public support for him waned considerably. The position of the Hospitallers and Templars was more complicated. They refused to join the emperor's army directly, but they supported the Crusade once Frederick agreed to have his name removed from official orders. The Outremer barons greeted Frederick enthusiastically at first, but were wary of the emperor's history of centralization and his desire to impose imperial authority. This was largely due to Frederick's treatment of John of Ibelin in Cyprus, and his apparent disdain for their constitutional concerns.\nFrederick's army was not large. Of the troops he had sent under duke Henry of Limburg in 1227 had mostly returned home out of impatience or of fear of offending the Church. The few who had sailed East under the patriarch G\u00e9rold of Lausanne remained as did the knights under Richard Filangieri. Even augmented with the forces available in Outremer, he could not muster an effective army capable of striking a decisive blow on the Muslims. Further, he got word that his regent Rainald of Spoleto had failed in his attack on the March of Ancona and that Gregory IX was planning to invade his own kingdom. He could neither afford nor mount a lengthening campaign in the Holy Land. The Sixth Crusade would be one of negotiation.\nTreaty of Jaffa.\nAfter resolving the internecine struggles in Syria, al-Kamil's position was stronger than it was a year before when he made his original offer to Frederick. He likely did not know that Frederick's force was a mere shadow of the army that had amassed when the Crusade had originally been called. Frederick realised that his only hope of success in the Holy Land was to negotiate for the return of Jerusalem as he lacked the manpower to engage in battle. He sent Thomas of Aquino and Balian of Sidon to inform the sultan of his arrival in the Holy Land. Al-Kamil was friendly but non-committal. In reply, Frederick received the ambassadors of the sultan, including Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh, at the Hospitaller camp at Recordane, near Acre. The sultan relocated from Nablus to Hiribya, northeast of Gaza, and Thomas and Balian were sent to resume negotiations.\nFrederick hoped that a token show of force, a threatening march down the coast, would be enough to convince al-Kamil to honor a proposed agreement that had been negotiated some years earlier. The masters of the Templars and Hospitallers, Pedro de Montaigu and Bertrand de Thessy, accompanied the emperor, at a distance behind as he was excommunicate. In January 1229, Frederick received notice that John of Brienne, serving the curia as rector of a Patrimony of Saint Peter, had taken San Germano and was threatening Capua. This placed Frederick in an awkward position. If he delayed in the Holy Land too long, he could lose his empire. If he left without results, he would be dishonored. He directed Henry of Malta to send twenty galleys to Syria by the following Easter. Fortunately, al-Kamil was occupied with a siege in Damascus against his nephew an-Nasir D\u0101\u2019\u016bd. He then agreed to cede Jerusalem to the Franks, along with a narrow corridor to the coast.\nThe treaty was concluded on 18 February 1229, and also involved a ten-year truce. The English bishops Peter des Roches and William Briwere were witness to the signing. No complete copy of the treaty has survived, either in Latin nor Arabic. In it, al-Kamil surrendered Jerusalem with the exception of some Muslim holy sites. Frederick also received Bethlehem and Nazareth, part of Sidon district, and Jaffa and Toron, dominating the coast. Other lordships may have been returned to Christian control, but sources disagree. It was, however, a treaty of compromise. The Muslims retained control over the Temple Mount area of Jerusalem, the Jami Al-Aqsa, and the Dome of the Rock. The Transjordan castles stayed in Ayyubid hands. Whether Frederick was permitted to restore Jerusalem's fortifications was unclear, although the Crusaders did in fact restore Jerusalem's defensive walls.\nThe agreement, known sometimes as the Treaty of Jaffa, also included the agreement signed by the different Ayyubid rulers at Tell Ajul near Gaza, of which, from al-Kamil's perspective, the treaty with Frederick was just an extension, which allows this agreement to be also called the Treaty of Jaffa and Tell Ajul. Frederick seems to have pledged his support to the sultan against all enemies, including Christian ones. The other Crusader states\u2014Principality of Antioch and County of Tripoli\u2014would receive no support in the event of war with the Muslims. The strongholds of the Hospitallers and Templars were left \"in statu quo\", and aid was not to be provided from any source. Prisoners from this conflict and the previous crusade were to be released. The provisions for the military orders and the possessions of Bohemond IV of Antioch likely reflect their lack of support provided to Frederick.\nIn Jerusalem.\nThe patriarch and the masters of the military orders\u2014G\u00e9rold of Lausanne, Pedro de Montaigu and Bertrand de Thessy\u2014all felt betrayed by the treaty and its concessions making the protection of the Holy city near-impossible. Hermann of Salza approached G\u00e9rold with a proposal of reconciliation, but the patriarch saw only deceit, trying to prevent Frederick's entry into Jerusalem by threatening excommunication of the army and placing the city under interdict. He sent archbishop Peter of Caesarea to meet the army, but he was too late.\nFrederick entered Jerusalem on 17 March 1229 and received the formal surrender of the city by al-Kamil's agent. He went to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre the next day and placed the crown on his own head. Hermann of Salza read the emperor's statement, blaming his excommunication not on the pope, but his advisors. It is unknown whether he intended this to be interpreted as his official coronation as King of Jerusalem; the absence of the patriarch rendered it questionable. There is evidence to suggest that the crown Frederick wore was actually the imperial one, but in any case proclaiming his lordship over Jerusalem was a provocative act. Legally, he was actually only regent for his son with Isabella, Conrad II of Jerusalem, who had been born shortly before Frederick left in 1228. Conrad's maternal grandparents were Maria of Montferrat and John of Brienne.\nStill wearing his crown, Frederick proceeded to the palace of the Hospitallers where he met with the English bishops and members of the military orders to discuss the fortifications of the city. Not until the morning of 19 March 1229 did Peter of Caesarea arrive to enforce the interdict, which he wisely chose not to do. At any rate, Frederick's interest in Jerusalem was waning, as he was planning to immediately leave. While Frederick was on his way to the harbour he was pelted with dung and entrails by the unappreciative people of Acre. Odo of Montb\u00e9liard and John of Ibelin quelled the unrest.\nOn 1 May 1229, Frederick departed from Acre, landing at Cyprus to attend the wedding by proxy of Henry I of Cyprus to Alice of Montferrat, with the bride later transported to Cyprus by the emperor's supporters. He arrived at Brindisi on 10 June 1229, and it was a month before the pope was aware that he had left the Holy Land. By the autumn, he had regained full possession of his empire. Frederick obtained from the pope relief from his excommunication on 28 August 1230 with the Treaty of San Germano, and he returned to the Hospitallers and the Templars the goods confiscated in Sicily.\nLegacy.\nThe results of the Sixth Crusade were not universally acclaimed. Two letters from the Christian side tell differing stories. In his correspondence to Henry III of England, Frederick touts the great success of the endeavour. In contrast, the letter to the \"all the faithful\" by the patriarch G\u00e9rold of Lausanne paints a darker picture of the emperor and his accomplishments. On the Muslim side, al-Kamil himself was pleased with the accord, but Arabic sources referred to the treaty as \"one of the most disastrous events of Islam,\" laying the blame solely with the sultan. The Muslim historians expressed equal disdain for the sultan and the Holy Roman Emperor.\nThe ten-year expiration of Frederick's treaty with al-Kamil caused Pope Gregory IX to call for a new crusade to secure the Holy Lands for Christendom beyond 1239. This initiated the Barons' Crusade, a disorganized affair which wound up with relatively limited support from both Frederick and the pope, but which nevertheless regained more land than even the Sixth Crusade.\nFrederick had set a precedent, in having achieved success on crusade without papal involvement. He achieved success without fighting since he lacked manpower to engage Ayyubids. This was due to the engagement of Ayyubids with the rebellion in Syria. Further crusades would be launched by individual kings, such as Theobald I of Navarre (the Barons' Crusade), Louis IX of France (the Seventh and Eighth Crusades), and Edward I of England (the Ninth Crusade), effectively demonstrating an erosion of papal authority.\nIn the Ayyubid camp, the treaty allowed the sultan al-Kamil and his brother al-Ashraf to focus their energies into defeating their nephew an-Nasir D\u0101\u2019\u016bd, emir of Damascus, capturing his capital city in June 1229. An-Nasir, was left subordinate to al-Kamil and in possession of Kerak.\nParticipants.\nA partial list of those that participated in the Sixth Crusade can be found in the category collections of and .\nPrimary sources.\nThe historiography of the Sixth Crusade is concerned with the \"history of the histories\" of the military campaigns discussed herein as well as biographies of the important figures of the period. The primary sources include works written in the medieval period, generally by participants in the Crusade or written contemporaneously with the event. The primary Western sources of the Sixth Crusade include several eyewitness accounts, and are as follows.\nThe Arabic sources of the Crusade include the following.\nMany of these primary sources can be found in Crusade Texts in Translation. German historian Reinhold R\u00f6hricht also compiled two collections of works concerning the Sixth Crusade: \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Geschichte der Kreuzz\u00fcg\" (1888), \"Geschichte der Kreuzz\u00fcge im Umriss\" (1898), and \"Die Kreuzfahrt Kaiser Friedrich des Zweiten (1228\u20131229)\" (1872). He also collaborated on the work \"Annales de Terre Sainte\" that provides a chronology of the Crusade correlated with the original sources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59718", "revid": "5183450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59718", "title": "Identity matrix", "text": "Square matrix with ones on the main diagonal and zeros elsewhere\nIn linear algebra, the identity matrix of size formula_1 is the formula_2 square matrix with ones on the main diagonal and zeros elsewhere. It has unique properties, for example when the identity matrix represents a geometric transformation, the object remains unchanged by the transformation. In other contexts, it is analogous to multiplying by the number 1.\nTerminology and notation.\nThe identity matrix is often denoted by formula_3, or simply by formula_4 if the size is immaterial or can be trivially determined by the context. \nformula_5\nThe term unit matrix has also been widely used, but the term \"identity matrix\" is now standard. The term \"unit matrix\" is ambiguous, because it is also used for a matrix of ones and for any unit of the ring of all formula_2 matrices.\nIn some fields, such as group theory or quantum mechanics, the identity matrix is sometimes denoted by a boldface one, formula_7, or called \"id\" (short for identity). Less frequently, some mathematics books use formula_8 or formula_9 to represent the identity matrix, standing for \"unit matrix\" and the German word respectively.\nIn terms of a notation that is sometimes used to concisely describe diagonal matrices, the identity matrix can be written as\nformula_10\nThe identity matrix can also be written using the Kronecker delta notation:\nformula_11\nProperties.\nWhen formula_12 is an formula_13 matrix, it is a property of matrix multiplication that\nformula_14\nIn particular, the identity matrix serves as the multiplicative identity of the matrix ring of all formula_2 matrices, and as the identity element of the general linear group formula_16, which consists of all invertible formula_2 matrices under the matrix multiplication operation. In particular, the identity matrix is invertible. It is an involutory matrix, equal to its own inverse. In this group, two square matrices have the identity matrix as their product exactly when they are the inverses of each other.\nWhen formula_2 matrices are used to represent linear transformations from an formula_1-dimensional vector space to itself, the identity matrix formula_3 represents the identity function, for whatever basis was used in this representation.\nThe formula_21th column of an identity matrix is the unit vector formula_22, a vector whose formula_21th entry is 1 and 0 elsewhere. The determinant of the identity matrix is\u00a01, and its trace is formula_1.\nThe identity matrix is the only idempotent matrix with non-zero determinant. That is, it is the only matrix such that:\nThe principal square root of an identity matrix is itself, and this is its only positive-definite square root. However, every identity matrix with at least two rows and columns has an infinitude of symmetric square roots.\nThe rank of an identity matrix formula_3 equals the size formula_1, i.e.:\nformula_27"}
{"id": "59719", "revid": "1302184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59719", "title": "C5", "text": "C5, C05, C V or C-5 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "59720", "revid": "17421013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59720", "title": "Alicia Keys", "text": "American singer and songwriter (born 1981)\nAlicia Augello Cook (born January 25, 1981), known professionally as Alicia Keys, is an American singer, songwriter and pianist. A classically trained pianist, Keys began composing songs at the age of 12 and was signed by Columbia Records at 15. After disputes with the label, she signed with J Records to release her debut studio album, \"Songs in A Minor\" (2001). Met with critical acclaim and commercial success, the album sold over 12 million copies worldwide and won five awards at the 44th Annual Grammy Awards. It contained the \"Billboard\" Hot 100-number one single \"Fallin'\". Her second album, \"The Diary of Alicia Keys\" (2003), was met with continued success, selling eight million units worldwide and spawning the singles \"You Don't Know My Name\", \"If I Ain't Got You\", and \"Diary\" (featuring Tony! Toni! Ton\u00e9!). Its release earned an additional four Grammy Awards.\nHer 2004 duet with Usher, \"My Boo\", became her second number-one single in the US. Keys's first live album, \"Unplugged\" (2005), spawned the single \"Unbreakable\" and made her the first female artist to have an \"MTV Unplugged\" project debut atop the \"Billboard\" 200. Her third album, \"As I Am\" (2007), sold seven million units worldwide and yielded her third \"Billboard\" Hot 100-number one single, \"No One\". In 2007, Keys made her film debut in the action-thriller \"Smokin' Aces\", and performed the theme song to the James Bond film \"Quantum of Solace\" with her single \"Another Way to Die\" (with Jack White) the following year. Her fourth album, \"The Element of Freedom\" (2009), peaked atop the UK Albums Chart, sold four million copies worldwide, and was supported by the singles \"Doesn't Mean Anything\", \"Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart\", and \"Un-Thinkable (I'm Ready)\".\nKeys guest appeared on Jay-Z's 2009 single \"Empire State of Mind\", which became her fourth number-one hit in the US. Her fifth album, \"Girl on Fire\" (2012), was her fourth non-consecutive album to peak the \"Billboard\" 200, and was supported by its lead single of the same name; her sixth album, \"Here\" (2016), peaked at number two on the chart. Her seventh and eighth studio albums, \"Alicia\" (2020) and \"Keys\" (2021), spawned the singles \"Show Me Love\" (featuring Miguel), \"Underdog\", \"Lala\" and \"Best of Me\". Her ninth, \"Santa Baby\" (2022), was a Christmas album and her first independent release. In 2023, she wrote, composed and co-produced her first Broadway musical, \"Hell's Kitchen\", which won two Tony Awards.\nKeys has sold over 90 million records worldwide, making her one of the world's best-selling music artists. She was named by \"Billboard\" as the Top Artist of the 2000s in the R&amp;B/Hip-Hop category, and placed tenth on their list of Top 50 R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years. She has received numerous accolades in her career, including 17 Grammy Awards, 17 NAACP Image Awards, 12 ASCAP Awards, and an award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame and National Music Publishers Association. Keys was also honored with the Producers &amp; Engineers Wing Award and the Global Impact Award by the Recording Industry Association of America. VH1 included her on their 100 Greatest Artists of All Time and 100 Greatest Women in Music lists, while \"Time\" has named her in their 100 list of most influential people in 2005 and 2017. Keys is also acclaimed for her humanitarian work, philanthropy, and activism. She co-founded the nonprofit HIV/AIDS-fighting organization Keep a Child Alive in 2003, for which she serves as Global Ambassador.\nEarly life, family and education.\nAlicia Augello Cook was born on January 25, 1981, in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City. She is the only child of Teresa Augello, who was a paralegal and part-time actress, and one of three children of Craig Cook, who was a flight attendant. Keys's father is African American and her mother is of Italian and \"Irish or Scottish\" descent; her mother's paternal grandparents were immigrants from Sciacca, Sicily; and Lamezia Terme, in Calabria. Named after her Puerto Rican godmother, Keys has said that she was comfortable with her multiracial heritage because she felt she was able to \"relate to different cultures\". Keys's father left when she was two years old. She was subsequently raised by her mother during her formative years at Manhattan Plaza in Hell's Kitchen. Keys has stated that her parents never had a relationship, and her father was not in her life. Although she did not like to speak about her father in order to not feed stereotypes, Keys remarked in 2001: \"I'm not in contact with him. That's fine. When I was younger, I minded about that. [It] made me angry. But it helped show me what a strong woman my mother was, and made me want to be strong like her. Probably, it was better for me this way.\" Keys and her mother lived in a one-bedroom apartment. Her mother often worked three jobs to provide for Keys, who \"learned how to survive\" from her mother's example of tenacity and self-reliance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI grew up in the middle of everything. I walked the streets alone, I rode the trains alone, I came home at three in the morning alone, that was what I did\u00a0... The city had a huge influence on me because it's such a diverse place. As hard as [growing up in it was], I always felt very blessed about being able to recognize different cultures and styles, people and places. I feel like the concrete alone just gave me a certain drive. I really saw everything: every negative I could possibly see from the time I could walk until now; and also every positive, every bright future, every dream that I could possibly see. So growing up around this big dichotomy definitely influenced my music.\n\u2014Keys\nFrom a young age, Keys struggled with self-esteem issues, hiding little by little when her differences made her vulnerable to judgment, and later uninvited sexual attention. Living in the rough neighborhood of Hell's Kitchen, she was, from an early age, regularly exposed to street violence, drugs, prostitution, and subjected to sexual propositions in the sex trade- and crime-riddled area. \"I saw a variety of people growing up, and lifestyles, lows and highs. I think it makes you realize right away what you want and what you don't want,\" Keys said. Keys recalled feeling fearful early on of the \"animal instinct\" she witnessed, and eventually feeling \"high\" due to recurrent harassment. Her experiences in the streets had led her to carry a homemade knife for protection. She became very wary, emotionally guarded, and she began wearing gender-neutral clothing and what would become her trademark cornrows. Keys explained that she is grateful for growing up where she did as it prepared her for the parallels in the music industry, particularly as she was a teenager starting out; she could maintain a particular focus and not derail herself. She credits her \"tough\" mother for anchoring her on a right path as opposed to many people she knew who ended up on the wrong path and in jail. Keys attributed her unusual maturity as a young girl to her mother, who depended on her to be responsible while she worked to provide for them and gave Keys as many opportunities as possible.\nKeys loved music and singing from early childhood. She recalled her mother playing jazz records of artists such as Thelonious Monk, Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, and Louis Armstrong on Sunday mornings\u2014early musical moments Keys considers influential in kindling her interest in and emotional connection to music. In preschool, Keys sang in her school's production of the musical \"Cats\" and was cast as Dorothy Gale in a production of \"The Wizard of Oz\". Keys discovered that she had a passion for the piano by age six, as she loved the sound and feel of the instrument and desired to play and learn it. When Keys was ten, a neighborhood friend who was moving home gave her family an old upright piano. This proved pivotal for Keys's musical development, which allowed her to practice, to play, and to benefit fully from music lessons at an early age. Keys began receiving classical piano lessons by age seven, practicing six hours a day, learning the Suzuki method and playing composers such as Beethoven, Mozart, Chopin, and Satie. She was particularly drawn to \"blue, dark, shadowy\" and melancholic compositions, as well as the passionate romanticism of \"blue composers\" like Chopin. Inspired by the film \"Philadelphia\", Keys wrote her first song about her departed grandfather on her piano by age 12. The scene in the film in which Tom Hanks's character listens to opera on a record player affected Keys, who \"never showed emotion very well\". After seeing the film, Keys, \"for the first time, could express how [she] felt through the music.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassical piano totally helped me to be a better songwriter and a better musician\u00a0... I knew the fundamentals of music. And I understood how to put things together and pull it together and change it. The dedication that it took to study classical music is a big reason why I have anything in this life I think. ... [It] was a big influence on me. It opened a lot of doors because it separated me from the rest. [...] And it did help me structure my songs.\n\u2014Keys\nKeys's mother had encouraged her to participate in different extracurricular activities, including music, dance, theater, and gymnastics, so she could \"find her muse\". Her extracurricular activities gave her focus and drive, and helped keep her out of trouble. Keys remained so occupied with her various pursuits that she experienced her first burnout before adolescence. Before her 13th birthday, she expressed to her mother that she was too overwhelmed and wanted to disengage, at which point her mother took some time off with her and encouraged her to keep focusing on piano. Keys would continue studying classical music until the age of 18. Keys regards her education in classical piano and dedication to classical music as vital for her stability in her youth and her development as a musician and songwriter. Keys later said of her classical background:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKeys enrolled in the Professional Performing Arts School at the age of 12, where she took music, dance, and theater classes and majored in choir. In her preteen years, Keys and her bass-playing friend formed their first group, though neither \"knew too much about how pop songs worked\". Keys would continue singing, writing songs, and performing in musical groups throughout junior high and high school. She became an accomplished pianist; according to some sources, after her classical-music teacher had nothing left to teach her, she began studying jazz at age 14 (this claim, however, was challenged by Keys's music teacher herself). Living in the \"musical melting pot\" city, Keys had already been discovering other genres of music, including soul music, hip hop, R&amp;B, and taken affinity to artists like Marvin Gaye and Curtis Mayfield. Keen on dissecting music, Keys continued developing her songwriting and finding her own 'flow and style\" through her exploration of the intricacies in different music.\nKeys spent more time in Harlem during her teenage years. She connected with the cultural and racial diversity in the neighborhood, where she expanded upon her musical exploration, and her character was also solidified. \"Harlem raised me in a lot of ways,\" Keys remarked. \"[It] taught me how to think fast, how to play the game\u00a0... taught me leadership, how to get out of bad situations when you need to, how to hold my own.\" During this period, she met her good friend who would later become her long-term collaborator and boyfriend Kerry Brothers Jr., also famously known as Krucial.\nCareer.\n1985\u20131997: Career beginnings and Columbia Records.\nIn 1985, at the age of four, Keys made her acting debut, appearing on \"The Cosby Show\" as Maria, one of Rudy's slumber-party friends.\nIn 1994, manager Jeff Robinson met 13-year-old Keys, who participated in his brother's youth organization called Teens in Motion. Robinson's brother had been giving Keys vocal lessons in Harlem. His brother had talked to him about Keys and advised him to go see her, but Robinson shrugged it off as he had \"heard that story 1,000 times\". At the time, Keys was part of a three-member band that had formed in the Bronx and was performing in Harlem. Robinson eventually agreed to his brother's request, and went to see Keys perform with her group at the Police Athletic League center in Harlem. He was soon taken by Keys, her soulful singing, playing contemporary and classical music and performing her own songs. Robinson was excited by audiences' reactions to her. Impressed by her talents, charisma, image, and maturity, Robinson considered her to be the \"total package\", and took her under his wing. By this time, Keys had already written two of the songs that she would later include on her debut album: \"Butterflyz\" and \"The Life\".\nRobinson wanted Keys to be informed and prepared for the music industry, so he took her everywhere with him, including all the meetings with attorneys and negotiations with record labels, while the teenager often became disgruntled with the process. Robinson had urged Keys to pursue a solo career, as she remained reluctant, preferring the musical interactions of a group. She took Robinson's advice after her group disbanded, and contacted Robinson who in 1995 introduced her to A&amp;R executive Peter Edge.\nRobinson and Edge helped Keys assemble some demos of songs she had written and set up a showcases for label executives. Keys performed on the piano for executives of various labels, and a bidding war ensued. Edge was keen to sign Keys himself but was unable to do so at that time due to being on the verge of leaving his present record company, Warner Bros. Records, to work at Clive Davis' Arista Records. During this period, Columbia Records had approached Keys for a record deal, offering her a $26,000 white baby grand piano; after negotiations with her and her manager, she signed to the label, at age 15. Keys was also finishing high school, and her academic success had provided her opportunity for scholarship and early admission to university. That year, Keys accepted a scholarship to study at Columbia University in Manhattan. She graduated from high school early as valedictorian, at the age of 16, and began attending Columbia University at that age while working on her music. Keys attempted to manage a difficult schedule between university and working in the studio into the morning, compounding stress and a distant relationship with her mother. She often stayed away from home, and wrote some of the most \"depressing\" poems of her life during this period. Keys decided to drop out of college after a month to pursue music full-time.\nColumbia Records had recruited a team of songwriters, producers and stylists to work on Keys and her music. They wanted Keys to submit to their creative and image decisions. Keys said they were not receptive to her contributions and being a musician and music creator. While Keys worked on her songs, Columbia executives attempted to change her material; they wanted her to sing and have others create the music, forcing big-name producers on her who demanded she also write with people with whom she was not comfortable. She would go into sessions already prepared with music she had composed, but the label would dismiss her work in favor of their vision. \"It was a constant battle, it was a lot of -isms\", Keys recalled. \"There was the sexism, but it was more the ageism \u2013 you're too young, how could you possibly know what you want to do? \u2013 and oh God, that just irked me to death, I hated that.\" \"The music coming out was very disappointing\", she recalled. \"You have this desire to have something good, and you have thoughts and ideas, but when you finish the music it's shit, and it keeps on going like that.\" Keys would be in \"perpetual music industry purgatory\" under Columbia, while they ultimately \"relegated [her] to the shelf\". She had performed \"Little Drummer Girl\" for So So Def's Christmas compilation in 1996, and later co-wrote the song \"Dah Dee Dah (Sexy Thing)\" for the \"Men in Black\" (1997) , the only released recording Keys made with Columbia.\nKeys \"hated\" the experience of writing with the people Columbia brought in. \"I remember driving to the studio one day with dread in my chest,\" she recalled. Keys said the producers would also sexually proposition her. \"It's all over the place. And it's crazy. And it's very difficult to understand and handle,\" she said. Keys had already built a \"protect yourself\" mentality from growing up in Hell's Kitchen, which served her as a young teen then in the industry having to rebuff the advances of producers and being around people who \"just wanted to use [her]\". Keys felt like she could not show weakness. Executives at Columbia also wanted to manufacture her image, with her \"hair blown out and flowing\", short dresses, and asking her to lose weight; \"they wanted me to be the same as everyone else,\" Keys felt. \"I had horrible experiences,\" she recalled. \"They were so disrespectful\u00a0... I started figuring, 'Hey, nothing's worth all this.'\" As months passed, Keys had grown more frustrated and depressed with the situation, while the label requested the finished tracks. Keys recalled, \"it was around that time that I realized that I couldn't do it with other people. I had to do it more with myself, with the people that I felt comfortable with or by myself with my piano.\" Keys decided to sit in with some producers and engineers to ask questions and watch them technically work on other artists' music. \"The only way it would sound like anything I would be remotely proud of is if I did it,\" Keys determined. \"I already knew my way around the keyboard, so that was an advantage. And the rest was watching people work on other artists and watching how they layer things.\"\nHer partner Kerry \"Krucial\" Brothers suggested to Keys she buy her own equipment and record on her own. Keys began working separately from the label, exploring more production and engineering on her own with her own equipment. She had moved out of her mother's apartment and into a sixth-floor walk-up apartment in Harlem with Brothers, where she fit a recording studio into their bedroom and worked on her music. Keys felt being on her own was \"necessary\" for her sanity. She was \"going through a lot\" with herself and with her mother, and she \"needed the space\"; \"I needed to have my own thoughts, to do my own thing.\" Keys and Brothers later moved to Queens and together they turned the basement into KrucialKeys Studios. Keys would return to her mother's house periodically, particularly when she felt \"lost or unbalanced or alone\". \"She would probably be working and I would sit at the piano,\" she reminisced. During this time, she composed the song \"Troubles\", which started as \"a conversation with God\", working on it further in Harlem. Around this time the album \"started coming together\", and she composed and recorded most of the songs that would appear on her album. \"Finally, I knew how to structure my feelings into something that made sense, something that can translate to people\", Keys. \"That was a changing point. My confidence was up, way up.\" The different experience reinvigorated Keys and her music. While the album was nearly completed, Columbia's management changed and more creative differences emerged with the new executives. Keys brought her songs to the executives, who rejected her work, saying it \"sounded like one long demo\". They wanted Keys to sing over loops, and told Keys they will bring in a \"top\" team and get her \"a more radio-friendly sound\". Keys would not allow it; \"they already had set the monster loose\", she recalled. \"Once I started producing my own stuff there wasn't any going back.\" Keys stated that Columbia had the \"wrong vision\" for her. \"They didn't want me to be an individual, didn't really care,\" Keys concluded. \"They just wanted to put me in a box.\" Control over her creative process was \"everything\" to Keys.\nKeys had wanted to leave Columbia since they began \"completely disrespecting [her] musical creativity\". Leaving Columbia was \"a hell of a fight,\" she recalled. \"Out of spite, they were threatening to keep everything I'd created even though they hated it. I thought I'd have to start over again just to get out, but I didn't care.\" Keys said in 2001: \"It's been one trial, one test of confidence and faith after the next.\" To Keys, \"success doesn't just mean that I'm the singer, and you give me my 14 points, and that's all. That's not how it's going to go down.\" Edge, who was by that time head of A&amp;R at Arista Records, said, \"I didn't see that there was much hands-on development at Columbia, and she was smart enough to figure that out and to ask to be released from her contract, which was a bold move for a new artist.\" Edge introduced Keys to Arista's then-president, Clive Davis, in 1998.\n1998\u20132002: Breakthrough with \"Songs in A Minor\".\nRobinson and Keys, with Davis's help, were able to negotiate out of the Columbia contract and she signed to Arista Records in late 1998. Keys was also able to leave with the music she had created. Davis gave Keys the creative freedom and control she wanted, and encouraged her to be herself. Keys said of Davis's instinct: \"he knows which artists are the ones that maybe are needing to craft their own sound and style and songs, and you just have to let an artist go and find that space. And I think he somehow knew that and saw that in me and really just let me find that.\" After signing with Davis, Keys continued honing her songs. Keys almost chose Wilde as her stage name at the age of 16 until her manager suggested the name Keys after a dream he had. She felt that name embodied her both as a performer and person. Keys contributed her songs \"Rock wit U\" and \"Rear View Mirror\" to the soundtracks of the films \"Shaft\" (2000) and \"Dr. Dolittle 2\" (2001).\nIn 2000, Davis was ousted from Arista, and the release of Keys's album was put on hold. Later that year, Davis formed J Records and immediately signed Keys to the label. \"He didn't try to divert me to something else,\" Keys said on following Davis to his new label. He understood that she wants to be herself and not \"made into what somebody else thinks I should be.\"\nKeys played small shows across America, performed at industry showcases for months and then on television. Davis thought \"pop stations might feel she's too urban. Urban might feel she's too traditional\", and as he felt Keys was a \"compelling, hypnotic performer\" best experienced in person, he had Keys perform her music to different crowds in different places to spread the word. \"I created opportunities for those who saw her to spread the word\", Davis recalled. \"She is her own ambassador.\" Davis wanted to \"let people discover her, and you can only do that with a few artists.\" Keys later performed on \"The Tonight Show\" in promotion for her upcoming debut. Davis wrote a letter to Oprah asking her to have Keys, Jill Scott, and India.Arie perform on her show to promote new women in music. Oprah booked Keys the day she heard her song \"Fallin'\", her debut single. Keys performed the song on Oprah's show the week prior to the release of her debut album. \"Fallin'\", released as a single in April, went to No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and stayed atop the chart for six consecutive weeks. \"Ebony\" magazine wrote that at the time \"the music that was pumping on the airwaves was hip-hop and rap \u2013 not Alicia's unique blend of classical meets soul, meets hip-hop, meets, well, Alicia. What could have been a recipe for disaster\u00a0... turned into the opportunity of a lifetime.\" Keys as an artist since her early days, Davis said, \"does her own thing. She has set out her own vision. That's the way it is for artists of her ilk\u00a0... They don't try to fit in. They try to establish their own paths\u00a0... [she has] sure natural instinct and sure vision\" and \"a respect for musical history.\"\n\"Songs in A Minor\", which included material that Columbia Records had rejected, was released on June 5, 2001, to critical acclaim. Musically, it incorporated classical piano in an R&amp;B, soul and jazz-fused album. \"Jam!\" described the music as \"old-school urban sounds and attitude set against a backdrop of classical piano and sweet, warm vocals\". \"USA Today\" wrote that Keys \"taps into the blues, soul, jazz and even classical music to propel haunting melodies and hard-driving funk\". \"Songs in A Minor\" would be \"lauded for its mix of traditional soul values and city-girl coolness\", wrote \"The Guardian\". \"PopMatters\" wrote that \"Keys's \"Songs in A Minor\" is a testament to her desire (and patience) to create a project that most reflects her sensibilities as a 20-year-old woman and as a musical, cultural, and racial hybrid.\"\n\"Songs in A Minor\" debuted on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart at number one, selling 236,000 in its first week at retail. In its second week, word of mouth and exposure from television performances was so significant that record stores requested another 450,000 copies. The album went on to sell over 6.2 million copies in the United States and 12 million internationally. It was certified six times Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. \"Songs in A Minor\" established Keys's popularity both inside and outside of the United States where she became the best-selling new artist and R&amp;B artist of the year.\nThe album's second single, \"A Woman's Worth\", was released in February 2002 and peaked at seven on the Hot 100 and number three on \"Billboard\"'s Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs; becoming her second top ten single on both charts. Released in June, \"How Come You Don't Call Me\", Keys's cover of Prince's song, served as the album's third single, peaking at 59 on the Hot 100. The album's fourth single \"Girlfriend\" was released in the United Kingdom where it peaked at 82. The following year, the album was reissued as \"Remixed &amp; Unplugged in A Minor\", which included eight remixes and seven unplugged versions of the songs from the original.\n\"Songs in A Minor\" received six Grammy Award nominations, including Record of the Year for \"Fallin'\". At the 2002 Grammy Awards, Keys won five awards: Song of the Year, Best Woman R&amp;B Vocal Performance, and Best R&amp;B Song for \"Fallin'\", Best New Artist, and Best R&amp;B Album. Keys tied Lauryn Hill's record for the most Grammy wins for a woman solo artist in a year. That year, Keys wrote and produced the song \"Impossible\" for Christina Aguilera's album \"Stripped\" (2002), also providing background vocals and piano. During the early 2000s, Keys also made small cameos in television series \"Charmed\" and \"American Dreams\".\n2003\u20132005: \"The Diary of Alicia Keys\" and \"Unplugged\".\nKeys followed up her debut with \"The Diary of Alicia Keys\", which was released in December 2003. The album debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, selling over 618,000 copies its first week of release, becoming the largest first-week sales for a female artist in 2003. It sold 4.4\u00a0million copies in the United States and was certified four times Platinum by the RIAA. It sold eight million copies worldwide, becoming the sixth-biggest-selling album by a female artist and the second-biggest-selling album by a female R&amp;B artist. The album's lead single, \"You Don't Know My Name\", peaked at number three on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for eight consecutive weeks, her first Top 10 single in both charts since 2002's \"A Woman's Worth\". The album's second single, \"If I Ain't Got You\", was released in February 2004 and peaked at number 4 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for six weeks. The album's third single, \"Diary\", peaked at number 8 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number two on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, being their third consecutive Top 10 single in both charts. The album's fourth and final single, \"Karma\", which peaked at number 20 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number 17 on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs, first release to fail to achieve top ten status on both charts. \"If I Ain't Got You\" became the first single by a female artist to remain on the \"Billboard\" Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for over a year. Keys also collaborated with recording artist Usher on the song \"My Boo\" from his 2004 album, \"Confessions (Special Edition)\". The song topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 for six weeks and Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for three weeks, became her first number-one single on the Hot 100 since 2001's \"Fallin'\". Keys won Best R&amp;B Video for \"If I Ain't Got You\" at the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards; she performed the song and \"Higher Ground\" with Lenny Kravitz and Stevie Wonder.\nWhile attending the Cannes Film Festival in May 2004, it was announced that Keys intended to make her film debut in a biopic about biracial piano prodigy Philippa Schuyler. The film was to be co-produced by Halle Berry and Marc Platt. September 25, Alicia Keys headlined The Great Wall Concert, initially called the Wall of Hope concert, on the Northern Gate Juyongguan section of the Great Wall of China, commemorating the 20th anniversary of the wall's restoration project that was part of a series of benefit concerts.\nLater that year, Keys released her book \"\", a collection of unreleased poems from her journals and lyrics. The title derived from one of her poems, \"Love and Chains\", from the line: \"I don't mind drinking my tears for water.\" She said the title is the foundation of her writing because \"everything I have ever written has stemmed from my tears of joy, of pain, of sorrow, of depression, even of question\". The book sold over US$500,000 and Keys made \"The New York Times\" bestseller list in 2005. The following year, she won a second consecutive award for Best R&amp;B Video at the MTV Video Music Awards for the video \"Karma\". Keys performed \"If I Ain't Got You\" and then joined Jamie Foxx and Quincy Jones in a rendition of \"Georgia on My Mind\", the Hoagy Carmichael song made famous by Ray Charles in 1960 at the 2005 Grammy Awards. That evening, she won four Grammy Awards: Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance for \"If I Ain't Got You\", Best R&amp;B Song for \"You Don't Know My Name\", Best R&amp;B Album for \"The Diary of Alicia Keys\", and Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals\" for \"My Boo\" with Usher.\nKeys performed and taped her installment of the \"MTV Unplugged\" series in July 2005 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. During this session, Keys added new arrangements to her original songs and performed a few choice covers. The session was released on CD and DVD in October 2005. Simply titled \"Unplugged\", the album debuted at number one on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200 chart with 196,000 units sold in its first week of release. The album sold one million copies in the United States, where it was certified Platinum by the RIAA, and two million copies worldwide. The debut of Keys's \"Unplugged\" was the highest for an \"MTV Unplugged\" album since Nirvana's 1994 \"MTV Unplugged in New York\" and the first \"Unplugged\" by a female artist to debut at number one. The album's first single, \"Unbreakable\", peaked at number 34 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number four on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. It remained at number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot Adult R&amp;B Airplay for 11 weeks. The album's second and final single, \"Every Little Bit Hurts\", was released in January 2006, it failed to enter the U.S. charts.\nKeys opened a recording studio in Long Island, New York, called The Oven Studios, which she co-owns with her production and songwriting partner Kerry \"Krucial\" Brothers. The studio was designed by renowned studio architect John Storyk of WSDG, designer of Jimi Hendrix' Electric Lady Studios. Keys and Brothers are the co-founders of KrucialKeys Enterprises, a production and songwriting team who have assisted Keys in creating her albums as well as creating music for other artists.\n2006\u20132008: Film debut and \"As I Am\".\nIn 2006, Keys won three NAACP Image Awards, including Outstanding Female Artist and Outstanding Song for \"Unbreakable\". She also received the Starlight Award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame. In October 2006, she played the voice of Mommy Martian in the \"Mission to Mars\" episode of Nick Jr.\u2019s CGI-animated children's television series \"The Backyardigans\", in which she sang an original song, \"Almost Everything Is Boinga Here\". That same year, Keys nearly had a mental breakdown. Her grandmother had died and her family was heavily dependent on her. She felt she needed to \"escape\" and went to Egypt for three weeks. She explained: \"That trip was definitely the most crucial thing I've ever done for myself in my life to date. It was a very difficult time that I was dealing with, and it just came to the point where I really needed to\u2014basically, I just needed to run away, honestly. And I needed to get as far away as possible.\"\nIn November 2006 Keys performed live with David Bowie at a fundraising event in New York. This would be Bowie's last public performance.\nKeys made her film debut in early 2007 in the crime film \"Smokin' Aces\", co-starring as an assassin named Georgia Sykes opposite Ben Affleck and Andy Garc\u00eda. Keys received much praise from her co-stars in the film; Ryan Reynolds called her \"so natural\" and said she would \"blow everybody away.\" \"Smokin' Aces\" was a moderate hit at the box office, earning $57,103,895 worldwide during its theatrical run. In the same year, Keys earned further praise for her second film, \"The Nanny Diaries\", based on the 2002 novel of the same name, in which she co-starred alongside Scarlett Johansson and Chris Evans. \"The Nanny Diaries\" had a hit moderate performance at the box office, earning only $44,638,886 worldwide during its theatrical run. She also guest starred as herself in the \"One Man Is an Island\" episode of the drama series \"Cane\".\nKeys released her third studio album, \"As I Am\", in November 2007; it debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, selling 742,000 copies in its first week. It gained Keys her largest first week sales of her career and became her fourth-consecutive number-one album, tying her with Britney Spears for the most consecutive number-one debuts on the \"Billboard\" 200 by a female artist. The week became the second-largest sales week of 2007 and the largest sales week for a female solo artist since singer Norah Jones' album \"Feels like Home\" in 2004. The album has sold three million copies in the United States and has been certified three times Platinum by the RIAA. It has sold five million copies worldwide. Keys received five nominations for \"As I Am\" at the 2008 American Music Award and ultimately won two. The album's lead single, \"No One\", peaked at number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks and Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for ten consecutive weeks, became her first number-one single on the Hot 100 since 2004's \"My Boo\" and becoming Keys's third and fifth number-one single on each chart, respectively. The album's second single, \"Like You'll Never See Me Again\", was released in late 2007 and peaked at number 12 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for seven consecutive weeks. From October 27, 2007, when \"No One\" reached No. 1, through February 16, 2008, the last week \"Like You'll Never See Me Again\" was at No. 1, the Keys was on top of the chart for 17 weeks, more consecutive weeks than any other artist on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip/Hop Songs chart. The album's third single, \"Teenage Love Affair\", which peaked at number 54 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number three on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. The album's fourth and final single, \"Superwoman\", which peaked at number 82 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number 12 on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs.\n\"No One\" earned Keys the awards for Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance and Best R&amp;B Song at the 2008 Grammy Awards. Keys opened the ceremony singing Frank Sinatra's 1950s song \"Learnin' the Blues\" as a \"duet\" with archival footage of Sinatra in video and \"No One\" with John Mayer later in the show. Keys also won Best Female R&amp;B Artist during the show. She starred in \"Fresh Takes\", a commercial micro-series created by Dove Go Fresh, which premiered during \"The Hills\" on MTV from March to April 2008. The premiere celebrated the launch of new Dove Go Fresh. She also signed a deal as spokesperson with Glac\u00e9au's VitaminWater to endorse the product, and was in an American Express commercial for the \"Are you a Cardmember?\" campaign. Keys, along with The White Stripes' guitarist and lead vocalist Jack White, recorded the theme song to \"Quantum of Solace\", the first duet in Bond soundtrack history. In 2008, Keys was ranked in at number 80 the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists. She also starred in the feature \"The Secret Life of Bees\". Her role earned her a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture at the NAACP Image Awards. She also received three nominations at the 2009 Grammy Awards and won Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance for \"Superwoman\".\nIn an interview with \"Blender\" magazine, Keys allegedly said \"'Gangsta rap' was a ploy to convince black people to kill each other, 'gangsta rap' didn't exist\" and went on to say that it was created by \"the government\". The magazine also claimed she said that Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. were \"essentially assassinated, their beefs stoked by the government and the media, to stop another great black leader from existing\". Keys later wrote a statement clarifying the issues and saying her words were misinterpreted. Later that year, Keys was criticized by anti-smoking campaigners after billboard posters for her forthcoming concerts in Indonesia featured a logo for the A Mild cigarette brand sponsored by tobacco firm Philip Morris. She apologized after discovering that the concert was sponsored by the firm and asked for \"corrective actions\". In response, the company withdrew its sponsorship.\n2009\u20132011: \"The Element of Freedom\", marriage and motherhood.\nIn 2009, Keys approached Clive Davis for permission to submit a song for Whitney Houston's sixth studio album \"I Look to You\". She subsequently co-wrote and produced the single \"Million Dollar Bill\" with record producer Swizz Beatz. Months later, she was featured on rapper Jay-Z's song \"Empire State of Mind\" which was the lead single from his eleventh studio album \"The Blueprint 3\". The song was a commercial and critical success, topping the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, becoming her fourth number-one song on that chart. Additionally, it won Grammy Awards for 'Best Rap/Sung Collaboration and 'Best Rap Song' the following year, among a total of five nominations.\nThe following month, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers honored Keys with the Golden Note Award, an award given to artists \"who have achieved extraordinary career milestones\". She collaborated with Spanish recording artist Alejandro Sanz for \"Looking for Paradise\", which topped the \"Billboard\" Hot Latin Songs chart, this was Keys's first number one on all three charts, which also made her the first African-American of non-Hispanic origin to reach number 1 on the \"Hot Latin Tracks\".\nKeys released her fourth studio album, \"The Element of Freedom\", in December 2009. It debuted at number two on the \"Billboard\" 200, selling 417,000 copies in its first week. It was preceded by the release of its lead single \"Doesn't Mean Anything\" which peaked at sixty on the Hot 100, and fourteen on \"Billboard\"'s Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. Keys was ranked as the top R&amp;B recording artist of the 2000\u20132009 decade by \"Billboard\" magazine and ranked at number five as artist of the decade, while \"No One\" was ranked at number six on the magazine's top songs of the decade. In the United Kingdom, \"The Element of Freedom\" became Keys's first album to top the UK Albums Chart. The album's second single, \"Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart\", was released in November and peaked at number twenty-seven on the Hot 100 and number two on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. The album's third single \"Put It in a Love Song\" featured recording artist Beyonc\u00e9. In February 2010, Keys released the fourth single, \"Empire State of Mind (Part II) Broken Down\" peaked at fifty-five on the Hot 100 and seventy-six on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. In May, \"Un-Thinkable (I'm Ready)\" featuring rapper Drake was released as the album's fifth single. While only peaking at twenty-one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, it topped the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for twelve consecutive weeks. The song became the album's most successful single; Keys eighth number one on the chart; and Key's first number one song in five years. The album's sixth and final single, \"Wait Til You See My Smile\", was released in December 2010 in the United Kingdom.\nIn May 2010, a representative for Keys and Swizz Beatz confirmed that they were engaged and expecting a child together. Keys and Beatz had a wedding celebration near the Mediterranean Sea on July 31, 2010. On October 14, 2010, Keys gave birth to their first son, in New York City. She recorded a song together with Eve called \"Speechless\", dedicated to her son.\nIn June 2011, \"Songs in A Minor\" was re-released as deluxe and collector's editions in commemoration of its 10th anniversary. To support the release, Keys embarked on a four-city promotional tour, titled , featuring only her piano. Keys is also set to co-produce the Broadway premiere of \"Stick Fly\", which was opened in December 2011. At the end of June, a wax figure of Keys was unveiled at Madame Tussauds New York. On September 26, 2011, was the premiere of \"Project 5\", known as \"Five\", a short film that marks the debut of Keys as a director. It is a documentary of five episodes that tell stories of five women who had breast cancer and how it affected their lives. The production also has co-direction of the actresses Jennifer Aniston, Demi Moore and film director Patty Jenkins. On October 7, 2011, Sony Music's RCA Music Group announced that it would be absorbing Keys's longtime label, J Records, as well as Arista and Jive Records. With the shutdown, Keys (and various other artists previously signed to the three labels) released her following music material under RCA Records.\n2012\u20132015: \"Girl on Fire\".\nKeys released her fifth studio album \"Girl on Fire\", her first album through RCA Records on November 27, 2012. Keys has stated that she wants the album to \"liberate\" and \"empower\" fans. The album's title track was released on September 4 as its lead single and peak number eleven on \"Billboard\" hot 100, the single was Keys's first top twenty own single on the chart since 2007 single \"Like You'll Never See Me Again\", she performed the song for the first time at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards on September 6. \"Girl on Fire\" is an uptempo anthem. \"Brand New Me\" was released as the album's second single. A softer ballad, it was noted as significantly different from the album's lead single. Prior, two songs from \"Girl on Fire\" were released as promotion. The first was a song titled \"New Day\". The song was later revealed to be the solo version of 50 Cent's lead single featuring Dr. Dre and Keys. Another song, \"Not Even the King\" was uploaded to VEVO as a promotional song. Co-written by Scottish singer-songwriter Emeli Sand\u00e9, its lyrics talk about a rich love that couldn't be afforded by \"the king\". Overall sales of the album were considerably lower than Keys's previous ones.\nIn September 2012, Keys collaborated with Reebok for her own sneakers collection. In October 2012, Keys announced her partnership with Bento Box Entertainment's Bento Box Interactive to create an education mobile application titled \"The Journals of Mama Mae and LeeLee\" for iOS devices about the relationship between a young New York City girl and her wise grandmother. The app featured two of Keys's original songs, \"Follow the Moon\" and \"Unlock Yourself\". In January 2013, BlackBerry CEO Thorsten Heins and Keys officially unveiled the BlackBerry 10 mobile platform in New York City. Heins announced that Keys would be the company's new Global Creative Director. In January 2014, BlackBerry said it will part ways with Keys at the end of that month.\nIn June 2013, Keys's VH1 Storytellers special was released on CD and DVD. In December 2013, Keys was featured on \"I Will Pray (Pregher\u00f2)\" released as a single from Italian singer Giorgia's studio album \"Senza paura\". In 2014, Keys collaborated with Kendrick Lamar on the song \"It's On Again\" for \"The Amazing Spider-Man 2\" soundtrack. In July 2014, it was reported that Keys had changed management from Red Light Management's Will Botwin to Ron Laffitte and Guy Oseary at Maverick.\nOn September 8, 2014, Keys uploaded the music video to a new song called \"We Are Here\" to her Facebook page, accompanied by a lengthy status update describing her motivation and inspiration to write the song. It was released digitally the following week. Keys was also working with Pharrell Williams on her sixth studio album, first set for a 2015 release. In an interview with \"Vibe\", Keys described the sound of the album as \"aggressive\". One of the songs on the album is called \"Killing Your Mother\". In the same interview Keys revealed one of the songs on the album was titled \"Killing Your Mother\" with \"WWD\", Keys discussed her first beauty campaign with Givenchy as the face of the new fragrance Dahlia Divin. In November 2014, Keys announced that she is releasing a series of children's books. The first book released is entitled \"Blue Moon: From the Journals of MaMa Mae and LeeLee\". Keys gave birth to her second child, son Genesis Ali Dean, on December 27, 2014. In 2015 Keys performed at the BET Awards 2015 with The Weeknd. Keys played the character Skye Summers in the second season of \"Empire\". She first appeared in the episode \"Sinned Against\", which aired November 25, 2015.\n2016\u20132018: \"Here\" and \"The Voice\".\nOn March 25, 2016, Keys was announced as a new coach on Season 11 of \"The Voice\". During \"The Voice\" finale, she came in third place with team member We' McDonald. In May 2016, Keys released \"In Common\" and performed the song in the opening ceremony of 2016 UEFA Champions League Final in San Siro, Milan. The song topped Billboard's Dance Club Songs chart on October 15. On June 20, 2016, World Refugee Day, Keys released the short film \"Let Me In\", which she executive produced in conjunction with her We Are Here organization. The film is a reimagining of the refugee crisis as taking place in the United States. In October 2016, she released a single from upcoming album \"Here\" called \"Blended Family (What You Do for Love)\" featuring A$AP Rocky. On November 1, 2016, Keys unveiled her short film, \"The Gospel\", to accompany the LP. Keys's concert special \"Here in Times Square\" was aired on BET on November 3, and \"Here\" was released on November 4, peaking at number 2 of the \"Billboard 200\", becoming her seventh top 10 album. It peaked at number-one on the R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, becoming her seventh chart topper.\nIn January 2017, she released the track \"That's What's Up\" that re-imagines the spoken word segment on the Kanye West song \"Low Lights\". Keys returned for Season 12 of \"The Voice\" and won the competition with her artist Chris Blue, on May 23, 2017. In May 2017, in an interview with Entertainment Tonight, Keys announced that she was working on her seventh studio album, therefore she did not return for the thirteenth series of \"The Voice\". In August 2017, she attended WE Day, an event of Canadian WE Charity organization. On September 17, 2017, Keys performed at Rock in Rio, in a powerful and acclaimed performance. On October 18, 2017, NBC announced that Keys would be returning to the series for the show's fourteenth season of \"The Voice\" alongside Adam Levine, Blake Shelton, and Kelly Clarkson. She placed in second place with her team member Britton Buchanan, with whom Keys released a cover version of Avicii's \"Wake Me Up\" as a single. In December 2017, Keys appeared on Eminem's album \"Revival\" on the song \"Like Home\". Keys also featured on the song \"Morning Light\" from Justin Timberlake's fifth studio album \"Man of the Woods\" (2018) and on \"Us\", the third single from James Bay's second studio album \"Electric Light\".\nOn December 6, 2018, Keys spoke at the 13th Annual \"Billboard\" Women in Music event spotlighting her new non-profit named \"She Is the Music\". As part of her address, Keys spoke briefly of the organization's efforts in creating an inclusive database of women in music and a partnership with \"Billboard\" to mentor young women interested in the music industry. She created She is the Music upon learning that the number of women in popular music reached a six-year low in 2017, partnering with Jody Gerson, Sam Kirby and Ann Mincieli.\n2019\u20132022: \"Alicia\", \"Keys\" and authorship.\nOn January 15, 2019, Alicia Keys was announced as the host of the 61st Annual Grammy Awards. When Keys hosted the event on February 10, 2019, it became the first time a woman hosted the show in 14 years. Keys performed at Pride Live's Stonewall Day Concert on June 28, 2019. Later Keys was announced as the buyer of the \"Razor House\" in the La Jolla community of San Diego, California. In September 2019, Keys released a new single, \"Show Me Love\", with Miguel. The accompanying music video starred actors Michael B. Jordan and Zoe Saldana. The song was released on September 24, 2019, as the first single from Keys's upcoming seventh studio album. The song was a commercial success on US Urban music charts and became Keys's first song to reach the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 since \"Girl on Fire\" in 2012; peaking at number 90 on November 22, 2019. This success extended her record as the artist with the most number one singles on the Adult R&amp;B Songs chart; reigning for five consecutive weeks. It was followed by the release of the single \"Time Machine\" in November 2019. The music video for \"Time Machine\" was released the same month and noted for its retro roller rink setting and vibes. In December 2019, Keys was awarded the American Express Impact Award for her efforts to foster female artist growth and provide them with new opportunities through the non-profit she co-founded the year before and developed in 2019 named \"She Is the Music\". Keys received the award at the 14th Annual Women in Music \"Billboard\" event on December 12, 2019.\nOn January 26, 2020, Alicia Keys hosted the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards for the second year in a row as announced on November 14, 2019. In addition to hosting the event, Keys performed multiple times, including a tribute with Boyz II Men to basketball star Kobe Bryant, who died in a helicopter crash earlier that same day. Keys also performed her new song \"Underdog\" with Brittany Howard backing the performance on acoustic guitar. Keys's seventh studio album \"Alicia\" was originally scheduled to be released on May 15, 2020, but then got postponed to September 18, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It debuted at number four on the \"Billboard\" 200 in its first week and became Keys's eighth top-10 record in the US and won the Grammy Award for Best Immersive Audio Album at the 2022 Grammy Awards. On October 29, 2020, Keys released \"A Beautiful Noise\" with Brandi Carlile to encourage Americans to get out and vote. It was also included on the digital reissue of Keys's seventh studio album \"Alicia\" that was released on December 18, 2020.\nKeys released her memoir \"\" on March 31, 2020. In September 2020, Keys launched her lifestyle brand Keys Soulcare. Keys and Brandi performed \"A Beautiful Noise\" on \"Every Vote Counts: A Celebration of Democracy\" on CBS. In May 2021, Keys was featured on DMX's album \"Exodus\" in the song \"Hold Me Down\". To commemorate the 20th anniversary of her debut album, \"Songs in A Minor\", Keys performed a three-song medley of singles from the album at the 2021 \"Billboard\" Music Awards. In June 2021, a 20th-anniversary edition of \"Songs in A Minor\" was released.\nOn September 9, 2021, Keys released the single \"Lala (Unlocked)\" featuring US rapper and singer Swae Lee of the hip hop duo Rae Sremmurd. The song was performed at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards. The music video was released on September 23, 2021. The single preceded the release of Keys's eighth studio album and follow-up companion to 2020's \"Alicia\", entitled \"Keys\" as final release under RCA Records. First previewed via Alicia's 2021 \"Noted\" YouTube docu-series, the album was released on December 10, 2021, as a double album featuring both fully produced and broken down versions of new material. On April 7, 2022, Keys released \"City of Gods (Part II)\" through her own label AKW Records. It was written and produced by Keys and is a sequel to the single \"City of Gods\" by Fivio Foreign, Kanye West and Keys. On July 14, 2022, Keys unveiled that \"Come for Me\" featuring Khalid and Lucky Daye would be released as the next and final single, ahead of a re-release of the album titled \"Keys II\" during the following month. The music video was released the same day. From June 9, 2022, the singer embarked on the global tour Alicia + Keys World Tour, extending it with eight dates in Latin America in May 2023.\n2022\u2013present: \"Santa Baby\" and \"Hell's Kitchen\".\nAfter her contract with RCA Records ended, Keys released her ninth studio album and first Christmas album, \"Santa Baby\", on November 4, 2022, exclusively on Apple Music. It was her first release as an independent artist under her own record label Alicia Keys Records. It peaked at number 148 on the Billboard 200.\nBetween June and August 2023, Keys undertook the Keys to the Summer Tour in North America. Keys wrote, composed and produced with Kristoffer Diaz a musical entitled \"Hell's Kitchen\", which premiered at The Public Theater's Newman Theater in New York City in November 2023 and transfer to the Shubert Theatre on Broadway in March 2024. On November 27, 2023 \"Lifeline\" was published as the second original song from the 2023 film \"The Color Purple\", written and performed by Keys .\nIn February 2024, Keys performed in the Super Bowl LVIII halftime entertainment as a guest of headliner Usher; she performed \"If I Ain't Got You\", before joining Usher to sing their duet \"My Boo\". In March 2024, Keys released \"Kaleidoscope\" as the lead single from the soundtrack album of \"Hell's Kitchen\". \"Finally\", Keys's collaboration with Swedish House Mafia, was released in August 2024.\nArtistry.\nFrom the beginning of her career, Keys has been noted for being a multifaceted talent as a singer, songwriter, instrumentalist, arranger, and producer. She achieved acclaim for her maturity as a classical musician and singer-songwriter with a unique style blending R&amp;B, pop, hip-hop, and soul. \"The Times\" wrote that Keys's debut album, \"Songs in A Minor\", \"spoke from a soul that seemed way beyond its years\", and her follow up, \"The Diary of Alicia Keys\", \"confirmed her place in musical history\". \"The Seattle Times\" assessed that with her third album, \"As I Am\", Keys continued showing diversity in her music and her \"depth as a songwriter, singer and pianist.\" \"USA Today\", in a review of \"Songs in A Minor\", commended Keys's \"musical, artistic and thematic maturity\" starting out her career. \"The Japan Times\" regarded Keys's production of \"Songs in A Minor\" as displaying \"the kind of taste and restraint that is rare in current mainstream R&amp;B\". \"Billboard\" wrote that her debut \"introduced a different kind of pop singer. Not only was she mean on the ivories, but she showed true musicianship, writing and performing her material\", and Keys continued developing her artistry with subsequent albums. \"Rolling Stone\" remarked that Keys broke into the music world as a singer \"with hip-hop swagger, an old-school soul sound and older school (as in Chopin) piano chops\", her appeal \"bridging the generation gap\". On MSN's list of \"Contemporary R&amp;B, hip hop and rap icons\", it was stated that Keys achieved prominence by \"drawing from her classical technique as a pianist, enhanced by her ease as a multi-instrumentalist\u00a0... and songwriting steeped in her formal studies.\" In March 2025, The Recording Academy named Keys as one of the essential R&amp;B female artists in their list of 7 Women Essential To R&amp;B, writing that by \"majestic blend of classical piano and R&amp;B\" Keys brought an \"impeccable level of musicianship to the 21st century\".\nKeys is also distinguished for being in control of her artistic output and image and having fought for creative independence since getting signed at 15 years old. \"PopMatters\" called Keys an artist who \"clearly has a fine sense of her creative talents and has struggled to make sure they are represented in the best way.\" \"Rolling Stone\" wrote that, with her classical training, Keys \"reintroduced the idea of a self-reliant (but still pop-friendly) R&amp;B singer-songwriter \u2013 a type that stretches back to Stevie Wonder\", crossing generational lines in the process. \"Blender\" magazine expressed that Keys emerged as a \"singer-songwriter-instrumentalist-producer with genuine urban swagger\", and her largely self-produced second album showcased her growing \"deftness and explorative verve\". In 2016, NPR stated that Keys \"stood apart from pop trends while forging a remarkable career\" and \"sustained her focus on artistry\". MOBO described Keys as an accomplished pianist, singer, songwriter and producer who \"has made a consistent and indelible contribution\" to the music industry, her \"unique approach\" making classical music more accessible and \"diffusing barriers between traditional and contemporary\" while \"keeping musical excellence at the core of her art\". In 2003, \"The Guardian\" wrote that Keys's largely self-created work is an \"indication of how much power she wields\", and described her as \"an uncompromising artist\" who \"bears little resemblance\" to contemporary stars.\nKeys has been praised for her expressive vocals and emotive delivery. In a review of \"Songs in A Minor\", Jam! complimented her \"crooning\" and \"warm\" vocals as well as her belting \"gospel-style\". \"CMJ New Music Monthly\" commended her \"deep soulful voice and heartfelt delivery\" of her songs. \"Q\" magazine compared her vocal talent to Mary J Blige's and acknowledged her \"sincerity\" as \"another plus\" to her musical instincts. \"PopMatters\" noted her \"deep purple vocals\" and considered that Keys is \"less concerned about technical proficiency\" and more interested in \"rendering musical moments as authentic and visceral as possible\". \"The Guardian\" wrote that Keys \"sings with devastating allure\". Reviewing a live performance, the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that Keys has a \"commanding voice\" and the \"style and vision to convey the character and detail of the songs\", and praised \"the range and taste of her musical instincts\". NPR described her voice as \"yearning and ready to break, even as it remains in control\", considering it one of the elements integral to her music. \"Rolling Stone\" wrote that her \"dynamic\" vocal tone extends \"from a soft croon to a raspy, full-throated roar\". Keys has a three octave contralto vocal range. In 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Keys at number 185 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nKeys has cited influences including Whitney Houston, John Lennon, Sade, Aretha Franklin, Bob Marley, Carole King, Prince, Nina Simone, Marvin Gaye, Quincy Jones, Donny Hathaway, Curtis Mayfield, Barbra Streisand, Radiohead, and Stevie Wonder. An accomplished classical pianist, Keys incorporates piano into a majority of her songs. Keys was described by the \"New York Daily News\" as \"one of the most versatile musicians of her generation\". Keys's music is influenced by vintage soul music rooted in gospel, while she heavily incorporates classical piano with R&amp;B, jazz, blues and hip hop into her music. \"The Guardian\" noted that Keys is skilled at fusing the \"ruff hip-hop rhythms she absorbed during her New York youth\" into her \"heartfelt, soulful R&amp;B stylings\". The Songwriters Hall of Fame stated that Keys broke onto the music scene with \"her unmistakable blend of soul, hip-hop, jazz and classical music\". She began experimenting with other genres, including pop and rock, in her third studio album, \"As I Am\", transitioning from neo soul to a 1980s and 1990s R&amp;B sound with her fourth album, \"The Element of Freedom\". In 2005, \"The Independent\" described her musical style as consisting of \"crawling blues coupled with a hip-hop backbeat, and soul melodies enhanced with her raw vocals\". The \"New York Daily News\" stated that her incorporation of classical piano riffs contributed to her breakout success. \"Jet\" magazine stated she \"thrives\" by touching fans with \"piano mastery, words and melodious voice\". In 2002, \"The New York Times\" wrote that on stage Keys \"invariably starts with a little Beethoven\" and \"moves into rhythm-and-blues that's accessorized with hip-hop scratching, jazz scat-singing and glimmers of gospel.\" Keys's debut album, \"PopMatters\" wrote, reflects her sensibilities as young woman and as a \"musical, cultural, and racial hybrid.\" NPR stated in 2016 that Keys's overall work consists of \"diversity to style and form\". \"Salon\" wrote that the diversity of Keys's music is \"representative of her own border-breaking background and also emblematic of the variety responsible for the excitement and energy of American culture.\"\nKeys's lyrical content has included themes of love, heartbreak, female empowerment, hope, her philosophy of life and struggles, inner city life experiences, and social and political commentary. John Pareles of \"The New York Times\" noted that Keys presents herself as a musician first, and lyrically, her songs \"plunge into the unsettled domain of female identity in the hip-hop era, determined to work their way through conflicting imperatives\", while she plays multiple roles in her songs, expressing loyalty, jealousy, rejection, sadness, desire, fear, uncertainty, and tenacity. Pareles considered in 2007 that Keys did not \"offer private details in her songs\" and that her musical compositions make up for a lack of lyrical refinement. Gregory Stephen Tate of \"The Village Voice\" compared Keys's writing and production to 1970s music. NPR described a few foundational elements in Key's music: \"heartache or infatuation\", a \"tenderness and emotion made heavy with wisdom\", a \"patiently unfurling melody\", and her \"yearning\" voice. In 2016, referencing her sixth album, \"Here\", \"Salon\" noted a \"hypnotic tension\" in Keys's lyrical expression and complimented her \"sense of rhythmic timing\" and socio-political consciousness.\nLegacy.\nKeys has been referred to as the \"Queen of R&amp;B\" by various media outlets. \"Time\" has listed her in its list of 100 most influential people twice. Journalist Christopher John Farley wrote: \"Her musicianship raises her above her peers. She doesn't have to sample music's past like a DJ scratching his way through a record collection; she has the chops to examine it, take it apart and create something new and personal with what she has found\" in 2005. In 2017, Kerry Washington also wrote \"\"Songs in A Minor\" infused the landscape of hip-hop with a classical sensibility and unfolded the complexity of being young, gifted, female and black for a new generation. Alicia became an avatar for millions of people, always remaining true to herself\" in 2017. \"Rolling Stone\" named \"Songs in A Minor\" as one of the \"100 Greatest Albums\", and its single \"Fallin'\" in their \"100 greatest songs\" of the 2000s decade.\nVH1 have listed Keys in their \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\", 14th on \"100 Greatest Women\", 33rd on \"50 Greatest Women of the Video Era\" lists and at number 10 on their 100 Sexiest Artist list. Considered a music icon, Keys was placed at number 27 on \"Billboard\"'s \"35 Greatest R&amp;B Artists of All Time\" list in 2015. In January 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Keys at number 185 on their list of The 200 Best Singers of All Time. In March 2025, Keys was ranked at number ten on \"Billboard\"'s \"Top 100 Women Artists of the 21st Century\" list. The BET Honors honored Keys for her contributions to music with the Entertainment Award in 2008. In 2009, American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) honored Keys with its Golden Note Award, presented \"to songwriters, composers, and artists who have achieved extraordinary career milestones.\"\nIn 2015, The Recording Academy honored Keys with the Recording Artists' Coalition Award for \"her artistry, philanthropy and her passion for creators' rights as a founding member of the Academy's brand-new GRAMMY Creators Alliance\". In 2018, she was honored by The Recording Academy's Producers &amp; Engineers Wing for her \"outstanding artistic contributions\" and accomplishments. In 2018, The National Music Publishers Association honored Keys with the Songwriter Icon award for her \"credits as a music creator\" and her \"role as an inspirational figure to millions\".\n\"Rolling Stone\" wrote in 2016 that Keys was \"something new\" in popular music, \"bridging the generation gap\" with \"hip-hop swagger, an old-school soul sound and older school (as in Chopin) piano chops.\" \"Billboard\" stated that year her debut album \"introduced a different kind of pop singer. Not only was she mean on the ivories, but she showed true musicianship, writing and performing her material\". Barry Walters of \"Rolling Stone\" wrote that Keys \"reintroduced the idea of a self-reliant (but still pop-friendly) R&amp;B singer-songwriter \u2013 a type that stretches back to Stevie Wonder\", crossing generational lines in the process. On MSN's list of \"Contemporary R&amp;B, hip hop and rap icons\", it was stated that Keys \"set a high bar\" from the outset of her career, \"drawing from her classical technique as a pianist, enhanced by her ease as a multi-instrumentalist...and songwriting steeped in her formal studies.\" AllMusic wrote that her debut \"kicked off a wave of ambitious new neo-soul songsters\" and \"fit neatly into the movement of ambitious yet classicist new female singer/songwriters that ranged from the worldbeat-inflected pop of Nelly Furtado to the jazzy Norah Jones, whose success may not have been possible if Keys hadn't laid the groundwork\".\nKeys transcends genres, The Recording Academy also stated in 2017, incorporating her \"classical background into her music and including gospel, jazz, blues and vintage soul, rock, and pop influences\", and she is \"one of the most respected musicians of today.\" \"Jet\" said that during 2001, Keys \"ushered in a marriage between classical and soul music.\" BBC's Babita Sharma stated in 2016 that Keys has had a significant impact \"on the R&amp;B-soul-jazz sound of the last two decades\". MOBO described Keys as an accomplished pianist, singer, songwriter and producer who is \"responsible for the emergence of vintage R&amp;B imbibed with a post-modernist twist where genres divinely melt\" and \"has made a consistent and indelible contribution\" to the music industry, her \"unique approach\" making classical music more accessible and \"diffusing barriers between traditional and contemporary\". ASCAP stated that Keys's \"innovative and enduring contributions to rhythm &amp; soul music have earned her an Extraordinary Place in American Popular Music.\"\nKeys has been credited with inspiring and influencing many artists, including a younger generation of artists like Adele, Rihanna, Janelle Mon\u00e1e, H.E.R., Jessie Ware, James Bay, Ella Mai, Wyvern Lingo, Anuhea Jenkins, Jorja Smith, Lauren Jauregui, Normani, Alessia Cara, Ruth-Anne Cunningham, Lianne La Havas, Heather Russell, Grimes, and Sophie Delila.\nA trail has been named after Alicia Keys in Saint-Jean-d'Heurs, a rural commune of France.\nAchievements.\nKeys is one of the world's best-selling music artists and is also listed on the Recording Industry Association of America's best-selling artists in the United States, selling over 17.8\u00a0million albums and 21.9\u00a0million digital songs. She has sold over 30 million albums worldwide, while her singles \"No One\" and \"Empire State of Mind\" are also amongst the list of best-selling singles worldwide. \"Billboard\" ranked Keys as the fifth-most successful artist of the 2000s decade, top R&amp;B artist of the 2000s decade, and placed her at number 10 in their 2010 list of Top 50 R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years. Keys was the best-selling new artist and best-selling R&amp;B artist of 2001. She has attained 4 \"Billboard\" Hot 100 number-one singles from 9 top-ten singles. She has also attained 8 Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs and Airplay number-one singles, and set a \"Guinness World Record\" on the former in 2008, when she became the first artist to replace herself at number one with \"No One\" and \"Like You'll Never See Me Again\". Keys is one of three female artists included on \"Billboard\" magazine's list of the \"Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters, 2000\u20132011\" for writing songs that topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart.\nKeys has earned numerous awards including 16 Grammy Awards, 17 NAACP Image Awards, 9 Billboard Music Awards and 7 BET Awards. Keys received 5 Grammy Awards in 2002, becoming the second female artist to win as many in one night. In 2005, Keys was awarded the Songwriters Hall of Fame Hal David Starlight Award, which honors \"gifted songwriters who are at an apex in their careers and are making a significant impact in the music industry via their original songs\". That year, ASCAP awarded Keys Songwriter of the Year at its Rhythm &amp; Soul Music Awards. In 2007, she was a recipient of The Recording Academy Honors, which \"celebrate outstanding individuals whose work embodies excellence and integrity and who have improved the environment for the creative community.\" In 2014, \"Fuse\" ranked her as the thirteenth-most awarded musician of all time. In 2020, \"Pollstar\" listed Keys among top female artists of the 21st century in the concert industry; according to the publication, she sold more than 1.7 million tickets, with an earning exceeding $111.5 million.\nPhilanthropy and activism.\nKeys performed Donny Hathaway's 1973 song \"Someday We'll All Be Free\" at the \"\" televised benefit concert following the September 11 attacks. Keys protested at the New York City Hall against proposed budget cuts for students' education in June 2002. Keys has also donated to Frum tha Ground Up, a non-profit organization that aids children and teenagers with scholarships.\nKeys is the co-founder and Global Ambassador of Keep a Child Alive, a non-profit organization that provides medicine, orphan care, and social support to families with HIV and AIDS in Africa and India. She discovered first-hand the extensive impact of the AIDS epidemic on a visit to South Africa, a trip that was the impetus to cofounding Keep a Child Alive. Keys had befriended AIDS activist Leigh Blake, who had reached out to her and helped raise her awareness to the global impact of HIV/AIDS. Keys and Leigh visited South African clinics with HIV-infected mothers and children, where Keys encountered the lack of resources and education on the disease present in the communities. Keys visited other African countries such as Uganda and Kenya to promote care for children affected by AIDS. Keys hosted and acted as the musical director of Keep a Child Alive's annual fundraising gala The Black Ball. In 2005, Keys and Bono released a cover version of Peter Gabriel and Kate Bush's \"Don't Give Up\" to raise funds for the organization. Her work in Africa was recorded in the documentary \"Alicia in Africa: Journey to the Motherland\" which was released in April 2008.\nIn 2005, Keys performed in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as part of the worldwide Live 8 concerts to raise awareness of the poverty in Africa and to pressure the G8 leaders to take action. In the same year, Keys performed on ' and ', two benefit programs that raised money for those affected by Hurricane Katrina.\nIn July 2007, Keys and Keith Urban performed The Rolling Stones' 1969 song \"Gimme Shelter\" at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey at the American leg of the Live Earth concerts. She participated in the Nobel Peace Prize Concert which took place at the Oslo Spektrum in Oslo, Norway, on December 11, 2007, along with other artists. Keys performed the song \"Prelude to a Kiss\", retitled \"Send Me an Angel\", from her 2007 album \"As I Am\" for the \"\" telethon in response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. In 2009, the BET Awards honored Keys with the Humanitarian Award.\nIn June 2011, Keys spoke alongside Annie Lennox at the United Nations AIDS conference in New York. She participated in a panel titled \"HIV Priorities for Positive Change: In Women's Words\", in which she calls on supporting organizations that provide treatment and care for families affected by AIDS.\nIn September 2012, she was featured in a campaign called \"30 Songs / 30 Days\" to support \", a multi-platform media project inspired by Nicholas Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn's book.\nIn March 2013, Keys teamed up with Greater Than AIDS to launch EMPOWERED, a new public information campaign to reach women in the United States about HIV/AIDS. Appearing in a public service announcement for EMPOWERED, Keys spoke with five women whose lives have been affected by HIV/AIDS. In December 2012, Keys performed alongside many other artists in \" to benefit victims of Hurricane Sandy.\nIn July 2016, Keys participated in a video on taking action against systemic racism in the United States titled, \"23 Ways You Could Be Killed if You are Black in America\". After the inauguration of Donald Trump as the 45th President of the United States in 2017, Keys protested during the Women's March on Washington and was one of the key speakers. In 2017, Keys received and shared the award for the Ambassador of Conscience from Amnesty International alongside Canadian Indigenous rights activists. In 2018, Keys was honored at \"Variety\"'s Power of Women luncheon for her work with Keep a Child Alive.\nKeys and her husband Swizz Beatz are also avid art collectors. On July 26, 2019, Bloomberg News reported Keys and Beatz were avidly purchasing works by artist Tschabalala Self and that they decided to keep two of the pieces they bought and donate one to the Brooklyn Museum. Through the Dean Collection, they also collect artists such as Henry Taylor, Jordan Casteel, Kehinde Wiley, Toyin Ojih Odutola, Arthur Jafa, and Cy Gavin. Keys and Dean are co-chairs of the Gordon Parks Foundation, which permanently preserves the work of Gordon Parks, the pioneering photographer, filmmaker, musician and activist. The couple acquired what is now the largest private holding of Gordon Parks's images, part of the Dean Collection, the couple's philanthropic organization and family collection of international contemporary art. In the summer of 2018, Keys and Dean were featured on the cover of the magazine \"Cultured\" where they delved into Gordon Parks's works and The Dean Collection.\nPersonal life.\nFor over a decade until 2008, Keys was in a low-profile romantic relationship with her long-time good friend and collaborator Kerry Brothers Jr. Keys later dated hip hop artist-producer Swizz Beatz, whom she married on July 31, 2010. They have two sons together.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nFilmography.\nFilms starred\nConcert tours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks\nPublished articles\nOther contributions\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59722", "revid": "49739718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59722", "title": "Drum brake", "text": "Type of vehicle brake\nA drum brake is a brake that uses friction caused by a set of shoes or pads that press outward against a rotating bowl-shaped part called a brake drum.\nThe term \"drum brake\" usually means a brake in which shoes press on the inner surface of the drum. When shoes press on the outside of the drum, it is usually called a \"clasp brake\". Where the drum is pinched between two shoes, similar to a conventional disc brake, it is sometimes called a \"pinch drum brake\", though such brakes are relatively rare. A related type called a band brake uses a flexible belt or \"band\" wrapping around the outside of a drum. Drum brakes are manufactured in small automobiles or cheap vehicles, as they are less expensive to make than a traditional disc brake.\nHistory.\nThe modern automobile drum brake was first used in a car made by Maybach in 1900, although the principle was only later patented in 1902 by Louis Renault. He used woven asbestos lining for the drum brake lining, as no alternative material dissipated heat more effectively, though Maybach had used a less sophisticated drum brake. In the first drum brakes, levers and rods or cables operated the shoes mechanically. From the mid-1930s, oil pressure in a small wheel cylinder and pistons (as in the picture) operated the brakes, though some vehicles continued with purely mechanical systems for decades. Some designs have two wheel cylinders.\nAs the shoes in drum brakes wear, brakes required regular manual adjustment until the introduction of self-adjusting drum brakes in the 1950s. Drum brakes are also prone to brake fade with repeated use.\nJaguar Cars fielded three cars equipped with disc brakes at Le Mans in 1953, where they won, in large part due to their superior braking over drum-equipped rivals. This spelled the beginning of the end for drum brakes in passenger cars. From the 1960s to the 1980s, disc brakes gradually replaced drum brakes on the front wheels of cars (which receive the majority of braking force). Now practically all cars use disc brakes on the front wheels, and many use disc brakes on all four wheels.\nIn the United States, the Jeep CJ-5 (manufactured by AM General) was the final automobile (produced for the United States Postal Service) to use front drum brakes when it was phased out in 1986. However, drum brakes are still often used on the rear wheels, and for parking brakes. Some vehicles utilize a \"drum-in-hat\" parking brake, where the brake shoes are arranged inside the center portion (hat) of a disc brake rotor, which acts as the drum.\nEarly brake shoes contained asbestos. After the United States Federal Government began to regulate asbestos production, brake manufacturers had to switch to non-asbestos linings. Owners initially complained of poor braking with the replacements, but brake technology eventually advanced to compensate. A majority of daily-driven older vehicles have been fitted with asbestos-free linings. Many other countries have also prohibited the use of asbestos in brakes.\nComponents.\nDrum brake components include the backing plate, brake drum, shoe, wheel cylinder, and various springs and pins.\nBacking plate.\nThe backing plate provides a base for the other components. The back plate also increases the rigidity of whole set-up, supports the housing, and protects it from foreign materials like dust and other road debris. It absorbs the torque from the braking action, and that is why back plate is also called the \"Torque Plate\". Since all braking operations exert pressure on the backing plate, it must be strong and wear-resistant. Levers for emergency or parking brakes, and automatic brake-shoe adjuster were also added in recent years. \nBrake drum.\nThe brake drum is generally made of a special type of cast iron that is heat-conductive and wear-resistant. It rotates with the wheel and axle. When a driver applies the brakes, the lining pushes radially against the inner surface of the drum, and the ensuing friction slows or stops rotation of the wheel and axle, and thus the vehicle. This friction generates substantial heat.\nWheel cylinder.\nOne wheel cylinder operates the brake on each wheel. Two pistons operate the shoes, one at each end of the wheel cylinder. The leading shoe (closest to the front of the vehicle) is known as the primary shoe. The trailing shoe is known as the secondary shoe. Hydraulic pressure from the master cylinder acts on the piston cup, pushing the pistons toward the shoes, forcing them against the drum. When the driver releases the brakes, the brake shoe springs restore the shoes to their original (disengaged) position. The parts of the wheel cylinder are shown to the right.\nBrake shoe.\nBrake shoes are typically made of two pieces of steel welded together. The friction material is either riveted to the lining table or attached with adhesive. The crescent-shaped piece is called the Web and contains holes and slots in different shapes for return springs, hold-down hardware, parking brake linkage and self-adjusting components. \nAll the application force of the wheel cylinder is applied through the web to the lining table and brake lining. The edge of the lining table generally has three V-shaped notches or tabs on each side called nibs. The nibs rest against the support pads of the backing plate to which the shoes are installed.\nEach brake assembly has two shoes, a primary and secondary. The primary shoe is located toward the front of the vehicle and has the lining positioned differently from the secondary shoe. Quite often, the two shoes are interchangeable, so close inspection for any variation is important. \nLinings must be resistant to heat and wear and have a high friction coefficient unaffected by fluctuations in temperature and humidity.\nMaterials that make up the brake shoe lining include, friction modifiers (which can include graphite and cashew nut shells), powdered metal such as lead, zinc, brass, aluminium and other metals that resist heat fade, binders, curing agents and fillers such as rubber chips to reduce brake noise.\nIn the UK two common grades of brake shoe material used to be available. DON 202 was a high friction material that did not require a brake power servo. The disadvantage was that the lining was prone to fading on steep hills. A harder lining, the famous VG95 was produced but this required a brake servo. The other snag was that the parking brake would often fail the annual MOT test unless the high friction linings were installed just for the test.\nIn operation.\nNormal braking.\nWhen the brakes are applied, brake fluid is forced under pressure from the master cylinder into the wheel cylinder, which in turn pushes the brake shoes into contact with the machined surface on the inside of the drum. This rubbing action reduces the rotation of the brake drum, which is coupled to the wheel. Hence the speed of the vehicle is reduced. When the pressure is released, return springs pull the shoes back to their rest position.\nAutomatic self-adjustment.\nAs the brake linings wear, the shoes must travel a greater distance to reach the drum. In systems fitted with automatic adjusters, when the distance reaches a certain point, a self-adjusting mechanism automatically reacts by adjusting the rest position of the shoes so that they are closer to the drum. Here, the adjusting lever rocks enough to advance the adjuster gear by one tooth. The adjuster has threads on it, like a bolt, so that it unscrews a little bit when it turns, lengthening to fill in the gap. When the brake shoes wear a little more, the adjuster can advance again, so it always keeps the shoes close to the drum. Typically the adjusters only operate when the vehicle is going in reverse and the brakes are engaged.\nOn vehicles without automatic adjusters, it is required to periodically manually adjust the brakes to take up any excess gap between the shoes and the drum.\nParking/emergency brake.\nThe parking (or emergency) brake system controls the brakes through a series of steel cables that are connected to either a hand lever or a foot pedal. The idea is that the system is fully mechanical and completely bypasses the hydraulic system so that the vehicle can be brought to a stop even if there is a total brake failure. Here the cable pulls on a lever mounted in the brake and is directly connected to the brake shoes. This has the effect of bypassing the wheel cylinder and controlling the brakes directly.\nSelf-applying characteristic.\nDrum brakes have a natural \"self-applying\" characteristic, better known as \"self-energizing.\" The rotation of the drum can drag either one or both of the shoes into the friction surface, causing the brakes to bite harder, which increases the force holding them together. This increases the stopping power without any additional effort being expended by the driver, but it does make it harder for the driver to modulate the brake's sensitivity. It also makes the brake more sensitive to brake fade, as a decrease in brake friction also reduces the amount of brake assist.\nDisc brakes exhibit no self-applying effect because the hydraulic pressure acting on the pads is perpendicular to the direction of rotation of the disc. Disc brake systems usually have\nservo assistance (\"Brake Booster\") to lessen the driver's pedal effort, but some disc braked cars (notably race cars) and smaller brakes for motorcycles, etc., do not need to use servos.\nDrum brake designs.\nDrum brakes are typically described as either leading/trailing (also called \"single leading\") or twin leading.\nRear drum brakes are typically of a leading/trailing design (for non-servo systems), or primary/secondary (for duo servo systems), the shoes being moved by a single double-acting hydraulic cylinder and hinged at the same point. In this design, one of the brake shoes always experiences the self-applying effect, irrespective of whether the vehicle is moving forwards or backwards. This is particularly useful on the rear brakes, where the parking brake (handbrake or footbrake) must exert enough force to stop the vehicle from traveling backwards and hold it on a slope. Provided the contact area of the brake shoes is large enough, which isn't always the case, the self-applying effect can securely hold a vehicle when the weight is transferred to the rear brakes due to the incline of a slope or the reverse direction of motion. A further advantage of using a single hydraulic cylinder on the rear is that the opposite pivot may be made in the form of a double-lobed cam that is rotated by the action of the parking brake system.\nFront drum brakes may be of either design in practice, but the twin leading design is more effective. This design uses two actuating cylinders arranged so that both shoes use the self-applying characteristic when the vehicle is moving forwards. The brake shoes pivot at opposite points to each other. This gives the maximum possible braking when moving forwards, but is not so effective when the vehicle is traveling in reverse.\nThe optimum arrangement of twin leading front brakes with leading/trailing brakes on the rear allows more braking force at the front of the vehicle when it is moving forwards, with less at the rear. This helps prevent the rear wheels from locking up, but still provides adequate braking at the rear.\nBecause aluminum wears more easily than iron, aluminum drums frequently have an iron or steel liner on the inner surface of the drum, bonded or riveted to the aluminum outer shell.\nAdvantages.\nDrum brakes are used in most heavy duty trucks, buses, some medium and light duty trucks, and a few cars, dirt bikes, ATVs, and a few smaller recreational vehicles like electric scooters. Drum brakes are often applied to the rear wheels since most of the stopping force is generated by the front brakes of the vehicle, and therefore, the heat generated in the rear is significantly less. Drum brakes allow simple incorporation of a parking brake.\nDrum brakes are also occasionally fitted as the parking (and emergency) brake even when the rear wheels use disc brakes as the main brakes. Many rear disc braking systems use a parking brake in which the piston in the caliper is actuated by a cam or screw. This compresses the pads against the rotor. However, this type of system becomes \"much\" more complicated when the rear disc brakes use fixed, multi-piston calipers. In this situation, a small drum is usually fitted within or as part of the brake disc. This type of brake is also known as a banksia brake.\nIn hybrid and electric vehicle applications, wear on braking systems is greatly reduced by energy recovering motor\u2013generators (see regenerative braking), so some hybrid vehicles such as the Toyota Prius (prior to the third generation) and Volkswagen ID.3 and ID.4 use drum brakes at the rear wheels.\nDisc brakes rely on pliability of caliper seals and slight runout to release pads, leading to drag, fuel mileage loss, and disc scoring. Drum brake return springs give more positive action and, adjusted correctly, often have less drag when released. It is however possible to design special seals that retract the piston on a disc brake.\nDrum brakes emit less particulate matter (PM) than disc brakes, as the wear-particles are mostly sealed in. They are not better in this regard than frictionless brakes though.\nCertain heavier-duty drum brake systems compensate for load when determining wheel cylinder pressure; a feature which is rare when discs are employed (hydropneumatic suspension systems as employed on Citro\u00ebn vehicles adjust brake pressure depending on load regardless of if drum or discs are used). One such vehicle is the Jeep Comanche. The Comanche can automatically send more pressure to the rear drums depending on the size of the load. Most other brands have used load sensing valves in the hydraulics to the rear axle for decades.\nDue to the fact that a drum brake's friction contact area is at the circumference of the brake, a drum brake can provide more braking force than an equal diameter disc brake. The increased friction contact area of drum brake shoes on the drum allows drum brake shoes to last longer than disc brake pads used in a brake system of similar dimensions and braking force. Drum brakes retain heat and are more complex than disc brakes, but are often the more economical and powerful brake type to use in rear brake applications due to the low heat generation of rear brakes, a drum brake's self-applying nature, larger friction surface contact area, and long life wear characteristics (% life used / kW of braking power).\nTo list advantages of drum brakes:\nAs a driveshaft parking/emergency brake.\nDrum brakes have also been built onto the transmission's driveshaft as parking brakes (e.g., Chryslers through 1962). This provides the advantage that it is completely independent of the service brakes\u2014but suffers a severe disadvantage in that, when used with a bumper jack (common in that era) on the rear, and without proper wheel blocks, the differential's action can allow the vehicle to roll off the jack.\nLand Rover have used a drum brake on the gearbox output shaft for over fifty years. The advantage is that all four wheels can be braked with the parking brake.\nDisadvantages.\nDrum brakes, like most other brakes, convert kinetic energy into heat by friction. This heat should dissipate into the surrounding air, but can just as easily transfer to other braking system components. Brake drums must be large to cope with the massive forces involved, and must be able to absorb and dissipate a lot of heat. Heat transfer to air can be aided by incorporating cooling fins onto the drum, or even drilling holes around the drum's circumference. However, excessive heating can occur due to heavy or repeated braking, which can cause the drum to distort, leading to vibration under braking.\nThe other consequence of overheating is brake fade. This is due to one of several processes, or more usually an accumulation of all of them. \nBrake fade is not always due to overheating. Water between the friction surfaces and the drum can act as a lubricant and reduce braking efficiency. The water tends to stay until heated sufficiently to vaporize, at which point braking efficiency returns. All friction braking systems have a maximum theoretical rate of energy conversion. Once that rate is reached, applying greater pedal pressure doesn't change it\u2014in fact, the effects mentioned can substantially reduce it. Ultimately, this is what brake fade is, regardless of the mechanisms of its causes. Disc brakes are not immune to any of these processes, but they deal with heat and water more effectively than drums.\nDrum brakes can be grabby if the drum surface gets light rust or if the brake is cold and damp, giving the pad material greater friction. Grabbing can be so severe that the tires skid and continue to skid even when the pedal is released. Grab is the opposite of fade: when the pad friction goes up, the self-assisting nature of drum brakes causes application force to go up. If the pad friction and self-amplification are high enough, the brake stays engaged due to self-application, even when the external application force is released.\nWhile disc brake rotors can be machined to clean the friction surface (i.e., 'turning'), the same generally cannot be done with brake drums. Machining the friction surface of a brake drum increases the diameter, which might require oversized shoes to maintain proper contact with the drum. However, since oversized shoes are generally unavailable for most applications, worn or damaged drums generally must be replaced.\nIt is quite simple to machine brake drums if one has a slow running lathe (one rule of thumb is that cast iron should not be machined faster than fifty feet per minute). Usually it is only necessary to machine away the ridge that forms that makes brake drum removal difficult, especially if the brakes are self-adjusting. In severe cases the ridge can make the brake drum captive, however most drum brake designs provide a way to externally release the self-adjusting mechanism in order to ease drum removal and service.\nAnother disadvantage of drum brakes is their relative complexity. A person must have a general understanding of how drum brakes work and take several simple steps to ensure the brakes are reassembled correctly when doing work on drum brakes. And, as a result of this increased complexity (compared to disc brakes), maintenance of drum brakes is generally more time-consuming. Also, the greater number of parts results in a greater number of failure modes compared to disc brakes. Springs can break from fatigue if not replaced along with worn brake shoes. And the drum and shoes can become damaged from scoring if various components (such as broken springs or self-adjusters) break and become loose inside the drum.\nCatastrophic failure of hardware such as springs and adjusters can also cause unintended brake application or even wheel lockup. If springs break, the shoes will be free to fall against the rotating drum, essentially causing the brakes to be applied. Because of the self-energizing qualities of drum brakes, the unrestrained shoes can even potentially cause the brakes to grab to the point of locking up the wheel. Also, broken pieces of springs and other hardware (like adjusters) can become lodged between the shoes and drum, resulting in unintended application of the brakes (and, as stated above, damage to brake components). For these reasons, brake hardware (such as springs and clips) should always be replaced with brake shoes.\nAlso, drum brakes do not apply immediately when the wheel cylinders are pressurized, because the force of the return springs must be overcome before the shoes start to move towards the drum. This means that the very common hybrid disc/drum systems only brake with the (nearly always front) discs on light pedal pressure unless extra hardware is added. In practice, a metering valve prevents hydraulic pressure from reaching the front calipers until pressure rises enough to overcome the return springs in the drum brakes. If the metering valve were left out, the vehicle would stop only with the front discs unless the driver used enough brake pedal pressure to overcome the return spring pressure on the rear shoes.\nSafety.\nWhen asbestos was common in drum brakes, there was a danger workers repairing or replacing them would breathe asbestos fibers, which can cause mesothelioma. Asbestos fibers would break off or become separated over time and with the high temperatures induced by braking. Wet brushes and aerosol sprays were commonly used to reduce dust. Safety regulators sometimes recommended using vacuum hoses to suck away the dust, or enclosures with interior lighting and space to use tools inside them, but these were rare and cumbersome. Distinctive shoes designed to protect against asbestos were also recommended. There is evidence that auto mechanics had disproportionate levels of mesothelioma.\nThose who do maintenance work on brakes can also be exposed to the solvents 1,1,1-trichloroethane and 2-butoxyethanol (a main ingredient in Greasoff No. 19). Exposure to these solvents can cause irritation, including to the eyes and mucous membranes. Exposure to 1-1-1-trichloroethane vapors can cause central nervous system damage, dizziness, incoordination, drowsiness, and increased reaction time.\nRe-arcing.\nBefore 1984, it was common to re-arc brake shoes to match the arc within brake drums. This practice was controversial however, as it removed friction material from the brakes, reduced the life of the shoes and created hazardous asbestos dust. After 1984, the current design theory was altered, to use shoes for the proper diameter drum, and to simply replace the brake drum when necessary, rather than re-arc the shoes.\nUse in music.\nThe brake drum has found popular use as a percussion instrument. This was likely first implemented in a 1939 composition \"First Construction (in Metal)\" by American avant-garde musician John Cage. In more recent times the brake drum has become associated with the front ensemble as used in the marching arts.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59723", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59723", "title": "Queen Anne's County, Maryland", "text": "County in Maryland, United States\nQueen Anne's County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 49,874. Its county seat and most populous municipality is Centreville. The census-designated place of Stevensville is the county's most populous place with a population of 7,442 as of 2020. The county is named for Queen Anne of Great Britain, who reigned when the county was established in 1706 during the colonial period. The county is part of the Mid-Eastern Shore region of the state.\nQueen Anne's County is included in the Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Washington-Baltimore-Arlington, DC-MD-VA-WV-PA Combined Statistical Area, and is the easternmost in both.\nChesapeake Bay Bridge connects Kent Island in Queen Anne's County across Chesapeake Bay to Anne Arundel County. The American Discovery Trail runs through the county.\nHistory.\nQueen Anne's County has 265 miles of waterfront, much of that being the shores of Kent Island, which stands out from the eastern shore of the Chesapeake Bay. From the waters of this county, watermen have harvested oysters, crabs, and terrapin. Migrating waterfowl overwinter here, and hunting for geese and ducks has been an important part of the county's history. The first Anglo-European settlement in Maryland was on Kent Island on August 21, 1631, and included twenty-five settlers in a manor house, a fort, and other buildings. The settlement was referred to as Winston's Island. The first houses were built similar to log cabins. The county has a number of properties on the National Register of Historic Places, but nothing remains of this original settlement. Stevensville, earlier known as Broad Creek, is one of the oldest towns still existing.\nQueen Anne's County was organized under a sheriff in 1706, bounded by Talbot, Kent, and Dorchester counties. In 1713, Queen Anne's County became an English postal district; the sheriff was also appointed as the postmaster and would travel to Annapolis, Maryland by boat across the Chesapeake Bay to obtain mail. In 1773 a part of Queen Anne's County, together with a portion of Dorchester County, was taken to form Caroline County. The county now is enclosed by Talbot, Caroline, and Kent counties, as well as the Chesapeake Bay.\nBy the time of Independence, the county had several churches, a government, school, and a postal system. It was developed for agriculture, and enslaved African Americans worked the fields of plantations. Tobacco was an early commodity crop but it exhausted the soil. By the Revolution, some planters were converting to mixed agriculture, which was less labor-intensive. They sold excess slaves in the domestic trade to the developing cotton plantations of the Deep South.\nIn 1876, Queen Anne's County had the first printed independent paper called the \"Maryland Citizen\". A bank was located in Centreville; the Centreville National Bank is still operating. A railway was constructed here in 1868; it operated from Baltimore, passing around the top of the Chesapeake Bay down to Queenstown, and connected with other railroads that continued east into Delaware as far as Rehoboth, and southward to the Eastern Shore of Virginia.\nIn the 20th century, Queen Anne's County was the home of Jimmie Foxx, who was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame. A statue and small park commemorate him in Sudlersville, where Foxx grew up.\nPolitics and government.\nQueen Anne's was historically the most strongly secessionist county in Maryland, dominated by the Democratic Party of the planters. Following the American Civil War, the predominately conservative white voters voted for the Democratic presidential nominee in every election from 1868 to 1948, though Herbert Hoover came within a point of defeating Al Smith in 1928 amidst great Southern resentment to Smith's Catholicism and opposition to Prohibition. Former general Dwight D. Eisenhower became the first Republican to carry the county in 1952.\nSince the late 20th century, Queen Anne's white voters have largely shifted to the Republican Party, in a realignment that has taken place among conservative whites across the South following the tumultuous 1960s and passage of national civil rights legislation. No Democratic presidential candidate has carried Queen Anne's County since Texan Lyndon Johnson\u2019s 1964 landslide. Democrat Jimmy Carter in 1980 remains the last Democrat to obtain even forty percent of the county\u2019s vote, and he in 1976 was the last to come within ten points of winning the county.\nQueen Anne's County was granted home rule in 1990 under a state code.\nThe county has a commission form of government. The commission consists of five commissioners: one at-large and four of whom must reside in the district they represent. All of the commissioners are elected by the general population. The at-large commissioner serves as president the first year following election. County code allows for rotation of the president position thereafter.\nThe current Board of Commissioners was elected in the 2022 election, and serves a four-year term. The current County Commissioners are J. Patrick McLaughlin (District 2), Christopher M. Corchiarino (District 4), Philip L. Dumenil (District 3), James J. Moran (at-large), and Jack N. Wilson, Jr. (District 1). The current form of five commissioners elected at large started in 2002. Prior to the 2002 election, Queen Anne's County was run by three commissioners.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (27%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 47,798\u00a0people, 18,016\u00a0households, and 13,314\u00a0families living in the county. The population density was . There were 20,140 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 88.7% white, 6.9% black or African American, 1.0% Asian, 0.3% American Indian, 1.4% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 3.0% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 25.9% were German, 22.4% were Irish, 15.8% were English, 6.2% were Italian, and 6.1% were American.\nOf the 18,016\u00a0households, 34.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.3% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 26.1% were non-families, and 20.6% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.04. The median age was 42.6 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $81,096 and the median income for a family was $89,188. Males had a median income of $57,218 versus $43,371 for females. The per capita income for the county was $35,964. About 3.8% of families and 5.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.0% of those under age 18 and 6.1% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 40,563 people, 15,315 households, and 11,547 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 16,674 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 89.05% White, 8.78% Black or African American, 0.22% Native American, 0.57% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.43% from other races, and 0.93% from two or more races. 1.09% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.9% were of German, 15.1% American, 14.6% English, 14.2% Irish and 5.3% Italian ancestry.\nThere were 15,315 households, out of which 33.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.20% were married couples living together, 9.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.60% were non-families. 19.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 2.99.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.40% under the age of 18, 5.80% from 18 to 24, 30.10% from 25 to 44, 25.90% from 45 to 64, and 12.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $57,037, and the median income for a family was $63,713. Males had a median income of $44,644 versus $30,144 for females. The per capita income for the county was $26,364. About 4.40% of families and 6.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.20% of those under age 18 and 7.30% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\nThe Census Bureau recognizes the following census-designated places in the county:\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59724", "revid": "29840718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59724", "title": "Cation", "text": ""}
{"id": "59725", "revid": "29840718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59725", "title": "Anion", "text": ""}
{"id": "59726", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59726", "title": "Cartagena de Indias", "text": ""}
{"id": "59727", "revid": "45200411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59727", "title": "Murcia", "text": "Murcia ( , , ) is a city in south-eastern Spain, and the capital and most populous city of the autonomous community of the Region of Murcia. As of 2024, with a population of 471,982, it is the 7th-largest city in Spain. The total population of the metropolitan area was 672,773 in 2020, covering an urban area of 1,230.9 km2. It is located on the Segura River, in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula. It has a climate with hot summers, mild winters, and relatively low precipitation.\nMurcia was founded by Abd ar-Rahman II, Emir of Cordoba, in 825 with the name \"Mursiyah\" (). It is now mainly a services city and a university town. Highlights for visitors include the Cathedral of Murcia and a number of baroque buildings, renowned local cuisine, Holy Week procession, works of art by the famous Murcian sculptor Francisco Salzillo, and the \"Fiestas de Primavera\" (Spring Festival).\nThe city, as the capital of the comarca \"Huerta de Murcia\", is called \"Europe's orchard\" due to its long agricultural tradition and its fruit, vegetable, and flower production and exports.\nHistory.\nThe territory has been inhabited by humans since prehistory. People also lived in the current municipality during the Bronze and Iron Ages. During the late Chalcolithic and the Bronze Age, the occupancy of part of the current municipality was performed by the Argaric people. During the late Bronze Age and the Iron Age, the people who inhabited the current municipality were the Iberians. A remarkable site is a religious building, whose name is the De la Luz Iberian Sanctuary. There are traces of people presence during the Roman rule in the Iberian Peninsula era. A construction of the late Roman period in the Iberian Peninsula is a fortress, \"Castillo de los Garres\", located in the south of the northern half of the municipality.\nIt is widely believed that Murcia's name is derived from the Latin word \"myrtea\" or \"murtea\", meaning land of the myrtle (the plant is known to grow in the general area), although it may also be a derivation of the word \"Murtia\", which would mean Murtius Village (Murtius was a common Roman name). Other research suggests that it may owe its name to the Latin \"Murtae\" (Mulberry), which covered the regional landscape for many centuries. The Latin name eventually changed into the Arabic Mursiya, and then, Murcia.\nThe city in its present location was founded with the name Madinat Mursiyah ( 'city of Murcia') in AD 825 by Abd ar-Rahman II, who was then the emir of C\u00f3rdoba. Umayyad planners, taking advantage of the course of the river Segura, created an imaginative and complex network of irrigation channels that made the town's agricultural existence prosperous. In the 12th century the traveller and writer Muhammad al-Idrisi described the city of Murcia as populous and strongly fortified. After the fall of the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba in 1031, Murcia passed under the successive rules of the powers seated variously at Almer\u00eda and Toledo, but finally became capital of its own kingdom with Ibn Tahir (). After the fall of the Almoravide empire, Ibn Mardanis made Murcia the capital of a new independent kingdom. At this time, Murcia was a very prosperous city, famous for its ceramics, exported to Italian towns, as well as for silk and paper industries, the first in Europe. The coinage of Murcia was considered as model in all the continent. The mystic Ibn Arabi (1165\u20131240) and the poet Ibn al-Jinan (d.1214) were born in Murcia during this period.\nIn 1172 Murcia was conquered by the north African Almohades, the last Muslim empire to rule southern Spain, and as the forces of the Christian Reconquista gained the upper hand, was the capital of a small Muslim emirate from 1223 to 1243. By the treaty of Alcaraz, in 1243, the Christian king Ferdinand III of Castile made Murcia a protectorate, getting access to the Mediterranean sea while Murcia was protected against Granada and Aragon. The Christian population of the town became the majority as immigrants poured in from almost all parts of the Iberian Peninsula, with Muslims confined to the suburb of Arrixaca. Christian immigration was encouraged with the goal of establishing a loyal Christian base. These measures led to the Muslim popular revolt in 1264, which was quelled by James I of Aragon in 1266, conquering Murcia and bringing Aragonese and Catalan immigrants with him.\nAfter this, during the reign of Alfonso X of Castile, Murcia was one of his capitals with Toledo and Seville.\nThe Murcian duality: Catalan population in a Castillian territory, brought the subsequent conquest of the city by James II of Aragon in 1296. In 1304, Murcia was finally incorporated into Castile under the Treaty of Torrellas.\nMurcia's prosperity declined as the Mediterranean lost trade to the ocean routes and from the wars between the Christians and the Ottoman Empire. The old prosperity of Murcia became crises during 14th century because of its border location with the neighbouring Muslim kingdom of Granada, but flourished after its conquest in 1492 and again in the 18th century, benefiting greatly from a boom in the silk industry. Most of the modern city's landmark churches, monuments and old architecture date from this period. In this century, Murcia lived an important role in Bourbon victory in the War of the Spanish Succession, thanks to Cardinal Belluga. In 1810, Murcia was looted by Napoleonic troops; it then suffered a major earthquake in 1829. According to contemporaneous accounts, an estimated 6,000 people died from the disaster's effects across the province. Plague and cholera followed.\nThe town and surrounding area suffered badly from floods in 1651, 1879, 1946 and 1948, though the construction of a levee helped to stave off the repeated floods from the Segura. A popular pedestrian walkway, the Malecon, runs along the top of the levee.\nMurcia has been the capital of the province of Murcia since 1833 and, with its creation by the central government in 1982, capital of the autonomous community (which includes only the city and the province). Since then, it has become the seventh most populated municipality in Spain, and a thriving services city.\nThe 5.1 Lorca earthquake shook the Region of Murcia with a maximum Mercalli intensity of VII ('Very strong') on 11 May 2011. Nine people were killed and over 400 were injured.\nGeography.\nMurcia is located near the center of a low-lying fertile plain known as the \"huerta\" (orchard or vineyard) of Murcia. The Segura River and its right-hand tributary, the Guadalent\u00edn, run through the area. The city has an elevation of above sea level and its municipality covers approximately .\nThe best known and most dominant aspect of the municipal area's landscape is the orchard. In addition to the orchard and urban zones, the great expanse of the municipal area is made up of different landscapes: badlands, groves of Carrasco pine trees in the precoastal mountain ranges and, towards the south, a semi-steppe region. A large natural park, the \"Parque Regional de Carrascoy y el Valle\", lies just to the south of the city.\nSegura River.\nThe Segura River crosses an alluvial plain (\"Vega Media del Segura\"), part of a Mediterranean pluvial system. The river crosses the city from west to east. Its volumetric flow is mostly small but the river is known to produce occasional flooding, like the times when the capital was inundated, in 1946, 1948, 1973 and 1989.\nMountains and hills.\nThe Segura river's Valley is surrounded by two mountain ranges, the hills of Guadalupe, Espinardo, Cabezo de Torres, Esparragal and Monteagudo in the north and the Cordillera Sur in the south. The municipality itself is divided into southern and northern zones by a series of mountain ranges, the aforementioned \"Cordillera Sur\" (Carrascoy, El Puerto, Villares, Columbares, Altaona, and Escalona). These two zones are known as Field of Murcia (in the south of Cordillera Sur) and Orchard of Murcia (the Segura Valley in the north of Cordillera Sur). Near the plain's center, the steep hill of Monteagudo protrudes dramatically.\nDistricts.\nThe territory of Murcia's municipality is made up of 54 \"pedan\u00edas\" (suburban districts) and 28 \"barrios\" (city neighbourhood districts). The barrios make up the the main urban portion of the city. The historic city center is approximately of the urbanised downtown portion of Murcia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nMurcia has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSh\"). It has mild winters and very hot summers because of its inland location. It averages more than 320 days with sun per year. Occasionally, Murcia has heavy, torrential rain.\nIn the coldest month, January, the average temperature range is a high of during the day and a low of at night. Night\u00a0frost occurs in most winters, but snow is very rare. Snow fell and accumulated in Murcia during the 20th century eight times, in 1910, 1914, 1926, 1942, 1951, 1957, 1971 and 1983, and twice in the 21st century in 2017 and 2021. In the warmest month, August, the range goes from during the day to at night. Temperatures almost always reach or exceed on at least one or two days per year. The official record for Murcia stands at and at Alcantarilla airport in the western suburbs on 15 august 2021 with .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, Murcia has 471,982 inhabitants making it the 7th-largest city in Spain. When adding in the municipalities of Alcantarilla, Alguazas, Beniel, Molina de Segura, Santomera, and Las Torres de Cotillas, the metropolitan area has 672,773 inhabitants making it the twelfth most populous metropolitan area in Spain as of 2020. Nevertheless, due to Murcia's large municipal territory, its population density (547 inhabitants/km2, 760 hab./sq.mi.) does not likewise rank among Spain's highest.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population of the city is 76,853, equal to 16.3% of the total population, with 3.7% from the rest of Europe, 4.9% from Africa, 7.1% from the Americas and 0.6% from Asia.\nMurcia is one of the communities with the largest Romani population in Spain.\nMain sights.\nThe Cathedral of Murcia was built between 1394 and 1465 in the Castilian Gothic style. Its tower was completed in 1792 and shows a blend of architectural styles. The first two stories were built in the Renaissance style (1521\u20131546), while the third is Baroque. The bell pavilion exhibits both Rococo and Neoclassical influences. The main fa\u00e7ade (1736\u20131754) is considered a masterpiece of the Spanish Baroque style.\nOther buildings in the square shared by the cathedral (Plaza Cardinal Belluga) are the colorful 'Bishop's Palace' (18th century) and a controversial extension to the town hall by Rafael Moneo (built in 1999).\nThe \"Glorieta\", which lies on the banks of the Segura River, has traditionally been the center of the town. It is a landscaped city square that was constructed during the 18th century. The \"ayuntamiento\" (city hall) of Murcia is located in this square.\nPedestrian areas cover most of the old town of the city, which is centered around Plater\u00eda and Traper\u00eda Streets. Traper\u00eda goes from the cathedral to the Plaza de Santo Domingo, formerly a bustling market square. Located in Traper\u00eda is the \"Casino\", a social club erected in 1847, with a sumptuous interior that includes a Moorish-style patio inspired by the royal chambers of the Alhambra near Granada. The name \"Plater\u00eda\" refers to \"plata\" (silver), as this street was the historical focus for the commerce of rare metals by Murcia's Jewish community. The other street, \"Traper\u00eda\", refers to \"trapos\", or cloths, as this was once the focus for the Jewish community's garment trade.\nSeveral bridges of different styles span the river Segura, from the \"Puente de los Peligros\", an 18th-century stone bridge with a Lady chapel on one of its sides; to modern bridges designed by Santiago Calatrava or Javier Manterola; through others such as the \"Puente Nuevo\" (new bridge), an iron bridge of the early 20th century.\nOther places around Murcia include:\nIn the metropolitan area are also the \"Azud de la Contraparada\" reservoir and the \"Noria de La \u00d1ora\" water wheel.\nFestivals.\nHoly Week.\nThe Holy Week procession hosted by the city is among the most famous throughout Spain. This traditional festival portrays the events which lead up to and include the Crucifixion according to the New Testament. Life-sized, finely detailed sculptures by Francisco Salzillo (1707\u20131783) are removed from their museums and carried around the city in elegant processions amid flowers and, at night, candles, pausing at stations which are meant to re-enact the final moments before the crucifixion of Jesus.\nThere is a small Jewish community of 127 members mostly Spanish born but too Israelis American European born.They celebrate all Jewish holidays hannuka Passover and more . These festivals are open to friends of Israel and businesses that buy sell in Israel.\nEaster fiestas.\nThe most colorful festival in Murcia may come one week after Holy Week, when locals dress up in traditional \"huertano\" clothing to celebrate the \"Bando de la Huerta\" (Orchard parade) on Tuesday and fill the streets for The Burial of the Sardine in Murcia. parade the following Saturday. This whole week receives the name of \"Fiestas de Primavera de Murcia\" (Spring Fest).\nThree Cultures International Festival.\nMurcia's Three Cultures International Festival happens each May and was first organised with the intent of overcoming racism and xenophobia in the culture. The festival seeks to foster understanding and reconciliation between the three cultures that have cohabited the peninsula for centuries, if not millennia: Christians, Jews and Muslims. Each year, the festival celebrates these three cultures through music, exhibitions, symposiums and conferences.\nFestivities in the districts.\nSundry festivities are held throughout the municipality and districts and patron saint festivities are included each part. Month where some occur are June and September. An activity that is slightly frequent in these festivities is the \"Coronaci\u00f3n de las reinas\", which usually consists in awarding the symbolic status of queens to three female children and three female teenagers. Holy Week festivities are also held in some districts on their own. \"Pasacalles\" (similar to standard parades) are also performed and so the desfiles de carrozas, which are parades in which floats play an important role. Religious activity includes processions (festive religious marches) in which there are statues of the Patron Virgin on a platform that is carried on the shoulders.\nEconomy.\nEconomically, Murcia predominantly acts as a centre for agriculture and tourism. 33.1% of the municipality is utilised with crops purposes. 35.3% of the agreements of 2019 were written for jobs in agriculture and fishing sectors and 9.84% workers had signed agreements for crop land labouring in the second half of 2016.\n7.79% agreements corresponded to the industry sector in 2019 and 5.91% workers had signed agreements for industry labouring in the second half of 2016. 53.12% agreements corresponded to jobs of the service sector in 2019 and 14.26% workers had signed agreements for waiter jobs in the second half of 2016.\nThe economy of Murcia is supported by fairs and congresses, museums, theatres, cinema, music, aquariums, restaurants, hotels, shopping centres, campings, sports, foreign students, and tourism.\nGovernment.\nAs generally in Spain, the governors are elected indirectly by voting for a political party in a day for municipal and autonomous community (the regions in Spain) elections every four years. The governors that are elected compose a government body named \"pleno\", which has 30 members in Murcia. The \"alcalde\" (head governor in a municipality) chooses 10 members from the \"pleno\" in order to compose a governing cabinet named \"junta de gobierno\", which has 10 members in Murcia. There are 7 partisans (including the \"alcalde\") of Partido Popular party and 3 partisans of Ciudadanos in the \"junta de gobierno\". The largest government body also includes 9 partisans of PSOE (Partido Socialista Obrero Espa\u00f1ol), 3 partisans of Vox and 2 partisans of Podemos and Equo.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nA national highway named A-30, which connects Cartagena and Albacete, traverses the municipality from south to north, A national motorway named A-7 also occurs in Murcia, specifically in its northwest. There is also a highway named MU-30, which connects Alcantarilla municipality and El Palmar district, so it occurs in the northwestern quarter of Murcia. 52 regional pavement lines also occur in the municipality. The RM-1 road, which is intended to connect Santomera and San Javier, takes place in the east and the RM-15 highway, which connects Alcantarilla and Ceheg\u00edn, occupies part of the northwest.\nBy plane.\nRegion of Murcia International Airport (RMU) is located 20\u00a0km south from the city centre, in the suburban district of Corvera. The airport operates several international and domestic routes. It was opened on 15 January 2019. Alicante\u2013Elche International Airport is located 60\u00a0km north-east from the city centre. This is 5th busiest airport in Spain with 15 million annual passengers.\nBy bus.\nBus service is provided by two companies: Transportes de Murcia, an UTE (Joint Venture) formed by Ruiz, Mar\u00edn &amp; Fernanb\u00fas, who operates the urban lines, and Transporte de Murcia y Pedan\u00edas (TMP), who operates the interurban lines. Apart from the public transport, there is also a bus station located at the city center.\nBy tram.\nThe Murcia tram is managed by Tranvimur. As of 2024[ [update]], of line were available. Line 1 runs from the Espinardo Campus of the University of Murcia to the Estadio Nueva Condomina, with a central stop at Plaza Circular in the city center. An additional line, Line 1B, extends from the neighborhood of Espinardo to the Catholic University of Saint Anthony and the Los Jer\u00f3nimos area.\nBy train.\nTrain connections are provided by Renfe. Murcia has a railway station called Murcia del Carmen, located in the neighbourhood of the same name on the Chinchilla\u2013Cartagena railway. Several long-distance lines link the city with Madrid, through Albacete, as well as Valencia, and Catalonia up to Montpellier in France. Murcia is also the center of a local network. The line C-1 connects the city to Alicante, and the line C-2 connects Murcia to Alcantarilla, Lorca and \u00c1guilas. It also has a regional line connecting it to Cartagena and a medium-range linea to Valencia and Zaragoza.\nHealthcare.\nThe hospitals and other public primary healthcare centers belong to the Murcian Healthcare Service. There are three public hospitals in Murcia:\nLarge part of the municipality belongs to the Health area I (Murcia/Oeste), which main place is the main town. Nevertheless, the districts that are located in the northeastern quarter are included in Health area VII (Murcia / Este) and the district Cabezo de Torres is included in Health area VI (Vega Media del Segura).\nEducation.\nMurcia has three universities:\nThere are several high schools, elementary schools, and professional schools. Murcia has three types of schools for children: private schools such as El Limonar International School, Murcia (a British international school) and King's College, Madrid, The American School of Murcia (an American international school), semi-private schools (\"concertado\"), which are private schools that receive government funding and sometimes offer religious instruction, and public schools such as Colegio Publico (CP) San Pablo, IES Licenciado Francisco Cascales or the centenary CP Cierva Pe\u00f1afiel, one of the oldest ones. The French international school, Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais Andr\u00e9 Malraux de Murcie, is in nearby Molina de Segura.\nThe private schools and \"concertados\" can be religious (Catholic mostly but any religion is acceptable) or secular, but the public schools are strictly secular. \"Concertado\" or semi-private or quasi-private schools fill a need by providing schools where the government isn't able to or predate the national school system. The private schools in Murcia are not only English language schools. They also include Nelva, a religious school, and San Jorge, a secular bilingual Spanish school.\nMurcia also offers Adult Education for people who want to return to complete high school and possibly continue on to the university.\nSports teams.\nSome of the sports teams of the municipality are listed below:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMurcia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59729", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59729", "title": "1934 FIFA World Cup", "text": "Association football tournament in Italy\nInternational football competition\nThe 1934 FIFA World Cup was the 2nd edition of the FIFA World Cup, the quadrennial international football championship for senior men's national teams. It took place in Italy from 27 May to 10 June 1934.\nThe 1934 World Cup was the first in which teams had to qualify to take part. Thirty-two nations entered the competition; 16 teams would qualify for the final tournament. Reigning champions Uruguay boycotted the tournament as only four European teams had accepted their invitation to the 1930 tournament. Italy beat Czechoslovakia 2\u20131 to become the second World Cup champions and the first European winners.\nThe 1934 World Cup was marred by being a high-profile instance of a sporting event being used for overt political gain. In particular, Benito Mussolini was keen to use this World Cup as a means of promoting fascism. Although some historians and sports journalists have made accusations of corruption and meddling by Mussolini to influence the competition to the benefit of Italy, Italy has always claimed that it deserved victory in the competition and the successful national team, considered one of the best in the country's history, emerged victorious also in the Olympic football tournament of 1936 hosted by Germany and in the 1938 World Cup hosted by France.\nThe Federale 102 ball, which was manufactured in Italy, was the match ball provided for the 1934 World Cup.\nHost selection.\nAfter a lengthy decision-making process in which FIFA's executive committee met eight times, Italy was chosen as the host nation at a meeting in Stockholm on 9 October 1932. The decision was taken by the executive committee without a ballot of members. The Italian bid was chosen in preference to one from Sweden; the Italian government assigned a budget of Lire\u00a03.5\u00a0million to the tournament.\nQualification and participants.\n32 countries applied to enter the tournament, so qualifying matches were required to thin the field to 16. Even so, there were several notable absentees. Reigning World Cup holders Uruguay declined to participate, in protest at the refusal of several European countries to travel to South America for the previous World Cup, which Uruguay had hosted in 1930. As a result, the 1934 World Cup is the only one in which the reigning champions did not participate. The British Home Nations, in a period of self-imposed exile from FIFA, also refused to participate, even though FIFA had offered England and Scotland direct entry to the tournament without qualification. Football Association committee member Charles Sutcliffe called the tournament \"a joke\" and claimed that \"the national associations of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland have quite enough to do in their own International Championship which seems to me a far better World Championship than the one to be staged in Rome\".\nDespite their role as hosts, Italy were still required to qualify, the only time the host needed to do so. The qualifying matches were arranged on a geographical basis. Withdrawals by Chile and Peru meant Argentina and Brazil qualified without playing a single match.\nTwelve of the 16 places were allocated to Europe, three to the Americas, and one to Africa or Asia (including Turkey). Only 10 of the 32 entrants, and four of the 16 qualified teams (Brazil, Argentina, United States and Egypt, the first African team to qualify for a World Cup finals tournament), were from outside Europe. The last place in the finals was contested between the United States and Mexico only three days before the start of the tournament in a one-off match in Rome, which the United States won.\nList of qualified teams.\nThe following 16 teams qualified for the final tournament.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n10 of these teams made their first World Cup appearance. This included 9 of the 12 European teams (Italy, Germany, Spain, the Netherlands, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Sweden, Austria, and Switzerland) as well as Egypt. Egypt was the first team from Africa in the finals and would not qualify again until the next time the competition was held in Italy, in 1990.\nVenues.\nThe number of supporters travelling from other countries was higher than at any previous football tournament, including 7,000 from the Netherlands and 10,000 each from Austria and Switzerland.\nFormat.\nThe group stage used in the first World Cup was discarded in favour of a straight knockout tournament. If a match was tied after ninety minutes, then thirty minutes of extra time were played. If the score was still tied after extra time, the match was replayed the next day.\nThe eight seeded teams \u2013 Argentina, Brazil, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria, Czechoslovakia and Hungary \u2013 were kept apart in the first round.\nSummary.\nAll eight first-round matches kicked off at the same time. Hosts and favourites Italy won handsomely, defeating the USA 7\u20131; \"The New York Times\" correspondent wrote that \"only the fine goal-tending of Julius Hjulian of Chicago kept the score as low as it was\".\nInternal disputes meant Argentina's squad for the tournament did not contain a single member of the team which had reached the final in 1930. In the end, \"La Albiceleste\" would partake with an amateur squad. Against Sweden in Bologna, Argentina twice took the lead, but two goals by Sven Jonasson and a winner by Knut Kroon gave Sweden a 3\u20132 victory. Fellow South Americans Brazil also suffered an early exit. Spain beat them comfortably, with 3\u20131 as the final score.\nFor the only time in World Cup history, the last eight consisted entirely of European teams \u2013 Austria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. All four non-European teams who made the journey to Italy were eliminated after one match.\nIn the quarter-finals, the first replayed match in World Cup history took place, when Italy and Spain drew 1\u20131 after extra time. The match was played in a highly aggressive manner with several players of both sides injured: rough play injured the Spanish goalkeeper Ricardo Zamora in the first match, leaving him unable to participate in the replay, while on the other side rough play by Spaniards broke the leg of the Italian Mario Pizziolo who would not play in the national team again. Italy won the replay 1\u20130; their play so physical that at least three Spaniards had to depart the field with injuries. Italy then went on to beat Austria in the semi-finals by the same score. Meanwhile, Czechoslovakia secured their place in the final by beating Germany 3\u20131.\nThe Stadium of the National Fascist Party was the venue for the final. With 80\u00a0minutes played, the Czechoslovaks led 1\u20130. The Italians managed to score before the final whistle and then added another goal in extra time to be crowned World Cup winners.\nThroughout the years, several sources have reported that the tournament was marred by bribery and corruption, and could have been influenced by Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, who used the tournament as a propaganda tool for fascism. According to these accusations, Mussolini personally selected referees for the matches where the Italy national team were playing, while the Italian government meddled in FIFA's organisation of events, reorganising the logistics of the matches to further promote fascism. Nonetheless, Italy also won the following edition of the World Cup (held in France) as well as the Olympic football tournament in 1936.\nSquads.\nFor a list of all squads that appeared in the final tournament, see \"1934 FIFA World Cup squads\".\nGoalscorers.\nWith five goals, Old\u0159ich Nejedl\u00fd was the top scorer in the tournament. In total, 70 goals were scored by 45 players, with none of them credited as an own goal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFIFA retrospective ranking.\nIn 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition (not counting replay results). The rankings for the 1934 tournament were as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59731", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59731", "title": "Navarre", "text": "Autonomous community and province of Spain\nNavarre ( ; ; ), officially the Chartered Community of Navarre, is a landlocked foral autonomous community and province in northern Spain, bordering the Basque Autonomous Community, La Rioja, and Aragon in Spain and Nouvelle-Aquitaine in France. The capital city is Pamplona (). The present-day province makes up the majority of the territory of the medieval Kingdom of Navarre, a long-standing Pyrenean kingdom that occupied lands on both sides of the western Pyrenees, with its northernmost part, Lower Navarre, located in the southwest corner of France.\nNavarre is in the transition zone between the green Cantabrian Coast and semi-arid interior areas and thus its landscapes vary widely across the region. Being in a transition zone also produces a highly variable climate, with summers that are a mix of cooler spells and heat waves, and winters that are mild for the latitude. Navarre is considered by Basque nationalists to be one of the historic Basque provinces: its Basque features are conspicuous in the north, but virtually absent on the southern fringes. The best-known event in Navarre is the annual festival of San Ferm\u00edn held in Pamplona in July.\nToponymy.\nThe first documented use of a name resembling \"Navarra\", \"Nafarroa\", or \"Naparroa\" is a reference to \"navarros\", in Eginhard's early-9th-century chronicle of the feats of the Holy Roman Emperor Charlemagne, describing his intrusion to the Ebro river. Other Royal Frankish Annals feature . There are two proposed etymologies for the name.\nThe linguist Joan Coromines considers \"naba\" to be linguistically part of a wider Vasconic or Aquitanian language substrate, rather than Basque \"per se\".\nThe official name in Basque is , but the form (Upper Navarre) is also often seen, sometimes for irredentist reasons, but mostly to distinguish the province from neighboring Lower Navarre.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nBefore and during the Roman Empire, the Vascones populated the southern slopes of the Pyrenees, including the area which would ultimately become Navarre. In the mountainous north, the Vascones escaped large-scale Roman settlement, except for some coastal areas\u2014for example Oiasso (in what is now Gipuzkoa)\u2014and the flatter areas to the south, Calagurris (in what is now La Rioja), which were amenable to large-scale Roman farming\u2014vineyards, olives, and wheat crops. There is no evidence of battles fought or general hostility between Romans and Basques, as they had the same enemies.\nKingdom of Navarre.\nNeither the Visigoths nor the Franks ever completely subjugated the area. The Vascones (to become the Basques) assimilated neighbouring tribes, such as the Suessetani from the area known today as Aragon and the Caristii, Varduli, and Autrigones, likely of \nCeltic, origin who inhabited the area of today's Basque Country, by the 7th century AD. The Vascones In the year 778, the Basques defeated a Frankish army at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass.\nFollowing the Battle of Roncevaux Pass (824), the Basque chieftain I\u00f1igo Arista was elected King of Pamplona supported by the muwallad Banu Qasi of Tudela, establishing a Basque kingdom that was later called Navarre. That kingdom reached its zenith during the reign of Sancho III, comprising most of the Christian realms to the south of the Pyrenees, and even a short overlordship of Gascony (in the early 11th century).\nWhen Sancho\u00a0III died in 1035, the kingdom was divided between his sons. It never fully recovered its political power, while its commercial importance increased as traders and pilgrims (the \"Francs\") poured into the kingdom via the Way of Saint James. In 1200, Navarre lost the key western Basque districts to Alphonse VIII of Castile, leaving the kingdom landlocked. Navarre then contributed with a small but symbolic force of 200 knights to the decisive Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 against the Almohads.\nThe native line of kings came to an end in 1234; their heirs intermarried with French dynasties. However, the Navarrese kept most of their strong laws and institutions. The death of Queen Blanche I (1441) inaugurated a civil war period between the Beaumont and Agramont confederacies with the intervention of the Castilian-Aragonese House of Trast\u00e1mara in Navarre's internal affairs. In 1512, Navarre was invaded by Ferdinand the Catholic's troops, with Queen Catherine and King John III withdrawing to the north of the Pyrenees, and establishing a Kingdom of Navarre-B\u00e9arn, led by Queen Joan III as of 1555.\nTo the south of the Pyrenees, Navarre was annexed to the Crown of Castile in 1515, but kept a separate ambiguous status, and a shaky balance up to 1610\u2014King Henry IV was ready to march over Spanish Navarre. A Chartered Government was established (the \"Diputaci\u00f3n\"), and the kingdom managed to keep home rule. Tensions with the Spanish government came to a head as of 1794, when Spanish premier Manuel Godoy attempted to suppress Navarrese and Basque self-government altogether, with the end of the First Carlist War (1839 \u2013 1841) definitely bringing the kingdom and its home rule (\"fueros\") to an end.\nProvince of Spain.\nLoss of home rule.\nAfter the 1839 Convention of Bergara, http:// was passed in 1839. However, the 1841 https:// (later called the \"Compromise Act\", \"Ley Paccionada\") definitely made the kingdom into a province after a compromise was reached by the Spanish government with officials of the Provincial Council of Navarre. The relocation of customs from the Ebro river to the Pyrenees in 1841 prompted the collapse of Navarre's customary cross-Pyrenean trade and the rise of smuggling.\nAmid instability in Spain, Carlists took over in Navarre and the rest of the Basque provinces. An actual Basque state was established during the Third Carlist War with Estella as its capital (1872 \u2013 1876), but King Alfonso XII's restoration in the throne of Spain and a counter-attack prompted the Carlist defeat. The end of the Third Carlist War saw a renewed wave of Spanish centralisation directly affecting Navarre.\nIn 1893 \u2013 1894, the \"Gamazada\" popular uprising took place centred in Pamplona against Madrid's governmental decisions breaching the 1841 chartered provisions. Except for a small faction (the so-called \"Alfonsinos\"), all parties in Navarre agreed on the need for a new political framework based on home rule within the \"Laurak Bat\", the Basque districts in Spain. Among these, the Carlists stood out, who politically dominated the province, and resented an increased string of rulings and laws passed by Madrid, as well as left leaning influences. Unlike Biscay or Gipuzkoa, Navarre did not develop manufacturing during this period, remaining a basically rural economy.\nRepublic and military uprising.\nIn 1932, a Basque Country's http:// failed to take off over disagreements on the centrality of Catholicism, a scene of political radicalisation ensued dividing the leftist and rightist forces during the 2nd Spanish Republic (1931 \u2013 1939). Thousands of landless labourers occupied properties of wealthy landowners in October 1933, leaving the latter eager for revenge. The most reactionary and clerical Carlists came to prominence, ideologues such as V\u00edctor Pradera, and an understanding with General Mola paved the way to the Spanish Nationalist uprising in Pamplona (18 July 1936).\nThe triumphant military revolt was followed by a terror campaign in the rearguard against blacklisted individuals considered to be progressive (\"reds\"), mildly republican, or just inconvenient. The purge especially affected southern Navarre along the Ebro banks, and counted on the active complicity of the clergy, who adopted the fascist salute and even involved in murderous tasks. The killing took a death toll of at least 2,857, plus a further 305 dying in prisons (ill-treatment, malnutrition).\nThe dead were buried in mass graves or discarded into chasms abounding on the central hilly areas (Urbasa, etc.). Basque nationalists were also chased to a lesser extent, e.g. Fortunato Aguirre, a Basque nationalist and mayor of Estella (and co-founder of Osasuna Football Club), was executed in September 1936. Humiliation and silence ensued for the survivors. Pamplona became the rebel launching point against the Republic during the War in the North.\nPost-war scene.\nAs a reward for its support in the Spanish Civil War (Navarre sided for the most part with the military uprising), Franco allowed Navarre, as it happened with \u00c1lava, to maintain during his dictatorship a number of prerogatives reminiscent of the ancient Navarrese liberties. The bleak post-war years were shaken by shortage, famine, and smuggling, with the economy relying on agriculture (wheat, vineyards, olive, barley), and a negative migration balance. The victors came to cluster around two main factions, Carlists and Falangists, while the totalitarian ultra-Catholic environment provided fertile grounds for another religious group, the Opus Dei, to found their University of Navarre (1952), ever more influential in Pamplona.\nThe coming of the society of consumption and incipient economic liberalisation saw also the establishment of factories and workshops during the early 1960s (automobile manufacturing and accessories, etc.), especially around the overgrown capital. It was followed by labour and political unrest.\nTension during the Spanish transition.\nOfficials and figures with good connections to the Navarrese regional government went on to join Adolfo Su\u00e1rez's UCD, later splitting into the party UPN led by Jes\u00fas Aizp\u00fan Tuero (1979), refusing to join a democratic constitutional process on the grounds that Navarre's charters (or \"fueros\") remained in place. They also refused to join the Basque process to become an autonomous community, where recently legalised Basque nationalist and leftist parties held a majority.\nA continuation of the institutional framework inherited from the dictatorship and its accommodation into the Spanish democracy was guaranteed by the Betterment (\"Amejoramiento\"), a Navarre-only solution considered 'an upgrade' of its former status issued from the (remains of the) charters. In a three-year span, the Spanish Socialists in Navarre veered in their position, quit the Basque process, and joined the arrangement adopted for Navarre (Chartered Community of Navarre, 1982). The reform was not ratified by referendum, as demanded by Basque nationalist and minority leftist forces.\nPolitics.\nInstitutions and status.\nAfter the end of Franco's dictatorship, Navarre became one of the 17 Autonomous Communities in Spain. The community ceremonies, education, and social services, together with housing, urban development, and environment protection policies are under the responsibility of Navarre's political institutions. As in the rest of the communities, Navarre has a Parliament elected every four years, and the majority in this Parliament determines the president of the Community, who is in charge of Navarre's government. Unlike most other autonomous communities of Spain (but like the Basque Autonomous Community), Navarre has almost full responsibility for collecting and administering taxes which must follow the overall guidelines established by the Spanish government but may have some minor differences.\nThe first 3 presidents of the community belonged to the extinct Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD) party. After 1984 the government was ruled by either the Socialist Party of Navarre (PSN \u2013 PSOE, one of the federative components of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party, main centre-left wing party in Spain) or the Navarrese People's Union (UPN) (a Navarrese party that had a long alliance with the People's Party (PP), main right-wing party in Spain). However, in 2015 Uxue Barkos (Geroa Bai) became president with the support of EH Bildu, Podemos and Izquierda-Ezkerra. She is the first Basque nationalist president in Navarre.\nBasque nationalist parties also represent a sizeable part of the vote (around 31% in the 2015 elections), and a majority in most of the northern areas. Basque nationalist parties have as a key point in their agendas to merge Navarre into the Basque Autonomous Community by referendum (as predicted in the Spanish constitution). All Spain-based parties, as well as UPN and PSN, oppose this move.\nPresent-day political dynamics.\nPolitics in Navarre have been marked by fierce rivalry between two blocs representing different national identities that are part of Navarre society: the pro-Basque EH Bildu and the Basque nationalist Geroa Bai parties, on the one side, and the institutional pro-Spanish parties, UPN, PP and PSN on the other. Parties on the pro-Basque spectrum demand further sovereignty in internal affairs of Navarre and closer relationship with the districts of the Basque Autonomous Community. Another 2013\u20132014 controversy refers to the alleged ideological profiling of public school Basque language teachers, billed as \"ETA supporting teachers\".\nSince the establishment of Navarre's present status (the \"Amejoramiento\", the 'Betterment') in 1982, the successive regional governments ruled by UPN and PSN have been shaken by frequent political instability and corruption scandals, with UPN's Miguel Sanz's term being the most stable and longest, extending from 2001 to 2011. Between 2012 and 2014, a series of corruption scandals broke out involving regional president Yolanda Barcina and other regional government officials that included influence peddling, embezzlement, misappropriation of funds and mismanagement leading to the bankruptcy of Caja Navarra. By November 2012, the PSN\u2014UPN's standing ally in Navarre up to that point\u2014backed down on its support of UPN, but refused to impeach Yolanda Barcina or search new political alliances, leaving a deadlocked government. The regional president, widely questioned in Navarre as of 2012 and relying only on the PP central government's backup, went on to urge the Constitutional Court to challenge several decisions made by the Parliament of Navarre.\nAfter the latest scandal and corruption allegations affecting a secretary of her cabinet (Lourdes Goicoechea, regional public finance secretary) in February 2014, the Spanish home office secretary Jorge Fern\u00e1ndez D\u00edaz stepped in warning leading members of PSN that \"Navarre is strategic for Spain\", and asserting that any other political alliance means \"supporting ETA\". The Justice secretary in Madrid Alberto Ruiz Gallard\u00f3n in turn stated that \"the worst political error is not corruption\" but getting along with Bildu (a Basque pro-independence coalition). In May 2015, the elections for Navarre Parliament left a better result for pro-Basque parties, which managed to establish an alliance, Uxue Barkos from Geroa Bai being elected president of Navarre for the period 2015 \u2013 2019. June 2019 elections, however, turned the tide, when rightist forces reunited in the platform Navarra Suma, made up of UPN, PP and Ciudadanos, and garnered 20 MPs, 40% of the seats in the Parliament of Navarre, although both Geroa Bai and EH Bildu increased their vote share. Following the election results, PSN's Mar\u00eda Chivite was elected president with the support provided by progressive forces, handing over Pamplona's council to Navarra Suma and explicitly excluding EH Bildu from any talks or alliances, but relying on its abstention for her inauguration.\nIn December 2017, the Navarrese parliament passed a law splitting teachers aspiring to work in the state-run education network into two different professional categories, one for those qualified in Basque and Spanish, and another for Spanish monolinguals, so thwarting with the vote of Izquierda-Ezkerra (integrated in the regional government) the new progressive government's plan to have just one; the latter echoes a long-running demand of education unions. In July 2018, the Constitutional Court of Spain suspended the Far Right's and Civil Servants' Victims Act passed by the Parliament of Navarre in 2015. Three months later, the chief executive officer of the National Police in Navarre stepped down for the disclosure of a fake Twitter account he owned that praised Antonio Tejero, as well as Vox leader Santiago Abascal as a new Jose Antonio, also insulting a number of Catalan and Basque nationalist and leftist figures. In October 2019, the High Court of Navarre ruled against the public use of bilingual signalling and institutional announcements in Mixed-Speaking and Non-Basque Speaking areas, also proscribing the consideration of Basque as a merit in job positions, unless strictly needed; the judgement sparked an uproar among some parties in the coalition government of Navarre, as well as EH Bildu, but was saluted by the PSN and Navarra Suma.\nGeography.\nNavarre consists of 272 municipalities and has a total population of 601,874 (2006), of whom approximately one-third live in the capital, Pamplona (195,769 pop.), and one-half in the capital's metropolitan area (315,988 pop.). There are no other large municipalities in the region. The next largest are Tudela (32,802), Bara\u00f1ain (22,401), Burlada/Burlata (18,388), Estella-Lizarra (13,892), Zizur Mayor (13,197), Tafalla (11,040), Villava/Atarrabia (10,295), and Anso\u00e1in/Antsoain (9,952).\nDespite its relatively small size, Navarre features stark contrasts in geography, from the Pyrenees mountain range that dominates the territory to the plains of the Ebro river valley in the south. The highest point in Navarre is Mesa de los Tres Reyes, with an elevation of .\nOther important mountains are Txamantxoia, Kartxela, the Larra-Belagua Massif, Sierra de Alaiz, Untzueko Harria, Sierra de Leyre, Sierra del Perd\u00f3n, Montejurra, Ezkaba, Monte Ori, Sierra de Cod\u00e9s, Urbasa, Andia, and the Aralar Range.\nClimate.\nIn the north, climate is affected by the Atlantic Ocean leading an Oceanic west coast climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfb). Since the northernmost part of Navarre is less than from the Bay of Biscay, the northern fringes resemble San Sebasti\u00e1n. At central Navarre the summer precipitations start to lower, leading to a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: Csa and Csb) At the southernmost part of Navarre the climate is cool semi-arid (K\u00f6ppen: Bsk). This is also at a comparatively low elevation compared to most of the north, further pontentiating the hot summers in comparison to Pamplona and even more so the northern hilly and mountainous region.\nThe sole official weather station of Navarre is located in Pamplona in its north-western corner and has summer highs of and lows of , while winter highs are and lows with moderate precipitation year-round.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;As of 2024, Navarra is the 15th most populous autonomous community in Spain with a population of 678,333, which makes a population density of 65.3 inhabitants per km2.\nThe data of the population pyramid of 2010 can be summarized as follows:\nLanguages.\nPresently, Spanish is predominantly spoken in most of the autonomous community, except for north-eastern areas, where Basque continues to be the prevailing language. According to official statistics, Spanish is the mother tongue of 81.9% of the population, Basque is 5.7% of the population's mother tongue, and 3.8% of the population has both languages as their mother tongue while 6.1% of the population have another language as their mother tongue.\nLanguage shift.\nThe number of people that can speak Basque has increased in Navarre lately, after a steady historic retreat. In 2011, 13.6% of the population in Navarre considered themselves to be speakers of Basque and another 14.5% considered themselves semi-speakers of Basque. Historically, Basque is the \"lingua navarrorum\", as it appears in documents of the Middle Ages, such as a document by the king Sancho the Wise. The kingdom cemented its roots in the predominantly Basque-speaking domain of Pamplona and surrounding areas. In the midst of contemporary scholarly debates on the existence of Navarre and its laws prior to the king's authority, the Navarrese author Garcia de Gongora states as follows in 1626:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Two languages are spoken across the kingdom, Basque and Romance, but most properly the Cantabric [language] Basque, the original and most ancient, brought along by its creator, the patriarch Tubal, devoid of mingling with others; it has always been preserved there, except in the Ribera and the bordering areas of Castile and Aragon, where Romance is spoken.\nJos\u00e9 Moret, chronicler of the kingdom, called Navarre and its bordering provinces \"the lands of Basque\", claiming also that Tubal founded the Kingdom of Navarre. However, Basque underwent a gradual erosion, accelerated following the conquest of the kingdom in the early 16th century due to the homogenizing push of the new Castilian authorities and the neglect of its own elites, among other reasons. By 1778, 121,000 inhabitants out of 227,000 were Basque speakers, 53% of its population, still the largest amount of Basque speakers across all Basque territories. However, the number of speakers dropped sharply in the 19th century. In 1936, Basque speakers accounted for a 17% of the total Navarrese population.\nOther languages have been spoken, but have disappeared, such as Navarro-Aragonese, a Romance language that was spoken in the Middle Ages around the central part of the Ebro basin. Starting in the late 11th century, the influx of pilgrims and colonizers from Toulouse and surrounding areas (\"Francs\") who settled in separate boroughs along the Way of Saint James rendered Occitan the status language of the kingdom up to early 14th century. Navarro-Aragonese became the written language in court and royal administration by 1329, when it reached official status. However, from the 15th century onwards the language grew closer to Castilian (Spanish) and eventually merged with it. Other languages which at some point held a status or were spoken in certain communities and periods are Erromintxela, French, Hebrew, and Arabic.\nLinguistic division of the territory and legal consequences.\nAccording to the 1978 Spanish constitution and the , a Navarrese law establishing the basic institutional make-up of the chartered community of Navarre, Spanish is the official language of Navarre, while the Basque language is also the official language in Basque-Speaking areas. Unlike any other statutes in the Spanish autonomous communities owning a regional language, the Amejoramiento omits citing Basque as a specific language of its people or its consideration as part of the Navarrese heritage.\n defined the above areas, creating the , an area in northern Navarre in which Basque is the co-official language along with Spanish. This law recognizes Spanish and Basque as Navarre's \"lenguas propias\" (i.e. 'native languages'), according to the Foral Law 18/1986 of Basque. This law divides Navarre into three linguistically distinct areas, a ', where Basque is the dominant language, a ', where Basque and Spanish are both dominant, and a \"\", where Spanish is the dominant language. In the latter, the public entities of Navarre are required to use only Spanish, but in the mixed area the use of Basque is also confined to certain position. The area of the municipalities belonging to the Basque-speaking and Mixed Basque and Spanish-speaking zones are the following:\nLater, two more municipalities would be added that came from the Basque-speaking zone: and .\nAs a consequence of the constitution of new municipalities, other municipalities would be added: Berrioplano, Berriozar, Orcoyen and Zizur Mayor. Moreover, in 2010 a legal modification granted four municipalities of Cuenca de Pamplona the power of incorporating into the \"Mixed-speaking zone\" if the absolute majority decided to be incorporated into the \"Mixed-speaking zone\". Aranguren, Belasco\u00e1in and Galar decided to be incorporated into the \"Mixed-speaking zone\" while No\u00e1in decided to remain in the \"Basque-speaking zone\".\nOne modification to the law implemented in June 2017 allowed 44 municipalities from the \"Non-Basque speaking zone\" to become a part of the \"mixed zone\" (Ab\u00e1igar, , Aibar, All\u00edn, Am\u00e9scoa Baja, Anc\u00edn, A\u00f1orbe, Aranarache, Arellano, Artazu, Bargota, Beri\u00e1in, Biurrun-Olcoz, Cabredo, Dicastillo, En\u00e9riz, Eulate, , Gar\u00ednoain, Izagaondoa, Larraona, Leoz, Lerga, , Mendigorr\u00eda, Metauten, Mirafuentes, Murieta, , Obanos, Olite, Oteiza, Pueyo, Sang\u00fcesa, Tafalla, , Tirapu, Unzu\u00e9, Uju\u00e9, Urra\u00fal Bajo, , Villatuerta, Cirauqui and Z\u00fa\u00f1iga) and for Atez to pass from the \"Mixed-speaking zone\" to the \"Basque-speaking zone.\"\nBasque dialects in Navarre.\nBasque in Navarre has various dialects (there are nine according to the classification of the General Basque Dictionary or the ). According to the most recent classification of , the most widespread dialect is Upper Navarrese, spoken in the northern part of Navarre. In localities such as Basaburua Mayor, Imoz and other localities bordering Gipuzkoa, the dialect of Central Basque is spoken and in the central part of the Pyrenees in Navarre a variety of Navarro-Lapurdian is spoken.\nOn the east of the Pyrenees in Navarre, the Roncalese and Salazarese dialects of Basque used to be spoken in the valleys of Roncal and Salazar, but they disappeared near the end of the twentieth century; the last person who spoke the Roncalese dialect died in 1991 and in Salazar the language also disappeared because the last person who spoke it fluently died during the first years of the twenty-first century. Apart from dialects, sub-dialects from Basque also exist and there are also differences in vocabulary in local linguistic communities.\nLinguistic traits of the Spanish spoken in Navarre.\nThere are a number of features of Spanish as spoken in Navarre that are either exclusive to the area or shared only with neighbouring areas (mainly Arag\u00f3n and La Rioja), such as the predominance of the diminutive with \"-ico\" or the use of the conditional verb tense in place of the preterite of the subjunctive (for example, using \"podr\u00eda\" instead of \"pudiera\"). There are also differences in the vocabulary of Spanish speakers from Navarre, including the presence of words of Basque origin, which is in some cases due to a , or long-standing contact and commercial exchanges with areas of Navarre in which Basque is spoken.\nCulture.\nNavarre is a mixture of its Basque tradition, the Trans-Pyrenean influx of people and ideas and Mediterranean influences coming from the Ebro. The Ebro valley is amenable to wheat, vegetables, wine, and even olive trees as in Aragon and La Rioja. It was a part of the Roman Empire, inhabited by the Vascones, later controlled on its southern fringes by the Muslim Banu Qasi, whose authority was taken over by the taifa kingdom of Tudela in the 11th\u00a0century.\nDuring the Reconquista, Navarre gained little ground at the expense of the Muslims, since its southern boundary had already been established by the time of the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212. Starting in the 11th century, the Way of Saint James grew in importance. It brought pilgrims, traders and Christian soldiers from the north. Gascons and Occitans from beyond the Pyrenees (called \"Franks\") received self-government and other privileges to foster settlement in Navarrese towns, and they brought their crafts, culture and Romance languages.\nJews and Muslims were persecuted both north and south of Navarre, expelled for the most part during the late 15th century to the early 16th century. The kingdom struggled to maintain its separate identity in 14th and 15th centuries, and after King Ferdinand V forcibly conquered Navarre after the death of his wife Queen Isabella, he extended the Castilian expulsion and forcible integration orders applicable to and of 1492 to the former kingdom. Therefore, Tudela in particular could no longer serve as a refuge after the Inquisitors were allowed.\nTransport.\nAir.\nPamplona Airport is the only airport in the region which provides flights to Madrid, Gran Canaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Ibiza which are operated by Iberia and Binter Canarias. \nHowever, other airports such as Bilbao Airport, Logro\u00f1o\u2013Agoncillo Airport, San Sebasti\u00e1n Airport, Zaragoza Airport and Biarritz Pays Basque Airport in France are also used by air travellers from the region.\nEconomy.\nNavarre is one of the wealthiest regions in Spain per capita, with a diversified economy primarily focused on the energy sector, healthcare services and manufacturing. The gross domestic product (GDP) of the autonomous community was 20.3 billion euros as of 2018, accounting for 1.7% of Spanish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 33,700 euros or 112% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 109% of the EU average.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 10.2% in 2017 and was the lowest in the country.\nEnergy policy.\nNavarre leads Europe in its use of renewable energy technology and planned to reach 100% renewable electricity generation by 2010. By 2004, 61% of the region's electricity was generated by renewable sources consisting of 43.6% from 28 wind farms, 12% from over 100 small-scale water turbines, and 5.3% from 2 biomass and 2 biogas plants. In addition, the region had what was then Spain's largest photovoltaic power plant at Montes de Cierzo de Tudela (1.2 MWp capacity) plus several hundred smaller photovoltaic installations.\nDevelopments since 2004 have included further photovoltaic plants at Larri\u00f3n (0.25 MWp) and another at Castej\u00f3n (2.44 MWp), also once the largest in Spain.\nDenomination of local entities.\nThe official denomination of Navarran municipalities and villages are regulated according to the \"Foral Basque Law.\" It distinguishes three different types of formulas:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59732", "revid": "43113831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59732", "title": "Pamplona", "text": "Pamplona (; Basque: Iru\u00f1ea ; officially in its bilingual form: Pamplona-Iru\u00f1a), historically also known as Pampeluna in English, is the capital city of the Chartered Community of Navarre in Spain. As of 2024, with a population of 208,243, it is the 29th largest city in Spain.\nLying at near above sea level, the city (and the wider Cuenca de Pamplona) is located on the flood plain of the Arga river, a second-order tributary of the Ebro. Precipitation-wise, it is located in a transitional location between the rainy Atlantic northern fa\u00e7ade of the Iberian Peninsula and its drier inland. Early population in the settlement traces back to the late Bronze to early Iron Age, even if the traditional inception date refers to the foundation of by Pompey during the Sertorian Wars circa 75 BC. During Visigothic rule Pamplona became an episcopal see, serving as a staging ground for the Christianization of the area. It later became one of the capitals of the Kingdom of Pamplona/Navarre.\nThe city is famous worldwide for the running of the bulls during the San Ferm\u00edn festival, which is held annually from 6 July to 14 July. This festival was brought to literary renown with the 1926 publication of Ernest Hemingway's novel \"The Sun Also Rises\". It is also home to Osasuna, the only Navarrese football club to have ever played in the Spanish top division.\nHistory.\nFoundation and Roman times.\nIn the winter of 75\u201374 BC, the area served as a camp for the Roman general Pompey in the war against Sertorius. He is considered to be the founder of Pompaelo, \"as if \"Pompeiopolis\"\" in Strabo's words, which became Pamplona, in modern Spanish. However, in later times, it has been discovered to be the chief town of the Vascones. They called it Iru\u00f1a, translating to 'the city'. Roman Pompaelo was located in the province of Hispania Tarraconensis, on the Ab Asturica Burdigalam, the road from Burdigala (modern Bordeaux) to Asturica (modern Astorga); it was a \"civitas stipendiaria\" in the jurisdiction of the \"conventus\" of Caesaraugusta (modern Zaragoza).\nEarly Middle Ages.\nDuring the Germanic invasions of 409 and later as a result of Rechiar's ravaging, Pamplona went through much disruption and destruction, starting a cycle of general decline along with other towns across the Basque territory, but managing to keep some sort of urban life. During the Visigothic period (fifth to eighth centuries), Pamplona alternated between self-rule, Visigoth domination or Frankish suzerainty in the Duchy of Vasconia (Councils of Toledo unattended by several Pamplonese bishops between 589 and 684). In 466 to 472, Pamplona was conquered by the Visigoth count Gauteric, but they seemed to abandon the restless position soon, struggling as the Visigoth kingdom was to survive and rearrange its lands after their defeats in Gaul. During the beginning of the sixth century, Pamplona probably stuck to an unstable self-rule, but in 541, Pamplona, along with other northern Iberian cities, was raided by the Franks.\nAround 581, the Visigoth king Liuvigild overcame the Basques, seized Pamplona, and founded in the town of Victoriacum. Despite the legend citing Saint Fermin as the first bishop of Pamplona and his baptising of 40,000 pagan inhabitants in just three days, the first reliable accounts of a bishop date from 589, when bishop Liliolus attended the Third Council of Toledo. After 684 and 693, a bishop called Opilano is mentioned again in 829, followed by Wiliesind and a certain Jimenez from 880 to 890. Even in the 10th century, important gaps are found in bishop succession, which is recorded unbroken only after 1005.\nAt the time of the Umayyad invasion in 711, the Visigothic king Roderic was fighting the Basques in Pamplona and had to turn his attention to the new enemy coming from the south. By 714\u201316, the Umayyad troops had reached the Basque-held Pamplona, with the town submitting apparently after a treaty was brokered between the inhabitants and the Arab military commanders. The position was then garrisoned by Berbers, who were stationed on the outside of the actual fortress, and established the cemetery unearthed not long ago at the Castle Square (\"Plaza del Castillo\"). During the following years, the Basques south of the Pyrenees do not seem to have shown much resistance to the Moorish thrust, and Pamplona may even have flourished as a launching point and centre of assembly for their expeditions into Gascony. In 740, the Wali (governor) Uqba ibn al-Hajjaj imposed direct central Cordovan discipline on the city. In 755, though, the last governor of Al-Andalus, Yusuf al Fihri, sent an expedition north to quash Basque unrest near Pamplona, resulting in the defeat of the Arab army.\nFrom 755 until 781, Pamplona remained autonomous, probably relying on regional alliances. Although sources are not clear, it seems apparent that in 778, the town was in hands of a Basque local or a Muslim rebel faction loyal to the Franks at the moment of Charlemagne's crossing of the Pyrenees to the south. However, on his way back from the failed expedition to Saragossa in August, the walls and probably the town were destroyed by Charlemagne (ahead of the Frankish defeat in the famous Battle of Roncevaux), out of fear that the anti-Frankish party strong in the town might use the position against him. After Abd al-Rahman I's conquest, Pamplona and its hinterland remained in a state of shaky balance between Franks, regional Andalusian lords and central Cordovan rule, all of whom proved unable to permanently secure dominance over the Basque region. To a considerable extent, that alternation reflected the internal struggles of the Basque warrior nobility.\nAfter the Frankish defeat at Roncevaux (778), Pamplona switched again to Cordovan rule, after Abd-al-Rahman's expedition captured the stronghold in 781. A \"wali\" or governor was imposed, Mutarrif ibn-Musa (a Banu-Qasi) up to the 799 rebellion. In that year, the Pamplonese\u2014possibly led by a certain Velasko\u2014stirred against their governor, but later the inhabitants provided some support for the Banu Qasi Fortun ibn-Musa's uprising. This regional revolt was shortly after suppressed by the Cordovan emir Hisham I, who re-established order, but failed to retain his grip on the town, since the Pamplonese returned to Frankish suzerainty in 806. A Muslim cemetery containing about 200 human remains mingled with Christian tombs was unearthed in 2003 at the Castle Square, bearing witness to an important Muslim presence in the city during this period, but further research was stopped by the destruction of this and other historic evidence as decided by the city council, headed by mayor Yolanda Barcina.\nFollowing a failed expedition to the town led by Louis the Pious around 812, allegiance to the Franks collapsed after Enecco Arista rose to prominence. Moreover, he was crowned as king of Pamplona in 824, when the Banu Qasi and he gained momentum in the wake of their victorious second battle of Roncevaux. The new kingdom, inextricably linked to the Banu Qasi of Tudela, strengthened its independence from the weakened Frankish empire and Cordoban emirate.\nDuring this period, Pamplona was not properly a town, but just a kind of fortress. In 924, Cordovan sources describe Pamplona as \"not being especially gifted by nature\", with its inhabitants being poor, not eating enough, and dedicated to banditry. They are reported to speak Basque for the most part, which \"makes them incomprehensible\". On the 24 July, after Christian troops and citizens fled, troops from Cordova sacked Pamplona, destroying houses and buildings including its celebrated church.\nThe town only regained its urban and human shape after the end of raids by Vikings and Andalusians on the province. Especially after 1083, traffic on the Way of St James brought prosperity and new cultures via travelers from north of the Pyrenees.\nThree boroughs and one city.\nFrom the 11th century, reviving economic development allowed Pamplona to recover its urban life. The bishops of Pamplona recovered their ecclesiastical leading role; during the previous centuries, isolated monasteries, especially Leyre, had actually held the religious authority. The pilgrimages to Santiago de Compostela contributed to the revival of the commercial and cultural exchanges with Christian Europe beyond the Pyrenees. In the 12th century, the city enlarged with two new separate \"burgos\" (independent boroughs): San Cern\u00edn (Saint Saturnin) and San Nicol\u00e1s; the population of local Navarrese mainly confined to the original urban nucleus, the Navarrer\u00eda, was swelled by Occitan merchants and artisans.\nThe boroughs showed very distinct features both socially and culturally, and were almost always engaged in quarrels among themselves. The most dramatic episode was the burning of the borough San Nicol\u00e1s in 1258 and the destruction of the Navarrer\u00eda by the other two boroughs and the massacre of its population in 1276. The site was abandoned for nearly 50 years. With regards to the outer defence walls of the city, the southern side was the weakest flank of the city, and the Navarrese king Louis I built a castle in the early 14th century in the site known today as Plaza del Castillo (Castle Square).\nEventually, King Charles III decreed the unification of the boroughs in a single city in 1423. The feuds between boroughs had been partly ignited by disputes over the use of the gulf dividing the three boroughs, so after Charles III's unification, the gulf was filled and on its site a common space laid out on the present-day city hall. The walls dividing the boroughs were demolished.\nDuring the late 15th century, Pamplona bore witness to power struggles between the Beaumont and Agramont confederacies and external military interventions. Several times, the stronghold was taken over by different factions and foreign forces, like the ones sent by Ferdinand II of Aragon. Queen Catherine I was a minor and often absent from Pamplona, but eventually she married John III in 1494, an event celebrated with joy in the city. However, Navarre continued divided.\nHistorically, a Jewish community existed in Pamplona. The first documentation of Jews in Pamplona dates to 958, when Hasdai Ibn Shaprut visited Pamplona on a diplomatic mission to meet with Sancho I. The Jews of Pamplona had an independent court system which enforced the Jewish system of halacha, or religious laws. In 1498, the Jewish population was either expelled or forced to convert to Christianity.\nA fortress-city.\nAfter the 1512 conquest and annexation of Navarre to Spain, Pamplona remained as capital of the semiautonomous kingdom of Navarre, which preserved its own (reformed) institutions and laws. Pamplona became a Castilian-Spanish outpost at the foot of the western Pyrenees. After the Castilian conquest, king Ferdinand V ordered in 1513 the demolition and removal of the medieval castle and the city's monasteries, as well as the building of a new castle in a very close place. In 1530, with Navarre under Spanish military occupation, the Castilian viceroy was still expecting a \"French invasion\", and in fear of a possible revolt of the city dwellers, he requested an additional 1,000-strong force from what he called \"healthy land\", i.e. Castile, besides the 1,000 stationed already in Navarre.\nThe progress of artillery demanded a complete renewal of the fortified system. Starting in 1569, King Philip II built the fortifications at Pamplona, to designs by Giovan Giacomo Paleari and Vespasiano Gonzaga. The citadel in the south of the town is a pentagonal star fort. Phillip had the city bounded by walls that made it almost a regular pentagon. The modernization of the walls was intended mainly to keep locals in check and strengthen the outpost Pamplona had become on the border with independent Navarre, a close ally of France. The walls that exist today date from the late 16th to 18th centuries.\nDuring the 18th century, Pamplona was considerably beautified and its urban services improved. A continuous water supply was established and the streets were paved, among many other enhancements. Rich aristocrats and businessmen also built their mansions. In the 19th century, this fortress-city played a key role in several wars in which Spain was involved.\nDuring the Peninsular War of the Napoleonic Wars, French troops occupied the city - by launching a \"coup de main\" (surprise attack) and seized the city in 1808, and remained in it until the French forces were compelled to surrender on 31 October 1813 due to starvation, having been blockaded in the town for four months by the Spanish army under Enrique Jos\u00e9 O'Donnell.\nDuring the Carlist Wars (1833\u20131839 and 1872\u20131876) Pamplona was each time controlled by the liberals, not just because the few liberals that lived in Navarre were mainly Pamplonese, but also because of the governmental control over the fortified city. Although Carlist rebels easily ruled the countryside, the government army had no problem in dominating the walled capital of Navarre. Nevertheless, during the last Carlist war, modern artillery operated by Carlists from surrounding mountains showed that the old walls would not be enough in the face of a stronger enemy. Thus, the government decided to build a fort on the top of mount San Crist\u00f3bal, just north of Pamplona.\nDue to its military role, the city could not grow outside its walled belt. Furthermore, building in the closest area to the walls was banned to avoid any advantage for a besieger; thus the city could only grow by increasing its housing density. Higher and narrower houses were built and courtyards gradually disappeared. During the 19th century, road transportation improved, and the railway came in 1860. Nevertheless, industry in Pamplona and Navarre as a whole was weak during the century of the Industrial Revolution. Basically, no industrial development was feasible in such a constrained fortress-city.\nAfter a slight modification of the star fort allowed an expansion of just six blocks in 1888, the First World War demonstrated that the fortified system of Pamplona was already obsolete. In 1915, the Army allowed the destruction of the walls and abolished the building ban in the city's surroundings. The southern side of the walls was destroyed and the other three remained as they did not hinder urban growth. The star fort continued to serve as a military facility until 1964, but just as a garrison.\nPamplona has in recent years taken great care to integrate and preserve its fortifications for modern use. In October 2014, working with the city of Bayonne, Pamplona hosts an international conference 'Fortified Heritage: Management and Sustainable Development', the website is in English, French, and Spanish.\nAvailable on a growing website are two free e-books, with copious colour photographs, on Pamplona's fortifications. Published in 2011 is 'Five living centuries of an impregnable fortress' about the city citadel and 'A walk round the Pamplona fortifications'.\nIndustrialization and modernization.\nFreed from its military function, Pamplona could lead the process of industrialization and modernization in which Navarre was involved during the 20th century, especially during its second half. The urban growth has been accompanied by the development of industry and services. Population growth has been the effect of an intense immigration process during the 1960s and 1970s: from the Navarrese countryside and from other less developed regions of Spain, mainly Castile and Le\u00f3n and Andalusia. Since the 1990s the immigration is coming mainly from abroad.\nPamplona is listed as a city with one of the highest standards of living and quality of life in Spain. Its industry rate is higher than the national average, although it is threatened by delocalization. Crime statistics are lower than the national average but cost of living, especially housing, is considerably higher. Thanks to its small size and an acceptable public transport service, there are no major transport problems.\nGeography.\nPamplona is located in the middle of Navarre in a rounded valley, known as the Basin of Pamplona, that links the mountainous north with the Ebro valley. It is from the city of San Sebasti\u00e1n, from Bilbao, from Paris, and from Madrid. The climate and landscape of the basin is a transition between those two main Navarrese geographical regions. Its central position at crossroads has served as a commercial link between those very different natural parts of Navarre. The historical centre of the city is on the left bank of the Arga River, a tributary of the Ebro. The city has developed on both sides of the river.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Pamplona is classified as an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\") with influences of a Mediterranean climate (\"Csb\"). Due to global warming and stronger summer heat waves in the 21st century, it is also on the boundary with a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). Precipitation patterns do not vary much over the course of the year, as is typical of marine climates, but both classifications are possible due to the Mediterranean patterns of somewhat drier summer months. Sunshine hours are typical for a location in Northern Spain, thus more similar to the oceanic coastal climate in nearby Basque locations than typical Spanish Mediterranean areas are, but rainfall is significantly lower than in Bilbao and especially San Sebasti\u00e1n, and the climate is harsher than in the northern coastal areas (colder winter lows, warmer summer highs) because of the altitude of and its inland location.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population of the city is 45,079, making up 21.6% of the total population.\nUrbanism.\nLike many other European cities, it is very easy to distinguish what is so called the \"old city\" and the new neighborhoods. The oldest part of the old city is Navarrer\u00eda, which corresponds with the Roman city. During the 12th century, the boroughs of Saint Sernin (San Saturnino or San Cernin) and Saint Nicholas (San Nicol\u00e1s) were established. Charles III decreed the unification of the three places under a single municipality in 1423.\nThe city did not expand until the late 19th century. In 1888, a modest modification of the star fort was allowed, but it just permitted the building of six blocks. It was called the I Ensanche (literally, \"first widening\"). The southern walls were destroyed in 1915 and the II Ensanche (\"second widening\") was planned. Its plan followed the grid pattern model designed by Ildefons Cerd\u00e0 for Barcelona. Its blocks were built between the 1920s and the 1950s. The prevailing housing model is apartment buildings of five to eight floors.\nAfter the Civil War, three new zones of Pamplona began to grow: Rochapea, Milagrosa, and Chantrea. Only the last one was a planned neighborhood, the other two being disorderly growths. In 1957, the municipality designed the first general ordination plan for the city, which established the guidelines for further urban development. According to this, during the 1960s and 1970s saw the creation of new neighborhoods like San Juan, Iturrama, San Jorge, Etxabakoitz, and Orvina.\nThe urban expansion of Pamplona exceeded the administrative limits of the city and involved municipalities like Bara\u00f1\u00e1in, Burlada, Villava, Ansoain, Berriozar, Noain or Huarte in a larger metropolitan area. During the 1980s and 1990s, new neighborhoods were born: Azpilaga\u00f1a, Mendebaldea, and Mendillorri. Rochapea was profoundly renewed. The urban development of those new neighborhoods is very similar to other Spanish provincial capitals that experienced a similar aggressive economic development during the sixties and seventies. The urbanization of Pamplona, being from anterior designs, is not constrained by the grid plan. The apartment buildings are taller: never less than five floors and many taller than ten. Industry, which previously coexisted with housing, was moved to industrial parks (the oldest and the only one within municipal limits of Pamplona is Landaben).\nIn recent years, single-family house-predominant neighborhoods have grown in the metropolitan area: Zizur Mayor, Cizur Menor, Mutilva Alta, Mutilva Baja, Olaz, Esqu\u00edroz, Artica, Alzuza, Artiberri and Sarriguren. And new districts emerged like Buztintxuri, Lezkairu and Ripagaina, the latter two being still under construction. These new suburbs have more room for green areas and recreative parks.\nEconomy.\nPamplona has shifted in a few decades from a little administrative and even rural town to a medium-size city of industry and services. The industry sector is diversified although the most important activity is related to automobile industry. The Landaben automotive plant opened in 1966, where Authi produced cars under license from British Motor Corporation. In 1975 the plant was bought by SEAT, which later became part of the Volkswagen Group in 1994. It produced over 8 million units of the Polo from 1984 to 2024, and currently produces the T-Cross and Taigo. The city has also many auxiliary industries that work for Volkswagen and other companies.\nOther remarkable industries are building materials, metalworking and food processing. Renewable energy technologies are also an increasing economic sector (wind turbine manufacturing and generation) and neighboring Sarriguren is the seat of the Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy, National Centre for Renewable Energies (CENER) and of Acciona Energ\u00eda.\nPamplona is the main commercial and services centre of Navarre. Its area of influence is not beyond the province, except for the University of Navarre and its teaching hospital, which provide private educational and health services nationwide.\nEducation.\nThe city is home to two universities: the above-mentioned University of Navarre, a corporate work of Opus Dei founded in 1952, which is ranked as the best private university in Spain, and the Public University of Navarre, established by the Government of Navarre in 1987. There is also a local branch of the UNED (Universidad Nacional de Educaci\u00f3n a Distancia).\nCulture.\nThe two most important museums in Pamplona are the Museo de Navarra, devoted to the archaeological and artistic heritage of Navarre, and the Museo Diocesano of religious art, located in the cathedral. Pamplona is the first Spanish city in the French way of the Way of Saint James.\nPamplona has hosted the Sarasate Violin International Competition biennially since 1991, and the annual Punto de Vista International Documentary Film Festival, the most important Spanish documentary film festival, since 2004.\nOne of the more popular cultural expressions include the \"Gigantes\", which come out during festivals many times during the year. These are approximately 30-foot wooden statues that have a person inside that make them dance around the city. They represent each of the main continents of the world, including Europe, the Americas, Africa, and Asia.\nPolitics.\nFollowing the 2023 municipal election, the mayor of the city is Joseba Asiron (EH Bildu), also supported by the Socialist Party of Navarre, Geroa Bai, and Contigo Zurekin.\nTransport.\nPamplona is linked by motorways with neighbouring Zaragoza (1978), San Sebasti\u00e1n, Vitoria (1995) and Logro\u00f1o (2006). Since 2007 buses use a new bus station in the city centre that replaces the old one (1934). \nThe airport (1972), operated by Aena and located in Noain, schedules several flights daily to Madrid and Barcelona. There are railway (1861) links with Madrid, Zaragoza and northern Spain, operated by Renfe. High speed train link with Zaragoza, Madrid, and Barcelona was not expected until 2014. A new railway station will be built in the southern part of the city. \nWithin the city and surroundings there are also 23 daytime lines and 10 night lines of public buses, operated by TCC, the chartered company of the Mancomunidad de la Comarca de Pamplona.\nMain sights.\nSeveral notable churches, most of its 16th- to 18th-century fortified system and other civil architecture buildings belong to the historic-artistic heritage of Pamplona.\nReligious architecture.\nThe most important religious building is the fourteenth century Gothic Cathedral, with an outstanding cloister and a Neoclassical fa\u00e7ade. There are another two main Gothic churches in the old city: Saint Sernin and Saint Nicholas, both built during the thirteenth century. Two other Gothic churches were built during the sixteenth century: Saint Dominic and Saint Augustine. During the seventeenth and eighteenth century were built the Baroque chapels of Saint Fermin, in the church of Saint Lawrence, and of the Virgin of the Road (Virgen del Camino), in the church of Saint Sernin, the convents of the Augustinian Recollect nuns and the Carmelite friars, and the Saint Ignatius basilica in the place where he was injured in the battle and during the subsequent convalescence he decided to be a priest. The most remarkable twentieth century religious buildings are probably the new diocesan seminary (1931) and the classical-revival style memorial church (1942) to the Navarrese dead in the Nationalist side of the Civil War and that is used today as temporary exhibitions room.\nMilitary and civil architecture.\nFrom the prominent military past of Pamplona remain three of the four sides of the city walls and, with little modifications, the citadel or star fort. All the mediaeval structures were replaced and improved during 16th, 17th and 18th centuries in order to resist artillery sieges. Completely obsolete for modern warfare, they are used today as parks.\nThe oldest civil building today existing is a fourteenth-century house that was used as C\u00e1mara de Comptos (the court of auditors of the early modern autonomous kingdom of Navarre) from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century. There are also several medieval bridges on the Arga: Santa Engracia, Miluce, Magdalena, and San Pedro. The medieval palace of Saint Peter, which was alternatively used by Navarrese kings and Pamplonese bishops, was used during the early modern age as the Viceroy's palace and later was the seat of the military governor of Navarre; from the time of the Civil War it was in ruins but was recently rebuilt to be used as the General Archive of Navarre.\nThe most outstanding Baroque civil architecture is from the eighteenth century: town hall, episcopal palace, Saint John the Baptist seminary, and the Rozalejo's, Ezpeleta's (today music school), Navarro-Tafalla's (today, the local office of PNV), and Guendul\u00e1in's (today, a hotel) mansions. The provincial government built its own Neoclassical palace, the so-called Palace of Navarre, during the nineteenth century.\nLate nineteenth and early twentieth century Pamplonese architecture shows the tendencies that are fully developed in other more important Spanish cities: La Agr\u00edcola building (1912), several apartment buildings with some timid modernist ornamentation, etc. The most notable architect in twentieth century Pamplona was V\u00edctor Eusa (1894\u20131990), whose designs were influenced by the European expressionism and other avant-garde movements.\nParks.\nPamplona has many parks and green areas. The oldest is the Taconera park, whose early designs are from the seventeenth century. Taconera is today a romantic park, with wide pedestrian paths, parterres, and sculptures.\nThe Media Luna park was built as part of the II Ensanche and is intended to allow relaxing strolling and sightseeing over the northern part of the town. \nAfter its demilitarization, the citadel (Ciudadela) and its surrounding area (Vuelta del Castillo) shifted into a park area with large lawns and modern sculptures.\nThe most remarkable parks of the new neighborhoods include the Yamaguchi park, between Iturrama and Ermitaga\u00f1a, which includes a little Japanese garden as well as the Planetarium of Pamplona; the campus of the University of Navarre; the Parque del Mundo in Chantrea; and the Arga park.\nSports.\nPamplona's bull ring, the Plaza de Toros de Pamplona, was rebuilt in 1923. It seats 19,529 and is the third largest in the world, after the bull rings of Mexico City and Madrid.\nThere are two football teams in Pamplona. CA Osasuna (Club Atl\u00e9tico \"Osasuna\" (Basque for \"Health\")) who play professionally in La Liga, and CD Pamplona who play in Tercera Federaci\u00f3n. Osasuna play their home games at El Sadar Stadium.\nOther notable sports teams in Pamplona include MRA Xota (futsal), water polo and fencing ().\nThe Movistar Team, the direct descendant of Indurain's Banesto team, is based in Eg\u00fc\u00e9s, a municipality in the metropolitan area of Pamplona.\nPamplona is also home to the headquarters of the International Federation of Basque Pelota (FIPV). Basque pelota is principally practiced in France, Spain, and North and South America, but also in other countries like Italy and Philippines.\nNotable Athletes.\nFive time Tour de France winner Miguel Indurain is arguably Pamplona's most famous athlete in any sport.\nFormer Arsenal goalkeeper Manuel Almunia was born in Pamplona and started his career at CA Osasuna.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;/div col&gt;\nTwin towns - sister cities.\nPamplona is twinned with the following cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59733", "revid": "17167633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59733", "title": "Hexagon", "text": "Shape with six sides\nIn geometry, a hexagon (from Greek , , meaning \"six\", and , , meaning \"corner, angle\") is a six-sided polygon. The total of the internal angles of any simple (non-self-intersecting) hexagon is 720\u00b0. \nRegular hexagon.\nA regular hexagon is defined as a hexagon that is both equilateral and equiangular. In other words, a hexagon is said to be regular if the edges are all equal in length, and each of its internal angle is equal to 120\u00b0. The Schl\u00e4fli symbol denotes this polygon as formula_1. However, the regular hexagon can also be considered as the cutting off the vertices of an equilateral triangle, which can also be denoted as formula_2.\nA regular hexagon is bicentric, meaning that it is both cyclic (has a circumscribed circle) and tangential (has an inscribed circle). The common length of the sides equals the radius of the circumscribed circle or circumcircle, which equals formula_3 times the apothem (radius of the inscribed circle).\nMeasurement.\nThe longest diagonals of a regular hexagon, connecting diametrically opposite vertices, are twice the length of one side. From this it can be seen that a triangle with a vertex at the center of the regular hexagon and sharing one side with the hexagon is equilateral, and that the regular hexagon can be partitioned into six equilateral triangles.\nThe maximal diameter (which corresponds to the long diagonal of the hexagon), \"D\", is twice the maximal radius or circumradius, \"R\", which equals the side length, \"t\". The minimal diameter or the diameter of the inscribed circle (separation of parallel sides, flat-to-flat distance, short diagonal or height when resting on a flat base), \"d\", is twice the minimal radius or inradius, \"r\". The maxima and minima are related by the same factor:\nformula_4 \u00a0 and, similarly, formula_5\nThe area of a regular hexagon\nformula_6\nFor any regular polygon, the area can also be expressed in terms of the apothem \"a\" and the perimeter \"p\". For the regular hexagon these are given by \"a\" = \"r\", and \"p\"formula_7, so\nformula_8\nThe regular hexagon fills the fraction formula_9 of its circumscribed circle.\nIf a regular hexagon has successive vertices A, B, C, D, E, F and if P is any point on the circumcircle between B and C, then PE + PF \n PA + PB + PC + PD.\nIt follows from the ratio of circumradius to inradius that the height-to-width ratio of a regular hexagon is 1:1.1547005; that is, a hexagon with a long diagonal of 1.0000000 will have a distance of 0.8660254 or cos(30\u00b0) between parallel sides.\nPoint in plane.\nFor an arbitrary point in the plane of a regular hexagon with circumradius formula_10, whose distances to the centroid of the regular hexagon and its six vertices are formula_11 and formula_12 \nrespectively, we have\nformula_13\nformula_14\nformula_15\nIf formula_12 are the distances from the vertices of a regular hexagon to any point on its circumcircle, then \nformula_17\nSymmetry.\nA regular hexagon has six rotational symmetries (\"rotational symmetry of order six\") and six reflection symmetries (\"six lines of symmetry\"), making up the dihedral group D6. There are 16 subgroups. There are 8 up to isomorphism: itself (D6), 2 dihedral: (D3, D2), 4 cyclic: (Z6, Z3, Z2, Z1) and the trivial (e)\nThese symmetries express nine distinct symmetries of a regular hexagon. John Conway labels these by a letter and group order. r12 is full symmetry, and a1 is no symmetry. p6, an isogonal hexagon constructed by three mirrors can alternate long and short edges, and d6, an isotoxal hexagon constructed with equal edge lengths, but vertices alternating two different internal angles. These two forms are duals of each other and have half the symmetry order of the regular hexagon. The i4 forms are regular hexagons flattened or stretched along one symmetry direction. It can be seen as an elongated rhombus, while d2 and p2 can be seen as horizontally and vertically elongated kites. g2 hexagons, with opposite sides parallel are also called hexagonal parallelogons.\nEach subgroup symmetry allows one or more degrees of freedom for irregular forms. Only the g6 subgroup has no degrees of freedom but can be seen as directed edges.\nHexagons of symmetry g2, i4, and r12, as parallelogons can tessellate the Euclidean plane by translation. Other hexagon shapes can tile the plane with different orientations.\nThe 6 roots of the simple Lie group , represented by a Dynkin diagram , are in a regular hexagonal pattern. The two simple roots have a 120\u00b0 angle between them.\nThe 12 roots of the Exceptional Lie group G2, represented by a Dynkin diagram are also in a hexagonal pattern. The two simple roots of two lengths have a 150\u00b0 angle between them.\nTessellations.\nLike squares and equilateral triangles, regular hexagons fit together without any gaps to \"tile the plane\" (three hexagons meeting at every vertex), and so are useful for constructing tessellations. The cells of a beehive honeycomb are hexagonal for this reason and because the shape makes efficient use of space and building materials. The Voronoi diagram of a regular triangular lattice is the honeycomb tessellation of hexagons.\nDissection.\nCoxeter states that every zonogon (a 2\"m\"-gon whose opposite sides are parallel and of equal length) can be dissected into parallelograms. In particular this is true for regular polygons with evenly many sides, in which case the parallelograms are all rhombi. This decomposition of a regular hexagon is based on a Petrie polygon projection of a cube, with 3 of 6 square faces. Other parallelogons and projective directions of the cube are dissected within rectangular cuboids.\nRelated polygons and tilings.\nA regular hexagon has Schl\u00e4fli symbol {6}. A regular hexagon is a part of the regular hexagonal tiling, {6,3}, with three hexagonal faces around each vertex.\nA regular hexagon can also be created as a truncated equilateral triangle, with Schl\u00e4fli symbol t{3}. Seen with two types (colors) of edges, this form only has D3 symmetry.\nA truncated hexagon, t{6}, is a dodecagon, {12}, alternating two types (colors) of edges. An alternated hexagon, h{6}, is an equilateral triangle, {3}. A regular hexagon can be stellated with equilateral triangles on its edges, creating a hexagram. A regular hexagon can be dissected into six equilateral triangles by adding a center point. This pattern repeats within the regular triangular tiling.\nA regular hexagon can be extended into a regular dodecagon by adding alternating squares and equilateral triangles around it. This pattern repeats within the rhombitrihexagonal tiling.\nSelf-crossing hexagons.\nThere are six self-crossing hexagons with the vertex arrangement of the regular hexagon:\nHexagonal structures.\nFrom bees' honeycombs to the Giant's Causeway, hexagonal patterns are prevalent in nature due to their efficiency. In a hexagonal grid each line is as short as it can possibly be if a large area is to be filled with the fewest hexagons. This means that honeycombs require less wax to construct and gain much strength under compression.\nIrregular hexagons with parallel opposite edges are called parallelogons and can also tile the plane by translation. In three dimensions, hexagonal prisms with parallel opposite faces are called parallelohedrons and these can tessellate 3-space by translation.\nTesselations by hexagons.\nIn addition to the regular hexagon, which determines a unique tessellation of the plane, any irregular hexagon which satisfies the Conway criterion will tile the plane.\nHexagon inscribed in a conic section.\nPascal's theorem (also known as the \"Hexagrammum Mysticum Theorem\") states that if an arbitrary hexagon is inscribed in any conic section, and pairs of opposite sides are extended until they meet, the three intersection points will lie on a straight line, the \"Pascal line\" of that configuration.\nCyclic hexagon.\nThe Lemoine hexagon is a cyclic hexagon (one inscribed in a circle) with vertices given by the six intersections of the edges of a triangle and the three lines that are parallel to the edges that pass through its symmedian point.\nIf the successive sides of a cyclic hexagon are \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", \"e\", \"f\", then the three main diagonals intersect in a single point if and only if \"ace\" \n \"bdf\".\nIf, for each side of a cyclic hexagon, the adjacent sides are extended to their intersection, forming a triangle exterior to the given side, then the segments connecting the circumcenters of opposite triangles are concurrent.\nIf a hexagon has vertices on the circumcircle of an acute triangle at the six points (including three triangle vertices) where the extended altitudes of the triangle meet the circumcircle, then the area of the hexagon is twice the area of the triangle.\nHexagon tangential to a conic section.\nLet ABCDEF be a hexagon formed by six tangent lines of a conic section. Then Brianchon's theorem states that the three main diagonals AD, BE, and CF intersect at a single point.\nIn a hexagon that is tangential to a circle and that has consecutive sides \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", \"e\", and \"f\",\nformula_18\nEquilateral triangles on the sides of an arbitrary hexagon.\nIf an equilateral triangle is constructed externally on each side of any hexagon, then the midpoints of the segments connecting the centroids of opposite triangles form another equilateral triangle.\nSkew hexagon.\nA skew hexagon is a skew polygon with six vertices and edges but not existing on the same plane. The interior of such a hexagon is not generally defined. A \"skew zig-zag hexagon\" has vertices alternating between two parallel planes.\nA regular skew hexagon is vertex-transitive with equal edge lengths. In three dimensions it will be a zig-zag skew hexagon and can be seen in the vertices and side edges of a triangular antiprism with the same D3d, [2+,6] symmetry, order 12.\nThe cube and octahedron (same as triangular antiprism) have regular skew hexagons as petrie polygons.\nPetrie polygons.\nThe regular skew hexagon is the Petrie polygon for these higher dimensional regular, uniform and dual polyhedra and polytopes, shown in these skew orthogonal projections:\nConvex equilateral hexagon.\nA \"principal diagonal\" of a hexagon is a diagonal which divides the hexagon into quadrilaterals. In any convex equilateral hexagon (one with all sides equal) with common side \"a\", there exists a principal diagonal \"d\"1 such that\nformula_19\nand a principal diagonal \"d\"2 such that\nformula_20\nPolyhedra with hexagons.\nThere is no Platonic solid made of only regular hexagons, because the hexagons tessellate, not allowing the result to \"fold up\". The Archimedean solids with some hexagonal faces are the truncated tetrahedron, truncated octahedron, truncated icosahedron (of soccer ball and fullerene fame), truncated cuboctahedron and the truncated icosidodecahedron. These hexagons can be considered truncated triangles, with Coxeter diagrams of the form and .\nThere are other symmetry polyhedra with stretched or flattened hexagons, like these Goldberg polyhedron G(2,0):\nThere are also 9 Johnson solids with regular hexagons:\nHexagon versus Sexagon.\nThe debate over whether hexagons should be referred to as \"sexagons\" has its roots in the etymology of the term. The prefix \"hex-\" originates from the Greek word \"hex,\" meaning six, while \"sex-\" comes from the Latin \"sex,\" also signifying six. Some linguists and mathematicians argue that since many English mathematical terms derive from Latin, the use of \"sexagon\" would align with this tradition. Historical discussions date back to the 19th century, when mathematicians began to standardize terminology in geometry. However, the term \"hexagon\" has prevailed in common usage and academic literature, solidifying its place in mathematical terminology despite the historical argument for \"sexagon.\" The consensus remains that \"hexagon\" is the appropriate term, reflecting its Greek origins and established usage in mathematics. (see Numeral_prefix#Occurrences).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59734", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59734", "title": "Plane figure", "text": ""}
{"id": "59735", "revid": "1307261337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59735", "title": "Free group", "text": "Mathematics concept\nIn mathematics, the free group \"F\"\"S\" over a given set \"S\" consists of all words that can be built from members of \"S\", considering two words to be different unless their equality follows from the group axioms (e.g. \"st\" = \"suu\"\u22121\"t\" but \"s\" \u2260 \"t\"\u22121 for \"s\",\"t\",\"u\" \u2208 \"S\"). The members of \"S\" are called generators of \"F\"\"S\", and the number of generators is the rank of the free group.\nAn arbitrary group \"G\" is called free if it is isomorphic to \"F\"\"S\" for some subset \"S\" of \"G\", that is, if there is a subset \"S\" of \"G\" such that every element of \"G\" can be written in exactly one way as a product of finitely many elements of \"S\" and their inverses (disregarding trivial variations such as \"st\" = \"suu\"\u22121\"t\").\nA related but different notion is a free abelian group; both notions are particular instances of a free object from universal algebra. As such, free groups are defined by their universal property.\nHistory.\nFree groups first arose in the study of hyperbolic geometry, as examples of Fuchsian groups (discrete groups acting by isometries on the hyperbolic plane). In an 1882 paper, Walther von Dyck pointed out that these groups have the simplest possible presentations. The algebraic study of free groups was initiated by Jakob Nielsen in 1924, who gave them their name and established many of their basic properties. Max Dehn realized the connection with topology, and obtained the first proof of the full Nielsen\u2013Schreier theorem. Otto Schreier published an algebraic proof of this result in 1927, and Kurt Reidemeister included a comprehensive treatment of free groups in his 1932 book on combinatorial topology. Later on in the 1930s, Wilhelm Magnus discovered the connection between the lower central series of free groups and free Lie algebras.\nExamples.\nThe group (Z,+) of integers is free of rank 1; a generating set is \"S\" = {1}. The integers are also a free abelian group, although all free groups of rank formula_1 are non-abelian. A free group on a two-element set \"S\" occurs in the proof of the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox and is described there.\nOn the other hand, any nontrivial finite group cannot be free, since the elements of a free generating set of a free group have infinite order.\nIn algebraic topology, the fundamental group of a bouquet of \"k\" circles (a set of \"k\" loops having only one point in common) is the free group on a set of \"k\" elements.\nConstruction.\nThe free group \"FS\" with free generating set \"S\" can be constructed as follows. \"S\" is a set of symbols, and we suppose for every \"s\" in \"S\" there is a corresponding \"inverse\" symbol, \"s\"\u22121, in a set \"S\"\u22121. Let \"T\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"S\"\u00a0\u222a\u00a0\"S\"\u22121, and define a word in \"S\" to be any written product of elements of \"T\". That is, a word in \"S\" is an element of the monoid generated by \"T\". The empty word is the word with no symbols at all. For example, if \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0{\"a\",\u00a0\"b\",\u00a0\"c\"}, then \"T\"\u00a0=\u00a0{\"a\",\u00a0\"a\"\u22121,\u00a0\"b\",\u00a0\"b\"\u22121,\u00a0\"c\",\u00a0\"c\"\u22121}, and\nformula_2\nis a word in \"FS\".\nIf an element of \"S\" lies immediately next to its inverse, the word may be simplified by omitting the c,\u00a0c\u22121 pair:\nformula_3\nA word that cannot be simplified further is called reduced.\nThe free group \"FS\" is defined to be the group of all reduced words in \"S\", with concatenation of words (followed by reduction if necessary) as group operation. The identity is the empty word.\nA reduced word is called cyclically reduced if its first and last letter are not inverse to each other. Every word is conjugate to a cyclically reduced word, and a cyclically reduced conjugate of a cyclically reduced word is a cyclic permutation of the letters in the word. For instance \"b\"\u22121\"abcb\" is not cyclically reduced, but is conjugate to \"abc\", which is cyclically reduced. The only cyclically reduced conjugates of \"abc\" are \"abc\", \"bca\", and \"cab\".\nUniversal property.\nThe free group \"FS\" is the universal group generated by the set \"S\". This can be formalized by the following universal property: given any function f from \"S\" to a group \"G\", there exists a unique homomorphism \"\u03c6\":\u00a0\"FS\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"G\" making the following diagram commute (where the unnamed mapping denotes the inclusion from \"S\" into \"FS\"):\nThat is, homomorphisms \"FS\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"G\" are in one-to-one correspondence with functions \"S\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"G\". For a non-free group, the presence of relations would restrict the possible images of the generators under a homomorphism.\nTo see how this relates to the constructive definition, think of the mapping from \"S\" to \"FS\" as sending each symbol to a word consisting of that symbol. To construct \"\u03c6\" for the given f, first note that \"\u03c6\" sends the empty word to the identity of \"G\" and it has to agree with f on the elements of \"S\". For the remaining words (consisting of more than one symbol), \"\u03c6\" can be uniquely extended, since it is a homomorphism, i.e., \"\u03c6\"(\"ab\") = \"\u03c6\"(\"a\") \"\u03c6\"(\"b\").\nThe above property characterizes free groups up to isomorphism, and is sometimes used as an alternative definition. It is known as the universal property of free groups, and the generating set \"S\" is called a basis for \"FS\". The basis for a free group is not uniquely determined.\nBeing characterized by a universal property is the standard feature of free objects in universal algebra. In the language of category theory, the construction of the free group (similar to most constructions of free objects) is a functor from the category of sets to the category of groups. This functor is left adjoint to the forgetful functor from groups to sets.\nFacts and theorems.\nSome properties of free groups follow readily from the definition:\nA few other related results are:\nFree abelian group.\nThe free abelian group on a set \"S\" is defined via its universal property in the analogous way, with obvious modifications:\nConsider a pair (\"F\", \"\u03c6\"), where \"F\" is an abelian group and \"\u03c6\": \"S\" \u2192 \"F\" is a function. \"F\" is said to be the free abelian group on \"S\" with respect to \"\u03c6\" if for any abelian group \"G\" and any function \"\u03c8\": \"S\" \u2192 \"G\", there exists a unique homomorphism \"f\": \"F\" \u2192 \"G\" such that\n\"f\"(\"\u03c6\"(\"s\")) = \"\u03c8\"(\"s\"), for all \"s\" in \"S\".\nThe free abelian group on \"S\" can be explicitly identified as the free group F(\"S\") modulo the subgroup generated by its commutators, [F(\"S\"), F(\"S\")], i.e.\nits abelianisation. In other words, the free abelian group on \"S\" is the set of words that are distinguished only up to the order of letters. The rank of a free group can therefore also be defined as the rank of its abelianisation as a free abelian group.\nTarski's problems.\nAround 1945, Alfred Tarski asked whether the free groups on two or more generators have the same first-order theory, and whether this theory is decidable. answered the first question by showing that any two nonabelian free groups have the same first-order theory, and answered both questions, showing that this theory is decidable.\nA similar unsolved (as of 2011) question in free probability theory asks whether the von Neumann group algebras of any two non-abelian finitely generated free groups are isomorphic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59736", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59736", "title": "Spanish Succession War", "text": ""}
{"id": "59737", "revid": "5908908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59737", "title": "Vocal chords", "text": ""}
{"id": "59739", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59739", "title": "Chania", "text": "City in Western Crete, Greece\nChania (, , ), also sometimes romanized as Hania, is a city in Greece and the capital of the Chania regional unit. It lies along the north west coast of the island Crete, about west of Rethymno and west of Heraklion.\nThe municipality has 111,375 inhabitants (2021). This consists of the city of Chania and several nearby areas, including Kounoupidiana, Mournies, Souda, Nerokouros, Daratsos, Perivolia, Galatas and Aroni.\nHistory.\nMinoan era.\nChania was the site of a Minoan settlement, known from Linear B tablets from Knossos as having been named (). The subsequent Greek settlement was likewise known as Cydonia (, \"Kyd\u014dn\u00eda\"), ultimately the source of the English word \"quince\". \nSome notable archaeological evidence for the existence of this Minoan city below some parts of today's Chania was found by excavations in the district of Kasteli in the Old Town. This area appears to have been inhabited since the Neolithic Age.\nAncient Greek and Roman eras.\nCydonia reemerged after the end of the Minoan period as an important city-state in Classical Greece, one whose domain extended from Chania Bay to the feet of the White Mountains. The first major wave of settlers from mainland Greece was by the Dorians who came around 1100 BC. Cydonia was constantly at war with other Cretan city-states such as Aptera, Phalasarna, and Polyrrinia and was important enough for the Cydonians to be mentioned in Homer's \"Odyssey\". In 69 BC, the Roman consul Q. Caecilius Metellus defeated the Cretans and conquered Cydonia, to which he granted the privileges of an independent city-state.\nByzantine and Arab eras.\nCydonia was not well documented in late antiquity or in the early medieval period, when it was first ruled by the Byzantine Empire (395\u2013824) and then by the Emirate of Crete (824\u2013961). The Arabs seem to have begun calling the settlement (), literally \"the Caravanserai\" or \"Inn\" but possibly transcribing the name of a neighborhood previously devoted to the worship of the Minoan god Welchanos. The city had become known as Chania in Greek by the time of the second period of Byzantine rule (961\u20131204). In order to deter another Arab invasion, the Byzantines strongly fortified the city, reusing materials from ancient buildings in the area. Chania was the seat of a Byzantine bishopric, which became the Roman Catholic Diocese of La Canea under Venetian rule and then the Latin titular see of Cydonia.\nVenetian era.\nAfter the fall of Constantinople during the 1204 Fourth Crusade, Crete was distributed to Bonifacio, Marquess of Montferrat. He in turn chose to sell it to the Venetians for 1000 silver marks.\nIn total, about 10,000 Venetians are estimated to have moved to Crete during the first century of Venetian rule\u2014by comparison, Venice itself had a population of c.\u200960,000 at this period. The colonization wave of 1252 also resulted in the establishment of Canea (modern Chania), on the site of the long abandoned ancient city of Kydonia.\nThe Venetian rule was initially strict and oppressive but slowly the relations between the two parts improved. Contact with Venice led to close intertwining of Cretan and Venetian cultures, without, however, the Cretans losing their Greek Orthodox nature. Its fortifications were strengthened, giving Chania the form that it still has today. On the other hand, after the fall of Constantinople in 1453, many priests, monks and artists took refuge in Crete and reinforced the Byzantine religion and culture on the island. The city of Canea during the period that followed was a blend of Byzantine, Venetian, and Classical Greek cultural elements. Many of the important buildings of the town were built during this era and the intellectual activities (written word, music, education) were also promoted.\nOttoman era.\nDuring the opening months of the Cretan War (1645\u20131669) the city's walls did not prevent an Ottoman army from capturing it from the Venetians after a two-month siege. Many Cretans fled to escape persecution, many others were slaughtered or converted to Islam. \nUnder the Ottoman Turkish name Hanya (), Muslims resided mainly in the eastern quarters, Kastelli and Splantzia, where they converted the Dominican church of St Nicholas into the central Sovereign's Mosque (Turkish: \"H\u00fcnkar Cam\u0131s\u0131\"). They also built new mosques such as the K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Hasan Pasha Mosque or Yali Mosque on the harbour. Public baths (hamam), and fountains were a feature of the Ottoman city. The pasha of Crete resided in Hanya.\nThe city remained under Ottoman control despite fighting during the Greek War of Independence (1821-29), the Cretan Revolt (1866\u20131869) and the Cretan Revolt (1878). Due to the island's mixture of Muslim and Christian residents, Crete was the subject of international debate between the European great powers, most notably at the Treaty of Berlin (1878) which resulted in the Pact of Halepa. During the 19th and early 20th century, interethnic violence on Crete eventually led to the mass migration of the island's local Muslim population to other Mediterranean islands or coastal cities. Mass conversions also occurred. The population exchange between Greece and Turkey in 1922 resulted in the deportation of the island's last Muslim residents.\nModern era.\nIn 1898, during the final moves towards independence and \"enosis\"\u2014union with Greece\u2014the Great Powers made Chania the capital of the semi-autonomous Cretan State (), with Prince George of Greece, the High Commissioner of Crete living here. During these years Crete issued its own stamps and money. This was a very important transitional period when, no longer an isolated \"vilayet\" of the Ottoman Empire, the city became more cosmopolitan and flourishing, regaining its role as the crossroad of civilizations, influenced by Europe as well as by the East. Many important buildings were built during this era, intellectual and artistic societies were created and a new class of local aristocracy brought a different atmosphere to the everyday life of the town. The district of Halepa has many fine neoclassical embassies and consulates dating from this period.\nHowever the main goal was \"enosis\" with Greece, which came after Eleftherios Venizelos's constant opposition to Prince George's rule over Crete. The series of conflicts includes the Therisos revolt in 1905, which overthrew Prince George and brought Alexandros Zaimis to rule Crete. Finally, in 1908, Venizelos managed to establish a revolutionary government, recognized by the Great Powers. His later election as the prime minister of Greece (1910) eventually led to Crete's union with Greece on 1 December 1913, following the Balkan Wars. The Greek flag was raised for the first time at Fort Firka in the Old Harbour in the presence of Venizelos and King Constantine.\nDue to the popularity of Venizelos, Chania as with most of Crete remained staunchly pro-Venizelist, pro-Liberal and later pro-Republican in the National Schism and the interwar period. The only attempt to overthrow the monarchist Metaxas Regime occurred in the city with the failed 28 July 1938 uprising.\nWorld War II.\nAnother important period for the city of Chania was the invasion and occupation by German forces during World War II. The British force that faced the German paratroopers during the Battle of Crete in 1941, had artillery elements over the hill of Dexameni in the south of the city. These elements bombarded the German forces in the Maleme airfield undetected, until they ran out of ammunition. George II of Greece stayed in a villa near the village of Perivolia outside Chania before escaping to Egypt. Part of the city was bombed and a significant proportion of the area's population was either executed or imprisoned due to participation in the resistance against the German rule. The Jewish community of Chania was also eliminated during the German occupation. Most of them were transported off the island by the Nazi occupiers in 1944. A British torpedo sank the ship \"Tanais\", which was carrying most of the Jewish prisoners.\nPostwar era.\nThe city of Chania slowly regained its normal pace of development during the 1950s, trying to overcome the difficulties that the war had left in its aftermath. During the 1970s, Crete became a major tourist destination for Greek and international tourists, something that gave a significant boost to the city's economy and affected the everyday life and the overall culture of the locals. The capital of Crete was moved to Heraklion in 1971. \nSince the 1990s, the city of Chania has entered a new era, mainly due to construction and infrastructure such as a new airport, port and educational facilities, and it is considered a prominent tourist resort in the Mediterranean Sea.\nGeography.\nThe city of Chania lies around from the west end of Crete. By road, the distance is approximately .\nCityscape.\nThe city of Chania can be divided into two parts: the old town and the modern city which is the larger one. The old town is situated next to the old harbour and is the matrix around which the whole urban area was developed. It used to be surrounded by the old Venetian fortifications that started to be built in 1538. Of them, only the eastern and western parts have survived. From the south, the old town is continuous with the new, and from the north the physical border is the sea. The centre of the modern city is the area extending next to the old town and especially towards the south.\nThe old town.\nThe borders of the Old Town are the partly destroyed old Venetian wall (and bulwarks) and this has been the cradle of all the civilizations which were developed in the area. The central part of the old town is named Kasteli and has been inhabited since Neolithic times (ancient Kydonia). It is located on a small hill right next to the seafront and has always been the ideal place for a settlement due to its secure position, its location next to the harbour and its proximity to the fertile valley in the south. Nowadays it is a bit more quiet than the neighbouring areas of the west part of the district. The Splantzia quarter (next to the east part of Kasteli) is also largely untouched.\nThe main square of the Old Town (next to the west end of Kasteli) is Eleftherios Venizelos Square, also known as \"Syntrivani\" (from Turkish \"\u015fad\u0131rvan\" 'fountain'). It is the heart of the tourist activities in the area. Next to this (on the west side) lies the Topanas district, which was the Christian quarter during the Ottoman period. Its name comes from the Venetian ammunition warehouse (Turkish \"tophane\"), which was located there. The Jewish quarter (\"Evraiki\" or \"Ovraiki\") was located at the north-west of the Old Town, behind the harbour and within the borders of Topanas. The Topanas area has many narrow alleys and old buildings, some of which have been restored as hotels, restaurants, shops and bars. This makes it a popular place especially during the warm period (April\u2013October). In the winter, it still remains a centre of activities (especially for nightlife).\nFinally, a very distinctive area of the Old Town is the harbour itself and generally the seafront. Akti Tompazi, Akti Kountouriotou and Akti Enoseos (marina) all feature several historical buildings and nightlife. The main street that combines the modern town with the old town is Halidon Street.\nThe modern city.\nThe modern part of Chania is where most locals live and work. It is less traditional than the old town, but there are still areas of some historical interest. \nThe oldest district (early 18th century) of the modern city is Nea Hora (meaning \"New Town\") which is located beyond the west end of the old town. It is a developing area with narrow old lanes leading to a small fishing harbour. \nThe district of Koum Kapi (the Venetians had first named it \"Sabbionara\", which means \"the Gate of the Sand\", the same as \"Koum Kapi\") situated beyond the walls at the eastern part of the old town, was also one of the first places to be inhabited outside the fortification walls. Initially, it was home for the \"Halikoutes\", a group of Bedouins from North Africa who had settled there in the last years of Ottoman rule. Nowadays it is a developing area with many cafes, bars and restaurants on its beach. \nIn the same era the district of Halepa began to grow to the east of the city and used to be home for the local aristocracy. Some of the historical buildings of the area (including old embassies of foreign countries) had been destroyed or abandoned during the later decades of the 20th century, and it was only recently when some interest was shown for the restoration of the remaining ones.\nOther historical buildings in the area include Eleftherios Venizelos's House (built 1876-1880), the old French school (now property of the Technical University of Crete, housing the Department of Architecture), the Church of Agia Magdalini (built 1901-1903), The \"Palace\" (built 1882, house of Prince George during the period of the Cretan independence) and The Church of Evangelistria (built 1908\u20131923). Part of the marine area of Halepa is called Tabakaria, where a unique architectural complex of old leather processing houses is situated.\nApart from the previously mentioned older districts of the modern part of the town, several new residential areas have been developed during the 20th century, like Agios Ioannis, Koumbes, Lentariana, Pachiana and Pasakaki. Sections of the city centre are dominated by colourless medium-height block buildings, typical of the urbanization period of Greece (1950\u20131970). However, there are still some neoclassical houses, especially in the eastern part of Chania. There are some parks and several sports grounds, the most important being the Venizeleio Stadium of Chania and the Swimming Pool at Nea Hora. The 1913 indoor market (\"Agora\"), is on the edge of the old town and is popular with tourists and locals alike. Some other important sites of the newer urban area are The Court House (\"Dikastiria\", built late in the 19th century), the Public Gardens (\"Kipos\", created in 1870), the Garden Clock-Tower (\"Roloi\", built in 1924\u20131927), the Episcopal Residence (Bishop's residence, \"Despotiko\", built in the early 19th century) and the House of Manousos Koundouros (built in 1909), the Cultural Centre (\"Pnevmatiko Kentro\"). The central largest squares in Chania are the Market Square (\"Agora\"), the Court House Square (\"Dikastiria\") and the \"1866 Square\".\nSince the 1990s, there has been a profound movement of Chania residents towards the suburbs, as well as towards areas around the city which used to be rural, mainly around Kounoupidiana in the Akrotiri Peninsula.\nClimate.\nThe city has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"), with sunny dry summers and mild rainy winters. During the period between April and October, clear-sky weather is almost an everyday feature. The atmosphere is always warm, but strong heat waves (temperatures above 38 \u00b0C) are not very common, since the prevailing etesian winds (\"Meltemia\") blow from the Aegean Sea and pleasantly moderate the conditions. Intervals of sunny days are frequent during the windy and rainy winter as well. Snow and frost are rare near the coast, with very few exceptions, like the snowstorm on 13 February 2004, when of snow accumulated in the greater regional area, causing general chaos. The last significant snowfall occurred on 8 January 2017 when the whole city and the old harbor were covered by snow. However, such cold days can be followed by much warmer and sunny weather. Heat waves can occur from as early as March, oftentimes accompanied by Saharan dust, whose main feature are the hot katabatic winds (foehn winds) blowing from the south, also called Sirocco (\u03a3\u03b9\u03c1\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2) or \"Livas\" (the wind from Libya) by the Greeks.\nThe adjacent climate chart is based on data recorded during 1958\u20131997. The absolute maximum temperature recorded during this period was , while the absolute minimum recorded was . \nHowever, the record minimum was broken on 13 February 2004 when the temperature dropped to in the nearby airport of Souda and the record maximum was broken on 1 July 2021 when the temperature reached in the city station operated by the National Observatory of Athens.\nThe climate in Chania is further complemented due to the terrain and can vary throughout its regions and elevations and according to its topography. At the south lies the mountain range of Lefka Ori. Furthermore, prevailing winds, such as those of the West side and South of Crete, in addition to the North side\u2014all interact to form its climate.\nGovernment.\nThe municipality of Chania was formed in the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following seven former municipalities, that became municipal units:\nThe municipality has an area of , the municipal unit . The municipality forms the eastern shore of Chania Bay (Kolpos Chanion \u039a\u03cc\u03bb\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 \u03a7\u03b1\u03bd\u03af\u03c9\u03bd) and is bordered by Platanias (6) to the west, Sfakia (7) to the south and Apokoronas (2) to the east.\nCulture.\nThere are several museums, art galleries, theatre and music groups, educational and research institutions within the city.\nThe most important museums in Chania are:\nSeveral theatre groups are active in Chania with the most important being the Municipal and Regional Theatre of Crete (DI.PE.THE.K). The repertoire includes old and contemporary plays from Greek and foreign writers. A number of traditional [Cretan] musicians are also active in town.\nThere are five cinemas (two of them open-air), concentrating both in commercial and independent movies and occasionally organizing small festivals. \nThere are numerous cafes, restaurants and bars throughout the Old Town and especially around the old Venetian harbour, at Enetiki Tafros (Venetian moat) and at Splantzia square, but also along the waterfront of the Koum Kapi and Nea Hora neighbourhoods. In summer, the bars and restaurants at Platanias and Agia Marina are also busy.\nDuring the summer period, a variety of cultural events take place on a daily basis. Theatrical plays, concerts and several exhibitions from Greek and foreign artists are organized either by the municipality or by individuals. A venue which hosts many of these events is a theater located in the east bulwark of the Old Town (\"Anatoliki Tafros\"). Also, several festivals, conferences and sport events take place in Chania, especially between May and September.\nA major role in the city's cultural life is played by the Municipal Cultural Corporation of Chania (DI.P.E.X.) which organizes a significant part of the events taking place throughout the year.\nThere is a French, a German, an Italian and a Swedish consulate in Chania.\nSports.\nWater sports are very popular in Chania. The local water polo team, Nautical Club of Chania, N.O.X. has managed to be a protagonist in the primary league of the Greek national championship for years. Several athletes of this team have also played for Greece men's national water polo team, which has achieved major international successes.\nFootball and basketball are also very popular in the town, however not as successful. The main football team is Chania FC (whose home ground is the Perivolia Municipal Stadium). Platanias FC (originally based at Maleme stadium near the town of Platanias) played in the top tier Greek Super League between 2012-2013 and 2017-2018. Platanias also played at Perivolia stadium during this period before returning to the smaller Maleme stadium after relegation.\nThe main clubs for athletics are \"Eleftherios Venizelos\" and \"Kydon\". The \"Antisfairisi\" club is specialized in tennis, table tennis and also has a significant tradition in chess. Many of the above sports are being practiced in the old Stadium of Chania, built in 1935 with the financial support of Elena Venizelou, then wife of Eleftherios Venizelos. \nThere is an open swimming pool for water sports in the suburb of Nea Chora. A new indoor pool, which was built on the nearby Akrotiri Peninsula in 2006, has not yet opened to the public because of the estimated operational costs. \nA modern indoor stadium for basketball, volleyball and other indoor sports and events, called Chania Kladissos Indoor Hall, was also built in 2005 near Nea Chora (Kladissos area).\nThere is a very active climbing and hiking club (Greek Mountaineering Club of Chania, E.O.S. Chanion) organizing weekly excursions of varying difficulty on the mountains of Crete and several other longer term missions in mainland Greece and abroad.\nEducation and research.\nEducational institutions located at the greater area of the city are:\nOther research and intellectual institutes and societies in Chania are:\nPrimary and secondary schools are mainly public in Chania (as in all cities in Greece). However, there has been a slow development of some private high schools recently. Among the \"Eniaia Lykeia\" (Unified Upper Secondary Schools) of the town there is an autonomous Ecclesiastical Lyceum in Agios Mattheos.\nEconomy.\nTwo main sources of wealth in Chania are agriculture and tourism. A large portion of the city's residents (not necessarily farmers) own many hectares of agricultural land where several plants are being cultivated, the most common ones being olive trees and citrus. Other important products include wine, avocados, dairy etc. The organization of the Agricultural August has been a recent attempt to promote local quality products including a series of activities organised by the Prefecture of Chania since 1999 has proved very successful.\nOn the other hand, starting from the early 1970s, tourism has developed rapidly. Nowadays the tertiary sector is becoming more and more important for the locals, since an increasing number of them are participating in the business.\nAn important centre of the economic activities in the town is the Chania Chamber of Commerce and Industry (E.B.E.X.).\nChania, has seen notable changes in its luxury residential market, reflecting its growing appeal to affluent tourists and expatriates. According to a report titled \"Chania Construction Market Trends for 2025-2028\" the annual change in luxury residential prices in 2024 for Chania has been significantly increased to 26% compared to 2021. This trend indicates a rising demand for high-end accommodations and properties, further boosting the tourism and real estate sectors.\nHealth care.\nThe main hospital in the city is the General Hospital \"Agios Georgios\". Other health institutions include the Crete Naval Hospital, the branch of the National Centre for Emergency Medical Care (E.K.A.B.), and the Clinic of Chronic Disease. The Chania branch of the Organisation Against Drugs (\u039f.\u039a\u0391.\u039d\u0391.) opened in 2003.\nThe city has a number of private clinics (e.g., Iasis and Central Clinic of Chania), as well as medical centres specialising in various areas.\nTransport.\nThe city is served by Chania International Airport (IATA code: CHQ) 14 km from Chania on the Akrotiri Peninsula. The airport is named after Daskalogiannis, a Sfakiot hero who was skinned alive by the Ottomans in the 18th century.\nSouda, some east of Chania, is the city's port, with daily ferries to Piraeus. Souda also hosts Crete Naval Base, a major Greek and NATO base. Kissamos port, 41 km (25.5 mi) to the west of Chania, has ferry connections to Kythira Island and the Peloponnese region.\nThe A90 motorway runs along the north coast of Crete connecting Chania to Kissamos in the west and Heraklion and Sitia to the east. It is currently being upgraded to motorway standard and is expected to be completed by 2028.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nChania is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59740", "revid": "41521740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59740", "title": "Federal Aviation Regulations", "text": "Rules prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration\nThe Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) are rules prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) governing all aviation activities in the United States. The FARs comprise Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR). A wide variety of activities are regulated, such as aircraft design and maintenance, typical airline flights, pilot training activities, hot-air ballooning, lighter-than-air aircraft, human-made structure heights, obstruction lighting and marking, model rocket launches, commercial space operations, model aircraft operations, unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) and kite flying. The rules are designed to promote safe aviation, protecting pilots, flight attendants, passengers and the general public from unnecessary risk.\nFAR vs. 14 CFR.\nSince 1958, these rules have typically been referred to as \"FARs\", short for Federal Aviation Regulations. However, another set of regulations (Title 48) is titled \"Federal Acquisition Regulations\", and this has led to confusion with the use of the acronym \"FAR\". Therefore, the FAA began to refer to specific regulations by the term \"14 CFR part XX\".\nhttps:// Chapter 3, Section 10 (Using References in the Text of an AC) para. h explains \"\"Do not use the acronym \"FAR\" to refer to FAA regulations. Neither the Department of Transportation nor the Office of the Federal Register allow us to use \"FAR\" for our regulations. The Federal Acquisition Regulations apply government-wide, and we are only allowed to use the acronym \"FAR\" for those regulations.\"\"\n14 CFR overview.\nTitle 14 CFR \u2013 Aeronautics and Space is one of the fifty titles that make up the United States Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 14 is the principal set of rules and regulations (sometimes called administrative law) issued by the Department of Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration, which oversee aeronautics and space.\nContent as of 2018.\nThe table of contents, as reflected in the e-CFR updated December 20, 2018:\nOrganization.\nEach title of the CFR is organized into sections, called \"parts\". Each part deals with a specific type of activity. For example, \"14 CFR Part 141\" contains rules for pilot training schools. The sections most relevant to aircraft pilots and AMTs (Aviation Maintenance Technicians) are listed below. Many of the FARs are designed to regulate certification of pilots, schools, or aircraft rather than the operation of airplanes. Once an airplane design is certified using some parts of these regulations, it is certified regardless of whether the regulations change in the future. For that reason, newer planes are certified using newer versions of the FARs, and in many aspects may be thus considered safer designs.\nRegulations of interest.\nThe FARs have tens of thousands of separate sections, many used by large numbers of researchers on any given day. A few of the regulations particularly relevant to laypersons, to political issues, or of historical interest are listed here.\nPart 1.\nMany other FARs depend on definitions, which are found in Part 1.1\nPart 21.\nThis part prescribes:\nPart 23.\nPart 23 contains airworthiness standards required for issuance and change of type certificates for airplanes in these categories:\nIn 2016 the FAA proposed a new system of performance-based airworthiness standards instead of prescriptive design requirements. The familiar weight and propulsion classifications of small airplane regulations would be replaced by performance and risk-based standards for aircraft weighing less than 19,000 pounds and seating 19 or fewer passengers. On August 30, 2017, a revised Part 23 ruling went into effect, changing the aircraft classifications. The new passenger classifications are: Level 1, seating for 0 to 1 passenger; Level 2, 2 to 6; Level 3, 7 to 9; Level 4, 10 to 19. Speed classifications are: low speed, Vc or Vmo equal to or less than 250 knots CAS and equal to or less than Mmo 0.6 Mach; high speed, Vc or Vmo greater than 250 knots CAS and Mmo greater than 0.6 Mach.\nPrior to August 30, 2017, Part 23 had a large number of regulations to ensure airworthiness in areas such as structural loads, airframe, performance, stability, controllability, and safety mechanisms, how the seats must be constructed, oxygen and air pressurization systems, fire prevention, escape hatches, flight management procedures, flight control communications, emergency landing procedures, and other limitations, as well as testing of all the systems of the aircraft.\nIt also determined special aspects of aircraft performance such as stall speed (e.g., for single engine airplanes \u2013 not more than 61 knots), rate of climb (not less than 300\u00a0ft/min), take-off speed (not less than 1.2 x VS1), and weight of each pilot and passenger (170\u00a0lb for airplanes in the normal and commuter categories, and 190\u00a0lb for airplanes in the acrobatic and utility categories).\nThe Cessna 177, Cirrus SR20 and Piper PA-34 Seneca are well-known airplanes types that were certified to standards set out in FAR Part 23.\nMost of the Federal Aviation Regulations, including Part 23, commenced on February 1, 1965. Prior to that date, airworthiness standards for airplanes in the normal, utility and acrobatic categories were promulgated in Part 3 of the US Civil Air Regulations. Many well-known types of light airplane, like the Cessna 150 and Piper Cherokee are certified to these older standards, even though they remained in production after 1965.\nPart 25.\nThis part contains airworthiness standards for airplanes in the transport category. The Boeing 737 and later types, and Airbus A300 series, are well-known airplane types that were certified according to standards set out in FAR Part 25. Transport category airplanes are either:\nThis Part is organized into six subparts, to specify design criteria for each of\nFor example, Part 25, Subpart D has section headings for\nMost of the Federal Aviation Regulations, including Part 25, commenced on February 1, 1965. Prior to that date, airworthiness standards for airplanes in the transport category were promulgated in Part 4b of the US Civil Air Regulations which was in effect by November 1945. Effective August 27, 1957, Special Civil Air Regulation (SR) 422 was the basis for certification of the first turbine-powered transport airplanes, such as the Boeing 707, the Lockheed Electra, and the Fairchild 27. SR 422A became effective July 2, 1958, and was superseded by SR 422B, effective August 29, 1959. Only a few airplanes were certified under SR 422A, such as the Gulfstream I and the CL-44. First generation turbine-powered transport category airplanes such as the DC-8, DC-9, and B-727, were originally certified under SR 422B. SR 422B was recodified with minor changes to 14 CFR part 25, which became effective February 1965.\nPart 27.\nThis part contains airworthiness standards for rotorcraft in the normal category. Rotorcraft up to 7,000\u00a0lb MTOW and 9 or fewer passengers are type certified in this part.\nExamples of rotorcraft certified in this part are the Robinson R44, Schweizer 300 and the Bell 429.\nPart 29.\nThis part contains airworthiness standards for rotorcraft in the transport category. Rotorcraft with more than MTOW and 10 or more passengers are type certified in this part. Rotorcraft with more than MTOW must be certified to additional Category A standards defined in this part.\nPart 91.\nPart 91 defines a Part 91 Operator. These are the regulations that define the operation of small non-commercial aircraft within the United States, however, many other countries defer to these rules. These rules set conditions, such as weather, under which the aircraft may operate.\nSection 91.3(b).\nThis regulation states that the pilot-in-command is the party directly responsible for, and is the final authority as to, an aircraft being operated.\nAdditionally, this regulation states that in an emergency requiring immediate action, the pilot-in-command may deviate from any regulation contained within Part 91 to the extent required to handle the emergency.\nTemporary flight restrictions.\nThe pertinent sections of the FAR (14 CFR Sections 91.137, 91.138, 91.139, 91.141, 91.143, 91.145, 99.7) describe temporary flight restrictions (TFR). A TFR is a geographically-limited, short-term, airspace restriction, typically in the United States. Temporary flight restrictions often encompass major sporting events, natural disaster areas, air shows, space launches, and Presidential movements. Before the September 11, 2001 attacks, most TFRs were in the interest of safety to flying aircraft with occasional small restrictions for Presidential movements. Since 9/11, TFRs have been routinely used to restrict airspace for 30 nautical miles around the President, with a radius no-fly zone for non-scheduled flights. They are also available to other high-profile figures such as presidential and vice-presidential candidates (though not all do so, as Senator John Kerry, who did not ask for any TFR during the 2004 election).\nTFRs are deeply unpopular with pilots in the general aviation sector. Presidential TFRs are nearly 70 miles in diameter, and frequently close off not only the airport Air Force One is using but nearby airports as well. Others, including the Transportation Security Administration, argue that they are necessary for national security. TFRs can also be instituted for special military operations, such as with the 2023 Chinese balloon incident, where the FAA put into place one of the largest airspace restrictions in U.S. history, with an area approximately twice the size of Massachusetts and more than five times the restricted airspace surrounding Washington, D.C.\nThe responsibility for screening requests for TFR and for subsequent granting or denying them, lies with the FAA's Office of System Operations Security.\nTwo-way radio communications failure.\nSection 91.185 of the Federal Aviation Restrictions deals with loss of radio communications while in flight.\nIf a loss of radio communications were to be encountered during VFR conditions, or if VFR conditions are encountered after loss of communication with the ground and other aircraft, the pilot of the aircraft shall continue the flight under VFR and land as soon as practicable.\nIf, however, the failure occurs in IFR conditions and/or the VFR conditions are not forthcoming, the pilot should continue under the following conditions:\n* Route \u2013 The pilot will follow:\n* The route assigned in the last contact with ATC before loss of communication, or, if being radar vectored, continue direct to the radar fix specified in the vector clearance;\n* In the absence of an assigned route, the pilot will follow the route advised by ATC;\n* In the absence of an ATC assigned or advised route, the pilot will follow the route set down in the flight plan.\n* Altitude \u2013 The pilot will continue at the highest of the following altitudes or flight levels:\n* The altitude assigned in the last contact with ATC before loss of communication;\n* The minimum altitude for IFR operations;\n* The altitude advised by ATC to be expected in a further clearance.\nPrivate, commuter, and commercial operations.\nFor all pilots, there is an important distinction in the parts that address classes of flight. These parts do not distinguish type of aircraft, but rather type of activity done with the aircraft. Regulations for commuter and commercial aviation are far more intensive than those for general aviation, and specific training is required. Hence, flights are often referred to as \"Part XX operations\", to specify which one of the different sets of rules applies in a particular case. Also, flight schools will often designate themselves as \"Part 61\" or \"Part 141\" to distinguish between different levels of training and different study programs they could offer to the students.\nPart 61 is certification for all pilots, flight instructors, and ground instructors.\nPart 63 is certification for flight crewmembers other than pilots; such as flight engineers and flight navigators.\nPart 65 is certification for airmen other than flight crewmembers; such as Air Traffic Control Tower Operators, Aircraft Dispatchers, Mechanics, Repairmen and Parachute Riggers.\nPart 91 is general operating rules for all aircraft. General aviation flights are conducted under this part. Part 91, Subpart (K) prescribes operating rules for fractional ownership programs.\nPart 107 (FAA sUAS Part 107) specifies regulations to fly under the Small UAS Rule, or small unmanned aircraft systems in the National Airspace System (NAS). Small unmanned aircraft systems (sUAS) are those that weigh less than 55 pounds.\nPart 117 specifies flight and duty-time limitations and rest requirements for flightcrew members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Part 121 defines regularly scheduled air carriers. These are airlines who operate scheduled flights carrying either cargo or more than nine passengers. Among the many Part 121 rules, pilots must have 1,500 hours of flight time and must retire by age 65.\nPart 133 is external load (helicopter) operations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Part 135 defines commuter and charter-type air carriers. These airlines can fly scheduled operations with aircraft with up to nine passengers (commuter flights), or they can fly on-demand, unscheduled air service for freight or with up to 30 passengers (charter flights). The Part 135 rules for pilots are less onerous, compared to Part 121: only 250 hours of flight time are required for a pilot to serve as first officer on a Part 135 flight and pilots are not subject to a mandatory retirement age. Additionally, Part 135 operators have lower TSA screening requirements for passengers. Part 135 operators may not sell individual seats on charter flights. Applicants for a Part 135 certificate must have exclusive use of at least one aircraft.\nPart 141 is a more structured method for pilot training, based on FAA syllabus and other standards.\nMaintenance.\nPart 21 is certification procedures for products and parts.\nPart 39 is airworthiness directives.\nPart 43 is maintenance, preventive maintenance, rebuilding, and alteration.\nPart 145 contains the rules a certificated repair station must follow as well as any person who holds, or is required to hold, a repair station certificate issued under this part.\nPublic charter operations.\nPart 380 governs public charter operators. These companies arrange flights on certified airlines (Part 121 or 135) but then sell individual seats on those flights directly to the public. Unlike the airlines they partner with, Part 380 operators do not operate the aircraft themselves. Historically, this business model has been used by tour operators and casinos to offer occasional flights between smaller cities and popular leisure destinations. However, more recently, the Part 380 rules have also seen some creative applications.\nIn 2016, JSX began scheduling flights and selling tickets on flights operated by a Part 135 certificated airline (owned by the same parent company). This essentially allowed them to function as a scheduled air carrier (typically under Part 121 rules) while adhering to the less stringent Part 135 regulations. This enabled JSX to operate from fixed-base operator terminals, offering a more exclusive, private jet-like experience for their customers.\nOther air carriers, including Advanced Air, Contour Airlines and Southern Airways Express, have also adopted similar strategies using Part 380. This approach allows them to offer more economical service to smaller cities participating in the Essential Air Service program, a government-backed initiative that subsidizes air service to under-served communities.\nSeveral airlines and labor unions are opposed to these \"creative\" applications of Part 380, calling it a \"loophole\" that permits these companies to skirt the Part 121 rules others must follow. As of 2024[ [update]], the FAA is considering revisions to Part 380 regulations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59741", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59741", "title": "Heraklion", "text": "City in Crete, Greece\nHeraklion, Herakleion ( ; , , , not to be mistaken with Heracleion, Egypt) or Iraklion, is the largest city and the administrative capital of the island of Crete and capital of Heraklion regional unit. It is the fourth largest city in Greece, and the largest city in the Greek islands, with a municipal population of 179,302 (2021) and 211,370 in its wider metropolitan area, according to the 2011 census.\nThe greater area of Heraklion has been continuously inhabited since at least 7000 BCE, making it one of the oldest inhabited regions in Europe. It is also home to the ancient Knossos Palace, a major center of the Minoan civilization dating back to approximately 2000-1350 BCE, often considered Europe's oldest city. The palace is one of the most significant archaeological sites in Greece, second only to the Parthenon in terms of visitor numbers.\nHeraklion was Europe's fastest growing tourism destination for 2017, according to Euromonitor, with an 11.2% growth in international arrivals. According to the ranking, Heraklion was ranked as the 20th most visited region in Europe, as the 66th area on the planet and as the 2nd in Greece for the year 2017, with 3.2 million visitors and the 19th in Europe for 2018, with 3.4 million visitors.\nEtymology.\nThe name Herakleion (\u0397\u03c1\u03ac\u03ba\u03bb\u03b5\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd) is derived from an ancient port of Heracleium that served as the harbour for Knossos. The port, bearing the same name, was named in honour of the hero Heracles (Hercules). In antiquity, it was located about 20 stadia (approximately 3.7 kilometers) from Knossos. Strabo also confirms the connection between the two.\nThe site of the ancient port falls within the boundaries of the modern city, near today\u2019s port area. Although ecclesiastical records do not list it as a bishopric, a bishop named Theodoros of Heracleopolis is mentioned at the Second Council of Nicaea.\nThe name was revived in the 19th century and was in use by locals as early as 1867.\nOther names.\n1. \"In antiquity\": The area that would later become the city of Heraklion served as the port for the ancient city of Knossos, one of the centers of the Minoan civilization. This strategic location facilitated trade and communication across the Mediterranean. Over time, as Knossos declined, the port area grew in significance, eventually becoming a prominent urban center.\n2. \"Rab\u1e0d al-\u1e2bandaq\" (\u0631\u0628\u0636 \u0627\u0644\u062e\u0646\u062f\u0642): In 824 CE, Arab exiles from al-Andalus (Iberia) who conquered Crete and founded the Emirate of Crete moved the island's capital from Gortyna to a new castle they called \"rab\u1e0d al-\u1e2bandaq\" (\"Castle of the Moat\").\n3. \"Ch\u00e1ndax\" (\u03a7\u03ac\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1\u03be) / \"Ch\u00e1ndakas\" (\u03a7\u03ac\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1\u03ba\u03b1\u03c2): The Arabic name \"rab\u1e0d al-\u1e2bandaq\" was Hellenized to \u03a7\u03ac\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1\u03be (\"Ch\u00e1ndax\") or \u03a7\u03ac\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1\u03ba\u03b1\u03c2 (\"Ch\u00e1ndakas\").\n4. \"Candia\": This name, derived from \"Ch\u00e1ndax,\" was Latinized as \"Candia\" and adopted into other European languages: in Italian and Latin as \"Candia\", in Spanish as \"Cand\u00eda\", in French as \"Candie\", and in English as \"Candy\". These names could refer to the island of Crete as a whole as well as to the city alone; the Ottoman name for the city was \"Kandiye\".\n5. \"Megalo Kastro\" (\u039c\u03b5\u03b3\u03ac\u03bb\u03bf \u039a\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf): After the Byzantine reconquest of Crete, the city was locally known as \"Megalo Kastro\" (, 'Big Castle' in Greek) and its inhabitants were called \"Kastrinoi\" (\u039a\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03af, \"castle-dwellers\").\nHistory.\nMinoan era.\nHeraklion is home to the ruins of the palace of Knossos, located in the southern periphery of the city and part of the Heraklion municipality. In Minoan times, Knossos was the largest centre of population on Crete and is considered by many to be the oldest city in Europe.\nKnossos itself had a port at the site of Heraklion (in the modern area of Poros-Katsambas neighborhood) from the beginning of the Early Minoan period (3500 to 2100 BC).\nAntiquity.\nAfter the fall of the Minoans, Heraklion, as well as the rest of Crete in general, fared poorly, with very little development in the area. Only with the arrival of the Romans did some construction in the area begin, yet especially early into Byzantine times the area abounded with pirates and bandits.\nEmirate of Crete.\nHeraklion was chosen as capital in 824, with fortifications starting being built the following year, by the Moors under Abu Hafs Umar who had been expelled from Al-Andalus by Emir Al-Hakam I and had taken over the island from the Eastern Roman Empire. They built a moat around the city for protection, and named the city \"rab\u1e0d al-\u1e2bandaq\" (\u0631\u0628\u0636 \u0627\u0644\u062e\u0646\u062f\u0642, \"Castle of the Moat\", hellenized as \u03a7\u03ac\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1\u03be, \"Chandax\"). It became the capital of the Emirate of Crete (c.\u2009827\u2013961). The Saracens allowed the port to be used as a safe haven for pirates who operated against Imperial (Byzantine) shipping and raided Imperial territory around the Aegean.\nByzantine era.\nIn 960, Byzantine forces under the command of Nikephoros Phokas, later to become Emperor, landed in Crete and attacked the city. After a prolonged siege, the city fell in March 961. The Saracen inhabitants were slaughtered, the city looted and burned to the ground. Soon rebuilt, the town remained under Byzantine control for the next 243 years.\nVenetian era.\nIn 1204, the city was bought by the Republic of Venice as part of a complicated political deal which involved, among other things, the Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade restoring the deposed Eastern Roman Emperor Isaac II Angelus to his throne. The Venetians improved on the ditch of the city by building enormous fortifications, most of which are still in place, including a giant wall, in places up to thick, with seven bastions, and a fortress in the harbour. Chandax was renamed \"Candia\" and became the seat of the Duke of Candia, and the Venetian administrative district of Crete became known as \"Regno di Candia\" (Kingdom of Candia). The city retained the name of Candia for centuries and the same name was often used to refer to the whole island of Crete as well. To secure their rule, the Venetians began in 1212 to settle families from Venice on Crete. The coexistence of two different cultures and the stimulus of the Italian Renaissance led to a flourishing of letters and the arts in Candia and Crete in general, that is today known as the \"Cretan Renaissance\".\nOttoman era.\nDuring the Cretan War (1645\u20131669), the Ottomans besieged the city for 21 years, from 1648 to 1669, the longest siege in history up until that time. In its final phase, which lasted for 22 months, 70,000 Turks, 38,000 Cretans and slaves and 29,088 of the city's Christian defenders perished. The Ottoman army under an Albanian grand vizier, K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc Faz\u0131l Ahmed Pasha conquered the city in 1669.\nUnder the Ottomans, \"Kandiye\" (Ottoman Turkish \u0642\u0646\u062f\u064a\u0647) was the capital of Crete (\"Girit Ey\u00e2leti\") until 1849, when Chania (\"Hanya\") became the capital, and Kandiye became a sancak. In Greek, it was commonly called \"Megalo Castro\" (\u039c\u03b5\u03b3\u03ac\u03bb\u03bf \u039a\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf 'Big Castle').\nDuring the Ottoman period, the harbour silted up, so most shipping shifted to Chania in the west of the island.\nModern era.\nAn earthquake located off the northern coast of Crete on October 12, 1856, destroyed most of the over 3,600 homes in the city. Only 18 homes were left intact. The disaster claimed 538 victims in Heraklion.\nIn 1898, the autonomous Cretan State was created, under Ottoman suzerainty, with Prince George of Greece as its High Commissioner and under international supervision. During the period of direct occupation of the island by the Great Powers (1898\u20131908), Candia was part of the British zone. At this time the ancient name of \"Heraklion\" was revived.\nIn 1913, with the rest of Crete, Heraklion was incorporated into the Kingdom of Greece. Heraklion was severely damaged in the bombing campaign in May 1941 during the German invasion in the Battle of Crete. The city remained under German rule until 1945. Heraklion again became capital of Crete in 1971, replacing Chania. The city, and Crete generally, became a major tourist destination from the 1980s onwards.\nArchitecture, urban sculpture and fortifications.\nThe oldest monument of architecture is the palace in Knossos on the outskirts of the city.\nTwo largest medieval churches in the city were the Dominican church of St. Peter (built between 1248 and 1253) and the San Salvatore, belonging to the Augustinian Friars. The latter one stood in Kornaros Square, but was demolished in 1970.\nOther monuments of architecture from Venetian times include the Saint Mark's Basilica and the Renaissance loggia next to Lions Square (1626\u201328).\nAround the historic city center of Heraklion there are also a series of defensive walls, bastions and other fortifications which were built earlier in the Middle Ages, but were completely rebuilt by the Republic of Venice. The fortifications managed to withstand the longest siege in history for 21 years, before the city fell to the Ottomans in 1669. The Koules Fortress (\"Castello a Mare\"), the ramparts and the arsenal dominate the port area.\nMany fountains of the Venetian era are preserved, such as the \"Bembo\" fountain, the \"Priuli\" fountain, \"Palmeti\" fountain, \"Sagredo\" fountain and \"Morosini\" fountain in Lions Square (1628).\nArchitecture from the 19th century is represented by the St Titus Cathedral, built in 1869 as the Yeni Cami (\"New Mosque\"), and the Agios Minas Cathedral (1862\u201395).\nAn example of modern architecture in Heraklion is the Heraklion Archaeological Museum built between 1937 and 1940 by architect Patroklos Karantinos.\nSeveral sculptures, statues and busts commemorating significant events and figures of the city's and island's history, like El Greco, Vitsentzos Kornaros, Nikos Kazantzakis and Eleftherios Venizelos can be found around the city.\nMunicipality.\nThe municipality Heraklion was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following 5 former municipalities, that became municipal units:\nThe municipality has an area of 244.613\u00a0km2, the municipal unit 109.026\u00a0km2.\nTransportation.\nPort.\nHeraklion is an important shipping port and ferry dock. Travellers can take ferries and boats from Heraklion to destinations including Santorini, Ios Island, Paros, Mykonos, and Rhodes. There are direct ferries to Naxos, Karpathos, Kasos, Sitia, Anafi, Chalki and Diafani. There are also several daily ferries to Piraeus, the port of Athens in mainland Greece. The port of Heraklion was built by Sir Robert McAlpine and completed in 1928.\nAirport.\nHeraklion International Airport, or Nikos Kazantzakis Airport is located about east of the city. The airport is named after Heraklion native Nikos Kazantzakis, a writer and a philosopher. It is the second busiest airport of Greece after Athens International Airport, first in charter flights and the 59th busiest in Europe, because of Crete being a major holiday destination with 8,066,000 passengers in 2022 (List of the busiest airports in Europe).\nThe airfield is shared with the 126th Combat Group of the Hellenic Air Force.\nHighway network.\nEuropean route E75 runs through the city and connects Heraklion with the three other major cities of Crete: Agios Nikolaos, Chania, and Rethymno.\nPublic transit.\nUrban buses serve the city, with 39 different routes. Intercity buses connect Heraklion to many major destinations in Crete.\nRailway.\nFrom 1922 to 1937, a working industrial railway connected the Koules in Heraklion to Xiropotamos for the construction of the harbor.\nIn the summer of 2007, at the Congress of Cretan emigrants held in Heraklion, two engineers, George Nathenas and Vassilis Economopoulos, recommended the development of a railway line in Crete, linking Chania, Rethymno, and Heraklion. No official plans exist for implementing this idea.\nClimate.\nHeraklion has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification). Summers are warm to hot and dry with clear skies. Dry hot days are often relieved by seasonal breezes. Winters are mild with moderate rain. Because Heraklion is further south than Athens, it has a warmer climate during winter but cooler during summer because of the Aegean Sea. The maximum temperature during the summer period is usually not more than 28 - 30\u00a0\u00b0C (Athens normal maximum temperature is about 5\u00a0\u00b0C higher). The minimum temperature record is -0.8\u00a0\u00b0C in the airport while in the port it has never dropped below 0\u00a0\u00b0C. Snowfalls are rare with the last significant snowfall with a measurable amount on the ground occurring in February 2004. Heraklion falls in 11a hardiness zone.\nCulture.\nArts.\nThe Cultural and Conference Center of Heraklion is a centre for the performing arts.\nSports.\nThe city is home to several sports clubs. Most notably, Heraklion hosts OFI and Ergotelis, two football clubs with earlier presence in the Greek Superleague, the top tier of the Greek football league system. Furthermore, the city is the headquarters of the Heraklion Football Clubs Association, which administers football in the entire region. Other notable sport clubs include Iraklio B.C. (basketball), Atsalenios (football) and Irodotos (football) in the suburbs of \"Atsalenio\" and Nea Alikarnassos respectively.\nNotable people.\nHeraklion has been the home town of some of Greece's most significant people, including the novelist Nikos Kazantzakis (best known for \"Zorba the Greek\"), the poet and Nobel Prize winner Odysseas Elytis and the world-famous painter Domenicos Theotokopoulos (El Greco).\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nHeraklion is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59742", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59742", "title": "Menorca", "text": "Island in Spain\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Carthage 4th century BC\u2013 201 BC\n Roman Republic 123 BC\u201327 BC\nRoman Empire 27 BC\u2013455\nVandal Kingdom 455\u2013534\nByzantine Empire 534\u2013628\nUmayyad state of C\u00f3rdoba 903\u20131015\nTaifa of D\u00e9nia 1015\u20131076\nTaifa of Majorca 1076\u20131115\nAlmoravid Dynasty 1115\u20131158\nTaifa of Majorca 1158\u20131203\nAlmohad Dynasty 1203\u20131229\n Crown of Aragon (Taifa of Menorca) 1229/1231\u20131287\n Crown of Aragon 1287\u20131298\n Kingdom of Mallorca 1298\u20131343\n Crown of Aragon 1343\u20131708\n Kingdom of Great Britain 1708\u20131756\n Kingdom of France 1756\u20131763\n Kingdom of Great Britain 1763\u20131782\n Kingdom of Spain 1782\u20131798\n Kingdom of Great Britain 1798\u20131800\n United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 1801\u20131802\n Kingdom of Spain 1802\u20131808\n Kingdom of Spain 1813\u20131931\n Second Spanish Republic 1931\u20131939\n Spanish State 1939\u20131978\n Spain 1978\u2013present\n \u00a0Balearic Islands 1983\u2013present\nMenorca or Minorca (from , later \"Minorica\") is one of the Balearic Islands located in the Mediterranean Sea belonging to Spain. Its name derives from its size, contrasting it with nearby Mallorca (Majorca). Its capital is Ma\u00f3, situated on the island's eastern end, although Menorca is not a province and forms a political union with the other islands in the archipelago. Ciutadella and Ma\u00f3 are the main ports and largest towns.\nPer the Census of 1 January 2025, Menorca had a population of 102,477. Its highest point, a hill in the middle of the island named El Toro (from Catalan \"tur\u00f3\" meaning \"hill\"), is above sea level.\nHistory.\nThe island is known for its collection of megalithic stone monuments: \"navetes\", \"taules\" and \"talaiots\", which indicate very early prehistoric human activity. Some of the earliest culture on Menorca was influenced by other Mediterranean cultures, including the Greek Minoans of ancient Crete (see also Gymnesian Islands). For example, the use of inverted plastered timber columns at Knossos is thought to have influenced early peoples of Menorca in imitating this practice.\nThe end of the Punic Wars saw an increase in piracy in the western Mediterranean. The Roman occupation of Hispania had meant a growth of maritime trade between the Iberian and Italian peninsulas. Pirates took advantage of the strategic location of the Balearic Islands to raid Roman commerce, using both Menorca and Mallorca as bases. In reaction to this, the Romans invaded Menorca. By 123 BC, both islands were fully under Roman control, later being incorporated into the province of Hispania Citerior.\nIn 13 BC, Roman emperor Augustus reorganised the provincial system and the Balearic Islands became part of the Tarraconensis imperial province. The ancient town of Mago (Mah\u00f3n) was transformed from a Carthaginian to a Roman town.\nJews of Menorca.\nThe island had a Jewish population. The \"Letter on the Conversion of the Jews\" by a fifth-century bishop named Severus tells of the forced conversion of the island's 540 Jewish men and women in AD 418. Several Jews, including Theodore, a rich representative Jew who stood high in the estimation of his coreligionists and of Christians alike, underwent baptism. The act of conversion brought about, within a previously peaceful coexisting community, the expulsion of the ruling Jewish elite into the bleak hinterlands, the burning of synagogues, and the gradual reinstatement of certain Jewish families after the forced acceptance of Christianity, allowing the survival of those Jewish families who had not already perished. Many Jews secretly retained their Jewish faith while outwardly professing Christian beliefs. Some of these Jews form part of the Xueta community.\nWhen Menorca became a British possession in 1713, they actively encouraged the immigration of foreign non-Catholics, which included Jews who were not accepted by the predominantly Christian inhabitants. When the Jewish community in Mahon requested the use of a room as a synagogue, their request was refused, and they were denounced by the clergy. In 1781, when Louis des Balbes de Berton de Crillon, duc de Mahon invaded Menorca, he ordered all Jews to leave in four days. At that time, the Jewish community consisted of about 500 people and they were transported from Menorca in four Spanish ships to the port of Marseille.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Vandals easily conquered the island in the fifth century. The Byzantine Empire recovered it in 534. Following the Umayyad conquest of Hispania, Menorca was annexed to the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba in 903, with many Muslims emigrating to the island.\n\"Man\u00fbrqa\" () was the Arabicized name given to the island by the Muslims from its annexation to the Caliphate of Cordoba by 'Is\u00e2m al-Khawl\u00e2n\u00ee in 903 until the rule of the last Muslim ra'\u00ees, Ab\u00fb 'Umar ibn Sa'\u00eed in 1287. The only urban centre of the island was \"Mad\u00eenat al Jaz\u00eera\" or \"al Man\u00fbrqa\" (modern Ciutadella). Most of the population lived in small farm communities organized under a tribal structure.\nIn 1231, after Christian forces took Mallorca, Menorca chose to become an independent Islamic state, albeit one tributary to King James I of Aragon. The island was ruled first by Ab\u00fb 'Uthm\u00e2n Sa'\u00eed Hakam al Qurashi (1234\u20131282), and following his death by his son, Ab\u00fb 'Umar ibn Sa'\u00eed (1282\u20131287).\nA Catalan-Aragonese invasion, led by Alfonso III (also known as Count of Barcelona Alfons II), came on 17 January 1287; its anniversary is now celebrated as Menorca's national day. Once the island was captured, most of its Muslim inhabitants were enslaved and sold in the slave markets of Eivissa, Valencia and Barcelona, while others became Christians.\nAfter the Christian conquest of 1287, the island was part of the Crown of Aragon. For some time it was ceded to the Kingdom of Mallorca, a vassal state of the Crown, but it was retaken by the king of Aragon in 1343. Eventually the Crown of Aragon merged with the Crown of Castile, and so Menorca became part of Spain.\nDuring the 16th century, Turkish naval attacks destroyed Mahon, and the then capital, Ciutadella. In Mahon, Barbary pirates from North Africa took considerable booty and as many as 6,000 slaves. Various Spanish kings, including Philip III and Philip IV, styled themselves \"King of Minorca\" as a subsidiary title.\nBritish rule.\nAnglo-Dutch forces captured Menorca in 1708 during the War of the Spanish Succession. The island became a British possession and was formally ceded to Great Britain by Spain in the 1713 Peace of Utrecht. Governed by a succession of British Army officers, during the period of British rule Menorca's capital was moved to Mah\u00f3n and a Royal Navy base established in the town's harbour. Menorca remained a British possession until 1756, when French forces captured it during the Seven Years' War after repulsing a British relief attempt. However, Britain's victory in the war led the island to be ceded back to them in the 1763 Treaty of Paris. In 1782, Franco-Spanish forces captured the island during the American Revolutionary War, and Britain ceded the island back to Spain in the 1783 Peace of Paris. The British once again captured Menorca in 1798 during the French Revolutionary Wars, though they ceded it back to Spain in 1802 Treaty of Amiens.\nRenewed Spanish rule.\nAs with the rest of the Balearic Islands, Menorca was not occupied by the French during the Peninsular War, as it was successfully protected by the Royal Navy, this time allied to Spain.\nA quarantine station (lazaretto), Llatzaret (Catalan), was constructed from 1793 to 1807 next to the entrance to the Port Mahon. It served ships from North Africa wishing to reach the Iberian Peninsula or the ports of the Balearic Islands. Lazarettos confined the crews of ships that were suspected of carrying infectious diseases, such as the plague. The crew needed to spend up to 40 days within its walls until it was clear there was no infection or until the sick recovered. It is now a national monument and can only be reached as part of an official tour.\nFrom 1815 until the mid-19th century, the U.S. Navy developed its Mediterranean headquarters at Port Mahon, leaving behind the English Cemetery, which was restored by the Spanish government in 2008 and is maintained in the 21st century.\nSince 1900.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, Menorca stayed loyal to the Second Spanish Republic, while the rest of the Balearic Islands supported the Spanish Nationalists. The island did not see ground combat, but it was a target of aerial bombing by the pro-Nationalist Italian Corpo Truppe Volontarie. Many Menorcans were also killed when taking part in a failed invasion of Mallorca. During the Pedro Marqu\u00e9s Barber era (July\u2013December 1936) some Mallorcans and a priest were executed on the island. After the Nationalist victory in the Battle of Minorca in February 1939, the Royal Navy assisted in a peaceful transition of power in Menorca and the evacuation of some political refugees aboard .\nIn October 1993, Menorca was designated by UNESCO as a biosphere reserve. In July 2005, the island's application to become the 25th member of the International Island Games Association was approved.\nClimate.\nAs the major part of Balearic Islands, Menorca has a mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"), with mild winters and hot summers. Menorca is generally wetter than Mallorca, with rainfall peaking in late autumn. Average annual highs range between in winter to in summer. Due to its offshore position and the small size of the island, temperatures are generally quite stable.\nCulture.\nThe location of Menorca in the middle of the western Mediterranean was a staging point for the different cultures since prehistoric times. This Balearic Island has a mix of colonial and local architecture.\nThe \"festes\" take place throughout the summer in different towns around the island, and have their origins in the early 14th century. The international opera week and international organ festival in Mah\u00f3n, and the summer music festival and Capella Davidica concerts in Ciutadella are the main events of the island.\nMenorca's cuisine is dominated by the Mediterranean diet, which is known to be very healthy. While many of the locals have adopted modern attitudes they still uphold certain old traditions.\nTraditional celebrations.\nMenorca is especially well known for its traditional summer \"festes\", which intrigue many visitors. The Saint John's Feast is held annually in Ciutadella de Menorca, during 23\u201325 June. The festes last for three days. On the first day, a man bears a well-groomed sheep upon his shoulders and parades around the local streets. In the late evening, main streets are closed, and bonfires held upon them.\nOn the second day, locally bred black horses are dressed with ribbons and rosettes. The riders, or \"caixers\", ride the horses through the streets and, along with a tumultuous crowd of people, encourage them to rear up on their hind legs. The brave can be found running underneath them in an attempt to touch the horses hearts for good luck. \nThe third day sees intense competition between the riders in a harmless form of jousting that involves spearing a suspended ring with a lance at considerable speed. The festes are brought to a close with a firework display.\nSports.\nAs a small island, Menorca offers limited opportunities to see top-level sport competitions. Football in Menorca is played at the fifth level of the Spanish football pyramid. There are currently 11 clubs contesting the Regional Preferente de Menorca, the champion of which progresses to the Tercera Divisi\u00f3n Grupo XI playoffs. The winner of this playoff is promoted to Tercera Divisi\u00f3n; the last Menorqu\u00ed club to do so was CF Sporting Mahon\u00e9s in 2009.\nCV Ciutadella are a professional women's volleyball club who play in the Superliga Femenina, the top league of Spanish volleyball, having won the league championship in 2011 and 2012. They play at Pavell\u00f3 Municipal d'Esports in Ciutadella.\nA semi-professional basketball club, CB Menorca, play in the LEB Plata, the third level of Spanish basketball. Their home court is Pavell\u00f3 Menorca in the Bintaufa neighborhood just outside of Ma\u00f3.\nIn recent years, some sporting events that gather hundreds of participants have been successfully held on a yearly basis, such as the triathlon race Extreme Man Menorca and the single-staged ultramarathon race Trail Menorca Cam\u00ed de Cavalls. In 2014, it was announced that the island would host the 18th editions of the Island Games in 2019; however, Menorca later pulled out of hosting the event, citing a change of government as the main reason.\nLanguage.\nThe two official languages are Catalan and Spanish. Natives to the island speak the variety of Catalan called \"Menorqu\u00ed\", and Spanish as well; many residents originating from the mainland are monolingual in Spanish. The language of education and of government is Catalan, with Spanish taught alongside it.\nA 2014 survey carried out by the government of the Balearic Islands found that 53.5% of participants identified themselves as Catalan speakers, 36.7% as Spanish speakers, and 7.7% as bilingual speakers.\nThe most distinctive difference between \"Menorqu\u00ed\" and standard Catalan, as with most Balearic dialects, is the word used for the article \"the\", where \"Menorqu\u00ed\" uses \"es\" for masculine and \"sa\" for feminine. Menorqu\u00ed thus shares the source of its article with many Sardinian varieties (masc. sing. \"su\", fem sing. \"sa\"), rather than the standard Catalan \"el\" and \"la\", similar to other Romance languages (e.g. Spanish \"el\", \"la\", Italian \"il\", \"la\"), corresponding to a form which was historically used along the Costa Brava of Catalonia, from where it is supposed that the islands were repopulated after being conquered from the Moors.\nMenorqu\u00ed also has a few English loan words dating back to the period of British rule, such as \"grevi\", \"xumaquer\", \"boinder\" and \"xoc\" taken from \"gravy\", \"shoemaker\", \"bow window\" and \"chalk\", respectively.\nFood and drink.\nWine production has been known on the island since ancient times, but it went into a heavy decline over the last century. Now, several new, small wineries have started up, producing wines locally.\nLingering British influence is seen in the Menorcans' taste for gin, which during local \"festes\" honoring towns' patron saints is mixed with lemonade (or bitter lemon) to make a golden liquid known as \"Pomada\". Gin from Menorca (known as Gin de Minorca or Gin de Mah\u00f3n)\nis not derived from grain alcohol but from wine alcohol (eau de vie de vin), making it more akin to brandy. It has the distinction to have geographical identity protection. Probably the best known gin is Gin Xoriguer which is named after the typical Menorcan windmill which was used to make the first gin.\nMayonnaise is thought to take its name from the capital of the island. According to this theory, it was first prepared by a French chef in 1756 as part of a victory feast after the capture of Port Mahon, Minorca. In those days, sauces were prepared by combining cream and eggs. The French chef needed cream to prepare a sauce, but there was none to be found. He therefore replaced it with olive oil, creating mayonnaise. The word \u2018mayonnaise\u2019 is the French for \u2018mahonesa\u2019, meaning from or belonging to Mah\u00f3n (\u2018Mahon\u2019 in French).\nAlso famous is Mah\u00f3n cheese, \"formatge de Ma\u00f3\", typical of the island.\nSweets known as flaons are one of the typical gastronomic products of Menorca.\nWildlife.\nFlowers.\nMenorca is rich in wild flowers with over 900 species of flowering plants recorded. Many are those typical of the Mediterranean, but some are endemic. There are 24 or 25 species of orchid found and of these most flower early in the year in late March, April and May.\nInsects.\n30 species of butterflies have been recorded on Menorca and most are on the wing from March to late September. The species that occur include the Cleopatra, Lang's short tailed blue and the two-tailed pasha.\nDespite not having many large wetlands dragonflies abound on Menorca. Seventeen species have been recorded including the emperor dragonfly.\nReptiles and amphibians.\nThere are three species of amphibians: green toad (\"Bufo viridis\"), marsh frog and stripeless tree frog (\"Hyla meridionalis\").\nThe common lizard seen all over the island is the Italian wall lizard (\"Podarcis siculus\") although the Moroccan rock lizard (\"Scelaris perspicillata\") also occurs. The Balearic endemic Lilford's wall lizard (\"Podarcis lilfordi\") can be found on many of the offshore islands. Two species of gecko can be found on Menorca, the Moorish (\"Tarentola mauritanica\") and the Turkish (\"Hemidactylus turcicus\") also called the Mediterranean house gecko.\nFour species of snake occur: the viperine snake (\"Natrix maura\"), grass snake, false smooth snake (\"Macroprotodon cucullatus\") and the ladder snake (\"Rhinechis scalaris\").\nHermann's tortoise (\"Testudo hermanni\") is quite common and can be found all over the island. Two terrapin species are also found, the native European pond terrapin (\"Emys orbicularis\") and the introduced American red-eared slider\" (Trachemys scripta\").\nBirds.\nThe birdlife of Menorca is very well known. Menorca is a well watched island which is on the migration route of many species and good number of passage migrants can be seen in spring. Residents include Audouin's gull, blue rock thrush and Thekla lark. Booted eagle and red kite are easy to see as is Egyptian vulture in the right habitat. In summer there are bee-eaters and Menorca has major colonies of Cory's shearwater and Balearic shearwater.\nMammals.\nMenorca has no large native mammals. There are some small mammals including rabbits, bats, rats, mice, pine martens and a subspecies of North African hedgehog.\nMunicipalities.\nThe major towns are Port Mahon and Ciutadella de Menorca. The island is administratively divided into eight municipalities (from west to east):\nThe areas and populations of the municipalities (according to the \"Instituto Nacional de Estad\u00edstica\", Spain) are:\nPolitics and government.\nInsular government.\nResults of the elections to the Island Council of Menorca.\nElections are held every four years concurrently with local elections. From 1983 to 2007, councilors were indirectly elected from the results of the election to Parliament of the Balearic Islands for the constituency of Menorca. Since 2007, however, separate direct elections are held to elect the Council.\nTransport.\nMenorca has several roads that go around the island, the most important one being Me-1 road (Spain), which goes from the island's capital, Mah\u00f3n, to Ciutadella. Menorca also has many bus lines, most of them only operated in the summer due to tourism. The most important line is line 01, which goes through Me-1 passing through all municipalities except Es Castell and Sant Llu\u00eds.\nMenorca has one Airport, that serves to the whole Island.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59743", "revid": "49316849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59743", "title": "Panic attack", "text": "Sudden periods of intense fear\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPanic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear and discomfort that may include palpitations, otherwise defined as a rapid, irregular heartbeat, sweating, chest pain or discomfort, shortness of breath, trembling, dizziness, numbness, confusion, or a sense of impending doom or loss of control. Typically, these symptoms are the worst within ten minutes of onset and can last for roughly 30 minutes, though they can vary anywhere from seconds to hours. While they can be extremely distressing, panic attacks themselves are not physically dangerous.\nThe \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition\" (DSM-5) defines them as \"an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes and during which time four or more of the following symptoms occur.\" These symptoms include, but are not limited to, the ones mentioned above.\nPanic attacks function as a marker for assessing severity, course, and comorbidity (the simultaneous presence of two or more diagnoses) of different disorders, including anxiety disorders. Hence, while panic attacks cannot be applied to all disorders found in the DSM, they are a common comorbidity.\nPanic attacks can be caused by an identifiable source, or they may happen without any warning and without a specific, recognizable situation.\nSome known causes that increase the risk of having a panic attack include medical and psychiatric conditions (e.g., panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, substance use disorder, depression), substances (e.g., nicotine, caffeine), and psychological stress.\nBefore making a diagnosis, physicians seek to eliminate other conditions that can produce similar symptoms, such as hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid), hyperparathyroidism (an overactive parathyroid), heart disease, lung disease, and dysautonomia, disease of the system that regulates the body's involuntary processes.\nTreatment of panic attacks should be directed at the underlying cause. In those with frequent attacks, counseling or medications may be used, as both preventative and abortive measures, ones that stop the attack while it is happening. Breathing training and muscle relaxation techniques may also be useful.\nPanic attacks often appear frightening to both those experiencing and those witnessing them, and often, people sometimes think they are having heart attacks due to the symptoms. However, while they do not cause much immediate physical harm, they may be a predictive risk factor for cardiac and other illnesses.\nPrevious studies have suggested that those who suffer from anxiety disorders (e.g., panic disorder) are at higher risk of suicide.\nIn Europe, approximately 3% of the population has a panic attack in a given year, while in the United States, they affect about 11%. Panic attacks are more commonly diagnosed in females than males and often begin during late puberty or early adulthood. Panic attacks can continue on and off for a lifetime, or appear only infrequently. Young children are less commonly affected.\nSigns and symptoms.\nWhen people experience a panic attack, it usually comes on very suddenly and unexpectedly with a wide range of symptoms that tend to last, on average, a few minutes, but in infrequent cases can last for several hours. Typically, the symptoms of panic attacks reach their worst intensity in the first minute, then gradually subside over the next several minutes. During this time, people often feel intense fear that something catastrophic will happen despite there being no immediate danger. The frequency of panic attacks varies between individuals, with some people experiencing a panic attack as frequently as every week, while others could have one panic attack per year. The features that help define a panic attack are the collection of symptoms that accompany a panic attack. In panic disorder, panic attacks can occur unprompted; meaning there can be no obvious triggering event that causes the panic attack. Panic attacks can occur together with other anxiety disorders as well and can be associated with triggering events, such as someone with social anxiety disorder being in a difficult social situation, such as public speaking, with a co-occurring panic attack.\nPanic attacks are associated with many different symptoms, with a person experiencing at least four of the following symptoms: increased heart rate, chest pain, palpitations (i.e. feeling like one's heart is pounding out of one's chest), difficulty breathing, choking sensation, nausea, abdominal pain, dizziness, lightheadedness (i.e. one feels like passing out), numbness or tingling (also called paresthesias), derealization (i.e. feeling detached from reality, like the events occurring are not real), depersonalization (i.e. feeling disconnected from one's body or thoughts), fear of losing control, and fear of dying.\nThese physical symptoms are typically concurrent with panic attacks in people who are prone to panicking. This results in increased anxiety and forms a positive feedback loop, meaning that the more a person with a panic attack has panic events, the more they experience feelings of \"anticipatory anxiety\" which serve to worsen their panic attacks. Panic attacks are distinguished from other forms of anxiety by their intensity and their sudden, episodic nature. \nChest pain.\nPeople can experience a wide range of symptoms during their panic attacks; they tend to be very intense and frightening and the common symptoms of difficulty breathing and chest pain can sometimes cause people to believe they are having a heart attack, leading them to go to the emergency department. Because chest pain and difficulty breathing are commonly symptoms of some sort of heart disease (such as a heart attack), there is medical importance in ruling out life-threatening reasons for their symptoms. A heart attack (also called a myocardial infarction) occurs when there is a blockage in the arteries going to the heart, causing less blood to get to the heart tissue, and ultimately causing the heart tissue to die. This would be evaluated in the emergency department with an electrocardiogram (i.e. a picture of the electrical activity of the heart) and by measuring a hormone called troponin, which is released from the heart tissue during times of stress on the tissue.\nCauses.\nPanic attacks can be caused by a mix of factors. Biological factors that may lead to or be caused by panic attacks include psychiatric disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), heart conditions, low blood pressure, and an overactive thyroid. Imbalance of the norepinephrine system, which is responsible for coordinating the body's fight-or-flight response, has been linked to panic attacks as well.\nPanic disorder tends to arise in early adulthood, though it can occur at any age. It is more commonly diagnosed in women and in individuals with above-average intelligence. Research involving identical twins has shown that if one twin has an anxiety disorder, the other is likely to have one too.\nPanic attacks may also occur due to short-term stressors. Major personal losses, like the end of a romantic relationship, life transitions such as jobs or moving, and other significant life changes may trigger a panic attack. Individuals who are naturally anxious, need a lot of reassurance, worry excessively about their health, have an overcautious view of the world, and have cumulative stress are more likely to experience panic attacks, which may actually cause some of those symptoms. For adolescents, social transitions, such as changes in classes and schools, may also be a contributing factor.\nPeople often experience phobias as a direct result of panic attacks triggered by exposure to specific fears. A situation can become associated to panic if someone has had a previous reaction before in similar contexts, but more often panic is triggered by fear of entrapment in a potentially phobic environment such as a plane. \nPsychoactive substances may also induce panic attacks. For example, discontinuation or reduction in the dose of a drug (drug withdrawal) without tapering can cause panic attacks. Other psychoactive substances that are commonly known to be associated with panic attacks include cannabis and nicotine.\nPanic disorder.\nA panic attack is an isolated episode of intense fear or discomfort that peaks within minutes. People who have repeated, persistent attacks or feel severe anxiety about having another attack are said to have panic disorder. Panic disorder is strikingly different from other types of anxiety disorders in that panic attacks are often sudden and unprovoked. However, panic attacks experienced by those with panic disorder may also be linked to or heightened by exposure to certain places or situations, making daily life difficult.\nIf a person has repeated and unexpected panic attacks, this could be a potential sign of panic disorder. According to the DSM-5, panic disorder can be diagnosed if a patient has not only recurrent panic attacks but also experiences at least a month of anxiety or worry about having additional attacks. This concern may lead to the person to modify their behavior to avoid situations that triggered the attack. Panic disorder can be diagnosed if the patient has another disorder at the same time (e.g., social anxiety disorder).\nPatients affected by panic disorder can struggle with depression and a diminished quality of life. Compared to the general population, they are also at increased risk for substance abuse and addiction.\nAgoraphobia.\nPanic disorder frequently presents with agoraphobia, which is an anxiety disorder where the individual presents with fear of a situation from which they cannot leave or escape, especially if a panic attack occurs. People who have had a panic attack in certain situations may develop phobias of these situations and begin to take measures to avoid them. Eventually, the pattern of avoidance and level of anxiety about another attack may reach the point where individuals with panic disorder are unable to drive or even step out of the house, preferring the safety of remaining in a known place. At this stage, the person is said to have panic disorder with agoraphobia.\nIn Japan, people who exhibit extreme agoraphobia to the point of becoming unwilling or unable to leave their homes are referred to as \"hikikomori\". This term is used to describe both the person and the phenomenon. According to some Japanese psychiatrists, hikikomori can be caused by panic associated agoraphobia, or by withdrawal due to social anxiety. After first being defined by the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare, a national research task force refined the definition as \"the state of avoiding social engagement (e.g., education, employment, and friendships) with generally persistent withdrawal into one's residence for at least six months as a result of various factors.\"\nPathophysiology.\nWhen panic attacks occur, people experience the sudden onset of fear and anxiety in the setting of no actual perceived threat (ex. one's mind believes there is something threatening one's wellbeing, but there is nothing actual life-threatening occurring). This fear-based response leads to a release of the hormone adrenaline (also known as epinephrine), which brings about the fight-or-flight response. The human nervous state consists of the sympathetic nervous system, which is responsible for the fight-or-flight (active) response, and the parasympathetic nervous system, which is responsible for the rest-and-digest (passive) response. The sympathetic nervous system prepares our body for strenuous physical activity (i.e. fight or flight) by affecting different bodily functions such as increasing heart rate, increasing breathing, sweating among others, leading to the physical symptoms that accompany a panic attack. The exact mechanism behind panic attacks remains unclear; there are several different ideas for why some people experience panic attacks while others do not. The current theories include conscious or unconscious fears of entrapment, genetic susceptibility factors, the fear network model, theory of acid-base disturbances in the brain, and irregular activity of the amygdala (i.e. the part of the brain responsible for controlling emotions, such as fear, and identifying threats).\nFear network model.\nThe fear network model hypothesizes that parts of our brain responsible for controlling the fear response that is created by the area of the brain where the amygdala is located (called the limbic system) is unable to control the fear sufficiently, leading to panic attacks. It is thought that dysfunction of the area responsible for controlling fear could be due to stress experienced in childhood, along with a genetic component as well. In summary, the fear network model states that the network in our brains responsible for responding to fear and then controlling that fear is not working properly, creating the inability for our brains to control fear that is occurring without any sort of external threat, leading to panic attacks.\nAcid-base disturbances theory.\nThis theory suggests that there is a part of the amygdala that is able to identify when the pH in our brain decreases, i.e. becomes more acidic. This part of the amygdala is called the acid-sensing ion channel. Since panic attacks typically occur without an obvious external trigger (meaning there is usually nothing life-threatening happening to cause a panic attack), studies have shown that panic attacks may be caused by internal triggers. One such internal trigger is the amygdala sensing acidosis, which can be caused by inhaling CO2 (carbon dioxide). In fact, one study has shown that people with a history of panic attacks had disturbances in their pH level minutes before having a panic attack.\nAnother theory, called the false suffocation alarm theory, is associated with the idea of acid-base imbalances in the amygdala. In this theory, inhalation of CO2 causes accumulation of acid in the blood and difficulty breathing, leading our brain to believe that we are suffocating, causing fear and panic. Studies have shown that inhaling CO2 can cause fear in people who do not have any prior history of panic attacks. This information has allowed scientists to suggest that panic attacks could be caused by our brain's inability to stop alarm signals that make us feel like we are suffocating.\nAmygdala dysfunction theory.\nThe amygdala in the human brain has several distinct sections that are responsible for our fear response. This theory suggests that problems in any of these brain areas or the connections between them could lead to excessive fear responses, like panic attacks. Studies have shown that in both animal and human subjects with a history of panic attacks, the amygdala is hyperactive with decreased volume when compared to the control. Another role the amygdala may play in panic attacks is decreasing its inhabitation (i.e. the amygdala not being shut down like it normally should), leading to increased levels of anxiety. A link between childhood traumatic experiences, as well as genetic abnormalities, has been found in those with a dysfunctional amygdala.\nNeurotransmitter imbalances.\nMany neurotransmitters are affected when the body is under the increased stress and anxiety that accompany a panic attack. Some include serotonin, GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), dopamine, norepinephrine, and glutamate.\nAn increase of serotonin in certain pathways of the brain seems to be correlated with reduced anxiety. More evidence that suggests serotonin plays a role in anxiety is that people who take selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) tend to feel a reduction of anxiety when their brain has more serotonin available to use.\nThe main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS) is GABA. This neurotransmitter acts by inhibiting, or blocking nerve signals, which is very helpful in anxiety. In fact, medications that increase GABA activity in the brain, such as benzodiazepines and barbiturates, help with reducing anxiety almost immediately.\nDopamine's role in anxiety is not well understood. Some antipsychotic medications that block dopamine production have been proven to treat anxiety. However, this may be attributed to dopamine's tendency to increase feelings of self-efficacy and confidence, which indirectly reduces anxiety. On the other hand, other medications that increase dopamine levels have also been found to improve anxiety.\nMany physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heart rate and hand tremors, are regulated by norepinephrine. Drugs that counteract norepinephrine's effect may be effective in reducing the physical symptoms of a panic attack. On the other hand, some medications that raise overall norepinephrine levels, such as tricyclic antidepressants and serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), can be effective for treating panic attacks over the long term by reducing the sudden increases in norepinephrine that happen during a panic attack.\nBecause glutamate is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter involved in the central nervous system (CNS), it can be found in almost every neural pathway in the body. Glutamate is likely involved in conditioning, which is the process by which certain fears are formed, and extinction, which is the elimination of those fears.\nCardiac mechanism.\nPeople who have been diagnosed with panic disorder have approximately double the risk of heart disease. Panic attacks can cause chest pain by affecting blood flow in arteries of the heart. During a panic attack, the body's stress response is triggered which can cause the small vessels of the heart to tighten, leading to chest pain. The body's nervous system and rapid breathing during a panic attack can cause spasming of the arteries of the heart (also known as vasospasm). This can reduce blood flow to the heart, causing damage to heart tissue and chest pain, despite normal heart scans.\nIn individuals with a history of coronary artery disease, panic attacks and stress can make chest pain worse by increasing the heart's need for oxygen. This occurs because increased heart rate, blood pressure, and stress responses (i.e. the sympathetic nervous system) puts more strain on the heart.\nDiagnosis.\nAccording to the DSM-5, a panic attack is part of the diagnostic class of anxiety disorders. DSM-5 criteria for a panic attack is defined as \"\"an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes and during which time four or more of the following symptoms occur\":\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhile some patients go to the emergency department due to their physical symptoms, there is no laboratory or imaging test used to diagnose panic attacks, it is a purely clinical diagnosis (i.e., the doctor uses their experience and expertise to diagnose panic attacks) once other more life-threatening diseases have been ruled out. In the research laboratory, there are diagnostic challenge tests for panic that rely on increasing the levels of certain naturally occurring chemicals. Most commonly, blood levels of sodium lactate are increased, or patients are given air with an increased level of carbon dioxide. These tests are considered to be sensitive in panic diagnosis, and very specific. Due to the physical symptoms that occur with a panic attack, people tend go to the emergency department for further evaluation; however, those who are experiencing panic attacks that are affecting their health and wellness should be seen by a mental health professional, such as a therapist or psychiatrist. Screening tools, such as the Panic Disorder Screener (PADIS), can be used to detect possible cases of panic disorder and suggest the need for a formal diagnostic assessment with a psychiatrist for further evaluation.\nTreatment.\nPanic disorder is usually effectively managed with a variety of interventions, including pharmacological treatment with medication, and psychological therapies. The focus on management of panic disorder involves reducing the frequency and intensity of panic attacks, reducing anticipatory anxiety and agoraphobia, and achieving full remission.\nMost panic attacks will resolve spontaneously within a course of 20 to 30 minutes without interference. However, benzodiazepines, specifically alprazolam and clonazepam, are frequently prescribed for panic disorder due to their quick onset of action and good tolerability. But because they take about 45 minutes to start working, they are not usually effective for ending a current, on-going attack. However, when clonazepam (which has a long half-life) is taken every 12 hours at a proper dose, it can prevent new panic attacks from starting. Additionally, deep breathing techniques and relaxation can be used and are occasionally found to be helpful while the person is experiencing a panic attack or immediately after as a way to calm oneself. Some maintaining causes include avoidance of panic-provoking situations or environments, anxious or negative self-talk (\"what-if\" thinking), mistaken beliefs (e.g., thinking one's symptoms are harmful or dangerous), and withheld feelings.\nCognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and Clonazepam (every 12 hours) may have the most complete and longest duration of effect, followed by specific selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and CBT. Some research suggests that CBT is more effective at gaining coping skills than at effecting true panic cessation. A 2009 review found positive results from therapy and medication and a much better result when the two were combined. Even though there are modern medications to make short-term benefits to the patients life, long-term medication for panic disorder is not always utilized. There is however, a method that is proven to be most effective in long-term treatment which is to combine different treatment styles. These different styles include both clonazepam or antidepressants, and CBT therapy.\nLifestyle changes.\nGrowing research suggests that along with standardized medical treatments, lifestyle changes can help alleviate some of the most common mental health conditions. Because of this, there has been a growing emphasis on the potential of lifestyle interventions and non-pharmacological methods for anxiety. These lifestyle interventions include, but are not limited to, focusing on physical activity, substance avoidance, and relaxation techniques. All are helpful, but their anti-panic benefits are not clear cut.\nExercise, especially aerobic, have become an alternative method for decreasing symptoms of anxiety and panic. Other more relaxing forms, such as yoga and tai chi, have also had similar effects in improving anxiety and can also be used as adjunctive therapy. Numerous studies have determined that exercise is inversely related to anxiety symptoms, thus as physical activity increases, levels of anxiety seem to decrease. On the other hand, some people with panic disorder may be more averse to exercise. There is evidence that suggests that this effect is correlated to the release of exercise-induced endorphins and the subsequent reduction of the stress hormone, cortisol. One thing to keep in mind is that with exercise, often comes increased respiration rate. This can lead to hyperventilation and hyperventilation syndrome, which mimics symptoms of a heart attack, thus inducing a panic attack, so it is important to pace the exercise regimen accordingly.\nSubstance avoidance can be important in reducing anxiety and panic symptoms, as many substances can cause, exacerbate, or mimic symptoms of panic disorder. For example, caffeine has been known to have anxiety and panic-inducing properties that can especially present in those who are more susceptible to panic attacks. Anxiety and panic can also temporarily increase during withdrawal from caffeine and various other drugs and substances.\nMeditation may also be helpful in the treatment of panic disorder. Muscle relaxation techniques are useful to some individuals as well. These can be learned using recordings, videos, or books. While muscle relaxation has proved to be less effective than cognitive behavioral therapy in controlled trials, many people still find at least temporary relief from muscle relaxation.\nBreathing exercises.\nIrregularities in breathing, including hyperventilation and shortness of breath, are key features of anxiety and panic attacks. Hyperventilation syndrome occurs when an individual experiences deep, quick-paced breathing, eventually affecting blood flow to the brain and altering conscious awareness.\nIt has been shown that several various breathwork techniques can reduce symptoms in patients diagnosed with anxiety disorders. By managing and focusing on breathing, individuals with anxiety experience less tension and stress in their muscles, as well as a diminished stress response. Breathing retraining exercise helps to rebalance the oxygen and CO2 levels in the blood, improving cerebral blood flow. Capnometry, which provides exhaled CO2 levels, may help guide breathing.\nDavid D. Burns recommends breathing exercises for those with anxiety. One such breathing exercise is a 5-2-5 count. Using the stomach (or diaphragm)\u2014and not the chest\u2014inhale (feel the stomach come out, as opposed to the chest expanding) for 5 seconds. As the maximal point at inhalation is reached, hold the breath for 2 seconds. Then slowly exhale, over 5 seconds. Repeat this cycle twice and then breathe 'normally' for 5 cycles (1 cycle = 1 inhale + 1 exhale). The point is to focus on breathing and relax the heart rate.\nAlthough breathing into a paper bag was a common recommendation for short-term treatment of symptoms of an acute panic attack, it has been criticized as inferior to measured breathing.\nTherapy.\nAccording to the American Psychological Association, \"most specialists agree that a combination of cognitive and behavioral therapies are the best treatment for panic disorder.\" Medication is appropriate in many cases. The first part of therapy is largely informational; many people are greatly helped by simply understanding exactly what panic disorder is and how many others experience it. Many people with panic disorder are worried that their panic attacks mean they are \"going crazy\" or that the panic might induce a heart attack. Cognitive restructuring helps people to replace those thoughts with more realistic, positive ways of viewing the attacks. Avoidant behavior, such as what is seen in patients with agoraphobia, is one of the key aspects that prevent people with frequent panic attacks from functioning healthily. Exposure therapy, which includes repeated and prolonged confrontation with feared situations and body sensations, helps weaken anxiety responses to panic-inducing external and internal stimuli.\nIn deeper-level psychoanalytic approaches, in particular object relations theory, panic attacks are frequently associated with splitting (psychology), paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions, and paranoid anxiety. They are often found to be comorbid with borderline personality disorder and child sexual abuse.\nThere was a meta-analysis of the comorbidity of panic disorders and agoraphobia that used exposure therapy to treat hundreds of patients over a period of time. A result was that thirty-two percent of patients had a panic episode after treatment. They concluded that the use of exposure therapy has some efficacy for a client who is living with a panic disorder and agoraphobia.\nMedication.\nMedication options for panic attacks typically include benzodiazepines (clonazepam and alprazolam) and antidepressants. Benzodiazepines are being prescribed less often because excess concern about such potential side effects such as dependence, fatigue, slurred speech, and memory loss. Antidepressant treatments for panic attacks include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). \nSSRIs in particular tend to be the first drug treatment used to treat panic attacks. SSRIs and tricyclic antidepressants appear similar for short-term efficacy.\nSSRIs carry a relatively low risk since they are not associated with much tolerance or dependence, and have a more tolerable side effect profile. TCAs are similar to SSRIs in their many advantages, and may be more effecive, but they do come with more common side effects such as weight gain and cognitive disturbances. MAOIs are generally suggested for patients who have not responded to other forms of treatment.\nWhile the use of drugs in treating panic attacks can be very successful, it is generally recommended that people also be in some form of therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy. Drug treatments are usually used throughout the duration of panic attack symptoms and discontinued after the patient has been free of symptoms for at least six months. It is usually safest to discontinue these drugs gradually while undergoing therapy. While drug treatment seems promising for children and adolescents, they are at an increased risk of suicidal thoughts while taking these medications and their well-being should be monitored closely.\nPrognosis.\nPanic attacks, while unpleasant, are not life-threatening. However, recurrent panic attacks can significantly affect one's mental health if people experiencing them do not seek or benefit from treatment. Sometimes, panic attacks can develop into phobias or panic disorder if untreated. However, when treated, people can do very well, with symptoms decreasing or fully disappearing within several weeks to months.\nEpidemiology.\nIn Europe, about 3% of the population has a panic attack in a given year. In the United States, they affect about 11%. Panic attacks are more common in females than in males. They often begin during puberty or early adulthood. Children and older people are less commonly affected. Results from twin and family studies have concluded that disorders, such as panic disorder, have a genetic component and are inherited or passed down through genes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59746", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59746", "title": "Brown recluse spider", "text": "Species of spider with venomous bite native to US\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe brown recluse (Loxosceles reclusa, Sicariidae, formerly placed in a family \"Loxoscelidae\") is a recluse spider with necrotic venom. Similar to those of other recluse spiders, their bites sometimes require medical attention. The brown recluse is one of two spiders in North America with dangerous venom, the other being the black widow.\nBrown recluse spiders are usually between , but may grow larger. While typically light to medium brown, they range in color from whitish to dark brown or blackish gray. The cephalothorax and abdomen are not necessarily the same color. These spiders usually have markings on the dorsal side of their cephalothorax, with a black line coming from it that looks like a violin with the neck of the violin pointing to the rear of the spider, resulting in the nicknames fiddleback spider, brown fiddler, or violin spider.\nDescription.\nThe violin pattern is not a definitive identifier, as other spiders can have similar markings (e.g. cellar spiders and pirate spiders). Instead, while most spiders have eight eyes, recluse spiders have six eyes arranged in pairs (dyads) with one median pair and two lateral pairs. Only a few other spiders have three pairs of eyes arranged in this way (e.g., scytodids). Recluses have no obvious coloration patterns on the abdomen or legs, and the legs lack spines.\nThe violin marking can vary in intensity depending on the age of the brown recluse spider, with mature spiders typically having dark violin shapes.\nDistribution.\nThe documented range of this species lies roughly south of a line from southeastern Nebraska through southern Iowa, Illinois, and Indiana to southwestern Ohio. In the southern states, it is native from central Texas to western Georgia and north to Kentucky.\nDespite rumors to the contrary, the brown recluse spider has not established itself in California or anywhere outside its native range. There are other species of the genus \"Loxosceles\" native to the southwestern part of the United States, including California, which may resemble the brown recluse, but interactions between humans and the recluse species in California and the region are rare because those species' native ranges lie outside of dense human populations. The number of \"false positive\" reports based on misidentifications is considerable; in a nationwide study where people submitted spiders that they thought were brown recluses, of 581 from California only one was a brown recluse\u2014submitted by a family that moved from Missouri and brought it with them (compared to specimens submitted from Missouri, Kansas, and Oklahoma, where between 75% and 90% were recluses).\nFrom this study, the most common spider submitted from California as a brown recluse was in the genus \"Titiotus\", whose bite is deemed harmless. A similar study documented that various arachnids were routinely misidentified by physicians, pest control operators, and other non-expert authorities, who told their patients or clients that the spider they had was a brown recluse when in fact it was not.\nDespite the absence of brown recluses from the Western U.S., physicians in the region commonly diagnose \"brown recluse bites\", leading to the popular misconception that the spiders inhabit those areas.\nOver the last century, spiders have occasionally been intercepted in locations where they have no known established populations; these spiders may be transported fairly easily, though the lack of \"established\" populations well outside the natural range also indicates that such movement has not led to the colonization of new areas, after decades of opportunities. Note that the occurrence of brown recluses in a single building (such as a warehouse) outside of the native range is not considered as successful colonization; such single-building populations can occur (e.g., in several such cases in Florida),\nbut do not spread, and can be easily eradicated.\nThe spider has also received numerous sensationalized media reports of bites occurring where these spiders are absent (and no specimens were found), such as a 2014 report from Thailand, where a man was claimed to have died from a brown recluse bite.\nMany misidentifications and erroneous geographic records stem from the similarity between \"L. reclusa\" and a related introduced species, the Mediterranean recluse (\"Loxosceles rufescens\"), which is found worldwide, including numerous sightings throughout the United States; the two species are superficially almost indistinguishable, and misidentifications are common, making it difficult to distinguish which reports of recluses refer to which species.\nLife cycle.\nAdult brown recluse spiders often live about one to two years. Each female produces several egg sacs over a period of two to three months, from May to July, with approximately 50 eggs in each sac. The eggs hatch in about one month. The spiderlings take about one year to grow to adulthood. The brown recluse spider is resilient and can tolerate up to six months of extreme drought and scarcity or absence of food. On one occasion, a brown recluse survived in controlled captivity for over five seasons without any food at all.\nAs part of the haplogynae, brown recluses do not balloon, which limits their ability to widely disperse geographically.(p63)\nThe brown recluse will, though not habitually, cannibalize another if food becomes scarce; especially during its typical mating season from June to September or when an unreceptive female encounters an aggressive male.\nBehavior.\nA brown recluse's stance on a flat surface is usually with all legs radially extended. When alarmed it may lower its body, withdraw the forward two legs straight rearward into a defensive position, withdraw the rearmost pair of legs into a position for lunging forward, and stand motionless with pedipalps raised. The pedipalps in mature specimens are dark and quite prominent and are normally held horizontally forward. When threatened it usually flees, seemingly to avoid a conflict, and if detained may further avoid contact with quick horizontal rotating movements or even resort to assuming a lifeless pose (playing dead). The spider does not usually jump unless touched brusquely, and even then its avoidance movement is more of a horizontal lunge rather than a vaulting of itself entirely off the surface. When running, the brown recluse does not leave a silk line behind, which would make it more easily tracked when it is being pursued. Movement at virtually any speed is an evenly paced gait with legs extended.\nThe brown recluse spider displays autotomy as a defense mechanism against physical, predatory attack to a leg as well as to prevent predatory, venom injections from spreading to the rest of the body.(p57) \"Once a leg is lost, a recluse spider does not regenerate a new one with subsequent molts\",(p57) unlike the huntsman spider, which does regenerate autotomized legs. With each time that a leg is autotomized, the recluse \"changes its gait to compensate for the loss.\"(p57)\nHabitat.\nBrown recluse spiders build asymmetrical (irregular) webs that frequently include a shelter consisting of disorderly threads. They frequently build their webs in woodpiles and sheds, closets, garages, plenum spaces, cellars, and other places that are dry and generally undisturbed. When dwelling in human residences they seem to favor cardboard, possibly because it mimics the rotting tree bark which they inhabit naturally. Human-recluse contact often occurs when such isolated spaces are disturbed and the spider feels threatened. Unlike most web weavers, they leave these lairs at night to hunt. Males move around more when hunting than the females, which tend to remain nearer to their webs.\nBite.\nLike all members of the \"Loxosceles\" genus, the brown recluse has potent tissue-destroying venoms containing the dermonecrotic agent sphingomyelinase D.\nMost bites are minor with no dermonecrosis, but a small number of brown recluse bites produce loxoscelism, a condition where the skin around the bite dies. While loxoscelism usually manifests as a skin condition (cutaneous loxoscelism), it can also include systemic symptoms like fever, nausea, and vomiting (viscerocutaneous loxoscelism). In very rare cases, bites can even cause hemolysis \u2013 the bursting of red blood cells.\nIn one study of clinically diagnosed brown recluse bites, skin necrosis occurred 37% of the time, while systemic illness occurred 14% of the time.\nAs suggested by its specific name \"reclusa\" (recluse), the brown recluse spider is rarely aggressive, and bites from the species are uncommon. In 2001, more than 2,000\u00a0brown recluse spiders were removed from a heavily infested home in Kansas, yet the four residents who had lived there for years were never harmed by the spiders, despite many encounters with them.\nThe spider usually bites only when pressed against the skin, such as when tangled within clothes, shoes, towels, bedding, inside work gloves, etc. Many human victims report having been bitten after putting on clothes or shoes that had not been worn recently or had been left for many days undisturbed on the floor. The fangs of the brown recluse are not large enough to penetrate most fabric.\nWhen both types of loxoscelism do result, systemic effects may occur before necrosis, as the venom spreads throughout the body in minutes. Children, the elderly, and the debilitatingly ill may be more susceptible to systemic loxoscelism. The systemic symptoms most commonly experienced include nausea, vomiting, fever, rashes, and muscle and joint pain. Rarely, such bites can result in hemolysis, low platelet levels, blood clots throughout the body, organ damage, and even death.\nMost fatalities are in children under the age of seven\nor those with a weak immune system.\nWhile the majority of brown recluse spider bites do not result in any symptoms, cutaneous symptoms occur more frequently than systemic symptoms. In such instances, the bite forms a necrotizing ulcer as the result of soft tissue destruction and may take months to heal, leaving deep scars. These bites usually become painful and itchy within 2\u20138\u00a0hours. Pain and other local effects worsen 12\u201336\u00a0hours after the bite, and the necrosis develops over the next few days.\nOver time, the wound may grow to as large as 25\u00a0cm (10\u00a0inches). The damaged tissue becomes gangrenous and eventually sloughs away. \"L.\u00a0reclusa\" can produce slightly more than 0.1\u00a0\u03bcL of venom, though the average yield is less.\nMisdiagnosis.\nThere is an ELISA-based test for brown recluse venom that can determine whether a wound is a brown recluse bite, although it is not commercially available and not in routine clinical use. Clinical diagnoses often use Occam's razor principle in diagnosing bites based on what spiders the patient likely encountered and previous similar diagnoses.\n suggested the mnemonic \"NOT RECLUSE\", shown below, as a memory device to help laymen and medical professionals more objectively screen and diagnose potential cases of loxoscelism.\nThere are numerous documented infectious and noninfectious conditions that produce wounds that have been initially misdiagnosed as recluse spider bites by medical professionals, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMany of these conditions are far more common and more likely to be the source of necrotic wounds, even in areas where brown recluse spiders actually occur. The most important of these is methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA), a bacterium whose necrotic lesions are very similar to those induced by recluse bites, and which can be lethal if left untreated. Misdiagnosis of MRSA as spider bites is extremely common (nearly 30% of patients with MRSA reported that they initially suspected a spider bite), and can have fatal consequences.\nReported cases of brown recluse bites occur primarily in Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Texas.\nThere have been many reports of brown recluse bites in California \u2013 though a few related species of spiders may be found there, none of the related spiders in California is known to bite humans.\nTo date, the reports of bites from areas outside of the spider's native range have been either unverified or, if verified, the spiders have been moved to those locations by travelers or commerce.\n \"For a comparison of the toxicity of several kinds of spider\"\n \"bites, see the list of medically significant spider bites\"\nOther spiders.\nMany arachnologists believe that a large number of bites attributed to the brown recluse in the U.S. West Coast are either from other spider species or not spider bites at all. Other spiders in western states that might possibly cause necrotic injuries are the hobo spider, desert recluse spider, and the yellow sac spider.\nFor example, the venom of the hobo spider, a common European species now established in the northwestern United States and southern British Columbia, has been reported to produce similar symptoms as the brown recluse bite when injected into laboratory rabbits. However, the toxicity of hobo spider venom has been called into question: Actual bites (rather than syringe injections) have not been shown to cause necrosis, and no necrotic hobo spider bites have ever been reported where it is native.\nNumerous other spiders have been associated with necrotic bites in the medical literature. Other recluse species, such as the desert recluse (found in the deserts of southwestern United States), are reported to have caused necrotic bite wounds, though only rarely.\nThe hobo spider and the yellow sac spider have also been reported to cause necrotic bites. However, the bites from these spiders are not known to produce the severe symptoms that can follow from a recluse spider bite, and the level of danger posed by these has been called into question.\nSo far, no known necrotoxins have been isolated from the venom of any of these spiders, and some arachnologists have disputed the accuracy of spider identifications carried out by bite victims, family members, medical responders, and other non-experts in arachnology.\nThere have been several studies questioning the danger posed by some of the other spiders mentioned: In these studies, scientists examined case studies of bites in which the spider in question was identified by an expert, and found that the incidence of necrotic injury diminished significantly when \"questionable\" identifications were excluded from the sample set.\nBite treatment.\nFirst aid involves the application of an ice pack to control inflammation and prompt medical care. If it can be easily captured, the spider should be brought with the patient in a clear, tightly closed container so it may be identified by an arachnologist; if there is no specimen at all, then confirmation by an expert is impossible.\nRoutine treatment should include immobilization of the affected limb, application of ice, local wound care, and tetanus prophylaxis. Many other therapies have been used with varying degrees of success, including hyperbaric oxygen, dapsone, antihistamines (e.g., cyproheptadine), antibiotics, dextran, glucocorticoids, vasodilators, heparin, nitroglycerin, electric shock, curettage, surgical excision, and antivenom.\nIn almost all cases, bites are self-limited and typically heal without any medical intervention.\nOutpatient palliative care following discharge often consists of a weak or moderate strength opioid (e.g. codeine or tramadol, respectively) depending on pain scores, an anti-inflammatory agent (e.g. naproxen, cortisone), and an antispasmodic (e.g. cyclobenzaprine, diazepam), for a few days to a week. If the pain or spasms have not resolved by this time, a second medical evaluation is generally advised, and differential diagnoses may be considered.\nSpecific treatments.\nIn presumed cases of recluse bites, dapsone is often used for the treatment of necrosis, but controlled clinical trials have yet to demonstrate efficacy.\nHowever, dapsone may be effective in treating many \"spider bites\" because many such cases are actually misdiagnosed microbial infections.\nThere have been conflicting reports about its efficacy in treating brown recluse bites, and some have suggested it should no longer be used routinely, if at all.\nWound infection is rare. Antibiotics are not recommended unless there is a credible diagnosis of infection.\nStudies have shown that surgical intervention is ineffective and may worsen outcomes. Excision may delay wound healing, cause abscesses, and lead to scarring.\nPurportedly application of nitroglycerin stopped necrosis. However, one scientific animal study found no benefit in preventing necrosis, with the study's results showing it increased inflammation and caused symptoms of systemic envenoming. The authors concluded the results of the study did not support the use of topical nitroglycerin in brown recluse envenoming. \nAntivenom is available in South America for the venom of related species of recluse spiders. However, the bites, often being painless, usually do not present symptoms until 24 or more hours after the event, possibly limiting the effect of this intervention.\nSpider population control.\nDue to increased fear of these spiders prompted by greater public awareness of their presence in recent years, the extermination of domestic brown recluses is performed frequently in the lower midwestern United States. Brown recluse spiders possess a variety of adaptive abilities, including the ability to survive up to 10 months with no food or water. Additionally, these spiders survive significantly longer in a relatively cool, thermally stable environment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59747", "revid": "10512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59747", "title": "List of incumbents", "text": ""}
{"id": "59748", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59748", "title": "Bored of the Rings", "text": "Parody novel\nBored of the Rings is a 1969 parody of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\". This short novel was written by Henry Beard and Douglas Kenney, who later founded \"National Lampoon\". It was published in 1969 by Signet for \"The Harvard Lampoon\", and, unusually for a parody, has remained in print for over 50 years. It has been translated into at least twelve languages.\nThe parody steps through \"The Lord of the Rings\", in turn mocking the prologue, the map, and the main text. The text combines slapstick humor with deliberately inappropriate use of brand names.\nBook.\nApproach.\nThe parody closely follows the outline of \"The Lord of the Rings\", lampooning the prologue and map of Middle-earth; its main text is a short satirical summary of Tolkien's plot. The witty text combines slapstick humour and deliberately inappropriate use of brand names. For example, the carbonated beverages \"Moxie\" and \"Pepsi\" replace \"Merry\" and \"Pippin\". Tom Bombadil appears as \"Tim Benzedrine\", a stereotypical hippie married to \"Hashberry\". Her name alludes to Haight-Ashbury, a district of San Francisco nicknamed Hashbury for its hippie counterculture at that time. Saruman is satirised as Serutan, a laxative, who lives in a \"mighty fortress\" with \"pastel pink-and-blue walls\" and a \"pale-lavender moat crossed by a bright-green drawbridge\", giving access to an amusement park for tourists. Minas Tirith appears as Minas Troney, designed by Beltelephon the senile.\nOther characters include the boggies (Hobbits) Dildo Bugger of Bug End and Frito Bugger (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins), Goddam (Gollum), and Arrowroot, son of Arrowshirt (Aragorn, son of Arathorn).\nNovelist David Barnett, in a retrospective for \"The Guardian\", notes that the characters also break the fourth wall at times. Near the beginning, Frito rolls his eyes and observes that \"it was going to be a long epic.\" The fifth chapter, \"Some Monsters,\" concludes as the characters \"set out with Frito along the rising gorge that led to the next chapter.\"\nMain text.\nThe main text broadly follows the plot of \"The Lord of the Rings\", its ten chapters roughly corresponding to key chapters of Tolkien's novel. \nOther materials.\nAside from the main text, the book includes:\nReception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0\u00a0Goodgulf sat dejectedly before the obstinate portal, mumbling spells. \u00a0\u00a0\"Pismo\", he intoned, striking the door with his wand. \"Bitumen. Lazlo. Clayton-Bulwer.\"Save for a hollow thud, the door made no sign of opening. \u00a0\u00a0\"It looks grim\", said Arrowroot.\u00a0\u00a0Suddenly the Wizard sprang to his feet. \"The knob\", he cried... \nII:5, \"Some Monsters\"\nThe Tolkien scholar David Bratman, writing in \"Mythlore\", quotes an extended passage from the book in which Frito, Spam Gangree (Sam Gamgee), and Goddam jostle on the edge of the \"Black Hole\" (a tar pit), commenting \"Those parodists wrought better than they knew\". He explains that Tolkien, in his many drafts, came very close to \"inadvertently writing the parody version of his own novel\", though in the end he managed to avoid that, in Bratman's view, remarkably completely.\nThe author Mike Sacks, quoting the book's opening lines, writes that the book has had the distinction, rare for a parody, of being continuously in print for over 40 years, was one of the earliest parodies of \"a modern, popular bestseller\", and has inspired many pop culture writers including those who worked on \"Saturday Night Live\" and \"The Onion\".\nLeah Schnelbach, on the science fiction and fantasy site Tor.com, writes that the book is full of \"interesting comedic thoughts ... stuffed in under all the silliness\". In her view, it takes \"an easy, marketable hook\" and creates \"a cutting satire of shallow consumerism and the good-old-fashioned American road trip\". She remarks, too, on the rescue of the Boggies Frito and Spam by the eagle Gwahno. The eagle \"is efficient to the point of rudeness, yelling at them to fasten their seatbelts, snapping at them to use the barf bags if necessary, and complaining about running behind schedule: he's the encapsulation of everything wrong with air travel\". Schnelbach writes that after a picaresque journey through American kitsch, \"they end firmly in the angry, efficiency-at-all-costs Jet Age. And thus this ridiculous parody becomes a commentary on the perils of modernism, just like \"Lord of the Rings\" itself.\"\nIn a 2011 essay, David Barnett decides that, with its characters reinvented as \"a fairly grimy, down-at-heel set,\" \"\"Bored of the Rings\" sits somewhere between the classic US parody magazine \"Mad\" and National Lampoon's signature movie \"Animal House\" \u2013 cruder than the former but not quite as rude as the latter.\" Barnett finds the book \"very funny, albeit perhaps less sophisticated than more modern parodies. But Kenney and Beard's respect and affection for the source material shines through. There's a gag you can appreciate on pretty much every page, and many of them will actually make you laugh out loud. Take Dildo's first encounter with the Gollum-alike: 'He would have finished Goddam off then and there, but pity stayed his hand. \"It's a pity I've run out of bullets\", he thought.'\"\nArtwork.\nThe Signet first edition cover, a parody of the 1965 Ballantine paperback covers by Barbara Remington, was drawn by Muppets designer Michael K. Frith. Current editions have different artwork by Douglas Carrel, since the paperback cover art for \"Lord of the Rings\" prevalent in the 1960s, then famous, is now obscure. William S. Donnell drew the \"parody map\" of Lower Middle Earth.\nDerivative works.\nDelta 4's \"Bored of the Rings\" is a 1985 text adventure game inspired by the book, but it was not directly based on it.\nIn 2013, an audio version was produced by Orion Audiobooks, narrated by Rupert Degas.\nTranslations.\nThe book has been translated into several languages, often with a title that puns on \"The Lord of the Rings\":\nIn the media.\nThe book is featured in the film \"A Futile and Stupid Gesture\", which follows the times of its authors at \"The Harvard Lampoon\" and \"National Lampoon\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59749", "revid": "46967642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59749", "title": "Dust Bowl", "text": "1930s period of severe dust storms in North America\nThe Dust Bowl was a period of severe dust storms that greatly damaged the ecology and agriculture of the American and Canadian prairies during the 1930s. The phenomenon was caused by a combination of natural factors (severe drought) and human-made factors: a failure to apply dryland farming methods to prevent wind erosion, most notably the destruction of the natural topsoil by settlers in the region. The drought came in three waves: 1934, 1936, and 1939\u20131940, but some regions of the High Plains experienced drought conditions for as long as eight years. It exacerbated an already existing agricultural recession.\nThe Dust Bowl has been the subject of many cultural works, including John Steinbeck's 1939 novel \"The Grapes of Wrath\"; the \"Dust Bowl Ballads\" of Woody Guthrie; and Dorothea Lange's photographs depicting the conditions of migrants, particularly \"Migrant Mother\", taken in 1936.\nGeographic characteristics and early history.\nThe Dust Bowl area lies principally west of the 100th meridian on the High Plains, characterized by plains that vary from rolling in the north to flat in the Llano Estacado. Elevation ranges from in the east to at the base of the Rocky Mountains. The area is semiarid, receiving less than of rain annually; this rainfall supports the shortgrass prairie biome originally present in the area. The region is also prone to extended drought, alternating with unusual wetness of equivalent duration. During wet years, the rich soil provides bountiful agricultural output, but crops fail during dry years. The region is also subject to high winds. During early European and American exploration of the Great Plains, this region was thought unsuitable for European-style agriculture; explorers called it the Great American Desert. The lack of surface water and timber made the region less attractive than other areas for pioneer settlement and agriculture.\nThe federal government encouraged settlement and development of the Plains for agriculture via the Homestead Act of 1862, offering settlers \"quarter section\" plots. With the end of the Civil War in 1865 and the completion of the first transcontinental railroad in 1869, waves of new migrants and immigrants reached the Great Plains and greatly increased the acreage under cultivation. An unusually wet period in the Great Plains mistakenly led settlers and the federal government to believe that \"rain follows the plow\" (a popular phrase among real estate promoters) and that the region's climate had permanently changed. While initial agricultural endeavors were primarily cattle ranching, the harsh winters' adverse effect on the cattle, beginning in 1886, a short drought in 1890, and general overgrazing, led many landowners to increase the amount of land under cultivation.\nRecognizing the challenge of cultivating marginal arid land, the U.S. government expanded on the offered under the Homestead Act, granting to homesteaders in western Nebraska under the Kinkaid Act (1904) and elsewhere in the Great Plains under the Enlarged Homestead Act of 1909. Waves of European settlers arrived in the plains at the beginning of the 20th century. A return of unusually wet weather seemingly confirmed a previously held opinion that the \"formerly\" semiarid area could support large-scale agriculture. At the same time, technological improvements such as mechanized plowing and mechanized harvesting made it possible to operate larger properties without increasing labor costs.\nWith insufficient understanding of the ecology of the plains, farmers had conducted extensive deep plowing of the Great Plains' virgin topsoil during the previous decade; this displaced the native, deep-rooted grasses that normally trapped soil and moisture even during periods of drought and high winds. The rapid mechanization of farm equipment, especially small gasoline tractors, and widespread use of the combine harvester contributed to farmers' decisions to convert arid grassland (much of which received no more than of precipitation per year) to cultivated cropland. During the drought of the 1930s, the unanchored soil turned to dust, which prevailing winds blew away in huge clouds that sometimes blackened the sky. These choking billows of dust\u00a0\u2013 named \"black blizzards\" or \"black rollers\"\u00a0\u2013 traveled cross-country, reaching as far as the East Coast and striking such cities as New York City and Washington, D.C. On the plains, they often reduced visibility to or less. Associated Press reporter Robert E. Geiger happened to be in Boise City, Oklahoma, to witness the \"Black Sunday\" black blizzards of April 14, 1935; Edward Stanley, the Kansas City news editor of the Associated Press, coined the term \"Dust Bowl\" while rewriting Geiger's news story.\nThe term \"the Dust Bowl\" originally referred to the geographical area affected by the dust, but today it usually refers to the event itself (the term \"Dirty Thirties\" is also sometimes used). The drought and erosion of the Dust Bowl affected that centered on the Texas Panhandle and Oklahoma Panhandle and touched adjacent sections of New Mexico, Colorado, and Kansas. The Dust Bowl forced tens of thousands of poverty-stricken families, who were unable to pay mortgages or grow crops, to abandon their farms, and losses reached $25\u00a0million per day by 1936 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). Many of these families, often called \"Okies\" because many of them came from Oklahoma, migrated to California and other states to find that the Great Depression had rendered economic conditions there little better than those they had left.\nThe combined effects of World War I and the disruption of the Russian Revolution, which decreased the supply of wheat and other commodity crops, increased agricultural prices; this demand encouraged farmers to dramatically increase cultivation. For example, in the Llano Estacado of eastern New Mexico and northwestern Texas, the area of farmland doubled between 1900 and 1920, then tripled between 1925 and 1930. The agricultural methods farmers favored during this period created the conditions for large-scale erosion under certain environmental conditions. The widespread conversion of the land by deep plowing and other soil preparation methods to enable agriculture eliminated the native grasses that held the soil in place and helped retain moisture during dry periods. Furthermore, cotton farmers left fields bare during the winter, when winds in the High Plains are highest, and burned the stubble as a means to control weeds before planting, thereby depriving the soil of organic nutrients and surface vegetation.\nDrought and dust storms.\nAfter fairly favorable climatic conditions in the 1920s with good rainfall and relatively moderate winters, which permitted increased settlement and cultivation in the Great Plains, the region entered an unusually dry era in the summer of 1930. During the next decade, the northern plains suffered four of their seven driest calendar years since 1895, Kansas four of its 12 driest, and the entire region south to West Texas lacked any period of above-normal rainfall until record rains hit in 1941. When severe drought struck the Great Plains region in the 1930s, it resulted in erosion and loss of topsoil because of farming practices at the time. The drought dried the topsoil and over time it became friable, reduced to a powdery consistency in some places. Without indigenous grasses in place, the plains' high winds picked up the topsoil and created massive dust storms. The persistent dry weather caused crops to fail, leaving the plowed fields exposed to wind erosion. The Great Plains' fine soil eroded easily and was carried east by strong continental winds.\nThe first recorded dust storm occurred on September 14, 1930. It was seen more as a meteorological anomaly at the time as it was unlike anything else ever recorded. Unlike a sand storm, the cloud was black or gray (not beige or red) and rolled across the ground. Inside, visibility dropped to the point where people couldn't see their hand in front of their face. It also generated a tremendous amount of static electricity, enough to short a car or knock someone out if they shook someone else's hand.\nOn November 11, 1933, a very strong dust storm stripped topsoil from desiccated South Dakota farmlands in one of a series of severe dust storms that year. Beginning on May 9, 1934, a strong, two-day dust storm removed massive amounts of Great Plains topsoil in one of the worst such storms of the Dust Bowl. The dust clouds blew all the way to Chicago, where they deposited of dust. Two days later, the same storm reached cities to the east, such as Cleveland, Buffalo, Boston, New York City, and Washington, D.C. Monuments like the Statue of Liberty and the United States Capitol were blotted out. Dust worked its way into even the most sealed homes, leaving a coating on food, skin, and furniture. That winter (1934\u201335), red snow fell on New England.\nOn April 14, 1935, known as \"Black Sunday\", the day started out clear and warm, with temperatures in the 80's and wind completely still, causing many people to let down their guard. However, a diving cold front from Canada kicked up mountains of dust in the turbulent air in the Dakotas and plowed south across the Great Plains at 60\u00a0mph. Before the line, it would still be very still with the only sign of the advancing storm being the snapping of static electricity and the screeching of flocks of birds and rabbits streaming south. The storm caught many people off guard as unlike every other storm, the winds didn't pick up until the leading edge arrived. Once inside, the temperature plummeted by 30 degrees and the winds immediately increased to 60\u00a0mph. The dust fell straight down instead of sideways like the others and was also so dense that there was practically no visibility and one couldn't even light a lamp as there wasn't enough oxygen in the storm to keep it going. Denver-based Associated Press reporter Robert E. Geiger happened to be in Boise City, Oklahoma, that day. His story about Black Sunday marked the first appearance of the term \"Dust Bowl\"; it was coined by Edward Stanley, Kansas City news editor of the Associated Press, while rewriting Geiger's news story.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Spearman and Hansford County have been literaly [sic] in a cloud of dust for the past week. Ever since Friday of last week, there hasn't been a day pass but what the county was beseieged [sic] with a blast of wind and dirt. On rare occasions when the wind did subside for a period of hours, the air has been so filled with dust that the town appeared to be overhung by a fog cloud. Because of this long seige of dust and every building being filled with it, the air has become stifling to breathe and many people have developed sore throats and dust colds as a result.\u2014\u200a\nMuch of the farmland was eroded in the aftermath of the Dust Bowl. In 1941, a Kansas agricultural experiment station released a bulletin that suggested reestablishing native grasses by the \"hay method\". Developed in 1937 to speed up the process and increase returns from pasture, the \"hay method\" was originally supposed to occur in Kansas naturally over 25\u201340 years.\nAfter much data analysis, the causal mechanism for the droughts can be linked to ocean temperature anomalies. Specifically, Atlantic Ocean sea surface temperatures appear to have had an indirect effect on the general atmospheric circulation, while Pacific sea surface temperatures seem to have had the most direct influence.\nHuman displacement.\nThis catastrophe intensified the economic impact of the Great Depression in the region.\nIn 1935, many families were forced to leave their farms and travel to other areas seeking work because of the drought, which had already lasted four years. The abandonment of homesteads and financial ruin resulting from catastrophic topsoil loss led to widespread hunger and poverty. Dust Bowl conditions fomented an exodus of the displaced from the Texas Panhandle, Oklahoma Panhandle, and the surrounding Great Plains to adjacent regions. More than 500,000 Americans were left homeless. More than 350 houses had to be torn down after one storm alone. The severe drought and dust storms left many homeless; others had their mortgages foreclosed by banks, or felt they had no choice but to abandon their farms in search of work. Many Americans migrated west, looking for work. Parents packed up \"jalopies\" with their families and a few personal belongings and headed west. Some residents of the Plains, especially Kansas and Oklahoma, fell ill and died of dust pneumonia or malnutrition.\nBetween 1930 and 1940, about 3.5\u00a0million people moved out of the Plains states. In just over a year, over 86,000 people migrated to California. This number is more than the number of migrants to that area during the 1849 gold rush. Migrants abandoned farms in Oklahoma, Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, Texas, Colorado, and New Mexico, but were often generally called \"Okies\", \"Arkies\", or \"Texies\". Terms such as \"Okies\" and \"Arkies\" came to be standard in the 1930s for those who had lost everything and were struggling the most during the Great Depression.\nBut not all migrants traveled long distances; most participated in internal state migration, moving from counties that the Dust Bowl badly impacted to other, less affected counties. So many families left their farms and were on the move that the proportion of migrants and residents was nearly equal in the Great Plains states.\nAn examination of Census Bureau statistics and other records, and a 1939 survey of occupation by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics of about 116,000 families who arrived in California in the 1930s, showed that only 43% of Southwesterners were doing farm work immediately before they migrated. Nearly a third of all migrants were professional or white-collar workers. Some farmers had to take on unskilled labor when they moved; leaving the farming sector commonly led to greater social mobility as there was a far greater likelihood that migrant farmers would later go into semi-skilled or high-skilled fields that paid better. Non-farmers experienced more downward occupational moves than farmers, but in most cases they were not significant enough to bring them into poverty, because high-skilled migrants were most likely to experience a downward shift into semi-skilled work. While semi-skilled work did not pay as well as high-skilled work, most of these workers were not impoverished. For the most part, by the end of the Dust Bowl the migrants generally were better off than those who chose to stay behind.\nAfter the Great Depression ended, some migrants moved back to their original states. Many others remained where they had resettled. As of 2007, about one-eighth of California's population was of Okie heritage.\nChanges in agriculture and population on the Plains.\nAgricultural land and revenue boomed during World War I, but fell during the Great Depression and the 1930s. The agricultural land most affected by the Dust Bowl was of land in the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles. These 20 counties that the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Soil Conservation Service identified as the worst wind-eroded region were home to the majority of the Great Plains migrants during the Dust Bowl.\nWhile migration from and between the Southern Great Plain States was greater than migration in other regions in the 1930s, the numbers of migrants from these areas had only slightly increased from the 1920s. The Dust Bowl and Great Depression thus did not trigger a mass exodus of southern migrants, but simply encouraged these migrants to keep moving where in other areas the Great Depression limited mobility due to economic issues, decreasing migration. While the population of the Great Plains did fall during the Dust Bowl and Great Depression, the drop was not caused by extreme numbers of migrants leaving the Great Plains but by of a lack of migrants moving from outside the Great Plains into the region.\nGovernment response.\nGovernment's greatly expanded participation in land management and soil conservation was an important result of the disaster. Different groups took many different approaches to responding to the disaster. To identify areas that needed attention, groups such as the Soil Conservation Service generated detailed soil maps and took photos of the land from the sky. To create shelterbelts to reduce soil erosion, groups such as the United States Forest Service's Prairie States Forestry Project planted trees on private lands. Groups like the Resettlement Administration, which later became the Farm Security Administration, encouraged small farm owners to resettle on other lands if they lived in drier parts of the Plains.\nDuring President Franklin D. Roosevelt's first 100 days in office in 1933, his administration quickly initiated programs to conserve soil and restore the nation's ecological balance. Interior Secretary Harold L. Ickes established the Soil Erosion Service in August 1933 under Hugh Hammond Bennett. In 1935, it was transferred and reorganized under the Department of Agriculture and renamed the Soil Conservation Service. It is now known as the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).\nAs part of New Deal programs, Congress passed the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act in 1936, requiring landowners to share the allocated government subsidies with the laborers who worked on their farms. Under the law, \"benefit payments were continued as measures for production control and income support, but they were now financed by direct Congressional appropriations and justified as soil conservation measures. The Act shifted the parity goal from price equality of agricultural commodities and the articles that farmers buy to income equality of farm and non-farm population.\" Thus, the parity goal was to re-create the ratio between the purchasing power of the net income per person on farms from agriculture and that of the income of persons not on farms that prevailed during 1909\u20131914.\nTo stabilize prices, the government paid farmers and ordered more than six million pigs to be slaughtered as part of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA). It paid to have the meat packed and distributed to the poor and hungry. The Federal Surplus Relief Corporation (FSRC) was established to regulate crop and other surpluses. In a May 14, 1935, address to the AAA, Roosevelt said:\nLet me make one other point clear for the benefit of the millions in cities who have to buy meats. Last year the Nation suffered a drought of unparalleled intensity. If there had been no Government program, if the old order had obtained in 1933 and 1934, that drought on the cattle ranges of America and in the corn belt would have resulted in the marketing of thin cattle, immature hogs and the death of these animals on the range and on the farm, and if the old order had been in effect those years, we would have had a vastly greater shortage than we face today. Our program\u00a0\u2013 we can prove it\u00a0\u2013 saved the lives of millions of head of livestock. They are still on the range, and other millions of heads are today canned and ready for this country to eat.\nThe FSRC diverted agricultural commodities to relief organizations. Apples, beans, canned beef, flour and pork products were distributed through local relief channels. Cotton goods were later included, to clothe needy.\nIn 1935, the federal government formed a Drought Relief Service (DRS) to coordinate relief activities. The DRS bought cattle in counties that were designated emergency areas for $14 to $20 a head. Animals determined unfit for human consumption were killed; at the beginning of the program, more than 50% were so designated in emergency areas. The DRS assigned the remaining cattle to the Federal Surplus Relief Corporation (FSRC) to be used in food distribution to families nationwide. Although it was difficult for farmers to give up their herds, the cattle slaughter program helped many of them avoid bankruptcy. \"The government cattle buying program was a blessing to many farmers, as they could not afford to keep their cattle, and the government paid a better price than they could obtain in local markets.\"\nRoosevelt ordered the Civilian Conservation Corps to plant the Great Plains Shelterbelt, a huge belt of more than 200\u00a0million trees from Canada to Abilene, Texas, to break the wind, hold water in the soil, and hold the soil in place. The administration also began to educate farmers on soil conservation and anti-erosion techniques, including crop rotation, strip farming, contour plowing, and terracing. In 1937, the federal government began an aggressive campaign to encourage Dust Bowl farmers to adopt planting and plowing methods that conserved the soil. The government paid reluctant farmers a dollar an acre () to use the new methods. By 1938, the massive conservation effort had reduced the amount of blowing soil by 65%. The land still failed to yield a decent living. In the fall of 1939, after nearly a decade of dirt and dust, the drought ended when regular rainfall finally returned to the region. The government still encouraged continuing the use of conservation methods to protect the Plains' soil and ecology.\nAt the end of the drought, the programs implemented during the tough times helped sustain a friendly relationship between farmers and the federal government.\nThe President's Drought Committee issued a report in 1935 covering the government's assistance to agriculture during 1934 through mid-1935: it discussed conditions, measures of relief, organization, finances, operations, and results of the government's assistance.\nLong-term economic impact.\nIn many regions, more than 75% of the topsoil was blown away by the end of the 1930s. Land degradation varied widely. Aside from the short-term economic consequences of erosion, the Dust Bowl had severe long-term economic consequences.\nBy 1940, counties that had experienced the most erosion had a greater decline in agricultural land values. The per-acre value of farmland declined by 28% in high-erosion counties and 17% in medium-erosion counties, relative to land value changes in low-erosion counties. Even over the long term, the land's agricultural value often failed to return to pre-Dust Bowl levels. In highly eroded areas, less than 25% of the original agricultural losses were recovered. The economy adjusted predominantly through large relative population declines in more-eroded counties, both during the 1930s and through the 1950s.\nThe economic effects persisted in part because of farmers' failure to switch to more appropriate crops for highly eroded areas. Because the amount of topsoil had been reduced, it would have been more productive to shift from crops and wheat to animals and hay. During the Depression and through at least the 1950s, there was limited relative adjustment of farmland away from activities that became less productive in more-eroded counties.\nSome of the failure to shift to more productive agricultural products may be related to ignorance about the benefits of changing land use. A second explanation is a lack of availability of credit, caused by the high rate of failure of banks in the Plains states. Because banks failed in the Dust Bowl region at a higher rate than elsewhere, farmers could not get the credit they needed to obtain capital to shift crop production. In addition, profit margins in either animals or hay were still minimal, and farmers at first had little incentive to change their crops.\nPatrick Allitt recounts how fellow historian Donald Worster responded to his return visit to the Dust Bowl in the mid-1970s when he revisited some of the worst afflicted counties:\nCapital-intensive agribusiness had transformed the scene; deep wells into the aquifer, intensive irrigation, the use of artificial pesticides and fertilizers, and giant harvesters were creating immense crops year after year whether it rained or not. According to the farmers he interviewed, technology had provided the perfect answer to old troubles, such of the bad days would not return. In Worster's view, by contrast, the scene demonstrated that America's capitalist high-tech farmers had learned nothing. They were continuing to work in an unsustainable way, devoting far cheaper subsidized energy to growing food than the energy could give back to its ultimate consumers.\nIn contrast with Worster's pessimism, historian Mathew Bonnifield argued that the Dust Bowl's long-term significance was \"the triumph of the human spirit in its capacity to endure and overcome hardships and reverses.\"\nA 2023 study in the \"Journal of Economic History\" found that while the Dust Bowl had large and enduring impacts on agricultural land, it had modest impacts on average wage incomes.\nInfluence on the arts and culture.\nThe crisis was documented by photographers, musicians, and authors, many hired during the Great Depression by the federal government. For instance, the Farm Security Administration hired photographers to document the crisis. Artists such as Dorothea Lange were aided by having salaried work during the Depression. She captured what have become classic images of the dust storms and migrant families. Among her best-known photographs is \"Destitute Pea Pickers in California. Mother of Seven Children\" depicted a gaunt-looking woman, Florence Owens Thompson, holding three of her children. This picture expressed the struggles of people caught by the Dust Bowl and raised awareness in other parts of the country of its reach and human cost. Decades later, Thompson disliked the boundless circulation of the photo and resented that she had received no money from its broadcast. Thompson felt it made her perceived as a Dust Bowl \"Okie\".\nThe work of independent artists was also influenced by the crises of the Dust Bowl and the Depression. Author John Steinbeck, borrowing closely from field notes taken by Farm Security Administration worker and author Sanora Babb, wrote \"The Grapes of Wrath\" (1939) about migrant workers and farm families displaced by the Dust Bowl. Babb's own novel about the lives of the migrant workers, \"Whose Names Are Unknown\", was written in 1939, but was eclipsed and shelved in response to Steinbeck's success, and was not published till 2004. Many of folk singer Woody Guthrie's songs, such as those on his 1940 album \"Dust Bowl Ballads\", are about his experiences in the Dust Bowl era during the Great Depression, when he traveled with displaced farmers from Oklahoma to California and learned their traditional folk and blues songs, earning him the nickname the \"Dust Bowl Troubadour\".\nMigrants also influenced musical culture wherever they went. Oklahoma migrants, in particular, were rural Southwesterners who carried their traditional country music to California. Today, the \"Bakersfield Sound\" describes this blend, which developed after the migrants brought country music to the city. Their new music inspired a proliferation of country dance halls as far south as Los Angeles.\nThe 2003\u20132005 HBO TV series \"Carniv\u00e0le\" was set during the Dust Bowl period.\nThe 2014 science fiction film \"Interstellar\" features a ravaged 21st-century America that is again scoured by dust storms (caused by a worldwide pathogen affecting all crops). Along with inspiration from the 1930s crisis, director Christopher Nolan features interviews from the 2012 documentary \"The Dust Bowl\" to draw further parallels.\nIn 2017, Americana recording artist Grant Maloy Smith released the album \"Dust Bowl \u2013 American Stories\", inspired by the history of the Dust Bowl. In a review, the music magazine \"No Depression\" wrote that the album's lyrics and music are \"as potent as Woody Guthrie, as intense as John Trudell and dusted with the trials and tribulations of Tom Joad\u00a0\u2013 Steinbeck and \"The Grapes of Wrath\".\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59751", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59751", "title": "Hardicanute", "text": ""}
{"id": "59752", "revid": "42617216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59752", "title": "Darryl Kile", "text": "American baseball player (1968\u20132002)\nDarryl Andrew Kile (December 2, 1968 \u2013 June 22, 2002) was an American professional baseball starting pitcher. He pitched from 1991 to 2002 for three Major League Baseball (MLB) teams, primarily for the Houston Astros. Kile was known for his sharp, big-breaking curveball. He died at the age of 33 of coronary artery disease in 2002 in Chicago, where he and the St. Louis Cardinals were staying for a weekend series against the Chicago Cubs. He was the first active major league player to die during the regular season since 1979, when the New York Yankees' Thurman Munson died in a plane crash.\nEarly life.\nKile was born on December 2, 1968, in Garden Grove, California, near Angel Stadium. He attended Norco High School in Norco, California, where his awkward frame and low pitch velocity \u2014 his four-seam fastball topping out at \u2014 meant that he was mostly overlooked by college recruiters and scouts. In 1987, after graduating from Norco, Kile enrolled at Chaffey Junior College in Rancho Cucamonga, California, and joined their college baseball team as a walk-on. Between his freshman and sophomore year of college, Kile underwent a growth spurt that took him from to , helped him gain , and added to his fastball.\nHouston Astros.\nKile was selected by the Houston Astros in the 30th round of the 1987 Major League draft. Having been successful with the Tucson Toros, the Astros' AAA club in the Pacific Coast League, Kile entered the majors in 1991, going 7\u201311 in 22 starts. In his first major league start on April 24, 1991, Kile had a no-hitter going when he was lifted after six innings by manager Art Howe, who wanted to protect the 22-year-old rookie's arm. Kile's breakthrough year came in 1993 when he went 15\u20138 with a 3.51 earned run average and made the All-Star team. On September 8, Kile pitched a no-hitter against the New York Mets. He pitched seven seasons with the Astros, mostly as a starter. Another strong season was 1997, when he went 19\u20137, compiled a 2.57 ERA, made the All-Star team again, threw a career-high &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;255+2\u20443 innings, and pitched four shutouts. He finished fifth in voting for the NL Cy Young Award. Kile made his first postseason appearance in Game 1 of the 1997 National League Division Series against the Atlanta Braves, giving up only two hits but suffering a hard-luck 2\u20131 loss. Atlanta swept Houston in the best-of-five series.\nColorado Rockies and St. Louis Cardinals.\nIn 1998, Kile signed with the Colorado Rockies as a free agent. Kile suffered control problems, allowing hitters to lay off his curveball. After two seasons in which he was a combined 21\u201330 and posted ERAs of 5.20 and 6.61, Kile was traded to the Cardinals. In his first season with St. Louis, Kile went 20\u20139, becoming the first Cardinal pitcher since John Tudor and Joaqu\u00edn And\u00fajar in 1985 to win 20 games in a season. He made his third All-Star team and again finished fifth in NL Cy Young Award voting. He earned the first playoff victory of his career in Game 2 of the 2000 NLDS against Atlanta, but suffered two losses in the NL Championship Series, which the Cardinals lost to the Mets in five games.\nKile went 16\u201311 in 2001, and the Cardinals made the playoffs again, losing to the eventual world champion Arizona Diamondbacks in the NLDS. Kile was the starting pitcher for Game 3 and received a no-decision. Kile threw &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;227+1\u20443 innings and compiled a 3.09 ERA that season, despite having an injured shoulder which required surgery after the Cardinals were eliminated from the playoffs. He spent the offseason rehabilitating and was ready for the start of the 2002 season. In 12 seasons as a major league pitcher, Kile never went on the disabled list.\nOn June 18, Kile pitched in an interleague game against the Anaheim Angels, scattering six hits over &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+2\u20443 innings, allowing one run. He exited the game in the eighth inning to a standing ovation. Kile and the Cardinals won the game, 7\u20132, and moved into first place in the NL's Central Division, a spot they held for the rest of the 2002 season.\nPersonal life.\nKile proposed to his wife, Flynn, in 1991, when they were both 22 years old. They were married on January 11, 1992, and had three children. He and his family lived in Clayton, Missouri, during the baseball season. The family also owned a home in Englewood, Colorado, where they lived during the offseason, though at the time of Kile's death, the family was in the process of moving to San Diego for the offseasons.\nDeath.\nOn June 22, 2002, during pregame warmups for what would have been a day game in Chicago against the rival Cubs, team personnel noted Kile's absence. Hotel staff entered his room and discovered him in his bed, under the covers, dead of a heart attack. His death, which came four days after that of longtime Cardinal broadcaster Jack Buck, was ruled to be from natural causes; an autopsy found that Kile had an enlarged heart, two of his coronary arteries were 90% blocked, and there was a blood clot in one artery. Kile's father had died from a blood clot in 1993, aged 44.\nCubs catcher Joe Girardi announced at Wrigley Field that the afternoon's game versus the Cardinals had been cancelled, though he did not give a specific reason. Girardi tearfully gave the news at 2:37\u00a0pm CDT, broadcast regionally on Fox: \"Excuse me. I thank you for your patience. We regret to inform you because of a tragedy in the Cardinal family, that the commissioner has cancelled the game today. Please be respectful. You will find out eventually what has happened, and I ask that you say a prayer for the St. Louis Cardinals' family.\" The game was rescheduled and made up later in the year on August 31, a 10\u20134 Cardinal defeat. Jason Simontacchi, who pitched for the Cardinals, was visibly emotional during the game since Kile was a mentor to him. Later that season, when the Cardinals clinched the Central Division championship in a game against the Astros, teammate Albert Pujols carried Kile's number 57 jersey, on a hanger, to the celebration on the field. \nMemorial.\nThe Cardinals honored Kile by placing a small \"DK 57\" sign in the home bullpen. This sign was carried over to the new Busch Stadium and remains today. The team wrote \"DK 57\" on their hats. The team put chalk and markers in the Busch Stadium concourses so fans could write similar messages on their caps. In the All-Star Game, Cardinals pitcher Matt Morris wrote DK 57 on his hands and held them up when they announced his name in honor of his fallen teammate and close friend.\nSince Kile's death, the Astros have not assigned his uniform number 57 to another player. The Cardinals were the first of Kile's former teams to re-issue the number, doing so in 2021, giving it to pitcher Zack Thompson during spring training. Thompson wore the number during his major league debut in 2022, nearly twenty full years after Kile's death. The Rockies kept the number 57 out of the rotation until it was issued to Tommy Doyle in 2023. \nThe Astros honored Kile with a memorial plaque that hangs along the left field wall at Minute Maid Park under the 1997 Central Division Championship banner, the last season Kile played for Houston before signing with Colorado. A \"DK 57\" sign currently sits among the wall in left-center field. The Rockies have a memorial near the bullpens. It is circular, says \"DK 57\", and is on pinstripes.\nIn 2003, the Darryl Kile Good Guy Award was established and is presented annually to the Astros player and Cardinals player who best exemplify Kile's traits of \"a good teammate, a great friend, a fine father and a humble man\". The winners are selected, respectively, by the Houston and St. Louis chapters of the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA). The first recipients of the award were Jeff Bagwell and Mike Matheny of the Astros and Cardinals, respectively.\nKile was given an exemption by the Baseball Writers' Association of America and placed on the ballot for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2003. With seven votes, he was eliminated from future BBWAA ballot consideration.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59753", "revid": "26801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59753", "title": "Harold II of England", "text": ""}
{"id": "59754", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59754", "title": "The Bored of the Rings", "text": ""}
{"id": "59755", "revid": "35751661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59755", "title": "G8", "text": "Intergovernmental political forum (1997\u20132014)\nThe Group of Eight (G8) was an intergovernmental political forum from 1997 to 2014, formed by incorporating Russia into the G7. The G8 became the G7 again after Russia was expelled in 2014 after the Russian annexation of Crimea.\nThe forum originated with a 1975 summit hosted by France that brought together representatives of six governments: France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, thus leading to the name Group of Six or G6. The summit came to be known as the Group of Seven in 1976 with the addition of Canada. The European Union (or predecessor institutions such as the European Economic Community) was represented at the G8 since the 1980s as a \"nonenumerated\" participant, but originally could not host or chair summits. Russia was added to the political forum from 1997, which the following year became known as the G8. In 2005, the UK government initiated the practice of inviting five leading emerging markets \u2013 Brazil, China, India, Mexico, and South Africa \u2013 to participate in the G8 meetings that came to be known as G8+5.\n\"G8\" referred to the member states in aggregate or to the annual summit meeting of the G8 heads of government. Each calendar year, the responsibility of hosting the G8 was rotated through the member states in the following order: France, United States, United Kingdom, Russia, Germany, Japan, Italy, and Canada. The holder of the presidency sets the agenda, hosts the summit for that year, and determines which ministerial meetings will take place. G8 ministers also met throughout the year, such as the G8 finance ministers (who meet four times a year), G8 foreign ministers, or G8 environment ministers.\nThe G8 countries were not strictly the largest in the world nor the highest-income per capita, but they did represent the largest high-income countries. With the G20 major economies growing in stature since the 2008 Washington summit, world leaders from the group announced at their Pittsburgh summit in September 2009 that the group would replace the G8 as the main economic council of wealthy nations. Collectively, in 2012 the G8 nations comprised 50.1 percent of 2012 global nominal GDP, 40.9 percent of global GDP (PPP) and 60.9 percent of 2024 global stock market capitalization. In March 2014 Russia was suspended indefinitely following the annexation of Crimea, whereupon the political forum name reverted to G7. The 2014 G7 summit was hosted and chaired by the European Union instead of Russia.\nHistory.\nFollowing 1994's G7 summit in Naples, Russian officials held separate meetings with leaders of the G7 after the group's summits. This informal arrangement was dubbed the Political 8 (P8)\u2014or, colloquially, the G7+1. At the invitation of UK Prime Minister Tony Blair and U.S. President Bill Clinton, President Boris Yeltsin was invited first as a guest observer, later as a full participant. It was seen as a way to encourage Yeltsin with his capitalist reforms. Russia formally joined the group in 1998, resulting in the Group of Eight, or G8.\nFocus of G8.\nAfter the 2008 financial crisis, the G20 replaced the G8 as the world's main international economic council. Nevertheless, the G8 retained its relevance as a \"steering group for the West\", with special significance appointed to Japan. The 40th summit was the first time the European Union was able to host and chair a summit.\nA major focus of the G8 since 2009 has been the global supply of food. At the 2009 L'Aquila summit, the G8's members promised to contribute $22 billion to the issue. By 2015, 93% of funds had been disbursed to projects like sustainable agriculture development and adequate emergency food aid assistance.\nAt the 2012 summit, President Barack Obama asked G8 leaders to adopt the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition initiative to \"help the rural poor produce more food and sell it in thriving local and regional markets as well as on the global market\". Ghana became one of the first six African countries to sign up to the G8 New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition in 2012. There was, however, almost no knowledge of the G8 initiative among some stakeholders, including farmers, academics and agricultural campaign groups. Confusion surrounding the plans was made worse, critics say, by \"a dizzying array of regional and national agriculture programmes that are inaccessible to ordinary people\".\nRussia's participation suspension (2014).\nOn 24 March 2014, the G7 members cancelled the planned G8 summit that was to be held in June of that year in the Russian city of Sochi, and suspended Russia's membership of the group, due to Russia's annexation of Crimea; nevertheless, they stopped short of outright permanent expulsion. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov downplayed the importance of the decision by the U.S. and its allies, and pointed out that major international decisions were made by the G20 countries.\nLater on, the Italian Foreign Affairs minister Federica Mogherini and other Italian authorities, along with the EastWest Institute board member Wolfgang Ischinger, suggested that Russia may restore its membership in the group. In April 2015, the German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said that Russia would be welcomed to return to G8 provided the Minsk Protocol were implemented. In 2016, he added that \"none of the major international conflicts can be solved without Russia\", and the G7 countries will consider Russia's return to the group in 2017. The same year, Japanese Prime Minister Shinz\u014d Abe called for Russia's return to G8, stating that Russia's involvement is \"crucial to tackling multiple crises in the Middle East\". In January 2017, the Italian foreign minister Angelino Alfano said that Italy hopes for \"resuming the G8 format with Russia and ending the atmosphere of the Cold War\".\nOn 13 January 2017, Russia announced that it would permanently leave the G8 grouping. In January 2017, Russia announced its permanent withdrawal from the G8. However, several representatives of G7 countries stated that they would be interested in Russia's return to the group. Christian Lindner, the leader of Free Democratic Party of Germany and member of the Bundestag, said that Putin should be \"asked to join the table of the G7\" so that one could \"talk with him and not about him\", and \"we cannot make all things dependent on the situation in Crimea\". In April 2018, the German politicians and members of the Bundestag Sahra Wagenknecht and Alexander Graf Lambsdorff said that Russia should be invited back to the group and attend the 2018 summit in Canada: \"Russia should again be at the table during the [June] summit at the latest\" because \"peace in Europe and also in the Middle East is only possible with Russia\". The US President Donald Trump also stated that Russia should be reinstated to the group; his appeal was supported by the Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte. After several G7 members quickly rejected US President Trump's suggestion to again accept the Russian Federation into the G8, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov said that the Russian Federation wasn't interested in rejoining the political forum. He also said that the G20 is sufficient for the Russian Federation. In the final statement of the 2018 meeting in Canada, the G7 members announced to continue sanctions and also to be ready to take further restrictive measures against the Russian Federation for the failure of Minsk Agreement complete implementation.\nA \"new G8\".\nOn 11 June 2022, Vyacheslav Volodin, the current Chairman of the State Duma, announced on Telegram that \"countries wishing to build an equal dialogue and mutually beneficial relations would actually form, together with Russia, a 'new G8'\". Although Volodin mentioned the group of eight countries not participating in the sanctions against the Russian Federation\u2014China, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Mexico, Iran, and Turkey\u2014there have been no updates regarding the new G8; however, five of the seven nations listed are already a part of BRICS.\nStructure and activities.\nBy design, the G8 deliberately lacked an administrative structure like those for international organizations, such as the United Nations or the World Bank. The group does not have a permanent secretariat, or offices for its members.\nThe presidency of the group rotates annually among member countries, with each new term beginning on 1 January of the year. The rotation order is: France, the United States, the United Kingdom, Russia (suspended), Germany, Japan, Italy, and Canada. The country holding the presidency is responsible for planning and hosting a series of ministerial-level meetings, leading up to a mid-year summit attended by the heads of government. The president of the European Commission participates as an equal in all summit events.\nThe ministerial meetings bring together ministers responsible for various portfolios to discuss issues of mutual or global concern. The range of topics include health, law enforcement, labor, economic and social development, energy, environment, foreign affairs, justice and interior, terrorism, and trade. There are also a separate set of meetings known as the G8+5, created during the 2005 Gleneagles, Scotland summit, that is attended by finance and energy ministers from all eight member countries in addition to the five \"outreach countries\" which are also known as the Group of Five\u2014Brazil, People's Republic of China, India, Mexico, and South Africa.\nIn June 2005, justice ministers and interior ministers from the G8 countries agreed to launch an international database on pedophiles. The G8 officials also agreed to pool data on terrorism, subject to restrictions by privacy and security laws in individual countries.\nGlobal energy.\nAt the Heiligendamm Summit in 2007, the G8 acknowledged a proposal from the EU for a worldwide initiative on efficient energy use. They agreed to explore, along with the International Energy Agency, the most effective means to promote energy efficiency internationally. A year later, on 8 June 2008, the G8 along with China, India, South Korea and the European Community established the International Partnership for Energy Efficiency Cooperation, at the Energy Ministerial meeting hosted by Japan holding 2008 G8 Presidency, in Aomori.\nG8 Finance Ministers, whilst in preparation for the 34th Summit of the G8 Heads of State and Government in Toyako, Hokkaido, met on the 13 and 14 June 2008, in Osaka, Japan. They agreed to the \"G8 Action Plan for Climate Change to Enhance the Engagement of Private and Public Financial Institutions\". In closing, Ministers supported the launch of new Climate Investment Funds (CIFs) by the World Bank, which will help existing efforts until a new framework under the UNFCCC is implemented after 2012. The UNFCCC is not on track to meeting any of its stated goals.\nIn July 2005, the G8 Summit endorsed the IPHE in its Plan of Action on Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable Development, and identified it as a medium of cooperation and collaboration to develop clean energy technologies.\nAnnual summit.\nThe first G8 summit was held in 1997 after Russia formally joined the G7 group, and the last one was held in 2013. The 2014 summit was scheduled to be held in Russia. However, due to Crimea's annexation by the Russian Federation, the other seven countries decided to hold a separate meeting without Russia as a G7 summit in Brussels, Belgium.\nCriticism.\nOne type of criticism is that members of G8 do not do enough to help global problems, due to strict patent policy and other issues related to globalization. In \"Unraveling Global Apartheid\", political analyst Titus Alexander described the G7, as it was in 1996, as the 'cabinet' of global minority rule, with a coordinating role in world affairs.\nIn 2012 The Heritage Foundation, an American conservative think tank, criticized the G8 for advocating food security without making room for economic freedom.\nRelevance.\nThe G8's relevance has been subject to debate from 2008 onward. It represented the major industrialized countries but critics argued that the G8 no longer represented the world's most powerful economies, as China has surpassed every economy but the United States.\nVladimir Putin did not attend the 2012 G8 summit at Camp David, causing \"Foreign Policy\" magazine to remark that the summit has generally outlived its usefulness as a viable international gathering of foreign leaders. Two years later, Russia was suspended from the G8, then chose to leave permanently in January 2017.\nThe G20 major economies leaders' summit has had an increased level of international prestige and influence. However, British Prime Minister David Cameron said of the G8 in 2012:\nSome people ask, does the G8 still matter, when we have a Group of 20? My answer is, yes. The G8 is a group of like-minded countries that share a belief in free enterprise as the best route to growth. As eight countries making up about half the world's gross domestic product, the standards we set, the commitments we make, and the steps we take can help solve vital global issues, fire up economies and drive prosperity all over the world.\nYouth 8 Summit.\nThe Y8 Summit or simply Y8, formerly known as the G8 Youth Summit is the youth counterpart to the G8 summit. The summits were organized from 2006 to 2013. The first summit to use the name Y8 took place in May 2012 in Puebla, Mexico, alongside the Youth G8 that took place in Washington, D.C. the same year. From 2016 onwards, similar youth conferences were organized under the name Y7 Summit.\nThe Y8 Summit brings together young leaders from G8 nations and the European Union to facilitate discussions of international affairs, promote cross-cultural understanding, and build global friendships. The conference closely follows the formal negotiation procedures of the G8 Summit. The Y8 Summit represents the innovative voice of young adults between the age of 18 and 35. At the end of the summit, the delegates jointly come up with a consensus-based written statement, the Final Communiqu\u00e9. This document is subsequently presented to G8 leaders in order to inspire positive change.\nThe Y8 Summit was organized annually by a global network of youth-led organizations called The IDEA (The International Diplomatic Engagement Association). The organizations undertake the selection processes for their respective national delegations, while the hosting country is responsible for organizing the summit. An example of such a youth-led organization is the Young European Leadership association, which recruits and sends EU Delegates.\nThe goal of the Y8 Summit is to bring together young people from around the world to allow the voices and opinions of young generations to be heard and to encourage them to take part in global decision-making processes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59756", "revid": "21931029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59756", "title": "South Vietnam", "text": "Country in Southeast Asia (1955\u20131975)\nSouth Vietnam, officially the Republic of Vietnam (RVN; , VNCH), was a country in Southeast Asia that existed from 1955 to 1975. It first garnered international recognition in 1949 as the associated State of Vietnam within the French Union, with its capital at Saigon. Since 1950, it was a member of the Western Bloc during the Cold War. Following the 1954 partition of Vietnam, it became known as South Vietnam and was established as a republic in 1955. Its sovereignty was recognized by the United States and 87 other nations, though it failed to gain admission into the United Nations as a result of a Soviet veto in 1957. It was succeeded by the Republic of South Vietnam in 1975. In 1976, the Republic of South Vietnam and North Vietnam merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.\nThe aftermath of World War II saw the communist-led Viet Minh, under Ho Chi Minh, seize power and proclaim the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) in Hanoi in September 1945, initiating civil conflicts. In 1949, during the First Indochina War, the French and anti-communist nationalists established the State of Vietnam (SVN), led by former emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. Returning from exile in June 1954, Ngo Dinh Diem, recognized as the prominent anti-communist and anti-colonialist figure, was appointed prime minister of the SVN.\nAfter the 1954 Geneva Conference, the DRV took control of North Vietnam, while the SVN administered South Vietnam, which encompassed the southern and part of the central regions of the country. A 1955 referendum on the state's future form of government was widely marred by electoral fraud and resulted in the deposal of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i by Prime Minister Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m, who proclaimed himself president of the new republic on 26 October 1955. Di\u1ec7m was killed in a CIA-backed military coup led by general D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh in 1963, and a series of short-lived military governments followed. General Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u then led the country after a US-encouraged but rigged civilian presidential election from 1967 until 1975.\nThe beginnings of the Vietnam War occurred in 1955 with an uprising by the newly organized National Liberation Front for South Vietnam (Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng), armed and supported by North Vietnam, with backing mainly from China and the Soviet Union. Larger escalation of the insurgency occurred in 1965 with American intervention and the introduction of regular forces of Marines, followed by Army units to supplement the cadre of military advisors guiding the Southern armed forces. A regular bombing campaign over North Vietnam was conducted by offshore US Navy airplanes, warships, and aircraft carriers joined by Air Force squadrons through 1966 and 1967. Fighting peaked up to that point during the Tet Offensive of February 1968, when there were over a million South Vietnamese soldiers, 500,000 U.S. soldiers, and 100,000 soldiers from other allied nations such as South Korea, Australia, and Thailand in South Vietnam. What started as a guerrilla war eventually turned into a more conventional fight as the balance of power became equalized. An even larger, armored invasion from the North commenced during the Easter Offensive following US ground-forces withdrawal, and had nearly overrun some major southern cities until being beaten back.\nDespite a truce agreement under the Paris Peace Accords, concluded in January 1973 after five years of on-and-off negotiations, fighting continued almost immediately afterwards. The regular North Vietnamese army and Vi\u1ec7t-C\u1ed9ng auxiliaries launched a major second combined-arms conventional invasion in 1975. Communist forces overran Saigon on 30 April 1975 in what is called the fall of Saigon, marking the end of the Republic of Vietnam. On 2 July 1976, the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam) and the North Vietnamese-controlled Republic of South Vietnam merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam; Saigon was renamed Ho Chi Minh City.\nEtymology.\nThe official name of the South Vietnamese state was the \"Republic of Vietnam\" (; ). The North was known as the \"Democratic Republic of Vietnam\".\n\"Vi\u1ec7t Nam\" () was the name adopted by Emperor Gia Long in 1804. It is a variation of \"Nam Vi\u1ec7t\" (\u5357 \u8d8a, \"Southern Vi\u1ec7t\"), a name used in ancient times. In 1839, Emperor Minh M\u1ea1ng renamed the country \"\u0110\u1ea1i Nam\" (\"Great South\"). In 1945, the nation's official name was changed back to \"Vietnam\". The name is also sometimes rendered as \"Viet Nam\" in English. \nBefore 1954, the three regions of Vietnam were often translated into English as \"North\", \"Central\", and \"South Viet-Nam\". Following the 1954 partition of Vietnam into communist and anti-communist parts, it was recommended to refer to Vietnam south of the 17th parallel as \"Southern Vietnam\", but later on, \"South Vietnam\" became common usage. Other names commonly used during its existence include \"Free Vietnam\" and the \"Government of Viet Nam\" (GVN).\nHistory.\nFoundations.\nRepublican ideas entered French Indochina in the early 20th century, introducing new concepts about the modern nation-state. By the 1920s, these ideas were embraced by Vietnamese elites, including both revolutionaries and reformers. They influenced Vietnamese independence movements, though suppressed by French colonial authorities. Republican activists were far more popular than communists in the competition between the two groups for leadership of the nationalist movement.\nDuring World War II, Indochina was administered by Vichy France and occupied by Japan in September 1940. Following the ousting of the French in March 1945 and the surrender of Japan in August of the same year, the Vietnamese were locked in a struggle over the destiny of their post-colonial state. The 16th parallel was established following the Potsdam Conference, dividing Vietnam into two military zones: Chinese Nationalist forces occupied the North and British forces the South to disarm Japanese troops. The nationalist sentiment that had intensified during World War II prepared the ground for the communist-led Viet Minh, which, cloaked in nationalism, seized power from the collapsing Empire of Vietnam during the August Revolution and proclaimed the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) in Hanoi. In the South, British-led forces facilitated the return of the French, who fought multiple Vietnamese groups and secured control over Saigon and other urban centers. \nThe Viet Minh sought to consolidate power by terrorizing and purging rival Vietnamese nationalist groups and Trotskyist activists. In 1946, the Franco-Chinese and Ho\u2013Sainteny Agreements enabled French forces to replace the Chinese north of the 16th parallel and facilitated a coexistence between the DRV and the French that strengthened the Viet Minh while undermining the nationalists. That summer, the Viet Minh colluded with French forces to eliminate nationalists, targeted for their ardent anti-colonialism. By eliminating the nationalist parties, the Viet Minh had undermined Vietnam's broader ability to resist French reconquest. The First Indochina War began on 19 December 1946, as French forces reasserted control over Hanoi and other cities. A number of anti-colonialist and anti-communist nationalists, caught between the two sides of the war, chose an uneasy neutrality and were at times labeled as \"attentistes\", including Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m and certain \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t politicians. With the internationalization of the war in 1950, many of these figures ultimately stepped off the fence and entered the political fray.\nThe communist destruction of opposition parties in the summer of 1946 hindered prospects for reconciliation. Nationalist partisans and politico-religious groups rallied around former emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i to negotiate with the French. The State of Vietnam (SVN) was created through co-operation between anti-communist Vietnamese and the French on 14 June 1949. B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i accepted the position of chief of state (\"qu\u1ed1c tr\u01b0\u1edfng\"). In 1950, China, the Soviet Union and other communist states recognised the DRV while the United States and other non-communist contries recognised the SVN. The civil war and the colonial war in Indochina became internationalized and intertwined with the global Cold War.\nAs the communist-led Viet Minh became increasingly radicalized, many people left its \"maquis\" and returned to the cities. Anti-communists accused the communists of manipulating the collective Vietnamese desire for independence to achieve domination. They criticized the Viet Minh for their revolutionary violence and repression, class struggle, and thought control.\nThe State of Vietnam withdrew from the French Union on July 20, 1954. The next day, France and the Viet Minh agreed at the Geneva Conference that Vietnam would be temporarily divided at 17th parallel north and the State of Vietnam would rule the territory south of the 17th parallel, pending unification on the basis of supervised elections in 1956. The State of Vietnam and the United States were firmly opposed to the final settlement at Geneva and the division of Vietnam. During the transitional period of relocation, at least 500,000 Catholics sailed South, many of them through Operation Passage to Freedom, driven by fears of religious persecution in the North. There were about 200,000 Buddhists who moved South with their main leaders, along with minority groups including 20,000 rural Chinese N\u00f9ng and a larger population of urban Chinese. \nA significant factor in shaping the anticommunist critique in South Vietnam came from this influx of educated Northern \u00e9migr\u00e9s (\"B\u1eafc di c\u01b0\"). Among them, most of the notable political and cultural voices were non-Catholic. Government and private writers illustrated how the communists had betrayed true nationalists and undermined the struggle for independence. They lamented that communism had corrupted the natural goodness of humanity and disrupted the traditional harmony of Vietnamese society. About 90,000 Vi\u1ec7t Minh were evacuated to the North while 5,000 to 10,000 cadre remained in the South, most of them with orders to refocus on political activity and agitation. The Saigon-Cholon Peace Committee, the first Viet Cong front, was founded in 1954 to provide leadership for this group.\nFirst Republic (1955\u20131963).\nAs Saigon's delegation did not sign the Geneva Accords, they claimed that the State of Vietnam was not bound by it, and that the communist government in the North created conditions that made a fair election impossible in that region. In July 1955, Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem announced in a broadcast that South Vietnam would not participate in the elections specified in the Geneva Accords, asserting that elections held under communist rule in North Vietnam would not be free. US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles stated that, under conditions of free elections, the communists would not win. Dennis J. Duncanson described the circumstances prevailing in 1955 and 1956 as \"anarchy among sects and of the retiring Vi\u1ec7t Minh in the South, the 1956 campaign of terror from Hanoi's land reform and resultant peasant uprising around Vinh in the North\".\nDi\u1ec7m held a referendum on 23 October 1955 to determine the future of the country. He asked voters to approve a republic, thus removing B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i as head of state. The poll was supervised by his younger brother, Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu. Di\u1ec7m was credited with 98 percent of the votes. In many districts, there were more votes to remove B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i than there were registered voters (e.g., in Saigon, 133% of the registered population reportedly voted to remove B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i). His American advisors had recommended a more modest winning margin of \"60 to 70 percent\". Di\u1ec7m, however, viewed the election as a test of authority. On 26 October 1955, Di\u1ec7m declared himself the president of the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam. The French, who needed troops to fight in Algeria and were increasingly sidelined by the United States, completely withdrew from Vietnam by April 1956.\nThe Geneva Accords promised elections in 1956 to determine a national government for a united Vietnam. In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the International Control Commission (ICC) stated that fair, unbiased elections were not possible, reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement: \"The elections were not held. South Vietnam, which had not signed the Geneva Accords, did not believe the Communists in North Vietnam would allow a fair election. In January 1957, the ICC agreed with this perception, reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement. With the French gone, a return to the traditional power struggle between north and south had begun again.\"\nIn October 1956 Di\u1ec7m, with US prodding, launched a land reform program restricting rice farm sizes to a maximum of 247 acres per landowner with the excess land to be sold to landless peasants. More than 1.8m acres of farm land would become available for purchase, the US would pay the landowners and receive payment from the purchasers over a six-year period. Land reform was regarded by the US as a crucial step to build support for the nascent South Vietnamese government and undermine communist propaganda.\nThe North Vietnamese Communist Party approved a \"people's war\" on the South at a session in January 1959 and this decision was confirmed by the Politburo in March. In May 1959, Group 559 was established to maintain and upgrade the Ho Chi Minh trail, at this time a six-month mountain trek through Laos. About 500 of the \"regroupees\" of 1954 were sent south on the trail during its first year of operation.\nDi\u1ec7m attempted to stabilise South Vietnam by defending against Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng activities. He launched an anti-communist denunciation campaign (T\u1ed1 C\u1ed9ng) against the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng and military campaigns against three powerful group\u00a0\u2013 the Cao \u0110\u00e0i, H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o and the B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean organised crime syndicate whose military strength combined amounted to approximately 350,000 fighters.\nBy 1960 the land reform process had stalled. Di\u1ec7m had never truly supported reform because many of his biggest supporters were the country's largest landowners. While the US threatened to cut aid unless land reform and other changes were made, Di\u1ec7m correctly assessed that the US was bluffing.\nThroughout this period, the level of US aid and political support increased. In spite of this, a 1961 US intelligence estimate reported that \"one-half of the entire rural region south and southwest of Saigon, as well as some areas to the north, are under considerable Communist control. Some of these areas are in effect denied to all government authority not immediately backed by substantial armed force. The Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng's strength encircles Saigon and has recently begun to move closer in the city.\" The report, later excerpted in \"The Pentagon Papers\", continued: \"Many feel that [Diem] is unable to rally the people in the fight against the Communists because of his reliance on virtual one-man rule, his tolerance of corruption extending even to his immediate entourage, and his refusal to relax a rigid system of public controls.\"\nDuring 1962, North Vietnam intensified its war efforts by infiltrating military personnel and materiel into South Vietnam. Meanwhile, Beijing, following the Sino-Soviet split and rejecting Moscow's policy of \"peaceful coexistence\" with the West, backed Hanoi's escalation by providing the Viet Cong with vital small arms and heavier weaponry.\nMilitary juntas (1963\u20131967).\nThe Di\u1ec7m government lost support among the populace, and from the Kennedy administration, due to its mishandling of Buddhist activists and military defeats by the Viet Cong. Notably, the Hu\u1ebf Ph\u1eadt \u0110\u1ea3n shootings of 8 May 1963 led to the Buddhist crisis, provoking protests and civil resistance. The situation came to a head when the Special Forces were sent to raid Buddhist temples across the country, leaving a death toll estimated to be in the hundreds. Di\u1ec7m was overthrown in a coup on 1 November 1963 with the tacit approval of the US.\nDi\u1ec7m's removal and assassination set off a period of political instability and declining legitimacy of the Saigon government. General D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh became president, but he was ousted in January 1964 by General Nguy\u1ec5n Kh\u00e1nh. Phan Kh\u1eafc S\u1eedu was named head of state, but power remained with a junta of generals led by Kh\u00e1nh, which soon fell to infighting. Meanwhile, the Gulf of Tonkin incident of 2 August 1964 led to a dramatic increase in direct American participation in the war, with nearly 200,000 troops deployed by the end of the year. Kh\u00e1nh sought to capitalize on the crisis with the V\u0169ng T\u00e0u Charter, a new constitution that would have curtailed civil liberties and concentrated his power, but was forced to back down in the face of widespread protests and strikes. Coup attempts followed in September and February 1965, the latter resulting in Air Marshal Nguy\u1ec5n Cao K\u1ef3 becoming prime minister and General Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u becoming nominal head of state.\nSecond Republic (1967\u20131975).\nK\u1ef3 and Thieu functioned in those roles until 1967, bringing much-desired stability to the government. They imposed censorship and suspended civil liberties, and intensified anticommunist efforts. Under pressure from the US, they held elections for president and the legislature in 1967. The Senate election took place on 2 September 1967. The Presidential election took place on 3 September 1967, Thi\u1ec7u was elected president with 34% of the vote in a widely criticised poll. The Parliamentary election took place on 22 October 1967.\nOn 31 January 1968, the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) and the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng broke the traditional truce accompanying the T\u1ebft (Lunar New Year) holiday. The Tet Offensive failed to spark a national uprising and was militarily disastrous. By bringing the war to South Vietnam's cities, however, and by demonstrating the continued strength of communist forces, it marked a turning point in US support for the government in South Vietnam. The new administration of Richard Nixon introduced a policy of Vietnamization to reduce US combat involvement and began negotiations with the North Vietnamese to end the war. Thi\u1ec7u used the aftermath of the Tet Offensive to sideline K\u1ef3, his chief rival.\nOn 26 March 1970 the government began to implement the Land-to-the-Tiller program of land reform with the US providing US$339m of the program's US$441m cost. Individual landholdings were limited to 15 hectares.\nUS and South Vietnamese forces launched a series of attacks on PAVN/VC bases in Cambodia in April\u2013July 1970. South Vietnam launched an invasion of North Vietnamese bases in Laos in February/March 1971 and were defeated by the PAVN in what was widely regarded as a setback for Vietnamization.\nThi\u1ec7u was reelected unopposed in the Presidential election on 2 October 1971.\nNorth Vietnam launched a conventional invasion of South Vietnam in late March 1972 which was only finally repulsed by October with massive US air support.\nFinal years: 1973\u20131975.\nIn accordance with the Paris Peace Accords signed on 27 January 1973, US military forces withdrew from South Vietnam at the end of March 1973 while PAVN forces in the South were permitted to remain in place.\nNorth Vietnamese leaders had expected that the ceasefire terms would favour their side. As Saigon began to roll back the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng, they found it necessary to adopt a new strategy, hammered out at a series of meetings in Hanoi in March 1973, according to the memoirs of Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n Tr\u00e0. As the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng's top commander, Tr\u00e0 participated in several of these meetings. A plan to improve logistics was prepared so that the PAVN would be able to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for 1976. A gas pipeline would be built from North Vietnam to the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng provisional capital in L\u1ed9c Ninh, about north of Saigon.\nOn 15 March 1973, Nixon implied that the US would intervene militarily if the communist side violated the ceasefire. Public reaction was unfavorable, and on 4 June 1973 the US Senate passed the Case\u2013Church Amendment to prohibit such intervention. The oil price shock of October 1973 caused significant damage to the South Vietnamese economy. A spokesman for Thi\u1ec7u admitted in a TV interview that the government was being \"overwhelmed\" by the inflation caused by the oil shock, while an American businessman living in Saigon stated after the oil shock that attempting to make money in South Vietnam was \"like making love to a corpse\". One consequence of the inflation was the South Vietnamese government had increasing difficulty in paying its soldiers and imposed restrictions on fuel and munition usage.\nAfter two clashes that left 55 South Vietnamese soldiers dead, President Thi\u1ec7u announced on 4 January 1974 that the war had restarted and that the Paris Peace Accord was no longer in effect. There were over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period. The same month, China attacked South Vietnamese forces in the Paracel Islands, taking control of the islands.\nIn August 1974, Nixon was forced to resign as a result of the Watergate scandal, and the US Congress voted to reduce assistance to South Vietnam from $1\u00a0billion a year to $700\u00a0million. By this time, the Ho Chi Minh trail, once an arduous mountain trek, had been upgraded into a drivable highway with gasoline stations.\nIn December 1974, the PAVN launched an invasion at Phuoc Long to test the South Vietnamese combat strength and political will and whether the US would respond militarily. With no US military assistance forthcoming, the ARVN were unable to hold and the PAVN successfully captured many of the districts around the provincial capital of Phuoc Long, weakening ARVN resistance in stronghold areas. President Thi\u1ec7u later abandoned Phuoc Long in early January 1975. As a result, Phuoc Long was the first provincial capital to fall to the PAVN.\nIn 1975, the PAVN launched an offensive at Ban Me Thuot in the Central Highlands, in the first phase of what became known as the Ho Chi Minh Campaign. The South Vietnamese unsuccessfully attempted a defence and counterattack but had few reserve forces, as well as a shortage of spare parts and ammunition. As a consequence, Thi\u1ec7u ordered a withdrawal of key army units from the Central Highlands, which exacerbated an already perilous military situation and undermined the confidence of the ARVN soldiers in their leadership. The retreat became a rout exacerbated by poor planning and conflicting orders from Thi\u1ec7u. PAVN forces also attacked south and from sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia capturing Hu\u1ebf and Da Nang and advanced southwards. As the military situation deteriorated, ARVN troops began deserting. By early April, the PAVN had overrun almost 3/5th of the South.\nThi\u1ec7u requested aid from US President Gerald Ford, but the US Senate would not release extra money to provide aid to South Vietnam, and had already passed laws to prevent further involvement in Vietnam. In desperation, Thi\u1ec7u recalled K\u1ef3 from retirement as a military commander, but resisted calls to name his old rival prime minister.\nFall of Saigon: April 1975.\nMorale was low in South Vietnam as the PAVN advanced. A last-ditch defense was made by the ARVN 18th Division at the Battle of Xu\u00e2n L\u1ed9c from 9\u201321 April. Thi\u1ec7u resigned on 21 April 1975, and fled to Taiwan. He nominated his Vice President Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n H\u01b0\u01a1ng as his successor. After only one week in office, the South Vietnamese national assembly voted to hand over the presidency to General D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh. Minh was seen as a more conciliatory figure toward the North, and it was hoped he might be able to negotiate a more favourable settlement to end the war. The North, however, was not interested in negotiations, and its forces captured Saigon. Minh unconditionally surrendered Saigon and the rest of South Vietnam to North Vietnam on 30 April 1975.\nDuring the hours leading up to the surrender, the United States undertook a massive evacuation of US government personnel as well as high-ranking members of the ARVN and other South Vietnamese who were seen as potential targets for persecution by the Communists. Many of the evacuees were taken directly by helicopter to multiple aircraft carriers waiting off the coast.\nProvisional Revolutionary Government.\nFollowing the surrender of Saigon to North Vietnamese forces on 30 April 1975, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam officially became the government of South Vietnam, which merged with the Democratic Republic of Vietnam to create the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on 2 July 1976.\nGeography.\nSouth Vietnam was bordered by North Vietnam to the north, Laos to the northwest, Cambodia to the southwest, and Thailand across the Gulf of Thailand to the southwest. \nThe South was divided into coastal lowlands, the mountainous Central Highlands (Cao-nguy\u00ean Trung-ph\u1ea7n), and the Mekong Delta. South Vietnam's time zone was one hour ahead of North Vietnam, belonging to the time zone with the same time as the Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia, Singapore, China, Taiwan, and Western Australia.\nApart from the mainland, the Republic of Vietnam also administered parts of the Paracels and Spratly Islands. China seized control of the Paracels in 1974 after the South Vietnamese navy attempted an assault on PRC-claimed islands.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nWhile South Vietnam would ultimately capitulate to North Vietnam as a presidential republic, it went through many political changes during its existence. Initially, former Emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i served as Head of State. He was unpopular, however, largely because monarchical leaders were considered collaborators during French rule and because he had spent his reign absent from France.\nIn 1955, Prime Minister Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m held a referendum to decide whether the State of Vietnam would remain a monarchy or become a republic. This referendum was blatantly rigged in favor of a republic. Not only did an implausible 98% vote in favor of deposing B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, but over 380,000 more votes were cast than the total number of registered voters; in Saigon, for instance, Di\u1ec7m was credited with 133% of the vote. Di\u1ec7m proclaimed himself the president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam. Despite successes in politics, economics, and social change in the first 5 years, Di\u1ec7m quickly became a dictatorial leader. With the support of the United States government and the CIA, ARVN officers led by General D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh staged a coup and killed him in 1963. The military held a brief interim military government until General Nguy\u1ec5n Kh\u00e1nh deposed Minh in a January 1964 coup. Until late 1965, multiple coups and changes of government occurred, with some civilians being allowed to give a semblance of civil rule overseen by a military junta.\nIn 1965, the feuding civilian government voluntarily resigned and handed power back to the nation's military, in the hope that this would bring stability and unity to the nation. An elected constituent assembly, including representatives of all the branches of the military, decided to switch the nation's system of government to a semi-presidential system. Military rule initially failed to provide much stability; however, as internal conflicts and political inexperience caused various factions of the army to launch coups and counter-coups against one another, making leadership very tumultuous. The situation within the ranks of the military stabilised in mid-1965 when the Republic of Vietnam Air Force chief Nguy\u1ec5n Cao K\u1ef3 became Prime Minister, with General Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u as the figurehead chief of state. As Prime Minister, K\u1ef3 consolidated control of the South Vietnamese government and ruled the country with an iron fist.\nIn June 1965, K\u1ef3's influence over the ruling military government was solidified when he forced civilian prime minister Phan Huy Qu\u00e1t from power. Often praising aspects of Western culture in public, Ky was supported by the United States and its allied nations, though doubts began to circulate among Western officials by 1966 on whether or not Ky could maintain stability in South Vietnam. A repressive leader, Ky was greatly despised by his fellow countrymen. In early 1966, protesters influenced by popular Buddhist monk Th\u00edch Tr\u00ed Quang attempted an uprising in Quang's hometown of Da Nang. The uprising was unsuccessful and Ky's repressive stance towards the nation's Buddhist population continued.\nIn 1967, the unicameral National Assembly was replaced by a bicameral system consisting of a House of Representatives or lower house () and a Senate or upper House () and South Vietnam held its first elections under the new system. The military nominated Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u as their candidate, and he was elected with a plurality of the popular vote. Thieu quickly consolidated power, much to the dismay of those who hoped for an era of more political openness. He was re-elected unopposed in 1971, receiving a suspiciously high 94% of the vote on an 87% turnout. Thieu ruled until the final days of the war, resigning on 21 April 1975. Vice-president Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n H\u01b0\u01a1ng assumed power for a week, but on 27 April the Parliament and Senate voted to transfer power to D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh, who was the nation's last president and who unconditionally surrendered to the North Vietnamese forces on 30 April 1975.\nThe National Assembly/House of Representatives was located in the Saigon Opera House, now the Municipal Theatre, Ho Chi Minh City, while the Senate was located at 45-47 B\u1ebfn Ch\u01b0\u01a1ng D\u01b0\u01a1ng Street (), District 1, originally the Chamber of Commerce, and now the Ho Chi Minh City Stock Exchange.\nHuman rights.\nFrom 1972 to 1974, Freedom House rated the level of freedom in South Vietnam at 4.5/7 points (the higher the score, the lower the level of freedom). Compared to many other regimes in the Southeast Asia region at that time, it had a higher level of freedom, democracy, and human rights than communist North Vietnam in many aspects, especially personal freedom, press, religion, and cultural activities in urban areas, only behind Malaysia. It ranked in the group of \"Partly Free\" countries. However, the South Vietnamese government was regularly accused of holding a large number of political prisoners, the exact number of which was a source of contention. Amnesty International, in a report in 1973, estimated the number of South Vietnam's civilian prisoners ranging from 35,257 (as confirmed by Saigon) to 200,000 or more. Among them, approximately 22,000\u201341,000 were accounted as \"communist\" political prisoners.\n*Hu\u1ef3nh T\u1ea5n Ph\u00e1t (1975\u20131976)\nMinistries.\nSouth Vietnam had the following Ministries:\nAdministrative divisions.\nProvinces.\nSouth Vietnam was divided into forty-four provinces:\nRegions.\nThroughout its history, South Vietnam had many reforms enacted that affected the organisation of its administrative divisions.\nOn 24 October 1956 Di\u1ec7m enacted a reform of the administrative divisions system of the Republic of Vietnam in the form of Decree 147a/NV. This decree divided the region of Trung ph\u1ea7n into Trung nguy\u00ean Trung ph\u1ea7n (the Central Midlands) and Cao nguy\u00ean Trung ph\u1ea7n (the Central Highlands).\nThe offices of appointed representative and assistant representative of the central government were created for the region of Trung ph\u1ea7n, the main representative had an office in Bu\u00f4n Ma Thu\u1ed9t, while the assistant had an office in Hu\u1ebf.\nFollowing the 1963 coup d'\u00e9tat that ousted Diem the Central Government's Representatives in the Trung ph\u1ea7n region were gradually replaced by the control of the Tactical zone's Commanders (T\u01b0 l\u1ec7nh V\u00f9ng Chi\u1ebfn thu\u1eadt), which replaced a civil administration with a military one. However, following the 1967 Senate election the military administration was replaced back with civilian administrators.\nOn 1 January 1969, during the presidency of Thi\u1ec7u, Act 001/69 became effective which abolished the offices of government's representative and assistant government's representative, this was later followed on 12 May 1969 with Decree 544 \u2013 N\u0110/ThT/QTCS which completely abolished the civil administration in Trung nguy\u00ean Trung ph\u1ea7n in favour of the \"T\u01b0 l\u1ec7nh V\u00f9ng Chi\u1ebfn thu\u1eadt\".\nMilitary.\nThe Republic of Vietnam Military Forces (RVNMF; Vietnamese: \u2013 QLVNCH), was formally established on 30 December 1955. Created out from ex-French Union Army colonial Indochinese auxiliary units (French: \"Suppl\u00e9tifs\"), gathered earlier in July 1951 into the French-led Vietnamese National Army \u2013 VNA (Vietnamese: \"Qu\u00e2n \u0110\u1ed9i Qu\u1ed1c Gia Vi\u1ec7t Nam\" \u2013 Q\u0110QGVN), Arm\u00e9e Nationale Vietnami\u00e8nne (ANV) in French, the armed forces of the new state consisted in the mid-1950s of ground, air, and naval branches of service, respectively:\nTheir roles were defined as follows: to protect the sovereignty of the free Vietnamese nation and that of the Republic; to maintain the political and social order and the rule of law by providing internal security; to defend the newly independent Republic of Vietnam from external (and internal) threats; and ultimately, to help reunify Vietnam.\nConscription was practiced in South Vietnam, but soldiers could also join voluntarily. However, enforcement of conscription was lax. Conscription began in 1957, initially requiring adult males aged 20 and 21 to serve for 18 months in the military. Rules would change over time in regards to military conscription.\nThe French ceased training the RVNMF in 1956, and training passed to American advisers who progressively restructured the military along US military lines.\nThe country was divided from north to south into four corps tactical zones: I Corps, II Corps, III Corps, IV Corps and the Capital Military District in and around Saigon.\nAt the time of signing of the Paris Peace Accords, the South Vietnamese government fielded the fourth largest military force in the world as a result of the American Enhance and Enhance Plus programs with approximately one and one-half million troops in uniform. The lack of sufficient training and dependence on the U.S. for spare parts, fuel, and ammunition caused maintenance and logistical problems. The impact of the 1973 oil crisis, a faltering economy, inflation, and reduced US aid led to a steady decline in South Vietnamese military expenditure and effectiveness.\nForeign relations.\nDuring its existence, South Vietnam had diplomatic relations with Australia, Brazil, Cambodia (until 1963 and then from 1970), Canada, the Republic of China, France, Indonesia (until 1964), Iran, Japan, Laos, New Zealand, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Thailand, the United Kingdom, the United States, and West Germany.\nMembership in international organisations.\nSouth Vietnam was a member of accT, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank (IBRD), the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the IMF, the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Intelsat), Interpol, the IOC, and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (LORCS).\nSouth Vietnam held observer status at the United Nations General Assembly, whereas North Vietnam did not. In 1957, the UN General Assembly twice reaffirmed that South Vietam was fully qualified for membership and should be admitted, yet both attempts were vetoed by the Soviet Union. As the continuator of the State of Vietnam, the Republic of Vietnam maintained membership in several specialized agencies of the United Nations, including the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), and the Universal Postal Union (UPU). The RVN themselves joined the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), among others.\nRelationship with the United States.\nDuring its existence, South Vietnam had a close, strategic alliance with the United States and served as a major counterbalance to the communist-backed North Vietnam.\nThe Geneva Accords promised elections in 1956 to determine a national government for a united Vietnam. Neither the United States government nor Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m's State of Vietnam signed anything at the 1954 Geneva Conference. With respect to the question of reunification, the non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected strenuously to any division of Vietnam, but lost out when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Ph\u1ea1m V\u0103n \u0110\u1ed3ng, who proposed that Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of \"local commissions\". The United States countered with what became known as the \"American Plan\", with the support of South Vietnam and the United Kingdom. It provided for unification elections under the supervision of the United Nations, but was rejected by the Soviet delegation and North Vietnamese.\nU.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower wrote in 1954 that \"I have never talked or corresponded with a person knowledgeable in Indochinese affairs who did not agree that had elections been held as of the time of the fighting, possibly eighty percent of the population would have voted for the Communist Ho Chi Minh as their leader rather than Chief of State B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. Indeed, the lack of leadership and drive on the part of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i was a factor in the feeling prevalent among Vietnamese that they had nothing to fight for.\" According to the \"Pentagon Papers\", however, from 1954 to 1956 \"Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m really did accomplish miracles\" in South Vietnam: \"It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which might have voted for Ho\u2014in a free election against \"Di\u1ec7m\"\u2014would have been much smaller than eighty percent.\" In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the ICC stated that fair, unbiased elections were not possible, reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement.\nThe failure to unify the country in 1956 led in 1959 to the foundation of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (commonly known as the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng), which initiated an organized and widespread guerrilla insurgency against the South Vietnamese government. Hanoi directed the insurgency, which grew in intensity. The United States, under President Eisenhower, initially sent military advisers to train the South Vietnamese Army. As historian James Gibson summed up the situation: Strategic hamlets had failed... The South Vietnamese regime was incapable of winning the peasantry because of its class base among landlords. Indeed, there was no longer a 'regime' in the sense of a relatively stable political alliance and functioning bureaucracy. Instead, civil government and military operations had virtually ceased. The National Liberation Front had made great progress and was close to declaring provisional revolutionary governments in large areas. President John F. Kennedy increased the size of the advisory force fourfold and allowed the advisers to participate in combat operations, and later acquiesced in the removal of President Di\u1ec7m in a military \"coup\".\nAfter promising not to do so during the 1964 election campaign, in 1965 President Lyndon B. Johnson decided to send in much larger numbers of combat troops, and conflict steadily escalated to become what is commonly known as the Vietnam War. In 1968, the NLF ceased to be an effective fighting organization after the Tet Offensive and the war was largely taken over by regular army units of North Vietnam. Following American withdrawal from the war in 1973, the South Vietnamese government continued fighting the North Vietnamese, until, overwhelmed by a conventional invasion by the North, it finally unconditionally surrendered on 30 April 1975, the day of the fall of Saigon. North Vietnam controlled South Vietnam under military occupation, while the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam, which had been proclaimed in June 1969 by the NLF, became the nominal government. The North Vietnamese quickly moved to marginalise non-communist members of the PRG and integrate South Vietnam into the communist North. The unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam was inaugurated on 2 July 1976.\nThe Embassy of the Republic of Vietnam in Washington donated 527 reels of South Vietnamese-produced film to the Library of Congress during the embassy's closure following the Fall of Saigon, which are in the Library to this day.\nEconomy.\nSouth Vietnam maintained a capitalist free-market economy with ties to the West. It established an airline named Air Vietnam. The economy was greatly assisted by American aid and the presence of large numbers of Americans in the country between 1961 and 1973 during Vietnam War. Electrical production increased fourteen-fold between 1954 and 1973 while industrial output increase by an average of 6.9 percent annually. During the same period, rice output increased by 203 percent and the number of students in university increased from 2,000 to 90,000. US aid peaked at $2.3\u00a0billion in 1973, but dropped to $1.1\u00a0billion in 1974. Inflation rose to 200 percent as the country suffered economic shock due to the decrease of American aid as well as the oil price shock of October 1973. The unification of Vietnam in 1976 was followed by the imposition of North Vietnam's centrally planned economy in the South.\nA 2017 study in the journal \"Diplomatic History\" found that South Vietnamese economic planners sought to model the South Vietnamese economy on Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan, which were perceived as successful examples of how to modernize developing economies.\nDemographics.\nIn 1968, the population of South Vietnam was estimated to be 16,259,334. However, about one-fifth of the people who lived in Southern Vietnam (from Quang Tri Province to the South) lived in areas that were controlled by Viet Cong. In 1970 about 90% of population was Kinh (Viet), and 10% was Hoa (Chinese), Montagnard, French, Khmer, Cham, Eurasians and others.\nVietnamese was the official language and was spoken by the majority of the population. Despite the end of French colonial rule, the French language maintained a strong presence in South Vietnam where it was used in administration, education (especially at the secondary and higher levels), trade and diplomacy. The ruling elite of South Vietnam spoke French. With US involvement in the Vietnam War, English was also later introduced to the armed forces and became a secondary diplomatic language. Languages spoken by minority groups included Chinese, Khmer, Cham, and other languages spoken by Montagnard groups.\nStarting from 1955, the South Vietnamese government of Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m carried out an assimilation policy towards indigenous peoples (Montagnard) of the Central Highlands and the Cham people, including banning the Cham language in public schools, seizing indigenous lands and granting them to mostly Catholic Northern Kinh people who had moved to South Vietnam during Operation Passage to Freedom. This resulted in increasing nationalism and support for independence among the Cham and other indigenous peoples. Some Cham joined the Viet Cong, some others joined the Front de Lib\u00e9ration des Hauts Plateaux du Champa. By 1964, civil rights activists and independent organizations of the indigenous peoples, including Cham organizations, had been merged into the Front Unifi\u00e9 de Lutte des Races Opprim\u00e9es (FULRO), which struggled against both the governments of South Vietnam and the succeeding Socialist Republic of Vietnam until the late 1980s.\nSouth Vietnam had relatively greater freedom of religion than the North. Confucianism as an ethical philosophy was an important influence in South Vietnam. There were about 4 million Confucians in the proper sense. Between 3 and 4 million people, or up to 27% of the population, were Buddhists of various schools. The Cao \u0110\u00e0i and H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o religions together had between 2.5 and 3 million followers. About 10% of the population was Catholic. Other citizens were animists, Taoists, Protestant Christians, Hindus, or Muslims.\nCulture.\nCultural life was strongly influenced by China until French domination in the 18th century. At that time, the traditional culture began to acquire an overlay of Western characteristics. Many families had three generations living under one roof. The emerging South Vietnamese middle class and youth in the 1960s became increasingly more Westernised, and followed American cultural and social trends, especially in music, fashion and social attitudes in major cities like Saigon.\nMedia.\nRadio.\nThere were four AM and one FM radio stations, all of them owned by the government (VTVN), named Radio Vietnam. One of them was designated as a nationwide civilian broadcast, another was for military service and the other two stations included a French-language broadcast station and foreign language station broadcasting in Chinese, English, Khmer and Thai. Radio Vietnam started its operation in 1955 under then President Ngo Dinh Diem, and ceased operation on 30 April 1975, with the broadcast of surrender by Duong Van Minh. The radio stations across the former South were later reused by the communist regime to broadcast their state-run radio service.\nTelevision.\nTelevision was introduced to South Vietnam on 7 February 1966 with a black-and-white FCC system. Covering major cities in South Vietnam, started with a one-hour broadcast per day then increased to six hours in the evening during the 1970s. There were two main channels:\nBoth channels used an airborne transmission relay system from airplanes flying at high altitudes, called Stratovision.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAcademic articles and chapters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nMonographs and edited volumes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "59758", "revid": "13679880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59758", "title": "Angler's loop", "text": "Type of knot\nAn angler's loop, otherwise known as a perfection loop, is a type of knot which forms a fixed loop. Useful for fine or slippery line, it is one of the few loop knots which holds well in bungee cord. It is quite secure, but it jams badly and is not suitable if the knot will need to be untied. \nTying.\nAngler's loop may be tied \nAngler's loop may be tied around the hand, it may also be tied this way one handed, or with several loops if need be:\nhttps://\nStructure.\nOverhand knot on standing part and half-hitch by the working end.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59759", "revid": "28991092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59759", "title": "Demographics of the Netherlands", "text": "Demographic features of the population of the Netherlands include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the population, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation.\nThe Netherlands is the 69th most populous country in the world. As of January 2023, the Netherlands has a population of 17,821,419.\nBetween 1900 and 1950 the population almost doubled from 5.14 to 10.11 million people. From 1950 to 2000 the population increased from 10.11 to 15.92 million people, increasing by a smaller proportion but, still, at an impressive pace for a European country, recording a growth of 57.45% over a 50-year time span.\nOf countries with at least 7.5 million people, The Netherlands is the 4th most densely populated, and is the 26th most densely populated in the world overall. It is the 5th most densely populated country in Europe; the first four are microstates. The 17,821,419 million Dutch inhabitants are concentrated on an area (land surface) of . This means that the country has a population density of . The density of 500 inhabitants/km2 was reached in the first half of 2014.\nAs a result of these demographic characteristics, the Netherlands has had to plan its land use strictly. Since 1946 the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment has been occupied with the national coordination of land use. Because of its high population density the Netherlands has also reclaimed land from the sea by poldering. Between 1927 and 1968 an entire province - Flevoland - was created. As of May 2023 it houses 447,193 people. Because of these policies, the Dutch have been able to combine high levels of population density with extremely high levels of agricultural production.\nEven though the Netherlands is so densely populated, it has no municipalities with a population over one million. Nevertheless, the two largest municipalities of the country do score well over a million if the complete city region is counted, thus including the neighbouring satellite towns that often are physically connected to the main municipality. Moreover, the \"four big cities\" (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht) can in many ways be regarded as a single metropolitan area, the Randstad (\"rim city\" or \"edge city\") with over 7.5 million inhabitants around an agricultural \"green heart\" (\"Groene Hart\").\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nGrowth rate.\n0.37% (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 168th\nFertility.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Dutch population is ageing. Furthermore, life expectancy has increased because of developments in medicine, and in addition to this, the Netherlands has seen increasing immigration. Despite these developments combined with the population boom after the Second World War, the low birth rate has caused extremely low population growth: 2005 saw the lowest absolute population growth since 1900.\nThis demographic development has consequences for health care and social security policy. As the Dutch population ages, the proportion of people of working age, as a percentage of the entire population, decreases. Important policy advisors like the CBS (Statistical Office) and the CPB (Planning Office) have pointed out that this will cause problems with the current system of old age pensions: fewer people will work to pay for old age pensions, while there will be more people receiving those pensions. Furthermore, the costs of health care are also projected to increase. These developments have caused several cabinets, notably the second Balkenende cabinet to reform the system of health care and social security to increase participation in the labour market and make people more conscious of the money they spend on health care.\nIn 2003, the annual birth rate per thousand was highest in the province of Flevoland (15.9). The overall lifelong Total fertility rate (TFR), was highest in the province of Flevoland (2.0) and lowest in the province of Limburg (1.6). The municipality with the highest TFR was Urk (3.23) followed by Valkenburg (2.83), Graafstroom (2.79) and Staphorst (2.76). The lowest TFRs were recorded in Vaals (1.11) and Thorn (1.21).\nThe total population at December 31, 2006 was 16,356,914. The population loss due to net emigration was 35,502 (an estimated 40-50% of emigrants were ethnic non-Dutch).\nIn 2007, there were 117,000 immigrants (including 7000 Germans, 6000 Poles, 5000 Bulgarians, 3000 Turks and 2000 Moroccans) and 123,000 emigrants. Nearly half the emigrants were native Dutch, followed at a distance by nearly 5000 Poles and more than 3000 Germans. There was an observable increase in net immigration from the former USSR, Bulgaria and Romania.\nThe annual death rate was lowest in the municipalities of Valkenburg (2.9 per 1000), Zeewolde (3.2), Renswoude (3.4), Westervoort and Zeevang (both 3.9). The highest annual death rates were recorded in Warmond (22.3 per 1000), Laren (19.9) and Doorn (18.8).\n16.4% of the total births in 2003 were to parents of non-European origin, although they account for only 12.4% of the population in the 25-34 age group. For example, 3.8% of the births were ethnic Moroccan, although they were only 2.26% of the 25-34 age group. Respective figures were 3.27% and 3.0% for Turks. The TFR for Moroccans in 2003 was 3.3 while the general TFR was 1.73. TFR was 2.3 for Turks, 1.7 for Surinamese, 1.8 for Arubans, 3.0 for Africans and 1.8 for Americans. (These figures compare with a figure of around 2.1 required to maintain a stable overall population figure.)\nAccording to Statistics Netherlands, for the year 2007, the TFR for those born in Netherlands was 1.72 (1.65 in 2000). TFR of Moroccan immigrants was 2.87 (3.22 in 2000) and that of Turkish immigrants was 1.88 (2.18 in 2000).\nThe total fertility rate is the annual average number of children born per woman over her lifespan. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\n1.78 children born/woman (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 157th\n11.0 births/1,000 population (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 178th\n29.8 years (2017 est.)\nLife expectancy.\nSources: Our World In Data\nTotal population: 81.9 years (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 30th\nMales: 79.7 years (2020 est.)\nFemales: 84.3 years (2020 est.)\n\"0-14 years\": 16.11% (male 1,425,547 /female 1,358,894)\n\"15-24 years\": 11.91% (male 1,049.000 /female 1,008,763)\n\"25-54 years\": 38.47% (male 3,334,064 /female 3,313,238)\n\"55-64 years\": 13.69% (male 1,177,657/female 1,188,613)\n\"65 years and over\": 19.82% (male 1,558,241/female 1,866,380) (2020 est.)\ntotal: 42.8 years. Country comparison to the world: 32nd\nmale: 41.6 years\nfemale: 44.0 years (2020 est.)\nCities and population density.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFunctional urban areas.\n\"Functional urban areas\" are a type of urban areas with large populations where commuters from nearby areas work in the core area. There are several functional urban areas officially identified in the Netherlands. The largest ones (with populations over 300,000) are listed below, which count the populations of the core city and their \"commuting zones\".\nVital statistics.\nStatistics.\nThe following table presents the evolution:\nNotable events in Dutch demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nCurrent vital statistics.\nSource: Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2011): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021): \nMigration and origin groups.\nBetween 1590 and 1800 the estimated share of foreign-born population was consistently above 5%.\nAccording to Eurostat, in 2010 there were 1,800,000 foreign-born residents in the Netherlands, corresponding to 11.1% of the total population. Of these, 1,400,000 (8.5%) were born outside the EU (including those from Dutch colonies) and 428,000 (2.6%) were born in another EU member state. The most common countries of birth being: Belgium, Germany, Poland and the United Kingdom. On 1 January 2016, 26.2% of persons aged 0\u201350 had at least one parent born in a foreign country. 11.4% of persons aged 0\u201350 of 'Dutch background' belonged to the 'third generation', the majority descending from Western immigrants. The third generation constitutes persons born from two second generation immigrants or one second generation immigrant and one person with a Dutch background. First and second generation immigrants and the third generation were 34.5% of the population aged 0\u201350.\nAs the result of immigration from overseas, the Netherlands have a sizeable minority of non-indigenous peoples. There is also a considerable level of emigration, in majority consisting of former immigrants. In 2005, some 121,000 people left the country, while 94,000 entered it. Out of a total of 101,150 people immigrating into the Netherlands in 2006, 66,658 were from Europe, Oceania, the Americas or Japan, and 34,492 were from other (mostly developing) countries. Out of a total of 132,470 emigrants, 94,834 were going to Europe, Oceania, the Americas or Japan and 37,636 to other countries.\nA large number of immigrants come from countries in Western Europe, mostly from the neighbouring countries of Germany and Belgium. There were five subsequent waves of immigration to the Netherlands in recent history.\nIllegal immigration to the Netherlands results in automatic deportation but this is often not enforced for various reasons such as unknown country of origin, etc. Many Dutch provinces in 2012 had quotas for deporting illegal immigrants.\nBy 2017, persons with a migration background, both western and non-western, formed a majority in Amsterdam (2011), Rotterdam (2013) and The Hague, the three largest cities of the Netherlands.\nIn 2005, the governmental \"Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau\" in its annual report, noted recurring integration problems for ethnic minorities. While during the economic boom of the 1990s their unemployment and dependence on welfare had strongly decreased, the economic downturn between 2001 and 2004 disproportionally affected immigrant groups. This would be explained by their functioning as a labour reserve, by their lower educational levels and by lower language skills. The report also noted that per capita social interactions between native Dutch and immigrant populations tended to decline over time, partly explainable by the size growth of immigrant groups. Integration levels strongly varied between groups. Surinamese and Antilleans were well economically integrated, but the latter less so culturally. Cultural integration was limited for Turks, but better for Moroccans. Of the asylum seekers, Somalis were among the least integrated into Dutch society, while Iranians were the best integrated with the highest education levels and modern lifestyles. Though the educational levels of the second generation were a significant improvement over those of the first generation, they still lagged behind the native Dutch who themselves on average had been attending ever higher school types. While half of all native Dutch pupils in 2005 proceeded to higher secondary education (HAVO and VWO), for Turks and Moroccans the share was a fifth and for Somali pupils even lower.\nIn 2007, non-Western groups were generally socio-economically disadvantaged. Of the four largest non-Western groups, Turks and Moroccans were the most disadvantaged. In 2006, only 38.7% of Moroccans and 43.9% of Turks aged 15\u201364 were employed, meaning their unemployment rate was about four times that of the native Dutch (17.2% for Moroccans and 15.1% for Turks), and 30% received some type of social welfare.\nThe 2008 financial crisis and the Euro area crisis affected immigrant groups particularly hard. In 2012, at 12% non-Western migrants were six times more likely than native Dutch to receive social welfare benefits, with 2% for the Dutch.\nAccording to a 2010 Statistics Netherlands report, the third generation of non-Western immigrants was predominantly young with 80% being younger than 15, while growing with 10% each year. The third generation have a similar employment rate as the native Dutch and receive a similar amount of social benefits. The third non-Western generation follow adult education more frequently than both the native Dutch and non-Western immigrants. The non-Western immigrant population as a whole has 1.5 to 2 times the benefit dependence compared to the natives. The non-Western third generation had a rate slightly higher than the native Dutch as crime suspects, but lower than for non-Western immigrants as a whole.\nAccording to Statistics Netherlands, nearly 53% of refugee households have a low income, six times the Netherlands average (8.2%). For Syrian and Eritrean households the share is about 80%. At 33% the poverty risk is lowest among Iranian refugee households. The group of Syrian households at risk of poverty grew from ten thousand (76% of all Syrian households in 2016) to eighteen thousand (79% of all Syrian households) in 2018. Households of Polish, Romanian or Bulgarian origin have a greater than average risk of poverty even though households from these Eastern European countries generally depend on work for their income. Migrant workers from Eastern Europe generally perform low-skilled work while migrants from Western Europe are often highly educated.\nImmigrants from foreign countries are divided into several ethnic groups. For example, there are both Russians and Chechens from Russia, Turks and Kurds from Turkey, Serbs and Albanians from Serbia and immigrants from Iran are divided into Persians, Azeris and Kurds.\nNational origins.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2022[ [update]], 4,438,900 citizens are of non-Dutch/Frisian origin. A majority of these (50,86%) are from seven backgrounds alone: Turks (inc. Kurds), Moroccans (inc. Berbers), Surinamese, Indonesians (inc. Moluccans), Germans, Poles and Cura\u00e7ao.\nWith the huge expansion of the European Union during the 2000s, the Netherlands has seen a rise in the number of immigrants coming from new member states. Migrant workers from these countries are estimated to be about 100,000 as of 2007. Legal migrants from new EU-member states doubled between 2007\u201311 to 200,000, with estimates totaling up to 300,000. Of the Poles who initially moved to the Netherlands in 2004, about a quarter had returned to Poland by 2006. In addition, a large number of Syrians moved to the Netherlands in the 2010s mostly as refugees, with the population increasing seven-fold between 2014 and 2019. Both Poles and Syrians have overtaken the population of Antilleans during the decade. More than 36,000 Roma live in the Netherlands. Dutch Roma, Sinti and Dutch Jews were decimated by the Holocaust. However, the Jewish population has seen growth in the Netherlands in recent years.\nAs of 2022[ [update]]:\nEmigration.\nThe Netherlands have seen considerable emigration. In the 1950s and early 1960s, 560,000 people migrated to Canada, Australia, the United States, South Africa and New Zealand, in response to low wage levels and a government programme aiming to reduce the perceived overpopulation. At least 60,000 of these migrants were Indo-European (mixed Dutch-Indonesian) repatriates that moved on, mostly to the United States, or returned to Indonesia after being repatriated to the Netherlands from the former Dutch East Indies during and after the Indonesian Revolution. The official emigration policy combined with a strong economic growth already in the early 1950s led to serious manpower shortages.\nIn 2005, some 121,000 people migrated from the Netherlands. There is considerable migration towards neighbouring states, Belgium, Germany and the United Kingdom and to the Netherlands Antilles. Furthermore, almost half of the current emigration consists of people returning to their country of birth, including rejected asylum seekers, after the more stringent migration laws were implemented.\nEducation by background.\nAccording to a 2016 study by Statistics Netherlands, students with a non-western background generally study at a lower level of secondary education. 48 percent of those with a Dutch background were at HAVO or VWO level at third year, compared to 23 percent for Dutch Turks, 28 percent for Dutch Moroccans, 35 percent for Dutch Surinamese and 31 percent for Dutch Antilleans. Some backgrounds fared better: over 40 percent of Dutch Afghans studied at HAVO/VWO level, and for Dutch Iranians the rate was 50 percent, which was above native Dutch students.\nEmployment and income.\nUnemployment, youth ages 15\u201324\ntotal: 7.2%. Country comparison to the world: 130th\nmale: 7.7%\nfemale: 6.6% (2018 est.)\nReligion.\nIn 2013, Statistics Netherlands found that 26% of the population identified as Roman Catholic, 16% as Protestant, 5% as Muslim, and 6% as \"other\" (the last includes other Christian denominations, Hindus 0.6%, Jews 0.1%, and Buddhists 0.4%). The agency interviewed 355,237 people in the period 2010\u20132013. In 2019, the Central Bureau of Statistics reported that for the first time non-religious people were in the majority in the Netherlands. Only 49% of people older than 15 years reported to be religious; in 2012 that was still 54%. The largest religion was still Catholicism (24%), while 5% identified with Islam.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguage.\nThe main language is Dutch, while Frisian (known as West Frisian outside of the Netherlands) is also a recognized language in the province of Friesland and is used by the government and schools there. Several dialects of Low Saxon (Nedersaksisch in Dutch) are spoken in much of the north and east and are recognized by the Netherlands as regional languages according to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Another group of dialects granted the status of regional language is Limburgish, which is spoken in the south-eastern province of Limburg. Major immigrant languages are Indonesian, Turkish, Arabic, Berber, Papiamento, German and Polish.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59760", "revid": "51045235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59760", "title": "Economy of the Netherlands", "text": "The Netherlands has a highly developed market economy focused on trade and logistics, manufacturing, services, innovation and technology and sustainable and renewable energy. It is the world's 18th largest economy by nominal GDP and the 28th largest by purchasing power parity (PPP) and is the fifth largest economy in European Union by nominal GDP. It has the world's 11th highest per capita GDP (nominal) and the 13th highest per capita GDP (PPP) as of 2023, making it one of the highest earning nations in the world. Many of the world's largest tech companies are based in its capital Amsterdam or have established their European headquarters in the city, such as IBM, Microsoft, Google, Oracle, Cisco, Uber and Netflix. Its second largest city Rotterdam is a major trade, logistics and economic center of the world and is Europe's largest seaport. Netherlands is ranked fifth on the Global Innovation Index and fourth on the WEF Global Competitiveness Report. Among OECD nations, Netherlands has a highly efficient and strong social security system; social expenditure stood at roughly 25.3% of GDP.\nThe Netherlands has a prosperous and open economy, which depends heavily on foreign trade. The economy is noted for stable industrial relations, fairly low unemployment and inflation, a sizable current account surplus (which, compared to the size of the country, is even more than Germany) and an important role as a European transportation hub; Rotterdam is the biggest port in Europe; and Amsterdam has one of the biggest airports in the world. Industrial activity is predominantly in food processing, chemicals, petroleum refining, high-tech, financial services, the creative sector and electrical machinery. Its highly mechanized agricultural sector employs no more than 2% of the labor force but provides large surpluses for the food-processing industry and for exports. The Netherlands, along with 11 of its EU partners, began circulating the euro currency on 1 January 2002.\nThe Netherlands has had steady natural gas resources since 1959, when a wellspring was discovered. Currently the Netherlands accounts for more than 25% of all natural gas reserves in the European Union. Over the following decades, the sale of natural gas generated a significant rise in revenue for the Netherlands. However, the unforeseen consequences of the country's energy wealth originally impacted the competitiveness of other sectors of the economy, leading to the theory of Dutch disease, after the discovery of the vast Groningen gas field.\nThe Netherlands is a \"conduit country\" that helps to funnel profits from high-tax countries to tax havens. It has been ranked as the 7th largest tax haven in the world.\nThe stern financial was abandoned in 2009, because of the then-current credit crises. The relatively large banking sector was partly nationalized and bailed out through government interventions. The unemployment rate dropped to 5.0% in the summer of 2011, but increased with a sharp rate to 7.3% in May 2013, and 6.8% in 2015. It dropped again to 3.9% in March 2018. The state budget deficit was about 2.2% in 2015, well below the norm of 3.0% in the EU. In 2016, the state budget showed a surplus of 0.4%. It was expected to grow to a surplus of over 1.0% in 2017. The Dutch invented and introduced the stock market, which initially focused on merchandise trading through the Dutch East India Company. The Netherlands is a founding member of the European Union, the OECD and the World Trade Organization.\nHistory.\nAfter declaring its independence from the empire of Philip II of Spain in 1581, the Netherlands experienced almost a century of explosive economic growth. A technological revolution in capital, due to Protestant traders of Flanders who fled to the Netherlands, helped the young Republic become the dominant trade power by the mid-17th century. In 1670 the Dutch merchant marine totalled 568,000 tons of shipping\u2014about half the European total. The main reasons for this were the dominance of the Amsterdam Entrep\u00f4t in European trade, and that of the Dutch East India Company (or Verenigde Oost-Indische Companie \u2013 VOC) and West India Companies in intercontinental trade. These companies were based on the English model and the success of England's joint-stock enterprises and trading guilds.\nBeside trade, an early \"industrial revolution\" (powered by wind, water and peat), land reclamation from the sea, and agricultural revolution, helped the Dutch economy achieve the highest standard of living in Europe (and presumably the world) by the middle of the 17th century. Affluence facilitated what is known as the Dutch Golden Age. This economic boom abruptly came to an end by a combination of political-military upheavals and adverse economic developments around 1670. Still the Netherlands kept a high level of prosperity, due to trade and agriculture.\nTowards the 1800s, the Netherlands did not industrialize as rapidly as some other countries in Europe. One explanation for this is that the Netherlands were struggling to come to terms with having lost their dominant economical (based mainly on trade and agriculture) and political position in the world. Griffiths argues that government policies made possible a unified Dutch national economy in the 19th century. They included the abolition of internal tariffs and guilds; a unified coinage system; modern methods of tax collection; standardized weights and measures; and the building of many roads, canals, and railroads.\nThe rest of Europe in the 19th century saw the gradual transformation of the Netherlands into a modern middle-class industrial society. The number of people employed in agriculture decreased while the country made an effort to revive its stake in the highly competitive industrial and trade business. The Netherlands lagged behind Belgium until the late 19th century in industrialization, then caught up by about 1920. Major industries included textiles and (later) the great Philips industrial conglomerate. Rotterdam became a major shipping and manufacturing center. Poverty slowly declined and begging largely disappeared along with steadily improving working conditions for the population.\nIt wasn\u2019t until the early 1930's when more interventionist economic policies were heavily considered by the Dutch. The great depression in 1930 raised doubts about the fairness of a pure market system, and its inability to correct the economy on its own. In 1940, Nazi Germany successfully invaded the Netherlands in just 5 days, followed by 5 years of occupation. In the later years of the war (1942\u201345), the Germans faced significant financial struggles and began to exploit the Dutch economy as much as they could. Two years later, in 1947, the Dutch economy had fully recovered. This was the fastest post-war recovery of any other Western European country. The following period from 1950-1973 is known as the second Golden Age of the Dutch economy.\nThis second Golden Age was fueled by high cooperation between firms, employers, unions, and the government. The government also adopted more hands-on economic regulations such as the guided wage policy, restrictions on shareholder control, and the expansion of welfare state programs.\nIn 1959, the Netherlands discovered large natural gas fields. The export of natural gas led to large windfall profits. However, as an unforeseen consequence, these were believed to have led to a decline in the manufacturing sector in the Netherlands.\nGovernment.\nWhile the private sector is the cornerstone of the Dutch economy, governments at different levels have a large part to play. Public spending, excluding social security transfer payments, was at 28% of GDP in 2011. Total tax revenue was 38.7% of GDP in 2010, which was below the EU average. In addition to its own spending, the government plays a significant role through the permit requirements and regulations pertaining to almost every aspect of economic activity. The government combines a rigorous and stable microeconomic policy with wide-ranging structural and regulatory reforms. The government has gradually reduced its role in the economy since the 1980s. Privatization and deregulation is still continuing. With regards to social and economic policy, the government cooperates with its so called social partners (trade unions and employers' organizations). The three parties come together in the Social-Economic Council (\u2018Sociaal Economische Raad\u2019), the main platform for social dialogue.\nSocial security system.\nThe Dutch social security is very comprehensive and multi-faceted, and is divided into the national security (\")\" and the employee insurance (\").\" Whereas the first covers all living in the Netherlands and the social benefits provided, the latter provides employment-related benefits. All living in the Netherlands are required to pay into the social security system, including residents from outside the Netherlands, with a few exceptions.\nThe Volksverzekering is compulsory for all and covers the residents under different forms of national insurance:\nIt is overseen by the Social Insurance Bank (\" (SVB))\" and financed through earning-related contributions of employers and employees up until a maximum income-ceiling. Whilst employed persons get their contribution deducted automatically from their wage, the unemployed pay by themselves. The AKW is financed by employers, whereas the AOW is financed by the employees. The AOW, additionally, is financed by a small government subsidy.\nThe \"Werknemersverzekering\" is compulsory for all employed people within the Netherlands. It includes the coverage of employees in the following areas:\nThe financing for the \"Werknemersverzekering\" is automatically deducted from the employee's income by the employer.\nUnemployment benefits.\nCoverage.\nThe unemployment benefits in the Netherlands, as set out under the WW, covers almost all employees, that are employees based on a working-contract. Excluded from the WW are the following: self-employed, nationally employed, persons working less than four days a week, heads of stockholders and voluntary workers that earn up to \u20ac150 per year.\nRight to benefits.\nTo profit from the benefit the unemployed has to submit an application to the Employee Insurance Agency (\"Uitvoeringsinstituut Werknemersverzekeringen (UWV))\" within one week of becoming unemployed and additionally has to register as job-seeker. The WW only covers employees with a sufficient work history, meaning that an applicant has to have been working for at least 26 weeks in the past 36 weeks before becoming unemployed. If so, the working-weeks requirement is met. Moreover, the employee is only eligible to unemployment benefits if the unemployment has not been due to his own fault (e.g. own termination of the job contract).\nBenefits.\nThe benefits received through the WW are earnings-related and amount to 75% of the previous daily earnings (based on 5 working days per week) for the duration of two months. After those two months the benefits reduce to 70%. Part-time work is taken into account with a calculation of parts of the working hours. If this benefit is less than the minimum income, the benefit can be supplemented under the Additional Allowances Act (\"Toeslagenwet\"). If there has been a change of employment, all jobs in the previous twelve months are included in the calculation of the benefits. To continue to receive benefits, the individual needs to be actively looking for work. Moreover, one needs to participate in e-coaching three and twelve months after the start of unemployment. After one year of unemployment one must register with an employment agency.\nControversial issues.\nLabour market and social welfare.\nThe Dutch labour market has relatively strict regulations for employers on firing employees, although by June 2014 the House of Representatives has agreed to loosen these regulations. Due to the costs of employees and costs of firing them, a large part of the working force (about 15% of the working force) is an independent one person company (ZZP). They are independent and get paid by delivery without higher social costs. Another big part of the workforce is hired as temporary workforce. State unemployment benefits in the form of a 70% benefit of the employee's last-earned salary for up to three years (with a maximum of roughly 2500 euros per month) are available for fired employees, provided that they have worked for a certain minimum time period, usually 26 weeks. Moreover, the self-employed individuals (zelfstandigen zonder personeel (ZZP)) are not automatically covered under the \"Werknemersverzekeringen\", and are not obligated to enroll into unemployment, sickness or disabilities insurance. Self-employed individuals are therefore required to enroll themselves with private insurance companies. The Dutch Government is however, working hard to combat bogus self-employment by applying significant changes and tightening of rules under Wet Deregulering Beoordeling Arbeidsrelaties (DBA).\nAge of retirement.\nUnder the AOW (General Old Age Pensions Act) of 1956, every Dutch citizen was entitled to a state pension from the age of 65. However the act was amended in 2012 to increase the pension age in several stages up to 67 in 2024. Married couples and those who live together receive 50% of minimum wage per person, and a single person receives 70% of minimum wage. Most (about 70%) earn an extra pension from private pension funds. Employees are obliged to participate in the sector pension funds. The total amount of pension funds at the end of 2009 was some 664 billion euro and by the end of 2019 this had increased to 1560 billion euro, for a population of just over 17 million. Employees receive on average about 70% of their final salary. During the economic crisis and because of low interest rates, pension funds have had difficulty keeping up with inflation.\nInequality and redistribution.\nWith a Gini coefficient of 25.1 (2013) the income inequality is relatively low in the Netherlands. However, the inequality when measured in distributions of household wealth is high, where the top 1% owns 24% of all net wealth, and the top 10% own 60%. Moreover, rather large wealth disparities persist in the Netherlands in relation to age, where those under 35 years-of-age own 10% as much as older workers. This is a consequence from the low taxation of home ownership and a generous mortgage interest deductibility, which benefit the wealthier households. Due to the generous pensions the pension-related savings are the most important part of wealth in the Netherlands, yet are not subject to capital income taxation, which increases the inequality. The taxation comes as income tax when the saved pension is paid out. People having earned minimum wages only, will not build up any pension. The idea behind a pension is to have a net income after retirement that is comparable to before retirement. The AOW, the Dutch retirement law, guarantees an income up to 70% of minimum wage per person. Therefore, only people earning more than minimum wage need to save to ensure comparable income after retirement.\nHome mortgage interest deduction.\nThe Netherlands was one of the few countries in the world where the interest paid on mortgages is almost fully deductible from income tax. Since 2013 big changes were made. The conditions allowing a borrowing of more than 116% of the value of the home were reduced to 106% and are still continuously being reduced every year. The deduction is also capped to 50.5% and reducing every year. Together with the after-effects of the Great Recession the result was a housing crisis, with a decrease of prices almost 25% percent in some areas. Recent years have shown a recovery of 10% to even 20% per year in the most popular cities.\nThe Service sector accounts for more than half of the national income, primarily in transportation, distribution and logistics, financial areas, software development and the creative industry. The breadth of service providers in financial services has contributed to the Netherlands achieving a DAW Index score of 5 in 2012. Industrial activity is dominated by the machinery, electronics/high tech industry, metalworking, oil refining, chemical, and food-processing industries. Construction amounts to about 6% of GDP. Agriculture and fishing, although visible and traditional Dutch activities, account for just 2%.\nThe Netherlands continues to be one of the leading European nations for attracting foreign direct investment and is one of the five largest investors in the United States. The economy experienced a slowdown in 2005, but in 2006 recovered to the fastest pace in six years on the back of increased exports and strong investment. The pace of job growth reached 10-year highs in 2007. The Netherlands is the fifth-most competitive economy in the world, according to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report.\nPrimary sector.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2018, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, the Netherlands produced:\nEnergy sector.\nNatural gas.\nThe discovery of the large Groningen natural gas field in 1959 and the massive windfalls accrued over subsequent decades, were believed to have led to a decline in the manufacturing sector in the Netherlands, leading to the theory of Dutch disease.\nWhile its oil reserves in the North Sea are of little importance, the Netherlands have an estimated 25% of natural gas reserves in the EU. Natural gas reserves of the Netherlands are estimated (as of 2014) to be about 600 billion cubic feet, or about 0.3% of the world total. In 2014\u20132015 the government decided to reduce the production of gas in the province Groningen significantly due to problems of sinking ground, differential settlement levels and tremors (small earth quakes) causing damages to properties, end 2018 the government decided to completely abandon the gas production in the province of Groningen by reducing the production slightly each year, the production was expected to come to a halt entirely by 2028. On June 23, 2023, the government decided to close the remaining five production facilities as of October 1, 2023. The possibility of reopening one or more facilities is being kept open, citing the uncertain international situation and possibly very cold weather as possible reasons for this. All wells will be permanently closed and dismantled as of October 1, 2024.\nTo reduce its greenhouse emissions, the government of the Netherlands is subsidizing a transition away from natural gas for all homes in the country by 2050. In the Netherlands, 98% of enterprises are reducing greenhouse gas emissions, beating the EU average of 89%. However, only 48% of Dutch firms set and monitor their own emission targets. Dutch enterprises mostly cut emissions through waste reduction or recycling (86%), as well as energy efficiency programmes (76%).\nIn the Netherlands, 78% of enterprises have invested in reducing carbon emissions and mitigating the impact of weather disasters as of 2023. Six out of ten (60%) plan to invest in these areas during the next three years. The numbers for 'already invested' and 'intend to invest' above the EU average (56% and 54%, respectively). The largest invested is in trash reduction or recycling (86% of Dutch firms).\nDutch companies are more likely to see the transition to stronger climate laws as an opportunity (39% vs 23% from other European firms).\nNuclear energy.\nResearchers in the Netherlands began studying nuclear energy in the 1930s and began construction of research reactor Dodewaard in 1955. Researchers\u2019 goal was to introduce nuclear power technology by 1962 and replace fossil fuels. In 1968, a test nuclear reactor was attached to the power grid. This unit was shut down in 1997. In the 1970s, the Dutch chose a policy that required reprocessing all spent nuclear fuel. In 1984, the government decided to create a long-term (100 years) storage facility for all intermediate and low-level radioactive waste and research strategies for ultimate disposal. In September 2003, the Central Organization for Radioactive Waste created an interim storage facility for high-level waste. The Netherlands' only commercial nuclear reactor is Borssele, which became operational in 1973 and as of 2011[ [update]] produces about 4% of the country's electricity. The older Dodewaard nuclear power plant was a test reactor that later got attached to the national grid but was closed in 1997. A 2MW research reactor known as Reactor Institute Delft (RID) is located in Delft, as part of the physics department of Delft University of Technology. This reactor is not meant for energy provision but used as a neutron and positron source for research.\nIn 1994, the States General of the Netherlands voted to phase out nuclear power after a discussion of nuclear waste management. In 1997, the power station at Dodewaard was shut down and the government decided it was planning to end Borssele's operating license in 2003. This has since been postponed to 2034, if it complied with the highest safety standards. After the 2010 election, the new government was open to expanding nuclear power. Both of the companies that share ownership of Borssele are proposing to build new reactors. In January 2012, Delta announced it postpones any decision to start building a second nuclear power plant.\nTourism.\nIn 2011, the Netherlands was visited by 11.3 million foreign tourists. In 2012, the Dutch tourism industry contributed 5.4% in total to the country's GDP and 9.6% in total to its employment. With its global ranking of 147th and 83rd place for total contribution to respectively GDP and employment, tourism is a relatively small sector of the Dutch economy. North Holland was by far the most popular province for foreign tourists in 2011. Out of all 11.3 million tourists, 6 million visited North Holland. South Holland took the second place with 1.4 million. Germans, Britons and Belgians made up the majority of foreign tourists, respectively 3, 1.5 and 1.4 million. As of 2020, there are nine World Heritage Sites in the Netherlands. The Netherlands are well known for their art and rich historical heritage.\nIn the fast food restaurant and snackbar sector McDonald's dominates and employs the most staff, followed by Burger King, FEBO established as only national player, and Kwalitaria. Other chains in the Dutch market are Pizza Hut, Domino's Pizza, and Kentucky Fried Chicken. The Belgium chain Quick retreated from the Dutch market in 2000.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation under 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCompanies.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Netherlands is Services with 761,749 companies followed by Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate and Retail Trade with 693,255 and 101,025 companies respectively.\nIn the Netherlands, 91% of enterprises say they have invested appropriately during the past three years (2023 - 2020). This beats the EU average at 82%. Compared to other enterprises in the EU, Dutch firms prioritise new goods or services (26% vs. 34% for replacement). In keeping with the EU average of 10%, just 7% of enterprises in the Netherlands do not plan to invest. Dutch companies were hurt by the energy crisis in 2022 - 2023, albeit to a lower extent than those elsewhere in the EU. While most companies are concerned about energy prices, just 30% consider it a critical issue. This is half of the EU average (59%).\nDutch firms face significant long-term hurdles to investment, including a lack of trained people (71%), and high energy prices (66%). Barriers are diminishing, with numbers lower than the EU average and than 2021. For example, the availability of funding is less of an impediment than across the EU (23% versus 44%).\nIn 2023, one in ten Dutch enterprises (13%) brought new goods, processes, or services to the Dutch or global market. Majority of Dutch firms are also more technologically oriented than EU peers - almost eight out of ten Dutch firms (78%) employed at least one digital technology in 2023. The EU average is 70%. The majority of Dutch firms utilise digital platform technologies (59%), robots (56%), and the Internet of Things (55%), whereas just a small percentage use 3D printing (19%) or augmented/VR technology (15%).\nLargest companies.\nThe Netherlands is home to several large multinationals including Heineken, Ahold, Philips, TomTom, Randstad NV and ING, all of which have their headquarters in Amsterdam. Thousands of companies of non-Dutch origin have their headquarters in the Netherlands, like EADS, LyondellBasell and IKEA, because of attractive corporate tax levels.\nThe Netherlands' biggest companies in the Fortune Global 500 as of 2022 are as following:\nMergers and acquisitions.\nIn the Netherlands 22,484 deals were conducted between 1985 and 2018, with an overall value of 2,226.6 billion USD. The year with the most deals was 2000, with 1,169 deals. The year with the highest overall value was 2007, with almost 394.9 billion USD. However this was followed by a drastic slump during the Great Recession.\nCaribbean Netherlands.\n\"The wider Dutch Kingdom\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59761", "revid": "749427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59761", "title": "Politics of the Netherlands", "text": " \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Netherlands is a sovereign state with a parliamentary representative democracy. A constitutional monarchy, the country is organised as a decentralised unitary state. The Netherlands can be described as a consociational state. Dutch politics and governance are characterised by a common striving for broad consensus on important issues, within both of the political community and society as a whole.\nConstitution.\nThe Dutch Constitution lists the basic civil and social rights of the Dutch citizens and it describes the position and function of the institutions that have executive, legislative and judiciary power.\nThe constitution applies to the Netherlands, one of the four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The Netherlands comprises all of the European territory, as well as the Caribbean islands of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. The Kingdom as a whole (the Netherlands along with Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten) has its own Statute, describing its federate political system.\nThe Netherlands does not have a constitutional court and judges do not have the authority to review laws on their constitutionality. International treaties and the Statute of the Kingdom, however, overrule Dutch law and the Constitution, and judges are allowed to review laws against these in a particular court case. Furthermore, all legislation that is not a law in the strict sense of the word (such as policy guidelines or laws proposed by provincial or municipal government) can be tested on its constitutionality.\nAmendments to the Constitution must be approved by both Houses of the States General () twice. The first time around, this requires a majority vote. After parliament has been dissolved and a general election has been held, both Houses must approve the proposed amendments again with a two-thirds majority.\nPolitical institutions.\nThe Netherlands is a sovereign state with a democratic government. It is a decentralised unitary state, meaning that power is centralised in the national government, with local governments having to act in accordance. Major political institutions are the monarchy (head of state), the cabinet (council of ministers), the States General (parliament) and the judicial system. Next to the two houses of parliament, there are four other High Councils of State, which are constitutionally independent from the government but have limited political role. The Council of State, which serves as the highest advisory body to the government is the most important. The others are the National Ombudsman, the Court of Audit and the Chancery of the orders of knighthood. Next to the central government the most influential level of government is the municipalities. Between the government and municipalities are positioned the provincial executives at a general regional level and the water boards responsible for water management. Although not mentioned in the Constitution, political parties and the social partners organised in the Social and Economic Council are important political institutions as well.\nThe Netherlands does not have a traditional separation of powers between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. Having a parliamentary system, the government (the monarch and ministers) is formed based on parliamentary majority. According to the Constitution, the States General and the government share legislative power. All legislation has to pass through the Council of State () for advice and the Social and Economic Council advises the government on most socio-economic legislation. Executive power is reserved for the government. The Social and Economic Council also has the special right to make and enforce legislation in specific sectors, mostly in agriculture. The judicial power is divided into two separate systems of courts. For civil and criminal law the independent Supreme Court is the highest court, while for administrative law the Council of State is the highest court, which is \"ex officio\" chaired by the monarch.\nDutch politics is characterised by seeking compromises.\nMonarchy.\nThe present monarchy was founded in 1813. After the expulsion of the French, the Prince of Orange was proclaimed Sovereign Prince of the Netherlands. The new monarchy was confirmed in 1815 at the Congress of Vienna as part of the re-arrangement of Europe after the fall of Napoleon. The House of Orange-Nassau was given the present-day Netherlands and Belgium to govern as the United Kingdom of the Netherlands. Between 1815 and 1890, the King of the Netherlands was also Grand Duke of Luxembourg.\nThe current monarch is Willem-Alexander, while the heir apparent is Catharina-Amalia, Princess of Orange.\nConstitutionally, the monarch is head of state and has a role in the legislative process, as he has to co-sign every law to make it valid. The monarch is also \"ex officio\" chair of the Council of State, which advises the cabinet on every piece of legislation and is the final court for administrative law. Although King Willem-Alexander takes these functions seriously, he refrains from exerting his power in these positions. Until 2012, the monarch also played a central role in the formation of a cabinet after a general election or a cabinet crisis. The monarch used to appoint the \"informateur\", who chairs the formation talks, after consulting the parliamentary leaders of all parties represented in the lower house of the States General. Because this advice was a matter of public record, the monarch could not easily take a direction that was contrary to the advice of a majority in parliament. On the other hand, what was actually talked about behind the closed doors of the palace was not known. Upon the conclusion of formation talks, the monarch appoints the cabinet. Upon the fall of a government, the Prime Minister has to request the monarch to dismiss the cabinet.\nCabinet.\nThe government of the Netherlands (\"regering\") constitutionally consists of the monarch and the ministers. The monarch only plays a role in the appointment of ministers, and is not involved in decision-making. The ministers collectively form the Council of Ministers. This executive council meets every Friday in the \"Tr\u00eaveszaal\" at the Binnenhof, and initiates laws and policy. While most of the ministers head government ministries, since 1939 it has been permissible to appoint ministers without portfolio. The Prime Minister of the Netherlands presides over the cabinet and is the most important political figure of the Dutch government.\nThe Dutch cabinet is characterised by a high degree of collegiality and collective decision-making. The prime minister draws up the agenda and chairs Council of Minister meetings, but lacks the prerogative to appoint or remove ministers without the formal approval of the whole cabinet. Moreover, the prime minister's office is limited in size. Despite these limitations, the prime minister's position has grown in importance since the 1960s as a result of increased media attention, increasing demand for policy coordination and European integration.\nThe national government ( or ) consists of ministries, the implementing organizations that fall under the responsibility of ministries, inspectorates, and High Councils of State, and is involved in the preparation and implementation of the plans of the government and parliament.\nSome of the most highly regarded Prime Ministers of the Netherlands include:\nStates General.\nThe Dutch Parliament, officially known as the States General of the Netherlands, consists of a House of Representatives (\"Tweede Kamer\") and a Senate (\"Eerste Kamer\"). Both chambers are housed in the Binnenhof in The Hague and discuss proposed legislation and review the actions of the cabinet. Only the House of Representatives has the right to propose or amend legislation while the Senate discusses its value regarding the Dutch law since the Netherlands has no constitutional court. Currently there are 150 members of the House of Representatives and 75 Senators.\nMembers of the House are elected directly every four years using party-list proportional representation. Representatives are chosen on personal title, so when a member no longer agrees with his or her party, the member can decide to stay in the chamber, either as an independent representative, or as a member of another parliamentary party. If a member decides to resign, the empty seat falls to the original party collecting the votes, and is offered to the highest placed candidate on the party's electoral list who was not elected. Coalition governments may fall before their term expires, which usually results in early dissolution of the House and new elections.\nMembers of the Senate are elected indirectly by provincial councilors, again every four years, just after the elections of the provincial councils, via a system of proportional representation. Nowadays, the Senate is mainly considered to be a body of elder statesmen reconsidering legislation at ease, away from the pressure of daily political and media hypes. The position of senator is a part-time job as the institution meets once a week.\nPolitical parties.\nThe system of proportional representation, combined with the historical social division between Catholics, Protestants, socialists and liberals, has resulted in a multiparty system. The parties currently represented in the Dutch House of Representatives are:\nCouncil of State.\nThe Council of State is an advisory body of cabinet on constitutional and judicial aspects of legislation and policy. All proposed legislation is sent to the Council of State for advice. Although the advice is not binding, the cabinet is required to respond to the advice and it often plays a significant role in the ensuing debate in Parliament. In addition, the council is the highest administrative court.\nThe council is \"ex officio\" chaired by the monarch. The probable heir to the throne becomes a member of the Council when reaching legal adulthood. The monarch leaves daily affairs to the Vice-President of the Council of State, currently Thom de Graaf, and the other councillors, who are mainly legal specialists, former ministers, members of parliament and judges or professors of law.\nHigh Councils of State.\nThe Dutch political system has five so-called High Councils of State, which are explicitly regarded as independent by the Constitution. Apart from the two Houses of Parliament and the Council of State, these are the Court of Audit and the National Ombudsman.\nThe Court of Audit investigates whether public funds are collected and spent legitimately and effectively. The National Ombudsman investigates complaints about the functioning and practices of government. As with the advice of the Council of State, the reports from these organisations are not easily put aside and often play a role in public and political debate.\nJudicial system.\nThe judiciary comprises eleven district courts, four courts of appeal, three administrative courts of appeal (Central Appeals Tribunal, Trade and Industry Appeals Tribunal and Council of State) and the Supreme Court. All judicial appointments are made by the Government. Judges are appointed for life until they retire at the age of 70.\nAdvisory councils.\nAs part of the Dutch tradition of depoliticised consensus-based decision making, the government often makes use of advisory councils composed of academic specialists or representatives of stakeholders.\nThe most prominent advisory council is the Social and Economic Council (, SER), which is composed of representatives of trade unions and employers' organisations, along with government-appointed specialists. It is consulted at an early stage in financial, economic and social policy-making. It advises government and its advice, like the advice of the High Councils of State, cannot easily be set aside. The SER heads a system of PBOs, self-regulating organisations that contribute to making laws for specific economic sectors.\nThe following organisations are represented in the Social and Economic Council, accounting for two thirds of its membership:\nThe remaining third of the members of the council are appointed by the government. These include professors of economics and related fields, as well as representatives of the Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and De Nederlandsche Bank. In addition, representatives of environmental and consumers' organisations are represented in SER working groups.\nOther prominent advisory bodies are\nSubnational government.\nThe Netherlands is divided into twelve provinces, which are responsible for spatial planning, health policy and recreation, within the bounds prescribed by the national government. Furthermore, they oversee the policy and finances of municipalities and water boards. Provincial councils are directly elected by inhabitants every four years. Executive authority is exercised by the King's (or Queens's) commissioner and the college of the provincial executive. The commissioner is appointed by the national government and is responsible to the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations. Members of the provincial executive are appointed by, and responsible to the provincial council.\nLocal government in the Netherlands is formed by 342 municipalities (as of 2023). Municipalities are responsible for education, spatial planning and social security, within the bounds prescribed by the national and provincial government. Like provincial councils, municipal councils are directly elected every four years. Municipalities are governed by the municipal executive, consisting of the mayor and a number of aldermen. The mayor is appointed by the national government and responsible to the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations. The aldermen are appointed by, and responsible to the municipal council. The major cities of Amsterdam and Rotterdam are subdivided into administrative areas (stadsdelen), which have their own (limited) responsibilities.\nLocal government on the Caribbean Netherlands is formed by three public bodies sometimes called \"special municipalities\" which are not part of a province. They are governed by a Lieutenant-general () and \"eilandgedeputeerden\" which are responsible to the island council, which is elected by direct suffrage. Their activities are similar to but wider than those of municipalities.\nFurthermore, there are water boards which are responsible for the country's inland waterways, groundwater levels, polders, dikes and other waterworks. These boards are ruled by representatives of companies, farmers and nature conservation organisations and representatives who are elected by citizens in the area. They have the power to tax their residents.\nElections.\nThe Netherlands forms a single constituency during general elections. Parties participating in an election submit a ranked list of candidates, based on which members of parliament are chosen. The Netherlands has an open list system, meaning that the ordering of the party list can be altered by preference votes. The electoral quota, the number of votes necessary to win a single seat in the House of Representatives (about 0.7% of the vote), serves as the electoral threshold. Because of this, smaller parties can secure seats in parliament.\nPolicy.\nForeign policy.\nThe foreign policy of the Netherlands is based on four basic commitments: to Transatlantic relations, European integration, international development and international law. While historically the Netherlands used to be a neutral state, it has joined many international organisations since World War II, most prominently the United Nations, NATO and the European Union. The Dutch economy is very open and heavily reliant on international trade. One of the more controversial international issues surrounding the Netherlands is its liberal policy towards soft drugs.\nPolicy issues.\nDutch policies on recreational drugs, prostitution, same-sex marriage, abortion and euthanasia are among the most liberal in the world.\nPolitical history.\n1800\u20131966.\nThe Netherlands has been a constitutional monarchy since 1813 and a parliamentary democracy since 1848. Previously, it was a republic from 1581 to 1806, and a kingdom between 1806 and 1810 (it was part of France between 1810 and 1813).\nBefore 1917, the Netherlands had a two-round system with census suffrage (per the Constitution of 1814), in which only property-owning adult males had the right to vote. Under influence of the rising socialist movement the requirements were gradually reduced until in 1917 the present party-list proportional representation voting system with universal manhood suffrage was instituted, expanded in 1919 to include women.\nUntil 1966, Dutch politics was characterised by pillarisation. Society was separated into several segments (pillars) which lived separately from each other and there was only contact at the top levels, in government. These pillars had their own organisations, most importantly the political parties. There were four pillars, which provided the five most important parties, the socialist Labour Party (PvdA), the conservative liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), the Catholic People's Party (KVP) and the two conservative Protestant parties, the Christian Historical Union (CHU) and the Anti-Revolutionary Party (ARP). Since no party ever won an absolute majority, these political parties had to work together in coalition governments. These alternated between a centre-left \"Roman/Red\" coalition of PvdA, KVP, ARP and CHU and a centre-right coalition of VVD, KVP, ARP and CHU.\n1966\u20131994.\nIn the 1960s, new parties appeared, which were mostly popular with young voters, who felt less bound to the pillars. The post-war babyboom meant that there had been a demographic shift to lower ages. On top of that, the voting age was lowered, first from 23 to 21 years in 1963 and then to 18 years in 1972. The most successful new party was the progressive liberal Democrats 66 (D66), which proposed democratisation to break down pillarisation.\nPillarisation declined, with the three Christian democratic parties losing almost half of their votes. In 1977 they merged into the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), which became a major force in Dutch politics, participating in governments uninterruptedly from 1977 until 1994. Meanwhile, the conservative liberal VVD and D66 made large electoral gains.\nThe Dutch welfare state had become the most extensive social security system in the world by the early eighties, but it came into crisis when spending rose due to dramatic high unemployment rates and poor economic growth. The early eighties saw unemployment rise to over 11% and the budget deficit rose to 10.7% of the national income. The centre-right and centre-left coalitions of CDA\u2013VVD and CDA\u2013PvdA reformed the Dutch welfare state to bring the budget deficit under control and to create jobs. Social benefits were reduced, taxes lowered and businesses deregulated. Gradually the economy recovered and the budget deficit and unemployment were reduced considerably.\nWhen the far-left parties lost much electoral support in the 1986 elections, they decided to merge into the new GroenLinks in 1989, with considerable success.\nSince 1994.\nIn the 1994 general election, the CDA lost nearly half its seats, while D66 doubled in size. For the first time in eighty years, a coalition was formed without the Christian democrats. The purple coalition was formed between PvdA, D66 and VVD. The colour purple symbolised the mixing of socialist red with liberal blue. During the purple years, which lasted until 2002, the government introduced legislation on abortion, euthanasia, and gay marriage. The purple coalition also marked a period of remarkable economic prosperity.\nSince 2000, the Netherlands has largely supported the European Union and taken marked steps to integrate itself with it and improve its ties with NATO. Globalization, the introduction of the Euro, the enlargement of the European Union, the enlargement of NATO, the aftermath of the Orange Revolution and other factors have contributed to that.\nThe purple coalition lost its majority in the 2002 general election due to the rise of the Pim Fortuyn List (LPF), the new political party led by the flamboyant populist Pim Fortuyn. He campaigned on an anti-immigration programme and spoke of the \"Purple Chaos\" (Dutch: \"Puinhopen van Paars\"). Fortuyn was shot dead nine days before the elections. The LPF entered the House of Representatives with one-sixth of the seats, while the PvdA lost half its seats. A cabinet was formed by CDA, VVD, and LPF, led by Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende. It proved short-lived: after only 87 days in power, the coalition fell apart as a result of consecutive conflicts within the LPF and between LPF ministers.\nIn the ensuing January 2003 general election, the LPF dropped to only five percent of the seats in the House of Representatives. The left-wing Socialist Party (SP) led by Jan Marijnissen became the fourth strongest party there. The centre-right second Balkenende cabinet was formed by the CDA, the VVD, and the D66. Against popular sentiment, the right-wing coalition initiated a programme of welfare state reforms, healthcare privatisation, and stricter immigration policies. On 1 June 2005, the Dutch electorate voted in a referendum against the proposed European Constitution by a majority of 61.54%, three days after 57.67% of the French voters had rejected the treaty.\nIn June 2006, D66 withdrew its support for the coalition in the aftermath of the upheaval about the asylum procedure of Ayaan Hirsi Ali instigated by immigration minister Rita Verdonk. As a result, the caretaker third Balkenende cabinet was formed by CDA and VVD. The ensuing November 2006 general election saw a major advance of the SP, which almost tripled in size and became the third largest party with 17% of the seats, while the moderate PvdA lost a quarter of its seats. At the other end of the spectrum, LPF lost all its seats, while the new anti-immigrant Party for Freedom (PVV) went from nothing to 6% of the seats, becoming the fifth largest party. This polarisation made the formation negotiations very difficult. The talks resulted in the formation of the social-Christian fourth Balkenende cabinet supported by CDA, PvdA, and the Christian Union. This cabinet was oriented at solidarity, durability, and \"norms and values\".\nIn February 2010, the PvdA withdrew its support for the fourth Balkenende cabinet. The PvdA disagreed with prolonging the Dutch military involvement in Afghanistan. In the following 2010 general election, the VVD became the biggest party with 31 seats, followed closely by the PvdA with 30 seats. The right-wing PVV went from 9 to 24 seats, while the CDA lost half of their support and was left with 21 seats. The SP lost 10 of its 25 seats, and both D66 and GroenLinks got 10 seats. The Christian Union, the smallest coalition party, lost 1 of its 6 seats. Both the SGP and the PvdD kept their 2 seats. The following cabinet formation eventually resulted in the first Rutte cabinet, a minority government formed by VVD and CDA, supported in parliament by the PVV.\nIn April 2012, the PVV withdrew its support for the Rutte cabinet after failed negotiations about the government budget for 2013. A political crisis followed, in which the parliamentary fractions of the VVD, CDA, D66, GroenLinks and the Christian Union, together disposing of a parliamentary majority, came to a temporary agreement for the 2013 budget. What followed in September 2012 was the 2012 general election, in which both the VVD and the PvdA won considerably, gaining 41 and 38 seats respectively.\nThe three parties that lost most were the PVV, sinking from 24 to 15 seats, the CDA, continuing their 2010 loss and winning only 13 seats, and GroenLinks, sinking from 10 to only 4 seats. The SP (15 seats), Christian Union (5 seats) and PvdD (2 seats) were stable, whereas D66 (10 to 12 seats) and SGP (2 to 3 seats) won mildly. Newcomer was 50PLUS, a pensioners' party, gaining 2 seats. In November 2012, after a relatively short cabinet formation, the second Rutte cabinet was formed by VVD and PvdA.\nThe second Rutte cabinet was followed by the third Rutte cabinet in October 2017, after the 2017 general election. It consisted of the VVD, CDA, D66 and CU.\nIn 2019, protests commenced with thousands of Dutch farmers who consider that \"green policies\" are a threat to their livelihood due to nitrogen consumption being limited and other policies which impose additional burdens on the ability to farm.\nOn 15 January 2021, the Rutte cabinet resigned in the face of the Dutch childcare benefits scandal. In March 2021, centre-right VVD of Prime Minister Mark Rutte was the winner of the elections, securing 35 out of 150 seats. The second biggest party was the centre to centre-left D66 with 24 seats. Geert Wilders' radical-right party lost a few seats, while Thierry Baudet's radical-right party Forum for Democracy grew. The ensuing fourth Rutte cabinet failed to reach a compromise on asylum policy and fell in July 2023, triggering November snap election. The right-wing populist Party for Freedom (PVV), led by Geert Wilders, won the largest number of seats, and it formed the right-wing Schoof cabinet.\nThe Netherlands were in 2023 considered the 17th most electoral democratic country in the world according to the V-Dem Democracy indices.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59762", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59762", "title": "List of kings of England", "text": ""}
{"id": "59764", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59764", "title": "Tim Wirth", "text": "American politician\nTimothy Endicott Wirth (born September 22, 1939) is an American politician from Colorado who served as a Democrat in both the United States Senate (1987\u20131993) and the United States House of Representatives (1975\u20131987). He also served in several appointed roles in government, including as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Education during the Nixon Administration and Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs for the U.S. State Department during the Clinton Administration. From 1998 to 2013, he served as the president of the United Nations Foundation, and currently sits on the Foundation's board.\nEarly life and education.\nWirth is a graduate of Graland Country Day School (1954) in Denver, and Phillips Exeter Academy. He received his B.A. and graduate degree from Harvard University and was awarded a PhD from Stanford University in 1973. He served as a member of the Harvard Board of Overseers.\nWirth served as a vice president of Great Western Cities Company, part of Great Western United, in 1970\u20131971. The CEO of GWU was William M. White Jr., age 31, in 1971, when Wirth described White and Wirth reading \"Future Shock\" and passing copies to the \"older generation\" of company directors.\nUnited States Representative.\nWirth began his political career as a White House Fellow under President Lyndon Johnson and was Deputy Assistant Secretary for Education in the Nixon Administration. In 1970, Wirth returned to Colorado and ran successfully for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1974, unseating incumbent Republican Donald G. Brotzman by a 52% to 48% margin. He represented Boulder and the Denver suburbs in Congress from 1975 to 1987. As a first term Congressman, Wirth organized the \"Freshman Revolt\" in 1975 unseating a handful of \"old bull\" committee chairmen, and encouraging others to be more inclusive. Wirth had a number of difficult reelections during his 12 years in Congress, and raised large sums of money to get reelected. With colleagues Norman Mineta, Leon Panetta and Dick Gephardt, he was part of \"The Gang of Four\" on the House Budget Committee challenging the budget process with bipartisan budget ideas, and developing a high technology and alternative budget in 1982. As Chair of the Telecommunications Subcommittee, he was the lead legislator in bringing competition to the video and telephone industries. Wirth also authored the Indian Peaks Wilderness Act of 1978.\nUnited States Senator.\nIn 1986, Wirth ran for the U.S. Senate and won his party's nomination unopposed to replace Sen. Gary Hart. The general election was more difficult than expected, and he defeated fellow U.S. Representative Ken Kramer by a narrow margin. In the Senate, he focused on environmental issues, particularly global climate change, and organized the historic Hansen hearings on climate change in 1988. At the hearings, Hansen testified that the Earth is warmer than at any other time in recent history, and that this can be attributed to human activity with 99% certainty. The hearings are widely credited with first bringing climate change into the public discourse. With his close friend, the late Senator John Heinz (R-PA), he authored \"Project 88\", outlining the groundbreaking \"Cap and Trade\" idea which became law in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. He authored the far-reaching Colorado Wilderness Bill which became law in 1993, and with Senator Alan Simpson (R-WY) he authored major legislation focused on population stabilization. Wirth also organized the Senate Task Force on the Expansion of Major League Baseball, which became a major factor in the awarding of a new expansion franchise to Denver. He chose not to run for re-election in 1992, citing in a front page cover story in the Sunday New York Times Magazine (August 9, 1992), frustration with the ever-increasing role of money in politics to the exclusion of focus on public policy.\nAfter Congressional service.\nFollowing two decades of elected politics, Wirth was national co-chair of the Clinton\u2013Gore campaign, and served in the U.S. Department of State as the first Undersecretary for Global Affairs from 1993 to 1997. He led U.S. foreign policy in the areas of refugees, population, environment, science, human rights and narcotics. He chaired the United States Delegation at the 1994 Cairo Conference on Population and Development, and was the lead U.S. negotiator for the Kyoto Climate Conference until he resigned from the Administration in late 1997 to accept Ted Turner's invitation to be President of the newly created United Nations Foundation.\nAs President of the UN Foundation (UNF) from 1998 to 2013, Wirth organized and led the formulation of the Foundation's mission and program priorities, which include the environment, women and population, children's health, and peace, security and human rights. The Foundation also engages in extensive public advocacy, fundraising, and institutional strengthening efforts on behalf of the United Nations. By mobilizing these diverse resources, the UN Foundation works with many public and private partners and manages a variety of campaigns to help solve major problems facing the UN and the world community.\nWork with the United Nations Foundation.\nThe University of Colorado at Denver has an endowed Tim Wirth Chair in Environmental and Community Development Policy. The current holder of the chair is the man Wirth replaced in the Senate, Gary Hart.\nWirth is a member of the ReFormers Caucus of Issue One.\nIn his retirement, Wirth has been supportive of the youth climate justice movement. He has been active in efforts to convince his alma mater, Harvard University, to divest from fossil fuels, and in March 2021 joined Harvard students, faculty, and alumni to file an official legal complaint charging that the university's fossil fuel investments were illegal under Massachusetts law. In response to the legal complaint and other efforts, Harvard committed to divestment from fossil fuels in the fall of 2021.\nPersonal life.\nWirth is married to Wren Winslow Wirth, the president of the Winslow Foundation. They have two children, Chris and Kelsey Wirth. Their daughter, Kelsey Wirth, is the co-founder of the orthodontic production company Align Technology. Their son, Chris Wirth, is the founder of Liberty Puzzles, the largest American laser-cut jigsaw puzzle company, based in Boulder, Colorado. His nephew, Peter Wirth, was elected to the New Mexico Legislature in 2004. His brother, the late John Wirth, was the Gildred Professor of Latin American Studies at Stanford University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59765", "revid": "50746695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59765", "title": "Leopold III of Belgium", "text": "King of the Belgians from 1934 to 1951\nLeopold III (3 November 1901 \u2013 25 September 1983) was King of the Belgians from 23 February 1934 until his abdication on 16 July 1951. At the outbreak of World War II, Leopold tried to maintain Belgian neutrality, but after the German invasion in May 1940, he surrendered his country, earning him much hostility, both at home and abroad.\nLeopold's act was declared unconstitutional by Prime Minister Hubert Pierlot and his cabinet, who moved to London to form a government-in-exile, while Leopold and his family were placed under house arrest by the Germans. In 1944, they were moved to Germany and then Austria, before being liberated by the Americans, but banned for some years from returning to Belgium, where his brother Prince Charles, Count of Flanders, had been declared regent. Leopold's eventual return to his homeland in 1950 nearly caused a civil war, with serious calls for a secessionist republic in Wallonia. Under pressure from the government, he abdicated in favour of his son Baudouin in July 1951.\nLeopold's first wife, Astrid of Sweden, died in a road accident while on a driving holiday in Switzerland in August 1935, being much mourned by the public. Leopold, who was driving the vehicle when it hit a tree, suffered minor injuries. His morganatic second marriage, to Lilian Baels in captivity in 1941, was contrary to Belgian law, which stipulates that the civil marriage has to occur before a religious marriage, and she was never permitted the title of queen. Although Lilian and Leopold had originally planned to postpone their civil marriage until the end of the war, Lilian was soon expecting their first child, necessitating a civil marriage, which took place on 6 December 1941.\nEarly life and family.\nPrince Leopold was born in Brussels, the first child of Prince Albert, heir to the Belgian throne, and his consort, Duchess Elisabeth of Bavaria. In 1909 his father became King of the Belgians, as Albert I, and Prince Leopold became Duke of Brabant.\nIn August 1914, when Belgium was invaded by Germany, King Albert allowed Leopold, then aged twelve, to enlist in the Belgian army as a private and fight in defence of the kingdom. However, in 1915, with Belgium almost entirely occupied by the Germans, Leopold was sent to attend Eton College, while his father fought on in France.\nAfter the war, in 1919, the Duke of Brabant visited the Old Mission and Saint Anthony Seminary in Santa Barbara, California.\nHe married Princess Astrid of Sweden in a civil ceremony in Stockholm on 4 November 1926, followed by a religious ceremony in Brussels on 10 November. The marriage produced three children:\nOn 29 August 1935, while the king and queen were driving along the winding, narrow roads near their villa at K\u00fcssnacht am Rigi, Schwyz, Switzerland, on the shores of Lake Lucerne, Leopold lost control of the car which plunged into the lake, killing Queen Astrid.\nLeopold married Lilian Baels on 11 September 1941, in a secret religious ceremony which was not valid under the law of Belgium. They originally intended to wait until the end of the war for the civil marriage, but as the new \"Princess of R\u00e9thy\" was soon expecting their first child, the ceremony took place on 6 December 1941. They had three children in total:\nWorld War II.\nWhen World War II broke out in September 1939, the French and British governments immediately sought to persuade Belgium to join them. Leopold and his government refused, maintaining Belgium's neutrality. Belgium considered itself well-prepared against a possible invasion by Axis forces, for during the 1930s the Belgian government had made extensive preparations to deter and repel an invasion of the country by Germany such as the one that had occurred in 1914.\nOn 10 May 1940, the Wehrmacht invaded Belgium. On the first day of the offensive, the principal Belgian strong point of Fort Eben-Emael was overwhelmed by a daring paratroop operation and the defensive perimeter thus penetrated before any French or British troops could arrive. After a short running battle that eventually involved the armies of all four belligerents, Belgium was overwhelmed by the numerically superior and better-prepared Germans.\nNevertheless, the Belgian perseverance prevented the British Expeditionary Force from being outflanked and cut off from the coast, enabling the evacuation from Dunkirk. Alan Brooke who commanded II Corps of the BEF thought that the 10th Belgian Division was in the wrong place and wanted to deploy north of Brussels to avoid \"double-banking\". He was advised by Roger Keyes to see the king, as the king was commanding the Belgian forces, and on 12 May was \"making progress in getting matters put right\" in discussion with the king in English, but was interrupted (twice) by the king's advisor who spoke to the king in French (in which Brooke was fluent). The advisor was insistent that the Belgian division could not be moved and the BEF should be stopped further south and clear of Brussels; Brooke said he was not putting the whole case to the king; he found that arguing with the advisor was a sheer waste of time as he cared little about the BEF and most of his suggestions were \"fantastic\". The king's advisor Raoul Van Overstraeten was not the Chief of Staff, as Brooke had assumed - Van Overstraeten had refused that rank - but the king's aide-de-camp, with the rank of Major-General, and would not give up the Louvain front. The French liaison officer, General Champon, told Brooke that Van Overstraeten had ascendancy over the king and had taken control, so it was useless to see the Chief of Staff. Later (15 May) Brooke found that the BEF was likely to \"have both flanks turned\" with French defeats, and started withdrawal on 16 May.\nAfter his military surrender, Leopold (unlike Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands in a similar predicament) remained in Brussels to surrender to the victorious invaders, while his entire civil government fled to Paris and later to London.\nSurrender and constitutional crisis.\nOn 24 May 1940, Leopold, having assumed command of the Belgian Army, met with his ministers for the final time. The ministers urged the king to leave the country with the government. Prime Minister Hubert Pierlot reminded him that capitulation was a decision for the Belgian government, not for the king, to make. The king indicated that he had decided to remain in Belgium with his troops, whatever the outcome. The ministers took this to mean that he would establish a new government under the direction of Hitler, potentially a treasonous act. Leopold thought that he might be seen as a deserter if he were to leave the country: \"He was resolved to remain with his army and amidst his people so as to share their fate.\" Leopold had long had a difficult and contentious relationship with his ministers, acting independently of government influence whenever possible, and seeking to circumvent and even limit the ministers' powers, while expanding his own.\nFrench, British, and Belgian troops were encircled by German forces at the Battle of Dunkirk. Leopold notified King George VI by telegram on 25 May 1940 that Belgian forces were being crushed, saying \"assistance which we give to the Allies will come to an end if our army is surrounded\". Two days later (27 May 1940), Leopold surrendered the Belgian forces to the Germans.\nPrime Minister Pierlot spoke on French radio, saying that the king's decision to surrender went against the Belgian Constitution. The decision, he said, was not only a military decision but also a political decision, and the king had acted without his ministers' advice, and therefore contrary to the Constitution. Pierlot and his government believed this created an \"impossibilit\u00e9 de r\u00e9gner\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Should the king find himself unable to reign, the ministers, having observed this inability, immediately summon the Chambers. Regency and guardianship are to be provided by the united Chambers.\nIt was impossible, however, to summon the Belgian Chamber of Representatives or Belgian Senate at this time, or to appoint a regent. After the liberation of Belgium in September 1944, the government asked Leopold's brother, Prince Charles, to serve as regent.\nAfter Leopold's surrender, the British press denounced him as \"Traitor King\" and \"King Rat\"; the \"Daily Mirror\" published a picture of Leopold with the headline \"The Face That Every Woman Now Despises\". A group of Belgian refugees in Paris placed a message at King Albert's statue denouncing his son as \"your unworthy successor\". French Prime Minister Paul Reynaud accused Leopold of treason. Flemish historians Valaers and Van Goethem wrote that Leopold III had become \"The scapegoat of Reynaud\", because Reynaud was likely already aware that the Battle of France was lost.\nLeopold's surrender was also decried by Winston Churchill. In the House of Commons on 4 June 1940 he said:\nAt the last moment when Belgium was already invaded, King Leopold called upon us to come to his aid, and even at the last moment we came. He and his brave, efficient army, nearly half a million strong, guarded our left flank and thus kept open our only line of retreat to the sea. Suddenly, without prior consultation, with the least possible notice, without the advice of his ministers and upon his own personal act, he sent a plenipotentiary to the German Command, surrendered his army and exposed our whole flank and means of retreat.\nIn 1949, Churchill's comments about the events of May 1940 were published in \"Le Soir\" (12 February 1949). Leopold's former secretary sent a letter to Churchill saying that Churchill was wrong. Churchill sent a copy of this letter to the King's brother, Prince Charles, via his secretary Andr\u00e9 de Staercke. In his own letter Churchill wrote,\nWith regards to King Leopold, the words which I used at the time in the House of Commons are upon record and after careful consideration I do not see any reason to change them (...) it seemed to me and many others that the king should have been guided by the advice of his ministers and should not have favoured a course which identified the capitulation of the Belgian Army with the submission of the Belgian State to Herr Hitler and consequently taking them out of the war. Happily this evil was averted, and in the end, all came right. I need scarcely say that nothing I said at the time could be interpreted as a reflection upon the personal courage or honour of King Leopold.\nDe Staercke replied that Churchill was right: \"The Prince, Monsieur Spaak [Belgian Foreign Minister Paul-Henri Spaak] and I read your text, which states the precise truth and seems perfect to us.\"\nBelgian historian Francis Balace wrote that capitulation was inevitable because the Belgian Army was not able to fight any longer against the German army. Even Churchill admitted that their position was perilous. In a telegram to Field Marshal Lord Gort on 27 May, only one day before the Belgian capitulation, he wrote, \"We are asking them to sacrifice themselves for us.\"\nAfter the fall of France.\nUpon Leopold's surrender, the government ministers left for exile, mostly in France. When France fell at the end of June 1940, several ministers sought to return to Belgium. They made an overture to Leopold but were rebuffed.\nBecause of the great popularity of the king, and the unpopularity of the civil government from the middle of 1940, the government crisis persisted.\nOn 2 August 1940, several ministers conferred in Le Perthus in France near the Spanish border. Prime Minister Pierlot and Foreign Minister Spaak were persuaded to go to London, but they were able to start out for London only at the end of August and could travel only via neutral Spain and Portugal. When they reached Spain, they were arrested and detained by the regime of Francisco Franco; they finally arrived in London on 22 October.\nMeeting with Hitler.\nLeopold rejected cooperation with the government of Nazi Germany and refused to administer Belgium in accordance with its dictates; thus, the Germans implemented a military government. Leopold attempted to assert his authority as monarch and head of the Belgian government, although he was a prisoner of the Germans. Despite his defiance of the Germans, the Belgian government-in-exile in London maintained that the king did not represent the Belgian government and was unable to reign. The Germans held him at first under house arrest at the Royal Castle of Laeken. Having since June 1940 desired a meeting with Adolf Hitler in respect of the situation of Belgian prisoners of war, Leopold III finally met with him on 19 November 1940. Leopold wanted to persuade Hitler to release Belgian POWs, and issue a public statement about Belgium's future independence. Hitler refused to speak about the independence of Belgium or issue a statement about it. In refusing to publish a statement, Hitler preserved the king from being seen as cooperating with Germany, and thus engaged in treasonous acts, which would likely have obliged him to abdicate upon the liberation of Belgium. \"The [German] Chancellor saved the king two times.\"\nSecond marriage.\nOn 11 September 1941, while a prisoner of the Germans, Leopold secretly married Lilian Baels in a religious ceremony that had no validity under Belgian law, which required a religious marriage to be preceded by a legal or civil marriage. On 6 December, they were married under civil law. The reason for the out-of-order marriages was never officially made public.\nJozef-Ernest Cardinal van Roey, Archbishop of Mechelen, wrote an open letter to parish priests throughout the country announcing Leopold's second marriage on 7 December. The letter from the Cardinal revealed that the king's new wife would be known as Princesse de R\u00e9thy, not Queen Lilian, and that any children they had would have no claim to the throne. Leopold's new marriage damaged his reputation further in the eyes of many of his subjects.\nThe \"Political Testament\".\nThe ministers made several efforts during the war to work out a suitable agreement with Leopold III. They sent Pierlot's son-in-law as an emissary to Leopold in January 1944, carrying a letter offering reconciliation from the Belgian government-in-exile. The letter never reached its destination, however, as the son-in-law was killed by the Germans en route. The ministers did not know what happened either to the message or the messenger and assumed that Leopold was ignoring them.\nLeopold wrote his \"Political Testament\" in January 1944, shortly after this failed attempt at reconciliation. The testament was to be published in case he was not in Belgium when Allied forces arrived. The testament, which had an imperious and negative tone, considered the potential Allied movement into Belgium an \"occupation\", not a \"liberation\". It gave no credit to the active Belgian resistance. The Belgian government-in-exile in London did not like Leopold's demand that the government ministers involved in the 1940 crisis be dismissed. The Allies did not like Leopold's repudiation of the treaties concluded by the Belgian government-in-exile in London. The United States was particularly concerned about the economic treaty it had reached with the government-in-exile that enabled it to obtain Congolese uranium for America's secret atom bomb program, which had been developed for use against Germany (although, as it turned out, Germany surrendered before the first bomb was ready).\nThe Belgian government did not publish the \"Political Testament\" and tried to ignore it, partly for fear of increased support for the Belgian Communist Party. When Pierlot and Spaak learned of its contents in September 1944, they were astonished and felt deceived by the king. According to Andr\u00e9 de Staercke, they were dismayed \"in the face of so much blindness and unawareness\".\nChurchill's reaction to the Testament was simply, \"It stinks.\" In a sentence inspired by a quote of Talleyrand about the Bourbons after the restoration of the French monarchy in 1815, Churchill declared, \"He is like the Bourbons, he has learned nothing and forgotten nothing.\"\nExile and abdication.\nDeportation and exile.\nOn 7 June 1944, Heinrich Himmler ordered Leopold deported to Germany. Princess Lilian followed with the family in another car the following day under an SS armed guard. The Nazis interned the family in a fort at Hirschstein in Saxony from June 1944 to March 1945, and then at Strobl, Austria.\nThe British and American governments worried about the return of the king. Charles W. Sawyer, US Ambassador to Belgium, warned his government that an immediate return by the king to Belgium would \"precipitate serious difficulties\". \"There are deep differences even in the royal family and the situation holds dynamite for Belgium and perhaps for Europe\". \"The Foreign Office feared that an increasing minority in French-speaking Wallonia would demand either autonomy or annexation to France. Winant, the American Ambassador to the Court of St James's, reported a Foreign Office official's concern regarding irredentist propaganda in Wallonia.\" and that \"the French Ambassador in Brussels... is believed to have connived in the spreading of this propaganda\".\nLeopold and his companions were released by members of the United States 106th Cavalry Group in early May 1945. Because of the controversy about his conduct during the war, Leopold III and his wife and children were unable to return to Belgium and spent the next six years in exile at Pregny-Chamb\u00e9sy near Geneva, Switzerland. A regency under his brother Prince Charles had been established by the Belgian legislature in 1944.\nResistance to Leopold's return.\nFrans Henri van den Dungen, rector of the Free University of Brussels, wrote to Leopold on 25 June 1945 about concerns for serious disorder in Wallonia, \"The question is not if the accusations against you are right or not [but that...] you are no longer a symbol of Belgian unity.\"\nRobert Gillon, the President of the Belgian Senate, told the king that there was a threat of serious disorder: \"If there are only ten or twenty people killed, the situation would become terrible for the king.\"\nThe president of the Belgian Chamber of Representatives, Frans Van Cauwelaert, was concerned that there would be a general strike in Wallonia and revolt in Li\u00e8ge. He wrote, \"The country is not able to put down the disorders because of the insufficient forces of the police and a lack of weapons.\"\nIn 1946, a commission of inquiry exonerated Leopold of treason. Nonetheless, controversy concerning his loyalty continued, and in 1950, a referendum was held about his future. Fifty-seven per cent of the voters favoured his return. The divide between Leopoldists and anti-Leopoldists ran along the lines of socialists and Walloons who were mostly opposed (42% favourable votes in Wallonia) and Christian Democrats and Flemish who were more in favour of the king (70% favourable votes in Flanders).\nGeneral strike of 1950.\nHis return to Belgium on 22 July 1950 was met with one of the most violent general strikes in the history of Belgium. Three protesters were killed when the gendarmerie opened fire with automatic weapons. The country stood on the brink of civil war, and Belgian banners were replaced by Walloon flags in Li\u00e8ge and other municipalities of Wallonia. To avoid tearing the country apart, and to preserve the monarchy, Leopold decided on 1 August 1950 to delegate his powers and duties to his 20-year-old son Baudouin, making the latter regent. At the urging of the government, Leopold abdicated on 16 July 1951 in favour of Baudouin. If he had remained king until the day of his death, he would have ruled for 49 years, surpassing Leopold II as longest-reigning monarch of Belgium.\nPost-abdication life.\nLeopold and his wife continued to advise King Baudouin until the latter's marriage in 1960. Some Belgian historians, such as Vincent Delcorps, speak of there having been a \"diarchy\" during this period.\nIn retirement, he followed his passion as an amateur social anthropologist and entomologist and travelled the world, collecting zoological specimens. Two species of reptiles are named after him, \"Gehyra leopoldi\" and \"Polemon leopoldi\".\nLeopold died in 1983 in Woluwe-Saint-Lambert (\"Sint-Lambrechts-Woluwe\") following emergency heart surgery. He was interred next to Queen Astrid in the royal vault at the Church of Our Lady of Laeken. Leopold's second wife, the Princess de R\u00e9thy, was later interred with them.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59766", "revid": "1057393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59766", "title": "United States Naval Academy", "text": "Service academy in Annapolis, Maryland, US\nThe United States Naval Academy (USNA, Navy, or Annapolis) is a federal service academy in Annapolis, Maryland. It was established on 10 October 1845 during the tenure of George Bancroft as Secretary of the Navy. The Naval Academy is the second oldest of the five U.S. service academies and it educates midshipmen for service in the officer corps of the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps. It is part of the Naval University System. The campus is located on the former grounds of Fort Severn at the confluence of the Severn River and Chesapeake Bay in Anne Arundel County, east of Washington, D.C., and southeast of Baltimore. The entire campus, known colloquially as the Yard, is a National Historic Landmark and home to many historic sites, buildings, and monuments. It replaced Philadelphia Naval Asylum in Philadelphia that had served as the first United States Naval Academy from 1838 to 1845, at which time the Naval Academy formed in Annapolis.\nCandidates for admission generally must apply directly to the academy and apply separately for a nomination, usually from a member of Congress. Students are officers-in-training with the rank of midshipman. Tuition for midshipmen is fully funded by the Navy in exchange for an active duty service obligation upon graduation. Approximately 1,200 \"plebes\" (an abbreviation of the Ancient Roman word \"plebeian\") enter the academy each summer for the rigorous Plebe Summer. About 1,000 midshipmen graduate and commission. Graduates are commissioned as either ensigns in the Navy or second lieutenants in the Marine Corps, but a small number can also be cross-commissioned as officers in other U.S. services, and the services of allied nations. The United States Naval Academy has some of the highest-paid graduates in the country according to starting salary. The academic program grants a Bachelor of Science degree with a curriculum that grades midshipmen's performance upon a broad academic program, military leadership performance, and mandatory participation in competitive athletics. Midshipmen are required to adhere to the academy's Honor Concept.\nOther Navy schools.\nThe Navy operates the Naval Postgraduate School and the Naval War College separately. The Naval Academy Preparatory School (NAPS) in Newport, Rhode Island, is the official preparatory school for the Naval Academy.\nHistory.\nThe first nautical school for officers was conceived by Commodore Arthur Sinclair in 1819 while in command of the Norfolk Navy Yard. Due to his zeal and perseverance, the \"Nautical School\" was opened on board the frigate on 3 December 1821 with between 40 and 50 midshipmen attached to the ship. The curriculum was diversified with naval tactics, astronomy, geography, French, history, English grammar, and international relations. The school operated until 1828, when USS \"Guerriere\" was ordered to duty in the Pacific. It was from that small start that the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis grew.\nThe history of the academy can be divided into four eras: the use of original Fort Severn from 1845 to 1861, \"Porter's Academy\" between 1865 and 1903, \"Flagg Academy\" from 1903 to 1941, and the modern era since 1941.\nThe academy's Latin motto is , which means 'Through Knowledge, Sea Power'. It appears on a design devised by naval academy graduate (1867) Park Benjamin, Jr. It was adopted by the Navy Department in 1898 due to the efforts of another graduate (also 1867) and collaborator, Jacob W. Miller.\nEarly years.\nThe institution was founded as the Naval School on 10 October 1845 by Secretary of the Navy George Bancroft. The campus was established at Annapolis on the grounds of the former U.S. Army post Fort Severn. The school opened with 50 midshipman students and seven professors. The decision to establish an academy on land may have been in part a result of the Affair, an alleged mutiny involving the Secretary of War's son that resulted in his execution at sea. Commodore Matthew Perry had a considerable interest in naval education, supporting an apprentice system to train new seamen, and helped establish the curriculum for the United States Naval Academy. He was also a vocal proponent of modernization of the navy.\nOriginally a course of study for five years was prescribed. Only the first and last were spent at the school with the other three being passed at sea. The present name was adopted when the school was reorganized in 1850 and placed under the supervision of the chief of the Bureau of Ordnance and Hydrography. Under the immediate charge of the superintendent, the course of study was extended to seven years with the first two and the last two to be spent at the school and the intervening three years at sea. The four years of study were made consecutive in 1851 and practice cruises were substituted for the three consecutive years at sea. The first class of naval academy students graduated on 10 June 1854. They were considered as passed midshipmen until 1912, when graduates were first sworn in as officers.\nIn 1850, Edward Seager joined the faculty as the first instructor of drawing, and he also served as the first fencing instructor. He held the position of teacher of the art of defence from 1851 to 1859.\nIn 1860, the Tripoli Monument was moved to the academy grounds. Later that year in August, the model of the USS \"Somers\" experiment was resurrected when , then 60 years old, was recommissioned as a school ship for the fourth-class midshipmen after a conversion and refitting begun in 1857. She was anchored at the yard, and the plebes lived on board the ship to immediately introduce them to shipboard life and experiences.\nAmerican Civil War.\nThe American Civil War was disruptive to the Naval Academy. Southern sympathy ran high in Maryland. Although riots broke out, Maryland did not declare secession. The United States government was planning to move the school, when the sudden outbreak of hostilities forced a quick departure. Almost immediately the three upper classes were detached and ordered to sea, and the remaining elements of the academy were transported to Fort Adams in Newport, Rhode Island by the in April 1861, where the academy was set up in temporary facilities and opened in May. The Annapolis campus, meanwhile, was turned into a United States Army Hospital.\nThe United States Navy was stressed by the situation \u2013 24% of its officers resigned to join the Confederate States Navy, including 95 graduates and 59 midshipmen, along with many key leaders who influenced USNA's founding. As the first superintendent of the United States Naval Observatory, Commander Matthew Fontaine Maury, who advocated for creating the United States Naval Academy, also resigned his commission.\nThe first superintendent, Admiral Franklin Buchanan, joined the Confederate States Navy as its first and primary admiral. Captain Sidney Smith Lee, the second commandant of midshipmen, and older brother of Robert E. Lee, left Federal service in 1861 for the Confederate States Navy. Lieutenant William Harwar Parker, CSN, class of 1848, and instructor at USNA, joined the Virginia State Navy, and then went on to become the superintendent of the Confederate States Naval Academy.\nLieutenant Charles \"Savez\" Read may have been \"anchor man\" (graduated last) in the class of 1860, but his later service to the Confederate States Navy included defending New Orleans, service on CSS \"Arkansas\" and CSS \"Florida\", and command of a series of captured Union ships that culminated in seizing the U.S. Revenue Cutter \"Caleb Cushing\" in Portland, Maine. Lieutenant James Iredell Waddell, CSN, a former instructor at the U.S. Naval Academy, commanded the CSS \"Shenandoah\".\nThe midshipmen and faculty returned to Annapolis in the summer of 1865, just after the war ended.\nPorter's Academy: Civil War to Spanish\u2013American War.\nCivil War hero Admiral David Dixon Porter became superintendent in 1865. He found the infrastructure at Annapolis a shambles, the result of ill military use during the War. Porter attempted to restore the facilities. He concentrated on recruiting naval officers as opposed to civilians, a change of philosophy. He recruited teachers Stephen B. Luce, future admirals Winfield Scott Schley, George Dewey, and William T. Sampson. The midshipman battalion consisted of four companies. These were bunked in a single wooden building containing 100 rooms, one company to a floor. They held dress parades every evening except Sunday. Students were termed \"cadets\", though sometimes \"cadet midshipmen\"; other appellations were used. Porter began organized athletics, usually intramural at the time.\nAntoine Joseph Corbesier, an immigrant from Belgium, was appointed to the position of Assistant Swordmaster in 1864, and then Swordmaster at USNA in October 1865. He coached Navy fencers in intercollegiate competition from 1896, when the Naval Academy joined the Intercollegiate Fencing Association, until 1914, when he retired. By special act of Congress, he was commissioned a 1st lieutenant in the Marine Corps on 4 March 1914. He died on 26 March 1915 and is buried on Hospital Point.\nIn 1867, indoor plumbing and water was supplied to the family quarters. In 1868, the figurehead of Tamanend from (later nicknamed \"Tecumseh\") was erected in the yard. Class rings were first issued in 1869. Weekly dances were held. Wags called the school \"Porter's Dancing Academy\". President U.S. Grant distributed diplomas to the class of 1869. Porter ensured continued room for expansion by overseeing the purchase of across College Creek, later known as Hospital Point.\nIn 1871, the color competition began, along with the selection of the color company and \"color girl\".\nIn the 1870s, cuts in the military budget resulted in graduating much smaller classes. In 1872, 25 graduated. Eight of these made the Navy a career. The third class physically hazed the fourth class so ruthlessly that Congress passed an anti-hazing law in 1874. Hazing continued in more stealthy forms.\nMany firsts for minorities occurred during this period. In 1877, Kiro Kunitomo, a Japanese citizen, graduated from the academy. And then in 1879, Robert F. Lopez was the first Hispanic-American to graduate from the academy.\nJohn H. Conyers of South Carolina was the first African-American admitted on 21 September 1872. After his arrival, he was subject to severe, ongoing hazing, including verbal torment, and beatings. His classmates even attempted to drown him. Three cadets were dismissed as a result, but the abuse, including shunning, continued in more subtle forms and Conyers finally resigned in October 1873.\nIn 1874, the curriculum was altered to study naval topics in the final two years at the academy. In 1878, the academy was awarded a gold medal for academics at the Universal Exposition in Paris. In the late 19th century, Congress required the academy to teach a formal course in hygiene, the only course required by Congress of any military academy.\nIn 1890, Navy adopted the goat mascot after winning its first football game with Army.\nThe Flagg Academy: Spanish\u2013American War to WWI.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War of 1898 greatly increased the academy's importance and the campus was almost wholly rebuilt and much enlarged between 1899 and 1906. The ground on which most of the academy sat was dredged from the surrounding bodies of water and consisted of silt. This was too fragile for the newer heavy stone buildings. Pilings were sunk from to deep. Some wooden with iron caps; modern ones of steel. Today's campus dates from that era. In 1905, Isherwood Hall, containing the Department of Marine Engineering, was constructed.\nPrior to that era, about 43 men entered annually. There were 114 joining the class of 1905, 201 with the class of 1908.\nThe academy built a modern hospital in 1907, the fourth in sequence, on what is today called \"Hospital Point\".\nIn 1910, the academy established its own dairy farm. In 1913, the Navy purchased the Howard's Adventure estate in nearby Gambrills, Maryland to expand their dairy operations. The farm is also home to Bill the Goat. The Naval Academy dairy was closed in 1998.\nThe Aviation School.\nOn 23 August 1911, the Navy officers on flight duty at Hammondsport, New York, and Dayton, Ohio, were ordered to report for duty at the Engineering Experiment Station, Naval Academy, \"in connection with the test of gasoline motors and other experimental work in the development of aviation, including instruction at the aviation school\" being set up on Greenbury Point, Annapolis. The \"aerodrome\" at Greenbury Point sat on 1000 square feet of land and consisted of a building with a rubber-reinforced roof containing three hangars (one for each of the newly purchased airplanes), a workshop, an office, and several bunk rooms. All three airplanes cost a total of $14,000. Over 100 officers applied for aviation duty prior to August 1911. Swimming was among a set of other qualifications that a pilot candidate must have passed before being accepted to aviation duty. Pilot qualifications were in accordance with Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) standards. In the presence of a committee of the Aero Club of America, a pilot candidate had to fly five figure eights around two flags buoyed 1500 feet apart then land within 150 feet of an established mark. This course had to be completed twice. The test also required the prospective aviator to climb to a minimum altitude of 150\u00a0ft (officially 50 meters). It was estimated by CAPT Washington Irving Chambers that a student could qualify as a new pilot in about a month, weather permitting. All students wore life preservers. The control wheel of the Curtiss machines featured a \"shift control\" where the controls could be \"thrown\" between the student and instructor at any time. The Wright machine was delivered to Greenbury by August 1911, but was not yet configured with water gear. Navy flight training moved to NAS Pensacola, Florida, in January 1914.\nIn 1912, , sunk at the Battle of Santiago de Cuba, was raised and used as the \"brig\" ship for the academy.\nBy 1912, the midshipmen were organized into a brigade, its current structure. The prior organization was named a regiment.\nIn 1914, the Midshipmen Drum and Bugle corps was formed and by 1922 it went defunct. They were revived in 1926.\nThe brigade and faculty tripled during WWI. The 3rd and 4th wings of Bancroft Hall were built.\nIn 1918, the great flu pandemic of 1918 infected about half the brigade (1,000 out of 2,000 men); ten midshipmen died.\nWorld War I and interwar period.\nWith the advent of the automobile and improved roads, the academy became a tourist attraction.\nAt the 1920 summer Olympics men's 8+ rowing competition in Brussels, the Naval Academy rowing men's 8+ (The Wonder Crew) won the gold medal. U.S. collegiate boats won the gold medal in the 8+ competition at the next seven Olympics \u2013 a standing record as of 2019 for consecutive gold medal wins by any nation in a particular sport.\nThe Naval Academy football team played the University of Washington in the Rose Bowl tying 14\u201314. In 1925, the second-class ring dance was started. In 1925, the Midshipmen Drum and Bugle Corps was formally reestablished. In 1926, \"Navy Blue and Gold\", composed by organist and choirmaster J. W. Crosley, was first sung in public. It became a tradition to sing this alma mater song at the end of student and alumni gatherings such as pep rallies and football games, and on graduation day. In 1926, Navy won the national collegiate football championship title. In the fall of 1929, the Secretary of the Navy gave his approval for graduates to compete for Rhodes Scholarships. Six graduates were selected for that honor that same year. The Association of American Universities accredited the Naval Academy curriculum on 30 October 1930.\nIn 1930, the class of 1891 presented a bronze replica of the figurehead of Tamanend to replace the deteriorating wooden figurehead that had been prominently displayed on campus.\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt signed into law an act of Congress (Public Law 73\u201321, 48 Stat. 73) on 25 May 1933 providing for the Bachelor of Science degree for Naval, Military, and Coast Guard Academies. Four years later, Congress authorized the superintendent to award a Bachelor of Science degree to all living graduates. Reserve officer training was re-established in anticipation of World War II in 1941.\nIn 1939, the first Yard patrol boat arrived.\nIn 1940, the academy stopped using \"Reina Mercedes\" as a brig for disciplining midshipmen, and restricted them to Bancroft Hall, instead.\nIn April 1941, superintendent Rear Admiral Russell Willson refused to allow the school's lacrosse team to play a visiting team from Harvard University because the Harvard team included an African-American player. Harvard's athletic director ordered the player home and the game was played on 4 April, as scheduled, which Navy won 12\u20130. Georgia Tech President and Colonel Dr. Blake R Van Leer would later be appointed by President Harry S. Truman to the Visitor Board and assist with its curriculum. Dr. Van Leer was already a member to The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization who had a focus to work against racism through influential statements on race starting with a declaration of anthropologists.\nIn 1941, the 5th and 6th wings of Bancroft Hall were completed. Landfill was made outboard of the hospital to create a sports field. Fill was made on the north side of the Severn to create an area for seaplanes.\nModern era: World War II to present.\nThe academy and its support facilities became part of the Severn River Naval Command from 1941 to 1962.\nA total of 3,319 graduates were commissioned during World War II. Dr. Chris Lambertsen held the first closed-circuit oxygen SCUBA course in the United States for the Office of Strategic Services maritime unit at the academy on 17 May 1943. In 1945, A Department of Aviation was established. That year a vice admiral, Aubrey W. Fitch, became superintendent. The naval academy celebrated its centennial. During the century of its existence, roughly 18,563 midshipmen had graduated, including the class of 1946.\nThe academy was accredited in 1947 by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.\nOn January 15, 1947, James L. Holloway became the 35th superintendent of the United States Naval Academy, succeeding Vice Admiral Aubrey W. Fitch. At 48, Holloway was the youngest superintendent in fifty years, having been handpicked by Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to implement the academic changes suggested by the Holloway Board, which had recommended that the Naval Academy curriculum move away from rote recitation and continuous crams \"to give a stronger emphasis to basic and general education, rendering more fundamental and less detailed instruction in strictly naval material and techniques.\"\nAn accelerated course was given to midshipmen during the war years which affected classes entering during the war and graduating later. The students studied year around. This affected the class of 1948 most of all. For the only time, a class was divided by academic standing. 1948A graduated in June 1947; the remainder, called 1948B, a year later.\nFrom 1946 to 1961, N3N amphibious biplanes were used at the academy to introduce midshipmen to flying.\nOn 3 June 1949, Wesley A. Brown, the sixth African-American to enter the academy, became the first to graduate, followed several years later by Lawrence Chambers, who became the first African-American graduate to make flag rank.\nThe 1950 Navy fencing team won the NCAA national championship.\nThe Navy eight-man rowing crew won the gold medal at 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki, Finland. They were also named National Intercollegiate Champions. In 1955, the tradition of greasing Herndon Monument for plebes to climb to exchange their plebe \"dixie cup\" covers (hats) for a midshipman's cover started.\nIn 1957, the moored training ship \"Reina Mercedes\", ruined by a hurricane, was scrapped.\nThe 1959 fencing team won the NCAA national championship, and became the first to do so by placing first in all three weapons (foil, \u00e9p\u00e9e, and saber). All 3 fencers were selected for the 1960 Olympics team, as was head coach Andre Deladrier. The Navy\u2013Marine Corps Memorial Stadium, funded by donations, was dedicated 26 September 1959.\nFrom 1959 to 1973, land was reclaimed from the Chesapeake Bay and Severn River, removal of Isherwood, Melville, and Griffin Halls, and by moving the stadium off-campus. This allowed room for expansion of Bancroft Hall, and the addition of Mitscher, Michelson, Chauvenet, Alumni, Rickover, and Hopper Halls, and the Nimitz Library. Encroached parade grounds and athletic fields were moved riverside onto the newly filled areas.\nJoe Bellino (Class of 1961) was awarded the Heisman Trophy on 22 June 1960. In 1961, the Naval Academy Foreign Affairs Conference was started. The U.S. Department of the Interior designated the campus of the U.S. Naval Academy as a National Historic Landmark on 21 August 1961.\nThe 1962 fencing team won the NCAA national championship.\nIn 1963, Roger Staubach, Class of 1965, was awarded the Heisman Trophy.\nIn 1963, the academy changed from a marking system based on 4.0 to a letter grade. Midshipmen began referring to the statue of Tamanend as the \"god of 2.0\" instead of \"the god of 2.5\", the former failing mark.\nThe academy started the Trident Scholar Program in 1963. From 3 to 16 juniors are selected for independent study during their final year.\nProfessor Samuel Massie became the first African-American faculty member in 1966. On 4 June 1969, the first designated engineering degrees were granted to qualified graduates of the Class of 1969. During the period 1968 to 1972, the academy moved beyond engineering to include more than 20 majors. From 1845 to 1968, midshipmen studied identical courses, with the exception of a choice of foreign language. In 1970, the \"James Forrestal Lecture\" was created, named for the first U.S. Secretary of Defense in 1947/1949. This has resulted in various leaders speaking to midshipmen, including U.S. Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, football coach Dick Vermeil, and Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, and others.\nIn 1972, Lieutenant Commander Georgia Clark became the first female officer instructor, and Dr. Rae Jean Goodman was appointed to the faculty as the first civilian woman. Later in 1972, a decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia terminated compulsory chapel attendance, a tradition which had been in effect since 1853. In September 1973, the new expansive library facility complex was completed and named for Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Class of 1905.\nOn 8 August 1975, Congress authorized women to attend service academies. The Class of 1980 was inducted with 81 female midshipmen. In 1980, the academy included \"Hispanic/Latino\" as a racial category for demographic purposes; four women identified themselves as Hispanic in the class of 1981, and these women become the first Hispanic women to graduate from the academy: Carmel Gilliland (who had the highest class rank), Lilia Ramirez (who retired with the rank of commander), Ina Marie Gomez, and Trinora Pinto. In 1979, the traditional \"June Week\" was renamed \"Commissioning Week\" because graduation had been moved earlier to May.\nIn 1980, Elizabeth Anne Belzer (later Rowe) became the first woman graduate, and Janie L. Mines became the first African-American woman graduate. On 23 May 1984, Kristine Holderied became the first woman to graduate at the head of the class. In addition, the Class of 1984 included the first naturalized Korean-American graduates, all choosing commissions in the U.S. Navy. The four Korean-American ensigns were Walter Lee, Thomas Kymn, Andrew Kim, and Se-Hun Oh.\nIn 1982, Isherwood, Griffin, and Melville Halls were demolished.\nOn 30 July 1987, the Computing Sciences Accreditation Board (CSAB) granted accreditation for the Computer Science program. In 1991, Midshipman Juliane Gallina, class of 1992, became the first woman brigade commander. On 29 January 1994, the first genderless service assignment was held. All billets were opened equally to men and women with the exception of special warfare and submarine duty.\nOn 12 March 1995, Lieutenant Commander Wendy B. Lawrence, Class of 1981, became a mission specialist in the space shuttle \"Endeavour\". She is the first woman USNA graduate to fly in space.\nTo celebrate the 150th Anniversary of the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis (1845\u20131995), the U.S. Postal Service printed a commemorative postage stamp; the First Day of Issue was 10 October 1995.\n\"Freedom 7\", America's first space capsule shot into sub-orbit in 1961, was placed on display at the visitor center as the centerpiece of the \"Grads in Space\" exhibit on 23 September 1998. The late Rear Admiral Alan Shepard, Class of 1945, had flown Mercury program capsule \"Freedom 7\" into space on 5 May 1961. His historic flight marked America's first step in the space race.\nOn 11 September 2001, the academy lost 14 alumni in the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and The Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia. The academy and its bounds was placed under unprecedented high security.\nIn August 2007, Superintendent Vice Admiral Jeffrey Fowler changed academy policy to limit liberty, required more squad interaction to emphasize that \"we are a nation at war.\"\nOn 3 November 2007, the Navy football team defeated long-time rival Notre Dame for the first time in 43 years: 46\u201344 in triple overtime. The two teams have met every year since 1926 and continue a rivalry that became amicable when Notre Dame volunteered to open its facilities for training of naval officers in World War II. Notre Dame's enrollment fell to just 250 students during World War II however the Navy was credited with saving the university by using its campus to train 12,000 men to become officers.\nIn November 2007, Memorial Hall was the venue for a 50-nation Annapolis Conference on a Palestinian-Israeli peace process discussion.\nIn 2017, hospital functions were moved across the Severn.\nIn 2019 the USNA team represented the U.S. in the King's Cup at the Henley Royal Regatta. The race commemorated the centenary of the 1919 Royal Henley Peace Regatta, and included the original World War I allies Australia, Canada, France, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States, joined in 2019 by Germany and the Netherlands. After exciting eliminations, the USNA mixed crew won the final race beating the strong German team.\nIn 2024, the USNA rescinded the invitation it had given Ruth Ben-Ghiat, a scholar of authoritarianism and fascist movements, to deliver the annual Bancroft Lecture in response to pressure from right-wing politicians. Ben-Ghiat's planned lecture was strictly nonpartisan and historical in nature.\nOn the evening of 11 September 2025, the Academy was put in lockdown after reports of shots being fired.\nRank structure.\nThe student body is known as the Brigade of Midshipmen. Students attending the U.S. Naval Academy are appointed to the rank of midshipman and serve on active duty in that rank. \"Naval Academy midshipmen are classified as officers of the line but are officers only in a qualified sense. They rank just below chief warrant officers.\"\nLegally, midshipmen are a special grade of officer that ranks above the most senior enlisted grades (E-9) and below the lowest grade of chief warrant officer (W-2) in the Navy and Coast Guard (the Navy and Coast Guard discontinued the rank of warrant officer, WO-1, in 1975). Additionally, midshipmen rank below warrant officer (W-1) in the Marine Corps and the Army, and below second lieutenant (O-1) in the Air Force (the Air Force ceased appointing warrant officers in 1959 and the last USAF WO died in 2008).\nMidshipmen are classified not as freshmen, sophomores, juniors, and seniors, but as fourth class, third class, second class, and first class, respectively.\nA member of the entering class\u2014the fourth class, the lowest rank of midshipmen\u2014is also known as a \"plebe\" (plural \"plebes\"). Because the first year at the academy is one of transformation from a civilian into a military officer, plebes must conform to a number of rules and regulations not placed on their seniors\u2014the upper three classes of midshipmen\u2014and have additional tasks and responsibilities that disappear upon promotion to midshipman third class.\nThird class midshipmen have been assimilated into the brigade and are treated with more respect because they are upperclassmen. They are commonly called \"youngsters\". Because of their new stature and rank, the youngsters are allowed such privileges as watching television, listening to music, and wearing non-issued Navy and Marine Corps related clothing.\nSecond class midshipmen are charged with training plebes. They report directly to the first class, and issue orders as necessary to carry out their responsibilities. Second class midshipmen are allowed to drive their own cars (but may not park them on campus) and are allowed to enter or exit the Yard (campus) in civilian attire (weekends only).\nFirst class midshipmen (nicknamed \"firsties\") have more freedoms and liberty in the brigade. While they must participate in mandatory sports and military activities and maintain academic standards, they are also charged with the leadership of the brigade. Firsties are allowed to park their cars on campus and have greater leave and liberty privileges than any other class.\nThe brigade is divided into two regiments of three battalions each. Six companies make up each battalion, for a total of 36 companies. The midshipman command structure is headed by a first class midshipman known as the brigade commander, chosen for outstanding leadership performance. The brigade commander is responsible for much of the brigade's day-to-day activities as well as the professional training of midshipmen. Overseeing all brigade activities is the commandant of midshipmen, an active-duty Navy captain or Marine Corps colonel. Working for the commandant, experienced Navy and Marine Corps officers are assigned as company and battalion officers.\nUniforms.\nMidshipmen at the academy wear service dress uniforms similar to those of U.S. Navy officers, with shoulder-board and/or sleeve insignia varying by school year or midshipman officer rank. All wear gold anchor insignia on both lapel collars of the service dress blue jacket. Shoulder boards, worn on summer white, service/full dress white, dinner dress uniforms, and the shirt of the service/full dress blue uniform have a gold anchor and a number of stripes indicating year or rank. Midshipman officer (also first class) shoulder boards have a small gold star in place of the anchor and have 1 through 6 horizontal stripes indicating their rank.\nOn the working blue uniform shirt collar, a freshman (Midshipman Fourth Class or \"plebe\") wears no collar insignia, a sophomore (Midshipman Third Class or \"youngster\") wears a single fouled anchor on the right collar point, a Junior (Midshipman Second Class) fouled anchors on each collar point, and a Senior (Midshipman First Class or \"firstie\") wears fouled anchors with perched eagles. First class midshipmen in officer billets replace those devices with their respective midshipman officer collar insignia. Midshipman officer collar insignia are a series of gold bars, from the rank of Midshipman Ensign (one bar or stripe) to Midshipman Captain (six bars or stripes).\nDepending on the season, midshipmen wear Summer White or Service Dress Blue as their service dress uniform, and Working Blue as their daily class uniform. In 2008, the first class midshipmen wore the Service Khaki as the daily uniform, but this option was repealed following the graduation of the class of 2011. First class midshipmen may wear their service assignment uniform on second semester \"Tactical Thursdays\" (i.e., naval aviator and naval flight officer selectees wear flight suits; submarine and surface warfare selectees wear coveralls or Navy Working Uniforms with their new command ballcaps; Marine Corps selectees wear MARPAT camouflage utilities). A unique uniform consisting of a Navy blue double-breasted jacket with brass buttons and high collar, blue or white high-rise trousers (white worn during Graduation Week), and duty belt with silver NA buckle, is worn for formal parades during spring and autumn parade seasons.\nDuring commissioning week (formerly known as \"June week\"), the uniform is Summer White.\nCampus.\nThe campus (or \"Yard\") has grown from a Army post named Fort Severn in 1845 to a campus in the 21st century. By comparison, the United States Air Force Academy is and United States Military Academy (Army) is .\nBrigade sports complex.\nThe complex includes McMullen Hockey Arena where the men's ice-hockey team is located; rugby venues, an indoor hitting, chipping and putting facility for the golf team, and the Tose Family Tennis Center \u2013 including the Fluegel-Moore Tennis Stadium.\nTerwilliger Brothers Field.\nThe academy baseball team plays at the Terwilliger Brothers Field at Max Bishop Stadium.\nSea level rise and flooding.\nIn recent decades, Academy grounds have experienced increased flooding. Flooding has occurred not only because of increasingly intense storms such as Hurricane Isabel ($100 million damage), but also because of high-tide flooding occurring atop a sea level that has risen about over the past 100 years. The Academy's Sea Level Rise Advisory Council has created a climate change adaptation plan including seawall repair, door dams, doorway barriers, backflow preventers in storm drain systems, and elevated building entrances. A $37 million sea wall was completed in 2024 to adapt to flooding occurring 30 to 40 times a year. However, adaptation approaches such as sea walls and building up the height of roadways and athletic fields are predicted to last only a few decades.\nSupervision of the Academy.\nIn 1850, the academy was placed under the jurisdiction of the Navy's Bureau of Ordnance and Hydrography but was transferred to the Bureau of Navigation when that organization was established in 1862. The academy was placed under the direct care of the Navy Department in 1867, but for many years the Bureau of Navigation provided administrative routine and financial management.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], the Superintendent of the Naval Academy reports directly to the Chief of Naval Operations. The Board of Visitors annually audits the academy. Its recommendations constitute a mandate to the administration. It is composed of officials appointed by Congress and the president. The 2020 recommendations include changing the historic names of buildings named after people who deserted the Union for the Confederacy during the American Civil War.\nFaculty.\nRoughly 500 faculty members are evenly divided between civilian professors and military instructors. The civilian professors nearly all have a PhD and can be awarded tenure, usually upon promotion from assistant professor to associate professor. Fewer of the military instructors have a PhD but nearly all have a master's degree. Most of them are assigned to the academy for only two or three years. Additionally, there are adjunct professors, hired to fill temporary shortages in various disciplines. The adjunct professors are not eligible for tenure.\nPermanent military professors (PMP).\nA small number of officers at the academy are designated as permanent military professors (PMP), initially at the academic rank of assistant professor. All PMPs have PhDs, and remain at the academy until statutory retirement. Most are commanders in the Navy; a few are captains. Like civilian professors, they seek academic promotion to the rank of associate professor and professor. However, they are not eligible for tenure.\nClass of 1957 Distinguished Chair of Naval Heritage.\nThe \"Class of 1957 Distinguished Chair of Naval Heritage\" is an academic professorial chair in the history department. In order to preserve and promote a better understanding of professional naval heritage in midshipmen at the U.S. Naval Academy, the academy's Class of 1957 donated the funds to permanently endow this position. It is designed to be a visiting position for a distinguished senior academic historian, who is to hold the post for one or two years. The position was first occupied in 2006 and, in addition to teaching requirements, the occupant is expected to give the McMullen Seapower Lecture at the academy's biennial McMullen Naval History Symposium.\nMcCain-Fulbright Distinguished Visiting Professor Program.\nThe program was created by Congress to bring mid-career international academics to USNA to teach classes on subjects pertaining to their regional background. Scholars will also practice outreach to D.C. area think tanks and military higher education institutions around the country.\nAppointment process.\nBy an Act of Congress passed in 1903, two midshipman appointments were allowed for each senator, representative, and delegate in Congress, two for the District of Columbia, and five each year at large. Currently each member of Congress and the vice president of the United States can have five appointees attending the Naval Academy at any time. When any appointee graduates or otherwise leaves the academy, a vacancy is created. Candidates are nominated by their senator, representative, or delegate in Congress, and those appointed at large are nominated by the vice president. The applicants do not have to know their Congressman to be nominated. Congressmen generally nominate 15 people per vacancy. They can nominate people in a competitive manner, or they can have a principal nomination. In a competitive nomination, all ten applicants are reviewed by the academy, to see who is the most qualified. If the congressman appoints a principal nominee, then as long as that candidate is physically, medically, and academically found qualified by the academy, he or she will be admitted, even if there are more qualified applicants. The degree of difficulty in obtaining a nomination varies greatly according to the number of applicants in a particular state. The process of obtaining a nomination typically consists of completing an application, completing one or more essays, and obtaining one or more letters of recommendation and often requires an interview either in person or over the phone. These requirements are set by the respective senator or representative and are in addition to the USNA application.\nThe Secretary of the Navy may appoint 170 enlisted members of the Regular and Reserve Navy and Marine Corps to the Naval Academy each year. Additional sources of appointment are open to children of career military personnel (100 per year) and 65 appointments are available to children of military members who were killed in action, or were rendered 100% disabled due to injuries received in action, or are currently prisoners of war or missing in action. Typically five to ten candidates are nominated for each appointment, which are normally awarded competitively; candidates who do not receive the appointment they are competing for may still be admitted to the academy as a qualified alternate. If a candidate is considered qualified but not picked up, they may receive an indirect admission to either a Naval Academy Foundation prep school or the Naval Academy Preparatory School in Newport; the following year, these candidates enlist in the Navy Reserve (or, in the case of prior enlisted members, remain in the Navy) and are eligible for Secretary of the Navy nominations, which are granted as a matter of course. To receive an appointment to the Naval Academy, students at the Naval Academy Preparatory School must first pass with a 2.2 QPA (a combination of GPA and Fitness Assessments), although this is waiverable. A candidate must also receive a recommendation for appointment from the commanding officer. The appointment process has been criticized as giving preferential treatment towards athletes.\nChildren of Medal of Honor recipients are automatically appointed to the Naval Academy; they only need to meet admission requirements.\nAdmissions requirements.\nTo be admitted, candidates must be between seventeen and twenty-three years of age upon entrance, unmarried with no children, and of good moral character. The current process includes a college application, personality testing, standardized testing, and personal references. Candidates for admission must also undergo a physical aptitude test (the CFA or Candidate Fitness Assessment [formerly the Physical Readiness Examination]) as well as a complete physical exam including a separate visual acuity test to be eligible for appointment. A medical waiver will automatically be sought on behalf of candidates with less than 20/20 vision, as well as a range of other injuries or illnesses. The physical aptitude test is most often administered by a high school physical education teacher or sports team coach.\nA small number of international students, usually from smaller allied or friendly countries, are admitted into each class. (International students from larger allies, such as France and the United Kingdom, typically come as shorter-term exchange students from their national naval colleges or academies.) The Class of 2025 includes 16 international students from: Egypt (1), Fiji (1), Ghana (1), Indonesia (2), Jordan (1), Malaysia (1), Maldives (1), Peru (1), Philippines (2), Sri Lanka (1), Taiwan (1), Thailand (1), and Tunisia (2).\nSeven second class cadets each from West Point, the Air Force Academy, and the Coast Guard Academy, spend a fall semester at Annapolis. The same applies for midshipmen exchanged out to those academies at the same time. The exchange process is competitive.\nAcademics.\nThe Naval Academy received accreditation as an approved \"technological institution\" in 1930. In 1933, President Franklin Roosevelt signed into law an act of Congress providing for the Bachelor of Science degree for the Naval, Military, and Coast Guard Academies. The Class of 1933 was the first to receive this degree and have it written in the diploma. In 1937, an act of Congress extended to the superintendent of the Naval Academy the authority to award the Bachelor of Science degree to all living graduates. The academy later replaced a fixed curriculum taken by all midshipmen with the present core curriculum plus 22 major fields of study.\nAcademic departments at the Naval Academy are organized into three divisions: Engineering and Weapons, known as Division I, Mathematics and Science, known as Division II, and Humanities and Social Sciences, known as Division III.\nIn its 2021 edition, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked the U.S. Naval Academy as the No. 1 top public school, No. 6 in national liberal arts colleges in the U.S., and No. 5 for Best Undergraduate Engineering program at schools where doctorates not offered. In 2016, \"Forbes\" ranked the U.S. Naval Academy as No. 24 overall in its report \"America's Top Colleges\".\nMoral education.\nMoral and ethical development is fundamental to all aspects of the Naval Academy. From Plebe Summer through graduation, the Officer Development Program, a four-year integrated program, focuses on integrity, honor, and mutual respect based on the moral values of respect for human dignity, respect for honesty and respect for the property of others.\nOne of the goals of the program is to develop midshipmen to possess a sense of their own moral beliefs and the ability to express them. Honor is emphasized through the Honor Concept of the Brigade of Midshipmen, which states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Midshipmen are persons of integrity: They stand for that which is right.\nThey tell the truth and ensure that the full truth is known. They do not lie.\nThey embrace fairness in all actions. They ensure that work submitted as their own is their own, and that assistance received from any source is authorized and properly documented. They do not cheat.\nThey respect the property of others and ensure that others are able to benefit from the use of their own property. They do not steal.\nSimilar ideals are expressed in the honor codes of the other service academies. However, midshipmen are allowed to confront someone they see violating the code without formally reporting it. It is believed that this method is a better way of developing the honor of midshipmen as opposed to the non-toleration clauses of the other service academies and is a better way of building honor and trust.\nBrigade Honor Committees composed of upper-class midshipmen are responsible for the education and training of the Honor Concept. Depending on the severity of the offense, midshipmen found in violation of the Honor Concept by their peers can be separated from the Naval Academy.\nNaval Academy Foreign Affairs Conference (NAFAC).\nSince 1961, the academy has hosted the annual Naval Academy Foreign Affairs Conference (NAFAC), the country's largest undergraduate, foreign-affairs conference. NAFAC provides a forum for addressing pressing international concerns and seeks to explore current issues from both a civilian and military perspective.\nEach year a unique theme is chosen for NAFAC. Noteworthy individuals with expertise in relevant fields are then invited to address the conference delegates, who represent civilian and military colleges from across the United States and around the globe.\nThe entire conference is organized and run by midshipmen, who also serve as moderators, presenters, and delegates. The midshipman director is responsible for every aspect of the conference, including the conference theme, and is generally charged with leading a staff of over 250 midshipmen.\nNaval Academy Science and Engineering Conference (NASEC).\nThe Naval Academy Science and Engineering Conference (NASEC), hosted annually since 2000, is an undergraduate STEM conference. Held in November each year, approximately 45 midshipmen join 150 attendees from other colleges and universities across the country meet and discuss significant science and engineering challenges. The delegates hear from leaders in scientific research and policy from academia, industry, and government, and participate in group discussions on the conference themes.\nThe conference serves as both a leadership opportunity for the midshipmen staff who organize and run the event, and as a venue to expose midshipmen to cutting-edge science and engineering challenges.\nMcMullen Naval History Symposium.\nSince 1973, the Naval Academy has hosted a major international conference for naval historians. In 2006 it was named after John J. McMullen, USNA Class of 1940.\nSmall Satellite Program.\nThe United States Naval Academy (USNA) Small Satellite Program (SSP) was founded in 1999 to actively pursue flight opportunities for miniature satellites designed, constructed, tested, and commanded or controlled by midshipmen.\nThe USNA MidSTAR Program's first satellite, MidSTAR I was launched 8 March 2007. The planned MidSTAR II was canceled.\nPostgraduate studies.\nBecause the majority of graduates commence directly into their military commissions, the Naval Academy offers no graduate degree programs. However, a number of programs allow midshipmen to obtain graduate degrees before fulfilling their service obligation. The Immediate Graduate Education Program (IGEP) allows newly commissioned Ensigns or Second Lieutenants to proceed directly to graduate school and complete a master's degree. The Voluntary Graduate Education Program (VGEP) allows the midshipman to begin their studies the second semester of their senior year at a local university, usually University of Maryland, Johns Hopkins University, Georgetown University, or George Washington University, and complete the degree by the following semester. Midshipmen accepted into prestigious scholarships, such as the Rhodes Scholarship are permitted to complete their studies before fulfilling their service obligation. Finally, the Bowman Scholarship allows Navy Nuclear Power candidates to complete their master's degrees at the Naval Postgraduate School before continuing into the Navy.\nStudent life.\nAthletics.\nParticipation in athletics is, in general, mandatory at the Naval Academy and most midshipmen not on an intercollegiate team must participate actively in intramural or club sports. There are exceptions for non-athletic Brigade Support Activities such as the YP Squadron (a professional surface warfare training activity providing midshipmen the opportunity to earn the Craftmaster Badge) or the Drum and Bugle Corps.\nVarsity-letter winners wear a specially issued blue cardigan with a large gold \"N\" patch affixed. Teams that beat Army in a year are awarded a gold star to affix near the \"N\" for each such victory.\nThe U.S. Naval Academy's varsity sports teams have no official name but usually are referred to in media as \"the Midshipmen\" (since all athletes are, in fact, midshipmen), or more informally as \"the Mids\". The term \"middies\" is generally considered derogatory. The sports teams' mascot is a goat named \"Bill\".\nThe Midshipmen participate in the NCAA's Division I FBS as a member of the American Athletic Conference in football and in the NCAA Division I-level Patriot League in many other sports. The academy fields 33 varsity sports teams and 15 club sports teams (along with 19 intramural sports teams).\nThe most important sporting event at the academy is the annual Army\u2013Navy Game, in football. The three major service academies (Navy, Air Force, and Army) compete for the Commander-in-Chief's Trophy, which is awarded to the academy that defeats the others in football that year (or retained by the previous winner in the event of a three-way tie). Keenan Reynolds (quarterback 2012\u20132015) set numerous Navy and NCAA records, including the FBS career rushing touchdown record, arguably becoming Navy's best quarterback ever. Reynolds finished fifth in the prestigious Heisman Trophy voting. In the Army-Navy rivalry, Reynolds became the first quarterback to beat Army in four seasons.\nNaval Academy sports teams have many accomplishments at the international and national levels. In 1926, Navy's football team won the U.S. national championship based on both the Boand and Houlgate mathematical poll systems. and the Navy men's lacrosse team won 21 USILL or USILA national championships and was the NCAA Division I runner-up in 1975 and 2004. The men's fencing team won NCAA Division I championships in 1950, 1959, and 1962 and was runner-up in 1948, 1953, 1960, and 1963, and NCAA Division I championships were also earned by the 1945 men's outdoor track and field team and the 1964 men's soccer team.\nThe academy lightweight crew won the 2004 and 2021 National Championship. The lightweights are accredited with two Jope Cup Championships as well, finishing the Eastern Sprints with the highest number of points in 2006 and 2007. The college's heavyweight crew won Olympic gold medals in men's eights in 1920 and 1952, and from 1907 to 1995 at Intercollegiate Rowing Association regatta the team earned 30 championships. In intercollegiate shooting, the Naval Academy has won nine National Rifle Association rifle team trophies, seven air pistol team championships, and five standard pistol team titles. Navy's squash team was the national nine-man team champion in 1957, 1959, and 1967, and the boxing team was National Collegiate Boxing Association champion in 1987, 1996, 1997, 1998, and 2005.\nThere is an unofficial (but previous National Champion) croquet team. They compete most notably in the Annapolis Cup held every April since 1983 against students from St. John's College, Annapolis. In 1982 the commandant of the U.S. Naval Academy told a Johnnie (slang for a student enrolled at St. John's) that the Midshipmen could beat St. John's at any sport. The St. John's student selected croquet. Since then, thousands attend the annual croquet match between St. John's and the 28th Company of the Brigade of Midshipmen (originally the 34th Company before the brigade was reduced to 30 companies). As of 2024, the Midshipmen had a record of 8 wins and 32 losses to the St John's team.\nOther extra-curricular activities.\nMidshipmen have the opportunity to participate in a broad range of other extracurricular activities including musical performance groups (Drum &amp; Bugle Corps, Men's Glee Club, Women's Glee Club, Gospel Choir, an annual musical, a midshipman orchestra, and a bagpipe band, the Pipes &amp; Drums), religious organizations, academic honor societies such as Omicron Delta Epsilon (an economics honor society), Campus Girl Scouts, the National Eagle Scout Association, a radio station (WRNV), and Navy and Marine Corps professional activities (diving, flying, seamanship, and the Semper Fidelis Society for future Marines). The midshipman theatrical company, \"The Masqueraders\", put on one production annually in Mahan Hall. There is an intercollegiate debate team. Colleges from along the East Coast attend the annual U.S. Naval Academy Debate Tournament. Midshipmen also participate in the Sandhurst Competition, a military skills event.\nThe brigade began publishing a humor magazine called \"The Log\" in 1913. This magazine was discontinued in 2001 but returned to print in the fall of 2008. Among \"The Log's\" usual features were \"Salty Sam\", an anonymous member of the senior class who served as a gossip columnist, and the \"Company Cuties\", photos of male midshipmen's girlfriends. (This last was deemed offensive to women, and despite attempts to incorporate the boyfriends of female midshipmen in some issues, the \"Company Cuties\" were dropped from \"The Log\"'s format by 1991.) \"The Log\" was once featured in \"Playboy Magazine\" for its parody of the famous periodical, called \"Playmid\". Playmid was an issue of \"The Log\" in 1989 and was ordered destroyed by Rear Admiral Virgil L. Hill Jr., the Academy Superintendent at the time, but a handful of copies survived. Earlier \"Log\" attempts to parody were much more successful, with the 18 April 1969 issue as the most famous; some sections of this issue can be seen online at an alumni website. In September 1949, \"The Log\" began publishing a half-sized \"Splinter\" bi-weekly, to alternate with its larger sized publication.\nSong.\nNotable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement and convocation, and athletic games is: \"Anchors Aweigh\", the United States Naval Academy fight song. According to \"College Fight Songs: An Annotated Anthology\" published in 1998, \"Anchors Aweigh\" ranks as the fifth greatest fight song of all time. \"Blue and Gold\" is the name of Naval Academy's Alma Mater.\nPolice.\nThe Naval District Washington-Naval Support Activity Annapolis Police Department, formerly known as the U.S. Naval Academy Police Department until 2010, is a full DOD law enforcement agency. It is composed of both DoD Department of Navy Civilian Police, and Navy Masters-at-Arms who are responsible for policing the U.S. Naval Academy complex. They enforce Maryland, federal and military law and local instructions, offer assistance to those in need, and provide a visible deterrent for criminal activity.\nLibrary.\nNimitz Library is the main library for the Annapolis Area Naval Complex, located at the United States Naval Academy campus in Maryland, United States. The academy's first library was organized in 1845. The current library building was opened in 1973. The building architects were John Carl Warnecke and Associates, who also designed Michelson Hall and Chauvenet Hall, in partnership with George M. Ewing Company. As of 2017, the library had roughly 300,000 patron visits annually. A major renovation of the ground floor of the building was completed in August 2021. Circulation in the 2021\u201322 was slightly more than 11,000 physical books and other media.\nWomen and the Naval Academy.\nThe Naval Academy first accepted women as midshipmen in 1976, after Congress authorized the admission of women to all of the service academies. Women account for about 22 percent of entering plebes. They pursue the same academic and professional training as do their male classmates, except that certain physical aptitude standards for women are lower than for men, mirroring the standards of the Navy itself. Women have most recently composed about 17 percent of each graduating class, however this number continues to rise. The first pregnant midshipman graduated in 2009. While regulations expressly forbade this, the woman was able to receive a waiver from the Department of the Navy.\nIn 2006, Michelle J. Howard, class of 1982, became the first female graduate of the Naval Academy to be selected for admiral; she was also the first admiral from her class. Margaret D. Klein, class of 1981, became the first female commandant of midshipmen in December 2006.\nFollowing the 2003 U.S. Air Force Academy sexual assault scandal and due to concern with sexual assault in the U.S. military the Department of Defense was required to establish a task force to investigate sexual harassment and assault at the United States military academies in the law funding the military for fiscal 2004. The report, issued 25 August 2005 showed that during 2004 50% of the women at Annapolis reported instances of sexual harassment while 99 incidents of sexual assault were reported. There had been an earlier incident in 1990 which involved male midshipmen chaining a female midshipman to a urinal and then taking pictures of her after she threw a snowball at them.\nAcademy Superintendent Vice Admiral Rodney Rempt issued a statement: \"With the benefit of the Defense Task Force's assessment and recommendations, we will continue to strive to establish a climate which encourages reporting of these incidents, so we can support the victim and deal with allegations fairly and appropriately. The very idea that any member of the Naval Academy family could be part of an environment that fosters sexual harassment, misconduct, or even assault is of great concern to me, and it is contrary to all we are trying to do and achieve. Preventing and deterring this unacceptable behavior is a leadership issue that I and all the Academy leaders take to heart. The public trusts that the Service Academies will adhere to the highest standards and that we will serve as beacons that exemplify character, dignity and respect. We will increase our efforts to meet that trust.\" Superintendent Rempt was criticized in 2006 for not allowing former Navy quarterback Lamar Owens to graduate, despite his acquittal on a rape charge. Some alumni have attributed this to an overeagerness on Rempt's part to placate critics urging a crackdown on sexual assault and harassment.\nIn 1979, James H. Webb published a provocative essay opposing the integration of women at the Naval Academy titled \"Women Can't Fight\". Webb was an instructor at the Naval Academy in 1979 when he wrote the article for Washingtonian magazine that was critical of women in combat and of them attending the service academies. The article, in which he referred to the dorm at the Naval Academy that housed 4,000 men and 300 women as \"a horny woman's dream\", was written three years after the academy admitted women. Webb said he did not write the headline.\nOn 7 November 2006, Webb was elected to the U.S. Senate from Virginia. His election opponent, then senator George Allen, raised the 1979 article as a campaign issue, depicting Webb as being opposed to women in military service. Webb's response read in part, \"To the extent that my writings subjected women at the Academy or the active armed forces to undue hardship, I remain profoundly sorry.\" He then went on to assert: \"I am completely comfortable with the roles of women in today's military.\" In a political advertisement for Allen five female graduates of the United States Naval Academy had said the article helped foster an air of hostility and harassment towards females within the academy.\nThe Navy Secretary Ray Mabus, on 21 December 2012, issued a statement of shame over a recent sexual abuse study which showed the nation's service academies continue to have trouble maintaining safe teaching environments regarding sexual abuse. Reported sexual assaults the prior year declined from 22 to 13 at Annapolis. The former superintendent, Vice Admiral Mike Miller, enforced a new academy policy, as of January 2013, related to training, victim support, campus security, leadership presence on weekends, and a general review of alcohol policy based on other information in the recent report which shows the actual number of sexual assaults has not declined and that offenses are not reported.\nIn May 2021, Vice President Kamala Harris became the first female commencement speaker at the Naval Academy.\nYvette M. Davids became the first female Superintendent of the Naval Academy on 11 January 2024.\nNotable alumni.\nGraduates include over 50 U.S. astronauts, including six who flew to the Moon, more than from any other undergraduate institution in the U.S. Over 990 noted scholars in a variety of academic fields are Academy graduates, including 46 Rhodes Scholars and 24 Marshall Scholars. Alumni include one President of the United States, Jimmy Carter, who is also a Nobel laureate, as is Albert A. Michelson (1907 \u2013 Nobel Prize in Physics). 73 alumni have earned the Medal of Honor.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59767", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59767", "title": "US Naval Academy", "text": ""}
{"id": "59768", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59768", "title": "U.S. Naval Academy", "text": ""}
{"id": "59769", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59769", "title": "Northumberland", "text": "County of England\nNorthumberland ( ) is a ceremonial county in North East England, on the border with Scotland. It is bordered by the North Sea to the east, Tyne and Wear and County Durham to the south, Cumbria to the west, and the Scottish Borders council area to the north. The town of Blyth is the largest settlement. Northumberland is the northernmost county in England.\nThe county has an area of and had a population of 331,420 in 2024, making it the least-densely populated county in England. The south-east contains the largest towns: Blyth, Cramlington, Ashington, Bedlington, and Morpeth, the last of which is the administrative centre. The remainder of the county is rural, the largest towns being Berwick-upon-Tweed in the far north and Hexham in the south-west. For local government purposes Northumberland is a unitary authority area. The county historically included the parts of Tyne and Wear north of the River Tyne.\nThe west of Northumberland contains part of the Cheviot Hills and North Pennines, while to the east the land becomes flatter before reaching the coast. The Cheviot (), after which the range of hills is named, is the county's highest point. The county contains the source of the River North Tyne and much of the South Tyne; near Hexham they combine to form the Tyne, which exits into Tyne and Wear shortly downstream. The other major rivers in Northumberland are, from south to north, the Blyth, Coquet, Aln, Wansbeck and Tweed, the last of which forms part of the Scottish border. The county contains Northumberland National Park and two national landscapes: the Northumberland Coast and part of the North Pennines.\nMuch of the county's history has been defined by its position on a border. In the Roman era most of the county lay north of Hadrian's Wall, and the region was contested between England and Scotland into the Early Modern era, leading to the construction of many castles, peel towers and bastle houses, and the early modern fortifications at Berwick-upon-Tweed. Northumberland is also associated with Celtic Christianity, particularly the tidal island of Lindisfarne. During the Industrial Revolution the area had significant coal mining, shipbuilding, and armaments industries.\nHistory.\nName origin.\nThe name of Northumberland is recorded in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle as \"nor\u00f0 h\u1e8fmbra land\", meaning \"the land north of the Humber\". The name of the kingdom of \"Northumbria\" derives from the Old English meaning \"the people or province north of the Humber\", as opposed to Southumbria, south of the Humber Estuary.\nBefore the county.\nThe land has long been an English frontier zone, and it is now bordered to the north by Scotland. Northumberland has a rich prehistory with many instances of rock art, hillforts such as Yeavering Bell, and stone circles such as the Goatstones and Duddo Five Stones. Most of the area was occupied by the Brythonic-Celtic Votadini people, with another large tribe, the Brigantes, to the south.\nDuring the Roman occupation of Britain, most of the present county lay north of Hadrian's Wall. It was controlled by Rome only for the brief period of its extension of power north to the Antonine Wall. The Roman road Dere Street crosses the county from Corbridge over high moorland west of the Cheviot Hills to Melrose, Scottish Borders (). As evidence of its border position through medieval times, Northumberland has more castles than any other county in England, including prominent ones at Alnwick, Bamburgh, Dunstanburgh, Newcastle, and Warkworth.\nNearly 2,000-year-old Roman boxing gloves were uncovered at Vindolanda in 2017 by the Vindolanda Trust experts, led by Andrew Birley. Being similar in style and function to the full-hand modern boxing gloves, those found at Vindolanda look like leather bands dating back to 120AD. It is suggested that, based on their difference from gladiator gloves, the gloves were not used in mortal combat, but rather in a sport for promoting fighting skills. The gloves are currently displayed at Vindolanda's museum.\nPresent-day Northumberland formed the core of the Anglian kingdom of Bernicia from about 547. It was united with Deira (south of the River Tees) to form the kingdom of Northumbria in the 7th century. The boundaries of Northumbria under King Edwin (reigned 616\u2013633) stretched from the Humber in the south to the Forth in the north. Northumberland is often called the \"cradle of Christianity\" in England because Christianity flourished on Lindisfarne\u2014a tidal island north of Bamburgh, also called Holy Island\u2014after King Oswald of Northumbria (r. 634\u2013642) invited monks from Iona to come to convert the English. The monastery at Lindisfarne was the centre of production of the Lindisfarne Gospels (around 700). It became the home of St Cuthbert (c.\u2009634\u2013687, abbot from c.\u2009665), who is buried in Durham Cathedral.\nThe Kingdom of Northumbria fragmented into a series of successor states following the Viking invasion. In the south, Viking settlers established the Kingdom of York between the Humber and Tees. However, Viking influence petered out at the Tees, with the river serving as the northern boundary of the Danelaw. Between the Tyne and Tees rivers, the Community of St. Cuthbert emerged as the successors to the Bishops of Lindisfarne; north of the Tyne, the earls of Bamburgh, who traced their lineage back to the Kings of Northumbria, continued to exercise authority and governance over this northern expanse. York was eventually integrated as a shire into the unified Kingdom of England by the House of Wessex. However, the West Saxon governmental structures were not extended beyond Tees, leaving the Earldom of Bamburgh and the Community of St. Cuthbert as contested buffer states with the emerging Kingdom of Scotland.\nAfter the battle of Nechtansmere, Northumbrian influence north of the Tweed began to decline as the Picts gradually reclaimed the land previously invaded by the Anglian kingdom. In 1018, its northern part, the region between the Tweed and the Forth (including Lothian, which includes present-day Edinburgh), was ceded to the Kingdom of Scotland.\nAs a county.\nThe Earldom of Northumberland was briefly held by the Scottish royal family by marriage, between 1139\u20131157 and 1215\u20131217. Scotland relinquished all claims to the region as part of the Treaty of York (1237). The earls of Northumberland once wielded significant power in English affairs because, as powerful and militaristic lords in the Scottish Marches, they had the task of protecting England from Scottish retaliation for English invasions.\nNorthumberland has a history of revolt and rebellion against the government, as seen in the Rising of the North (1569\u20131570) against Elizabeth I. These revolts were usually led by the earls of Northumberland, the Percy family. Shakespeare makes one of the Percys, the dashing Harry Hotspur (1364\u20131403), the hero of his \"Henry IV, Part 1\". The Percys were often aided in conflict by other powerful Northern families, such as the Nevilles and the Patchetts. The latter were stripped of all power and titles by the victorious Parliamentarians after the English Civil War of 1642\u20131651.\nAfter the Restoration in 1660, the county was a centre for Roman Catholicism in England, as well as a focus of Jacobite support. Northumberland was long a wild county, where outlaws and Border Reivers hid from the law. However, the frequent cross-border skirmishes and accompanying local lawlessness largely subsided after the Union of the Crowns of Scotland and England under King James I and VI in 1603.\nNorthumberland played a key role in the Industrial Revolution from the 18th century on. Many coal mines operated in Northumberland until the widespread closures in the 1970s and 1980s. Collieries operated at Ashington, Bedlington, Blyth, Choppington, Netherton, Ellington, and Pegswood. The region's coalfields fuelled industrial expansion in other areas of Britain, and the need to transport the coal from the collieries to the Tyne led to the development of the first railways. Shipbuilding and armaments manufacture were other important industries before the deindustrialisation of the 1980s.\nNorthumberland remains largely rural, and is the least densely populated county in England. In recent years, the county has had considerable growth in tourism. Visitors are attracted both to its scenic beauty and to its historical sites.\nGeography.\nNorthumberland has a diverse physical geography. It is low and flat near the North Sea coast and increasingly mountainous towards the northwest. Being in the far north of England, above 55\u00b0 latitude, and having many areas of high land, Northumberland is one of the coldest areas of the country. But as the county lies on the east coast, it has relatively low rainfall, with the highest amounts falling on the high land in the west.\nAbout a quarter of the county forms the Northumberland National Park, an area of outstanding landscape that has largely been protected from development and agriculture. The park stretches south from the Scottish border and includes Hadrian's Wall. Most of the park is over above sea level. The Northumberland Coast is also a designated Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). A small part of the North Pennines AONB is also in the county.\nThere is a variety of nature reserves in Northumberland including Holy Island National Nature Reserve and Farne Islands National Nature Reserve. Moreover, 50% of England's red squirrel population lives in the Kielder Water and Forest Park.\nNatural England recognises the following natural regions, or national character areas, that lie wholly or partially within Northumberland:\nGeology.\nThe Cheviot Hills, in the northwest of the county, consist mainly of resistant Devonian granite and andesite lava. A second area of igneous rock underlies the Whin Sill (on which Hadrian's Wall runs), an intrusion of Carboniferous dolerite. Both ridges support a rather bare moorland landscape. Either side of the Whin Sill the county lies on Carboniferous Limestone, giving some areas of karst landscape. Lying off the coast of Northumberland are the Farne Islands, another dolerite outcrop, famous for their bird life.\nThe Northumberland Coalfield extends across the southeast corner of the county, from the River Tyne as far north as Shilbottle. There were smaller-scale workings for coal within the Tyne Limestone Formation as far north as Scremerston. The term 'sea coal' likely originated from chunks of coal, found washed up on beaches, that wave action had broken from coastal outcroppings.\nGreen belt.\nNorthumberland's green belt is in the south of the county, surrounding Cramlington and other communities along the county border, to afford a protection from the Tyneside conurbation. The belt continues west along the border, past Darras Hall, and on to Hexham, stopping before Haydon Bridge. Its border there is shared with the North Pennines AONB. There are also some separated belt areas, for example to the east of Morpeth. The green belt was first drawn up in the 1950s.\nPolitics.\nCounty town.\nThe historic county town was Alnwick; assizes were mainly held in Newcastle, with the county gaol in Morpeth. Newcastle became a city in 1400, with county corporate status, with both areas having joint assizes.\nFrom the county council's formation in 1889 until 1981 Newcastle was the county town, being briefly the county town of two counties when the city became a part of the Tyne and Wear metropolitan county in 1974. The county council has been governed from Morpeth since 1981. In 2009 the county council became a unitary authority when the county's districts were abolished and the county council took on their functions.\nCouncil.\nThe unitary authority of Northumberland Council was established in April 2009. Previously, the county had a two-tier council system for the county and its six districts, both responsible for different aspects of local government. These districts were Blyth Valley, Wansbeck, Castle Morpeth, Tynedale, Alnwick and Berwick-upon-Tweed.\nElections for the unitary authority council first took place on 1 May 2008. The most recent elections, in 2021, had the following results:\nConstituencies.\nNorthumberland is divided into four parliamentary constituencies: Berwick-upon-Tweed, Blyth Valley, Wansbeck and Hexham. The 2019 general election produced the following total votes, with changes since previous election:\n2016 European Union Referendum.\nOn 23 June 2016 Northumberland took part in the UK-wide referendum on the UK's membership of the EU. In Northumberland a majority voted to leave the European Union. The only one of the four parliamentary constituencies in Northumberland to vote Remain was Hexham.\nDemography.\nAt the 2001 UK Census Northumberland registered a population of 307,190, estimated to be 309,237 in 2003, The 2011 UK Census gave a population of 316,028.\nIn 2001 there were 130,780 households, 10% of the population were retired, and one-third rented their homes. Northumberland has an ethnic minority population at 0.985% of the population, far lower compared to the average of 9.1% for England as a whole. In the 2001 UK Census, 81% of the population reported their religion as Christianity, 0.8% as \"other religion\", and 12% as having no religion.\nBeing primarily rural with significant areas of upland, the population density of Northumberland is only 62 persons per square kilometre, giving it one of the lowest population density in England.\nEconomy.\nNorthumberland's industry is dominated by some multinational corporations: Coca-Cola, MSD, GE and Drager all have significant facilities in the region.\nTourism is a major source of employment and income in Northumberland. In the early 2000s the county annually received 1.1 million British visitors and 50,000 foreign tourists, who spent a total of \u00a3162 million.\nCoal mining in the county goes back to Tudor times. Coal mines continue to operate today; many of them are open-cast mines. Planning approval was given in January 2014 for an open-cast mine at Halton Lea Gate near Lambley.\nA major employer in Northumberland is Hexham-based Egger (UK) Limited.\nPharmaceuticals, health care and biotechnology.\nPharmaceutical, health care and emerging biotechnology companies form a very significant part of the county's economy. Many of these companies are part of the approximately 11,000-worker Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC) and include Aesica Pharmaceuticals, Arcinova, MSD, Piramal Healthcare, Procter &amp; Gamble, Shire Plc (formerly SCM Pharma), Shasun Pharma Solutions, Specials Laboratory, and Thermo Fisher Scientific. The cluster also includes Cambridge Bioresearch, GlaxoSmithKline, Fujifilm Diosynth Biotech, Leica Bio, Data Trial, High Force Research, Non-Linear Dynamics, and Immuno Diagnostic Systems (IDS). The towns of Alnwick, Cramlington, Morpeth, Prudhoe all have significant pharmaceutical factories and laboratories.\nNewcastle University and Northumbria University are the leading academic institutions nearby. The local industry includes commercial or academic activity in pre-clinical research and development, clinical research and development, pilot-scale manufacturing, full-scale active pharmaceutical ingredient/intermediate manufacturing, formulation, packaging, and distribution.\nMedia.\nHaving no large population centres, the county's mainstream media outlets are served from nearby Tyne and Wear, including radio stations and television channels (such as BBC Look North, BBC Radio Newcastle, ITV Tyne Tees and Hits Radio North East), along with the majority of daily newspapers covering the area (\"The Journal\", \"Evening Chronicle\"). It is worth remembering however that although Northumberland, like many administrative areas in England, has been shorn of its geographical regional centre, that centre\u2014Newcastle upon Tyne\u2014remains an essential element within the entity we know as Northumberland. Newcastle's newspapers are as widely read in its Northumbrian hinterland as any of those of the wider county: the \"Northumberland Gazette\", \"Morpeth Herald\", \"Berwick Advertiser\", \"Hexham Courant\" and the \"News Post Leader\".\nLionheart Radio, a community radio station based in Alnwick, has been awarded a community broadcasting licence by Ofcom.\nBusinesses.\nAshington has the former Alcan Lynemouth Aluminium Smelter, next to the Lynemouth Power Station. Hammerite and Cuprinol are made in Prudhoe by ICI Paints. A Procter &amp; Gamble factory in Seaton Delaval makes Hugo Boss aftershave and Clairol and Nice 'n Easy hair dye at a site formerly owned by Shultons, who originated Old Spice and were bought by P&amp;G in 1990. McQuay UK makes air conditioning systems on the Bassington Industrial Estate at the A1068/A1172 junction in Cramlington, and Avery Dennison UK make labels on the Nelson Industrial Estate off of the A192. Schweppes' Abbey Well mineral water is made by Coca-Cola in the east of Morpeth. The National Renewable Energy Centre (Narec) is at Blyth.\nSettlements.\nParishes.\nNOTE: New parishes have been added since 2001. These are missing from the list, see List of civil parishes in Northumberland. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough not on this list, the population of Cramlington is estimated at 39,000.\nHistoric areas.\nSome settlements that are part historic county of Northumberland now fall under the county of Tyne and Wear:\nSport.\nFootball.\nA precursor of modern football is still seen in the region at some annual Shrove Tuesday games at Alnwick. In 1280 at Ulgham near Morpeth Northumberland, records show that Henry of Ellington was killed playing football when David Le Keu's knife went into Henry's belly and killed him. Organised football teams as we know today did not appear until the 1870s. Newcastle United Football Club was formed in 1892 by uniting Newcastle West End FC with Newcastle East End.\nNewcastle United were first division champions three times in the early 20th century, reaching the FA Cup Final three times before winning it at the fourth attempt in 1910.\nToday, top quality professional football remains in Northumberland. Since the 2017 \u2013 18 season, Newcastle United is a Premier League team. St James' Park in Newcastle is a first class football venue, often used for international games at all levels. Blyth Spartans A.F.C. have had success and public attention through Football Association Cup runs.\nNotable associated footballers.\nThere are many notable footballers from the county, pre Second World War and immediate post war greats were George Camsell and Hughie Gallacher, these were described in the \"Clown Prince of Football\" by Len Shackleton. The author played for Newcastle United and Northumberland County Cricket Club. Shackleton's book was controversial when it was first published because chapter 9, named \"The Average Director's Knowledge of Football\", was produced as a blank page. Notable players after the Second World War included Joe Harvey, Jackie Milburn, Brian Clough and Newcastle's Bobby Moncur who led his team to win the Inter City Fairs Cup in 1969.\nTwo of Jackie Milburn's nephews from Ashington, Bobby Charlton and Jackie Charlton are perhaps the two most significant players for England. Bobby joined Manchester United and Jackie Leeds United both contributing much to the success and history of their respective clubs. They both became permanent fixtures in Alf Ramsey's 1966 England World Cup winning team. Malcolm Macdonald was a successful Newcastle player of the 1970s. Great national players who played at Northumberland clubs in the 1980s and 1990s include Peter Beardsley, Paul Gascoigne, Chris Waddle and Alan Shearer. Shearer remains the highest scoring player in Premier League history with 260 goals in 441 appearances.\nHorseracing.\nEarly races were held at Newcastle's Killingworth Moor from 1632 before moving to the Town Moor. The 'Pitmen's Derby' or Northumberland Plate was held from 1833 and moved to Gosforth in 1882. Modern day horse racing still takes place at Newcastle Racecourse.\nGolf.\nGolf is a Scottish import to many countries, but it is said to have been played in this region by St Cuthbert on the dunes of the Northumberland coast. The oldest club in Northumberland was at Alnmouth, founded in 1869, it is the fourth oldest in the country and is now Alnmouth Village Club; it is a 9 hole links course.\nThere is one old links course at Goswick. It is a James Braid design which is widely acknowledged as a classic Northumberland links course; so much so, that the Royal and Ancient Golf Club (R&amp;A) chose Goswick as a regional qualifier for the Open Championship for five years from 2008.\nDuring the English Civil War of 1642\u20131651, King Charles played 'Goff' in the Shield Fields suburb of Pandon during his imprisonment in the town.\nToday inland golf courses are abundant in the county,\nThe county has a professional golfer who has played in many professional golf tour events: Kenny Ferrie from Ashington, who has won events on the prestigious European Tour.\nOther.\nThe annual Great North Run, one of the best known half marathons in which thousands of participants run from Newcastle to South Shields. In 2013 the 33rd Great North Run had 56,000 participants most of whom were raising money for charity.\nEducation.\nNorthumberland has a completely comprehensive education system, with 15 state schools, two academies and one independent school. Like Bedfordshire, it embraced the comprehensive ideal with the three-tier system of lower/middle/upper schools with large school year sizes (often around 300). This eliminated choice of school in most areas: instead of having two secondary schools in one town, one school became a middle school and another became an upper school. A programme introduced in 2006 known as Putting the Learner First has eliminated this structure in the former areas of Blyth Valley and Wansbeck, where two-tier education has been introduced. Although the two processes are not officially connected, the introduction of two tiers has coincided with the move to build academy schools in Blyth, with Bede Academy and in Ashington at Hirst. One response to these changes has been the decision of Ponteland High School to apply for Trust status.\nCramlington Learning Village has almost 400 pupils in each school year, making it one of the largest schools in England. The Blyth Academy in southeast Northumberland can hold 1,500 students throughout the building. Astley Community High School in Seaton Delaval, which accepts students from Seaton Delaval, Seaton Sluice and Blyth, has been the subject of controversial remarks from politicians claiming it would no longer be viable once Bede Academy opened in Blyth, a claim strongly disputed by the headteacher. \nThe county of Northumberland is served by one Catholic high school, St Benet Biscop Catholic Academy in Bedlington, which is attended by students from all over the area. Students from Northumberland also attend independent schools such as the Royal Grammar School in Newcastle.\nCulture.\nNorthumberland has traditions not found elsewhere in England. These include the rapper sword dance, the clog dance and the Northumbrian smallpipe. Northumberland also has its own tartan or check, sometimes referred to in Scotland as the Shepherd's Tartan. Traditional Northumbrian music has more similarity to Lowland Scottish and Irish music than it does to that of other parts of England, reflecting the strong historical links between Northumbria and the Lowlands of Scotland, and the large Irish population on Tyneside.\nThe border ballads of the region have been famous since late mediaeval times. Thomas Percy, whose celebrated \"Reliques of Ancient English Poetry\" appeared in 1765, states that most of the minstrels who sang the border ballads in London and elsewhere in the 15th and 16th centuries belonged to the North. The activities of Sir Walter Scott and others in the 19th century gave the ballads an even wider popularity. William Morris considered them to be the greatest poems in the language, while Algernon Charles Swinburne knew virtually all of them by heart.\nOne of the best-known is the stirring \"Chevy Chase\", which tells of the Earl of Northumberland's vow to hunt for three days across the Border \"maugre the doughty Douglas\". Of it, the Elizabethan courtier, soldier and poet Sir Philip Sidney famously said, \"I never heard the old song of Percy and Douglas that I found not my heart moved more than with a trumpet\". Ben Jonson said that he would give all his works to have written \"Chevy Chase\".\nOverall the culture of Northumberland, as with the North East of England in general, may have more in common with Scottish Lowland culture than with that of Southern England. Both regions have their cultural origins in the old Anglian Kingdom of Northumbria, a fact borne out by the linguistic links between the two regions. These include many Old English words not found in other forms of Modern English, such as \"bairn\" for child (see Scots language and Northumbrian dialect).\nThe lands just north or south of the border have long shared certain aspects of history and heritage; it is thus thought by some that the Anglo-Scottish border is largely political rather than cultural.\nAttempts to raise the level of awareness of Northumberland culture have also started, with the formation of a Northumbrian Language Society to preserve the unique dialects (Pitmatic and other Northumbrian dialects) of this region, as well as to promote home-grown talent.\nNorthumberland's county flower is the bloody crane's-bill (\"Geranium sanguineum\") and its affiliated Royal Navy ship is its namesake, .\nFlag.\nThe historic county of Northumberland has its own flag, which is a banner of the arms of Northumberland County Council. The shield of arms is in turn based on the arms medieval heralds had attributed to the Kingdom of Bernicia (which the first County Council used until it was granted its own arms). The Bernician arms were fictional but inspired by Bede's brief description of a flag used on the tomb of St Oswald in the 7th century.\nThe current arms were granted to the county council in 1951, and adopted as the flag of Northumberland in 1995.\nNotable people.\nBorn in Northumberland.\nAshington was the birthplace of three famous footballers: Bobby and Jack Charlton, born in 1937 and 1935 respectively, and Jackie Milburn, born in 1924. In 1978 the international cricketer Steve Harmison was born in the same town.\nMickley was the birthplace of Thomas Bewick, an artist, wood engraver and naturalist born in 1753, and Bob Stokoe, a footballer and F.A. Cup-winning manager (with Sunderland in 1973) born in 1930.\nOther notable births include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59771", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59771", "title": "Eisenach", "text": "Town in Thuringia, Germany\nEisenach () is a town in Thuringia, Germany with 42,000 inhabitants, west of Erfurt, southeast of Kassel and northeast of Frankfurt. It is the main urban centre of western Thuringia, and bordering northeastern Hessian regions, is near the former Inner German border. A major attraction is Wartburg castle, which has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1999.\nEisenach was an early capital of Thuringia in the 12th and 13th centuries. St.Elizabeth lived at the court of the Ludowingians here between 1211 and 1228. Later Martin Luther came to Eisenach and translated the Bible into German. In 1685 Johann Sebastian Bach was born here. During the early modern period Eisenach was a residence of the Ernestine Wettins and was visited by numerous representatives of Weimar classicism like Johann Wolfgang Goethe. In 1869 the SDAP, one of the two precursors of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), was founded in Eisenach.\nCar production is an important industry in Eisenach. The \"Automobilwerk Eisenach\" was founded in 1896. In the German Democratic Republic the Wartburg was produced here, before the factory was acquired by Opel in 1990.\nEisenach is on the H\u00f6rsel river, a tributary of the Werra between the Thuringian Forest in the south, the Hainich mountains in the north-east, and the East Hesse Highlands in the north-west. Since January 2021 it has been part of the Wartburgkreis.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nEisenach's origin and early history is unknown. An 8th-century Frankish settlement near Petersberg hill is regarded as the nucleus of Eisenach; but there are no written sources about that early period. According to legend, Louis the Springer began in 1067 to establish Wartburg castle above the settlement.\nIn 1080 the castle was first mentioned in a Saxon chronicle. Eisenach itself followed in a document dating to 1150, where it was referred to as \"Isinacha\". During the 1180s the town was established by the construction of three independent market settlements around the Saturday market (today's Karlsplatz), the Wednesday market (today's Frauenplan), and the Monday market (today's Marktplatz). Due to its convenient location at a cross-roads between the Thuringian Forest in the south and the Hainich mountains in the north, Eisenach benefited from substantial east\u2013west trade along Via Regia from Frankfurt to Erfurt and Leipzig, and became a rich merchant town. During the second half of the 12th century, the town walls were erected (the Nikolaitor is an important relict of this wall) and Eisenach got a planned grid of streets and alleys. In the late 12th century the Wartburg became the main residence of the Ludowingians, making Eisenach a leading place in today's western Thuringia and northern Hesse, which also belonged to the Ludowingian landgraviate. In 1207 the legendary S\u00e4ngerkrieg supposedly took place at Wartburg castle.\nIn 1221 St Elizabeth married Landgrave Louis' IV and lived in Eisenach or at Wartburg castle until 1228. Later she became the patroness of Thuringia and Hesse.\nIn 1247 the Ludowingians died out, which led to the War of the Thuringian Succession between the Wettins and Duchess Sophie of Brabant. As a consequence the landgraviate was divided. Eisenach and the eastern parts went to the Wettins (later becoming Thuringia) and Kassel, Marburg, and the western parts went to Sophie (later becoming Hesse). Eisenach kept a leading position among the Wettin's Thuringian cities by becoming their \"Oberhof\" (leading court), so that their law had to be derived from Eisenach's municipal law and disputes had to be resolved here. The confident citizens of Eisenach fought against the Wettin's rule to become a free imperial city between 1306 and 1308, but lost. In the 14th century various crises followed: in 1342 a big fire destroyed nearly all the buildings, and the Black Death killed many inhabitants in 1349 and 1393. Since 1406 Eisenach was no longer a Wettin residence, which led to a decline in urban development. In 1485, in the \"division of Leipzig\", the town fell to the Ernestine line of the Wettins.\nEarly-modern period.\nBetween 1498 and 1501, the young Martin Luther attended the St. George's Latin school in Eisenach in preparation for his following studies at the University of Erfurt. In 1521/22 he was hidden by Frederick the Wise at Wartburg castle to protect him from the Imperial ban. During that time Luther translated the New Testament from Greek into German, in what was an important step both for the German Reformation and the development of a consistent German standard language.\nLuther referred to Eisenach as \"ein Pfaffennest\" (\"a clerical backwater\"), since during his time there were 300 monks and nuns per 1,000 inhabitants.\nIn 1525 there was heavy fighting in the area during the \"Bauernkrieg\".\nIn 1528 the Lutheran Reformation was implemented in Eisenach. In 1596 Eisenach became a ducal residence again for the house of Saxe-Eisenach.\nJohann Sebastian Bach was born in Eisenach in 1685, when it was a part of the Holy Roman Empire. His father, Johann Ambrosius Bach, worked there as a musician at that time. Other famous composers and musicians associated with Eisenach during that period were Johann Pachelbel, Johann Christoph Bach and Georg Philipp Telemann. As the Eisenach dukes died out in 1741, the town and the state became part of Saxe-Weimar. Nevertheless, the cultural life remained unimpaired. The coterie around the poet Julie von Bechtolsheim met up with famous personalities like Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Christoph Martin Wieland in Eisenach.\nFrom 1809 to 1918 Eisenach was part of the Duchy (after 1815 Grand Duchy) of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach.\nAfter 1815.\nIn 1817 the Wartburg Festival took place in Eisenach, a meeting of students advocating moves toward a more liberal, constitutional state and a unification of Germany. The industrial revolution started relatively early in Eisenach. As early as the first half of the 19th century the first factories were founded. In 1847 Eisenach was connected by the Thuringian Railway to Erfurt and Halle/Leipzig in the east and in 1849 to Kassel and Frankfurt in the west. In 1858 the Werra Railway to Lichtenfels (and further to Nuremberg) was opened.\nIn August 1869 the leading socialists August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht founded the SDAP, one of the two predecessors of today's SPD in Eisenach. The Eisenach Program remained the party's main manifesto for the following years. The late 19th and early 20th century was the period with the fastest urban growth in Eisenach. The \"Fahrzeugfabrik Eisenach\" (FFE), later \"Automobilwerk Eisenach\", the basis of car production in Eisenach, was founded in 1896, the first trams ran in 1897, the \"Burschenschaftsdenkmal\" (\"fraternity monument\") was erected in 1902, and the J. S. Bach museum opened in 1907. Tourists also started to arrive in this period, drawn by the pleasing landscape and the various sights within the town.\nBetween the 1860s and 1938 Eisenach was the home of one of the largest Jewish communities in Thuringia, with nearly 500 members at the beginning of the 20th century. Many Jews migrated from the Rh\u00f6n area around Stadtlengsfeld to Eisenach after their emancipation in the early 19th century. The new synagogue was built in 1885 and destroyed by the Nazis during \"Kristallnacht\" in November 1938. Most Jews emigrated at that time; others were deported to concentration camps and murdered. During Nazi Germany the Institute for the Study and Elimination of Jewish Influence on German Church Life, an antisemitic propaganda institute, was set up in Eisenach by 11 German Protestant churches, founded at the instigation of the German Christian movement.\nBefore the Second World War, Bayerische Motoren Werke AG had produced motorcycles in the town. In preparation for World War II, new barracks were established in Eisenach and the car industry started the production of military equipment. After 1940 some 4000 forced labourers (most of them from the Soviet Union) were pressed to work in the town's factories, where some of them died due to the bad working conditions. Postwar, the managing director of the BMW aircraft engine works, Dr Schaaf, told the Fedden Mission there were as many as 11,000 working in the town, 4,500 in a plant inside a hillside turning out BMW 132 engines and parts for the 801, the rest in town. The bombings during the war destroyed about 2,000 housing units and big parts of the car factories, as well as some historic buildings in the town centre, which were rebuilt soon after the war. The US Army arrived in Eisenach on 6 April 1945, but the Soviets took over control of the town on 1 July 1945, making it Communism's westernmost major town.\nEisenach was part of the GDR after 1949. The Inner German border ran only ten kilometres west of Eisenach and was closed in 1952, cutting off parts of Eisenach's traditional hinterland. The location near the border inhibited the further development during the next 40 years and the population declined through that period. Nevertheless, Eisenach remained an important industrial location. The BMW car factory was socialized and under the new name EMW produced the Wartburg, the so-called \"Mercedes of the East\". The deteriorating condition of many historic houses led to a housing shortage during the 1970s. The government fought this by demolishing some historic quarters (e.g. at Jakobstra\u00dfe) and rebuilding them with \"Plattenbau\" settlements. The biggest \"Plattenbau\" district was built at the northern periphery of Eisenach between 1978 and 1985, with nearly 4,000 housing units. In 1975 the tramway system was discontinued.\nAfter German reunification in 1990 the economic situation changed. The car factory was taken over by Opel, whereas many other factories were closed. On the other hand Eisenach moved from the inner German border to the centre of the reunified country. Tourism saw significant growth and the Wartburg castle was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1999. Nevertheless the financial situation of Eisenach remained difficult, unemployment stayed above average, and car production suffered from the business problems of Opel.\nGeography and climate.\nTopography.\nEisenach is at the northern edge of the Thuringian Forest, at an elevation of about 220 m. The terrain is hilly, and to the south also mountainous (up to 460 m of elevation), with the central H\u00f6rsel valley crossing the town in east\u2013west direction. The Nesse river enters the H\u00f6rsel river in Eisenach after forming a valley through the spur of the H\u00f6rselberg mountains in the eastern municipal territory. The northern territory around the Neunkirchen, Stregda, and H\u00f6tzelsroda districts is relatively flat and in agricultural use. About west of the town centre runs the wide Werra valley, where the H\u00f6rsel river enters this bigger river near H\u00f6rschel district. The southern municipal territory is covered with forest, as are some smaller parts north of the H\u00f6rsel river. The Hainich mountains begin north-east of Eisenach.\nAdministrative division.\nEisenach abuts the municipalities Krauthausen, Mihla, Lauterbach, Bischofroda and Berka vor dem Hainich in the north, H\u00f6rselberg-Hainich and Wutha-Farnroda in the east, and Marksuhl, Wolfsburg-Unkeroda, and Gerstungen in the south (all in the district Wartburgkreis) and Werra-Mei\u00dfner-Kreis (Hesse, municipality of Herleshausen in the west). The municipal border between Eisenach and Herleshausen was part of the inner German border/Iron Curtain from 1949 to 1990.\nThe municipality of Eisenach includes the following rural districts (all of them incorporated in 1994), aside from the old town:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe village of Fischbach was incorporated in 1922 and is part of the inner town today.\nClimate.\nEisenach has a humid continental climate (Dfb) or an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"), according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system. Summers are warm and sometimes humid, and winters are relatively cold. The town's topography creates a microclimate with mostly adequate air circulation along the west-eastern valley, which made Eisenach a resort at the end of the 19th century. Annual precipitation is with moderate rainfall throughout the year. Light snowfall mainly occurs from December through February, but snow cover does not usually remain for long in the inner town valley.\nDemographics.\nEisenach has always been one of the larger towns in Thuringia, with 4,000 to 5,000 inhabitants during the Middle Ages. By 1800 the population rose to 8000 and further to 10,000 as industrialisation started around 1850. In 1875 the town had 16,000 inhabitants, and 30,000 in 1900, 43,000 in 1925, and more than 50,000 in 1940, the peak. Like most other east German mid-sized towns, Eisenach has had a shrinking population since 1950. It declined to 48,000 in 1990, 44,000 in 2000, and 42,000 in 2012. During 2009\u20132012 the annual change was \u22120.12%. Suburbanization played only a small role in Eisenach. It occurred after reunification for a short time in the 1990s, but most of the suburban areas are within the administrative town borders.\nThe birth deficit was 240 in 2012, or \u22125.7 per 1000 inhabitants (Thuringian average: \u22124.5; national average: \u22122.4). The net migration rate was +6.5 per 1,000 inhabitants in 2012 (Thuringian average: \u22120.8; national average: +4.6). The most important regions of origin of people who have moved to Eisenach are rural areas of Thuringia, as well as foreign countries like Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia, Romania, and Bulgaria.\nLike other eastern German cities, only a small share of Eisenach's population is foreign: circa 2.3% are non-Germans by citizenship and overall 4.9% are classified as \"migrants\" (according to the 2011 EU census). Differing from the national average, the biggest groups of migrants in Eisenach are Vietnamese, Russians and Ukrainians.\nDue to the official atheism of the former German Democratic Republic, most of the population is non-religious: 23.0% are members of the Evangelical Church in Central Germany and 4.4% are Catholics (according to the 2011 EU census).\nEconomy.\nAgriculture, industry and services.\nThe region around Eisenach is the part of Thuringia with the strongest economic base.\nAgriculture is not very important in Eisenach, because of the hilly terrain, the less fertile soil, and the relatively humid climate, compared with central Thuringia further east. But 43% of the total municipal territory is in agricultural use, mostly as maize and rapeseed fields, or as cattle pasture.\nThe industrial structure is relatively focused on car production. The German auto manufacturer Opel built an entirely new plant in the northwest of the town, after the Wartburg car plant had ceased production in 1991. The new plant opened in 1992. Most other large manufacturers in Eisenach serve as suppliers for Opel, the largest among them is Bosch. BMW runs a factory in the neighbouring municipality of Krauthausen that supplies car parts. Another component supplier is \"Truck-Lite Europe\". In 2012 there were a total of 19 industrial companies with more than 20 workers in Eisenach, employing 5,600 people and generating a turnover of more than 1.8\u00a0billion euros. Of those employees, 3,000 work for just two companies (Opel and Bosch), underlining the dependence of Eisenach on the automotive industry.\nServices in Eisenach are focused on tourism, with 166,000 overnight visitors spending a total of 311,000 nights in hotels in 2012. In addition, there are large numbers of (mostly German) one-day visitors.\nEisenach also provides services to the region (retail, hospitals, theatres, cinemas etc.).\nDuring recent years the economic situation of the town improved: the unemployment rate declined from 17% in 2005 to 9% in 2013.\nAttractions.\nThe Wartburg castle is, aside from Weimar, the most-visited tourist attraction in Thuringia. Further sights are:\nMuseums.\nEisenach hosts a number of museums:\nTownscape.\nThe town of Eisenach developed during the Middle Ages at the exit of \"Mariental\" valley, opening to the H\u00f6rsel valley around Marktplatz, Karlsplatz and Frauenplan in a triangle structure. The early-modern period brought extensions to the west (Katharinenstra\u00dfe), to the north (Jakobstra\u00dfe) and to the east (in front of Nikolaitor gate). The construction boom between 1850 and 1914 led to a strict division in urban development. South of the historic centre, mansion districts were established on the hillsides of Mariental valley, where the rich factory owners, rentiers and other upper-class people lived. These districts are among the most important examples of this urban type in Germany, and one of the largest in Europe. North of the historic centre, next to the railway and H\u00f6rsel river, factories and worker quarters were established. These also host some examples of interesting Gr\u00fcnderzeit architecture. After World War I, the town extended further to the north on the other bank of H\u00f6rsel river, where some new residential areas were developed before 1990.\nPolitics.\nMayor and city council.\nThe first freely elected mayor after German reunification was Hans-Peter Brodhun of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), who served from 1990 to 2000. He was succeeded by fellow CDU member Gerhard Schneider from 2000 and 2006. Matthias Doht of the Social Democratic Party (SPD) was elected mayor in 2006. In 2012, Katja Wolf of The Left won the mayoralty, becoming the first female mayor in Eisenach's history. After defecting to the Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance in 2023, she retired as mayor to run for the 2024 Thuringian state election. The most recent mayoral election was held on 26 May 2024, with a runoff held on 9 June, and the results were as follows:\nThe most recent city council election was held on 26 May 2024, and the results were as follows:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nEisenach is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nEisenach is connected by the Thuringian Railway to Erfurt and Halle/Leipzig to the east and to Kassel and Frankfurt to the west. Furthermore, there is the Werra Railway, a former main-line railway between north and south Germany from Eisenach via Meiningen to Eisfeld, which since the division of Germany after World War II has served only for regional transport. At the former inner German border, it is still interrupted between Eisfeld and Coburg, but rebuilding is in discussion. Eisenach Hauptbahnhof is a stop of all long-distance trains from Frankfurt to Leipzig/Dresden, running once an hour. Local trains, also once an hour, start in Eisenach to Halle via Erfurt, to Sonneberg via Meiningen and Eisfeld and to Bebra via Gerstungen. Freight transport is important at Eisenach's Opel factory which has its own terminal. Further local passenger stations are Eisenach-West, Eisenach-Opelwerk and H\u00f6rschel.\nEisenach is located on the Bundesautobahn 4 from Frankfurt in the west to Erfurt and Dresden in the east. Since 2010, the Autobahn has been moved to a new route farther away from the town to protect the residents from noise and air pollution. Moreover, it was not possible to expand the old route because of the mountainous topography. After 2010, parts of the old route became a town highway, whereas other parts were renaturalized. A second Autobahn between Eisenach and Kassel is in construction (Bundesautobahn 44). There are four Bundesstra\u00dfen connecting Eisenach: The Bundesstra\u00dfe 7 runs to Kassel in the north-west, whereas its eastern branch to Gotha was annulled in 2010. The Bundesstra\u00dfe 19 leads to Meiningen in the south, the Bundesstra\u00dfe 84 to Bad Langensalza in the north-east and to Fulda via Vacha in the south-west and the Bundesstra\u00dfe 88 is a connection to Ilmenau in the south-east. Furthermore, there are two important secondary roads to M\u00fchlhausen via Mihla in the north and to Herleshausen in the west through the H\u00f6rsel valley. Downtown traffic is concentrated on Rennbahn street, which often leads to congestion due to a large number of commuters and the town's narrow topography.\nThe next local airports are the Erfurt-Weimar Airport, about to the east and the Kassel Calden Airport, roughly to the north-west. Both offer service to tourist destinations. The next major international airport is Frankfurt Airport, circa to the south-west. Kindel Airfield, east of Eisenach, is a former Soviet military base, today used for private aviation.\nBiking is getting more and more popular since the construction of quality cycle tracks began in the 1990s. Long distance trails include the \"Werra trail\", the \"Rennsteig trail\" and the \"Radweg Th\u00fcringer St\u00e4dtekette\" (\"Thuringian town string trail\"). These all connect points of touristic interest, the first along the Werra valley from the Thuringian Forest to the Weser river in Hann. M\u00fcnden, the second through the Thuringian Forest along its crest to the Saale river near Hof and the third follows near the medieval Via Regia from the Werra valley/Eisenach via Gotha, Erfurt and Weimar to Altenburg.\nPublic transport in Eisenach is by a bus network servicing the downtown areas as well as the neighbouring towns and villages. The three-line tramway system of Eisenach was in operation between 1897 and 1975.\nEducation.\nAfter reunification, the educational system was reformed. Eisenach currently has six state-run and one Protestant primary schools.\nThere are two types of secondary school in Germany. The gymnasium prepares students for higher education at a university and students graduate after a total of 12 or 13 years of education with an Abitur. There are two public and one evangelical gymnasium in Eisenach named after personalities of the cities history:\nAnother form of secondary school is the \"Realschule\" where students graduate after a total of ten years of education. There are four public and one free sponsored \"Realschulen\" in Eisenach.\nIn addition, there is one Waldorf school where education spans from primary school to gymnasium.\nIn 1998, the \"Berufsakademie Eisenach\" was founded. The roughly 600 students can obtain a bachelor's degree there, either in economics or in technics.\nSport.\nThSV Eisenach is a professional handball club that plays in the second division.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59772", "revid": "45125438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59772", "title": "German submarine U-490", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-490\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 21 February 1942, by Germaniawerft of Kiel as yard number 559. She was launched on 24 December 1942 and commissioned on 27 March 1943, with \"Leutnant zur See\" Wilhelm Gerlach in command. He remained in command throughout the boat's career.\nThe U-boat's service life commenced with the 4th U-boat Flotilla from 27 March 1943 until 31 March 1944 for training. She then served, for operations, with the 12th flotilla.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-490\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-490\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-490\"'s only patrol began with her departure from Kiel on 4 May 1944. She headed for the Atlantic by way of the so-called Faeroes Gap between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands, north of the British Isles.\nAlthough as a supply boat, she avoided combat, she was lost on her first patrol when on 12 June, she was attacked in mid-ocean by the escort carrier and the destroyers , and . There were 60 survivors (no casualties).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59773", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59773", "title": "German submarine U-460", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-460\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 30 November 1940 by Deutsche Werke in Kiel as yard number 291. She was launched on 13 September 1941 and commissioned on 24 December that same year, with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Friedrich Sch\u00e4fer in command. Sch\u00e4fer was relieved by \"Kptlt.\" Ebe Schnoor on 1 August 1942. She carried out training with the 4th U-boat Flotilla before moving on to the 10th and 12th flotillas for operations.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs. \"U-460\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-460\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-460\" conducted six patrols. As a supply boat, she avoided combat.\nFirst and second patrols.\n\"U-460\"'s first patrol started with her departure from Kiel on 7 June 1942, taking her out to mid-Atlantic through the gap between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands. She arrived in St. Nazaire in occupied France on 31 July.\nHer second foray, which began on 27 August 1942, saw her steam west out of the Bay of Biscay, south, then south southeast toward the Cape Verde Islands in the South Atlantic.\nThird, fourth and fifth patrols.\n\"U-460\"'s third patrol was due west from St. Nazaire and lasted 39 days, a typical length.\nHer fourth sortie was almost a repeat of her third, except it terminated in Bordeaux.\nThe U-boat's fifth patrol commenced on 24 April 1943 and lasted 63 days, her longest. It took her to a point almost equidistant with the South American and African coasts. She returned to Bordeaux on 25 June.\nSixth patrol and loss.\nShe left Bordeaux for the last time on 30 August 1943. On 4 October, \"U-460\" was resupplying the submarines , , and in the North Atlantic north of the Azores, when they were attacked by American Avenger and Wildcat aircraft of US Navy squadron VC-9 flying from the escort carrier . While the other U-boats submerged and escaped, \"U-460\" was sunk by depth charges in position . 62 were killed; two crewmen survived.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59774", "revid": "12866484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59774", "title": "German submarine U-461", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-461\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 9 December 1940, by Deutsche Werke in Kiel as yard number 292. She was launched on 8 November 1941 and commissioned on 30 January 1942 with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Hinrich-Oscar Bernbeck in command. Bernbeck was promoted to \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" by 21 April 1942, when he was relieved by \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\" Wolf-Harro Stiebler.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-461\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-461\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-461\" conducted six patrols. As a supply boat, she avoided combat.\nFirst and second patrols.\n\"U-461\"'s first patrol took her from Kiel to St. Nazaire in occupied France, via the gap between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands and out into the mid-Atlantic.\nHer second patrol was much like her first; the most westerly point in the Atlantic was reached on 30 September 1942.\nThird and fourth patrols.\n\"U-461\"'s third sortie commenced with her departure from St. Nazaire on 19 November 1942. Travelling south, she reached the furthest spot in the patrol which was roughly between South America and Africa. There, she spent two days (according to her position reports), before moving a short distance west on 11 December 1942. She returned to her French base on 3 January 1943.\nShe steamed to a point west of the Canary Islands, which she reached on 2 March 1943. Having departed St. Nazaire on 13 February, she returned there for the last time on 22 March.\nFifth patrol.\nShe left St.Nazaire on 20 April 1943, but was attacked on the return leg on 23 April by a Canadian Wellington of 172 squadron RAF, equipped with a Leigh Light. Three bombs were dropped, resulting in slight damage and, more seriously, a trail of oil. She returned to France, but this time to Bordeaux.\nSixth patrol and loss.\nShe had left Bordeaux on 27 July 1943, but was hardly out of the Bay of Biscay, north-west of Cape Ortegal, Spain, when she was sunk on 30 July by an Australian Sunderland flying boat from No. 461 Squadron RAAF piloted by Flight Lieutenant Dudley Marrows. Coincidentally this aircraft had the registration \"U\", also making it known as 'U-461'. As a result of the attack, all 12 Australian crew on the flying boat agreed to drop an inflatable dinghy, fifteen of her crew survived; 53 were killed.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-461\" took part in three wolfpacks, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59775", "revid": "12866484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59775", "title": "German submarine U-462", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-462\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 2 January 1941, by Deutsche Werke in Kiel. She was launched on 29 November 1941 and commissioned on 5 March 1942 with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Bruno Vowe in command. Vowe commanded the boat until she was lost. She served, first as part of the 4th U-boat Flotilla while carrying out training, then as part of the 10th and 12th flotillas while taking part in operations.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on.\u2018\u2019U-462\u2019\u2019 had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \u2018\u2019U-462\u2019\u2019 was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-462\" conducted eight patrols. As a supply boat, she avoided combat.\nFirst patrol.\nFor her first patrol, \"U-462\" departed Kiel on 23 July 1942 and arrived at St. Nazaire in occupied France on 21 September of the same year, having travelled by way of the gap between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands and out into the Atlantic. The latter part of the voyage took her past the Azores on her way to her new base.\nSecond and third patrols.\nThe U-boat's second effort took her to a point west-southwest of the Cape Verde Islands which she reached on 9 November 1942. She arrived back at St. Nazaire on 7 December 1942.\nHer third outing was very short. She left Bordeaux on 20 January 1943, but returned on the 22nd.\nFourth and fifth patrols.\nThe submarine's fourth sortie took her out into the Atlantic once again. The most westerly spot of this patrol was recorded on 27 February 1943. She returned to France, but this time it was to Bordeaux, on 11 March.\nThe boat's fifth patrol was also routine.\nSixth patrol.\nShe did not leave the Bay of Biscay, being attacked by Mosquito aircraft of 151 and 156 squadrons, RAF on 21 June 1943. One man was killed (\"Matrosengefreiter\" Ferdinand Brunnbaur), and four more were wounded. The patrol was aborted, the boat returned to Bordeaux on the 23rd.\nSeventh patrol.\n\"U-462\"'s seventh patrol was also cut short. She had barely cleared the northwest Spanish coast when she was attacked by a British B-24 Liberator of 224 squadron, RAF. After sustaining sufficient damage to force a return, she entered Bordeaux harbour on 6 July 1943.\nLoss.\nOn 30 July 1943, \"U-462\" was sunk by a British Halifax bomber of 502 Squadron RAF and gunfire from the British sloops , , , and , in the Bay of Biscay. One of these ships, \"Kite\", registered a hit at . One crewman was killed; the other 64 survived.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-462\" took part in one wolfpack, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59776", "revid": "12866484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59776", "title": "German submarine U-463", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-463\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 8 March 1941 by Deutsche Werke of Kiel. She was launched on 20 December 1941 and commissioned on 2 April 1942 with \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\" Leo Wolfbauer in command. Wolfbauer remained in charge for the boat's entire career.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-463\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-463\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-463\" conducted five patrols. As a supply boat, she avoided combat.\nFirst patrol.\n\"U-463\" departed Kiel on her first patrol on 11 July 1942, arriving at St. Nazaire in occupied France on 3 September. She had gone the 'long' way round the British Isles, by way of the gap between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands, heading out into mid-Atlantic toward the Caribbean.\nSecond, third and fourth patrols.\nHer second foray took her into the middle of the Atlantic again, between 28 September 1942 and 11 November.\nThe submarine's next sortie was further south, passing the Azores on the outward journey to the north and to the south on the return. By now she was based at St. Nazaire once more.\nAnother uneventful patrol began on 4 March 1943, but when the U-boat returned to France on 17 April, she moved into Bordeaux.\nFifth patrol and loss.\n\"U-463\"'s fifth patrol began with her departure from Le Verdon, (north of Bordeaux): She had barely cleared the Bay of Biscay, when she was attacked and sunk on 16 May 1943 by depth charges dropped by a British Halifax from 58 Squadron RAF Coastal Command, piloted by Wing Commander Wilfrid Oulton. All 57 of her crew died.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-463\" took part in one wolfpack, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59777", "revid": "1233060673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59777", "title": "German submarine U-464", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-464\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 18 March 1941, by Deutsche Werke in Kiel as yard number 295. She was launched on 20 December 1941 and commissioned on 30 April 1942 with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Otto Harms in command. He remained in charge for her entire career.\nThe boat began her service life training in the 4th U-boat Flotilla before moving on to the 10th flotilla for operations.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-464\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-464\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-464\" was lost on her first patrol. As a supply boat, she avoided combat. She transited from Kiel to Bergen in Norway, arriving on 9 August 1942.\nFirst and only patrol.\n\"U-464\" set-off for her first patrol from Bergen on 14 August 1942. On the 20th, she was attacked south south-east of Iceland by a US PBY Catalina flying boat of VP-73. Two crew members were killed, there were 52 survivors. Although the aircraft dropped all its bombs without sinking the boat, she was still capable of making eight knots but was unable to dive. With many other ships and aircraft in the vicinity and realizing that the situation was hopeless, Harms decided to scuttle the boat near an Icelandic trawler, the 60 GRT \"Skaftfellingur\".\nWhat happened next is still open to question.\n\"English and Icelandic sources\" on 'Uboat.net' say that the 52 German submariners were picked up by the seven-man crew of the fishing boat, put in the bows and covered by a machine gun on the bridge. They were then transferred to a pair of British destroyers later that same day.\nThe \"Kriegsmarine\" officially published a different version: namely that the U-boat crew boarded the trawler by force, captured its crew, and were heading for Germany when they were intercepted by the destroyers and taken prisoner.\nIn July 1999 a squadron of German Navy submarines visited Reykjav\u00edk to honor the Icelandic seamen who rescued the U-boat crew.\nIn 1942, Captain (later Admiral) Daniel V. Gallery was commander of the US PBY anti-submarine base in Keflavik, Iceland. Chapter 1 of his 1976 book \"Clear The Decks\" contains a detailed description of the \"U-464\" incident with the Icelandic trawler which confirms the Kriegsmarine account. Some background: \"U-464\" was the first of eight confirmed U-boat sinkings by Gallery's PBY squadron. Due to several botched attacks prior to this, Gallery had closed his base's Officers Club.\nDuring the era of the closed club Lieutenant Hopgood, en route to meet a convoy coming up from England, caught the \"U-464\" surfaced about from the convoy and crippled her so she couldn't submerge, but could still limp along on the surface. Hopgood expended all his depth charges on his first attack, and his single .30 caliber gun was useless against the sub's thick skin and heavy AA battery. In the messy weather the sub soon shook off our circling plane by running into a fog bank. Meantime, a British destroyer left the convoy at full speed in answer to Hoppy's radio report of his attack. Hopgood flew toward the convoy until he found the speeding destroyer, advised her how to steer, and then flew back to hunt for the U-boat again. By this time the fog had lifted a bit and he found the sub, heading for an Icelandic fishing vessel a few miles away. As Hopgood circled, the sub went alongside the little trawler and the Nazis boarded the fishing vessel, abandoned and scuttled the U-boat, and laid a course toward Germany. Hoppy duly reported all this by radio and spent the next couple of hours shuttling back and forth between the trawler and the oncoming destroyer, coaching the destroyer how to steer.\nThis was an exciting three hours in all the R.A.F. and Royal Navy operations rooms in England, as well as in ours up in Iceland. Hoppy's first electrifying messages telling that he had a cripple on his hands but couldn't finish it off had brought everybody in England to the operations rooms. For the rest of the morning Vice Admirals, Air Marshals and their staffs sat with their ears glued to the radio following the dramatic developments at sea. Hoppy's radio reports right up to the final one had been masterpieces of correct official phraseology giving a terse, clear and complete picture of all the essential details of the changing action as it occurred. Finally he came through with the big punch line that we were waiting for: \"Destroyer is alongside trawler and has taken off fifty-two prisoners.\" Then, shifting from code to plain English he continued, \"Personal message for Commander Gallery: Sank Sub\u2014open club!\"\nWe opened the club all right. We damned near blew the roof off the joint. But Coastal Command Headquarters in London were a bit puzzled over that final message, and even after the Air Commodore, Iceland, explained it to them, they considered it \"most extraordinary.\"\nhttp://www.vpnavy.org/vp73_1940.html (search page for \"Hopgood\") confirms Gallery's account. For his actions that day, Lt. Hopgood was awarded the US Navy Cross.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59778", "revid": "12866484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59778", "title": "German submarine U-487", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-487\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down 31 December 1941 by Germaniawerft in Kiel as yard number 556. She was launched on 17 October 1942 and commissioned on 21 December 1942 with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Helmut Metz in command. Metz commanded the boat for its entire career.\nHer service began with training as part of the 4th U-boat Flotilla. She then joined the 12th flotilla for operations.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-487\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-487\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-487\" conducted two patrols. As a supply boat, she avoided combat.\nFirst patrol.\nThe U-boat departed Kiel on 27 March 1943, heading for the mid-Atlantic. She arrived in Bordeaux, in occupied France on 12 May.\nSecond patrol and loss.\nHer second patrol saw her leave Bordeaux on 15 June 1943. On 13 July, \"U-487\" was attacked in the central Atlantic by five United States Navy Grumman TBF Avengers and Grumman F4F Wildcats from the escort carrier . The U-boat's crew were taken by surprise, so much so that sunbathers were seen on the casing. One Wildcat was shot down, but 31 men were killed and the U-boat sunk. The 33 survivors were taken prisoner on board .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59779", "revid": "12866484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59779", "title": "German submarine U-488", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-488\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nIts keel was laid down on 3 January 1942 by Germaniawerft in Kiel as yard number 557. It was launched on 17 October 1942 and commissioned on 1 February 1943, with \"Leutnant zur See\" Erwin Bartke in command. Bartke was promoted to \"Oberleutnant zur See\" by February 1944; he was relieved by \"Oblt.z.S.\" Bruno Studt.\nThe boat's service began with training under the 4th U-boat Flotilla and culminated with the 12th flotilla for operations.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-488\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-488\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-488\" conducted three patrols. As a supply boat, it avoided combat.\nFirst patrol.\n\"U-488\"'s first patrol commenced when it left Kiel on 18 May 1943. It cleared the British Isles, sailing through the gap between the Faroe Islands and Iceland and out into the central Atlantic. On the return journey, it passed to the north-west of the Azores and reached Bordeaux in occupied France on 10 July 1943.\nSecond patrol.\nIt was attacked on its second patrol on 12 October 1943 by two Avengers from the escort carrier . The aircraft claimed a sinking, but \"U-488\" was able to continue its mission.\nOn 15 October, \"Maschinenmaat\" Karl Bergmann died of an illness. On 25 November, \"Matrosenobergefreiter\" Heinz Heinlein fell overboard. He was rescued, but died of heart failure shortly afterwards.\nThe U-boat returned to Bordeaux on 12 December 1943.\nThird patrol and loss.\nThe boat departed Bordeaux for the last time on 22 April 1944. \"U-488\" was sunk with all hands (64 dead) on the 26th in the mid-Atlantic west of Cape Verde by depth charges from the American destroyer escorts , , and .\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-488\" took part in one wolfpack, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59780", "revid": "12866484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59780", "title": "German submarine U-489", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-489\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\") of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 28 January 1942, by Germaniawerft of Kiel as yard number 558. She was launched on 24 December 1942 and commissioned on 8 March 1943, with \"Leutnant zur See\" Adalbert Schmandt in command. He remained in command throughout the boat's short career.\nThe U-boat's service life commenced with the 4th U-boat Flotilla from 8 March until 31 July 1943 for training. She then served, for operations, with the 12th flotilla.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-489\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-489\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-489\"'s only patrol began with her departure from Kiel on 22 July 1943. She headed for the Atlantic by way of the so-called Faeroes Gap between Iceland and the Faroe Islands, north of the British Isles.\nShe was attacked by a PBY Catalina flying boat of No. 190 Squadron RAF on 3 August. During the action, the 'Cat' was hit twice and retired. Her crew were obliged to jettison depth charges and on their return, found the rudder cables almost severed. Her place was taken by a Lockheed Hudson of 269 Squadron, which succeeded in damaging \"U-489\".\nAlthough as a supply boat, she avoided combat, she was lost on her first patrol when on 4 August, she was attacked by a Canadian Sunderland flying boat of No. 423 Squadron RCAF, south-east of Iceland. The Sunderland was shot down, five of the eleven man crew were killed; \"U-489\" was sunk. 53 of her crew escaped. All the survivors were picked up by the destroyers and ; they had both observed the attack.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59781", "revid": "47043792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59781", "title": "German submarine U-459", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-459\" was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (\"Milchkuh\" or 'milk cow') of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down on 22 November 1940 by Deutsche Werke in Kiel as yard number 290. The submarine was launched on 13 September 1941 and commissioned on 15 November, with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Georg von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff in command; he remained in charge until the boat was lost, receiving promotion to \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\" in the process.\nDesign.\nGerman Type XIV submarines were shortened versions of the Type IXDs they were based on. \"U-459\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-459\" was not fitted with torpedo tubes or deck guns, but had two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 guns with 3000 rounds. The boat had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperational career.\n\"U-459\" conducted six patrols, but as a supply boat, she avoided combat. The submarine initially served in the 4th U-boat Flotilla, for training, before moving on to the 10th (in April 1942) and the 12th flotillas (in November of the same year), for operations.\nFirst and second patrols.\nHaving moved from Kiel to Helgoland \"U-459\" set-off for occupied France, arriving in St. Nazaire on 15 May 1942, after traversing the north-central Atlantic. Her captain, von Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, was 48, one of the oldest skippers at the time. In April 1942 she arrived in a position approximately 500 miles north-east of Bermuda where she refuelled eleven U-Boats operating in the Caribbean and off the east coast of the USA, significantly extending their time on patrol and effect against allied shipping. \nHer second patrol began on 6 June 1942. It was at about this time that von Wilamowitz-Moellendorf was promoted to \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\".\nThird and fourth patrols.\nHer third foray saw the boat sail into the south Atlantic, as far as Namibia. She departed St. Nazaire on 18 August 1942 and returned on 4 November.\nHer fourth patrol was her longest, from 20 December 1942 to 7 March 1943, a total of 78 days. She started in St. Nazaire and finished in Bordeaux. This voyage included sailing toward Cameroon, the boat's nearest position to that country was reached on 18 January 1943. On 4 September 1942 U-459 shared rations with the survivors in a lifeboat from the sunken freighter SS California which had been torpedoed by Italian sub Reginaldo Giuliani 13 August 1942\nFifth and sixth patrols and loss.\nHer fifth patrol began when she left Bordeaux on 20 April 1943. On 30 May, she shot down a British Whitley aircraft of (10 OTU RAF) (Crew rescued). She was also attacked, on the same day, by an RAF Liberator with a total of ten depth charges. \"U-459\" was not damaged but her AA guns caused slight damage to the attacking Liberator. She returned to her French base on 30 May.\nAfter departing Bordeaux on 22 July 1943, \"U-459\" was attacked on 24 July near Cape Ortegal, Spain, by two British Wellington aircraft of No. 172 Squadron RAF. The boat shot down one of the Wellingtons (5 Killed In Action, 1 survived) but 18 submarine crewmen were killed during the action. \"U-459\" was crippled when a Wellington of No. 547 Squadron RAF, damaged by flak, crashed into the starboard side of the boat. The damage was so severe that she had to be scuttled. The rear gunner of the Wellington, Sergeant A. A. Turner, was the only survivor of the aircraft. Norman Franks wrote that Commander von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff was seen on the bridge, saluting his crew before disappearing into the conning tower hatch to complete the scuttling. He seemingly made no attempt to escape, going down with his command. The 41 survivors of the crew were taken prisoner.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-459\" took part in one wolfpack, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59784", "revid": "1317044045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59784", "title": "Farmer in the Sky", "text": "1950 novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nFarmer In The Sky is a 1950 science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein about a teenaged boy who emigrates with his family to Jupiter's moon Ganymede, which is in the process of being terraformed. Among Heinlein's juveniles, a condensed version of the novel was published in serial form in \"Boys' Life\" magazine (August, September, October, November 1950), under the title \"Satellite Scout\". The novel was awarded a Retro Hugo in 2001.\nPassing references by the lead character to the song \"The Green Hills of Earth\" and to its author, Rhysling, have caused some to consider it part of Heinlein's \"Future History\" series. There are references to the \"Space Patrol\", the interplanetary peace-keeping organization described in \"Space Cadet\".\nPlot summary.\nIn the future, food is carefully rationed on an overcrowded Earth. Teenager William \"Bill\" Lermer lives with his widowed father, George, who decides to emigrate to the farming colony on Ganymede, one of Jupiter's moons. After George marries Molly Kenyon, the couple, Bill, and Molly's daughter Peggy embark on the 'torchship' \"Mayflower\". On the journey, Bill saves his bunkmates from asphyxiation by improvising a patch when a meteor punctures their compartment. During the trip, all the children attend class; also, to combat the boredom of the long trip, the Boy Scouts among the passengers form troops. (Because the novel was originally written to be serialized in the Boy Scout magazine \"Boys' Life\", Bill's participation in the Scouts is pervasive, mentioned at least once per chapter.)\nWhen they arrive on Ganymede, an unpleasant surprise awaits the newcomers. The arriving group is much larger than the colony wanted or can easily absorb. The soil has to be built from scratch by pulverizing boulders and lava flows, then seeding the resulting dust with carefully formulated organic material, and the rock crushers are in short supply. While some whine about the injustice of it all, Bill accepts an invitation to live with his prospective neighbors, a prosperous farmer and his large, hard-working family, to learn the needed skills, while his father signs on as an engineer in the town of Leda. Peggy, unable to adjust to the low pressure atmosphere, has to stay in a bubble in the hospital. When the Lermers are finally reunited on their own homestead, they build their house with a pressurized room for Peggy.\nOne day, a rare alignment of all of Jupiter's major moons causes a devastating moonquake. Peggy is seriously injured when her room suffers an explosive decompression. Furthermore, the machinery that maintains Ganymede's \"heat trap\" fails and the temperature starts dropping rapidly. George quickly realizes what has happened and gets his family to the safety of the town. Others do not grasp their peril soon enough and either stay in their homes or start for town too late; two-thirds of the colonists perish, either from the quake or by freezing. The Lermers consider returning to Earth, but after Peggy dies, they decide to stay and rebuild. The colony gradually recovers.\nAn expedition sets out to survey more of Ganymede. Bill goes along as the cook. While exploring, he and his friend Hank discover artifacts of an alien civilization, including a working land vehicle that has legs, like a large metal centipede. This proves fortuitous when Bill's appendix bursts. Forced to adhere to a schedule, a shuttle picks up the rest of the group and leaves without the missing pair. Hank figures out how to drive the alien vehicle and transports Bill to the next landing site. Bill is then taken to the hospital for a life-saving operation.\nUpon awakening from the operation, Bill contemplates a discussion he had with George about his future: whether to return to Earth for school or stay. He sneaks outside and looks up at the sky. When a nurse finds him and scolds him to return where he belongs, he replies, \"I am where I belong. And I'm going to stay!\"\nReception.\nGroff Conklin wrote that although \"Farmer in the Sky\" was \"conceived as a novel for 'adolescents' ... this book is also one of the best of the month's output in science fiction for adults ... an adventure story with an unusual amount of realism in its telling. It is \"not\" childish\". Boucher and McComas named \"Farmer\" \"just about the only \"mature\" science fiction novel of the year [1950]\", describing it as \"a magnificently detailed study of the technological and human problems of interplanetary colonization.\" Damon Knight found the novel \"a typical Heinlein story ... typically brilliant, thorough and readable.\" P. Schuyler Miller recommended the novel unreservedly, saying that Heinlein's \"minute attention to detail ... has never been more fascinatingly shown.\"\nSurveying Heinlein's juvenile novels, Jack Williamson noted that \"Farmer in the Sky\" \"has harsh realism for a juvenile.\" He described it as \"a novel of education\" where the protagonist \"tell[s] his own story in a relaxed conversational style.\"\nMajor themes.\nThe book takes up consciously many of the themes of the 19th century American frontier and homesteading - but without the moral stain of dispossessing the Native Americans. In particular, a character who grows the first apple tree on Ganymede and offers seeds to other colonists comes to be known as \"Johnny Appleseed\" (and saves his family from freezing by burning his precious tree).\nScientific inaccuracies.\nThe \"heat trap\", which allows humans to live on Ganymede, is a man-made implementation of the greenhouse effect, although its mechanism is never explained. This effect could be achieved in reality by releasing large quantities of super greenhouse gases, which would not require a constant power supply, and would therefore be unaffected by a disaster such as that described in the book.\nDecades after publication, it was discovered that the magnetosphere of Jupiter encloses Ganymede and the other Galilean moons in an analog of Earth's Van Allen radiation belt, subjecting their surfaces to an intense rain of ionizing radiation. The Galileo flyby in 1995 discovered that Ganymede has a magnetosphere, but the shielding effect is weak; it is believed that the surface radiation intensity would still be lethal within months.\nThe alignment of Jupiter's four major moons as described in the book can never happen in reality. The three inner Galilean satellites are in a resonance with one another such that whenever two of them are aligned, the third will always be non-aligned and quite often situated on the opposite side of Jupiter.\nThe book describes Ganymede as having about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 Earth gravity but in reality it is only about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20447.\nHeinlein also postulated that the surface of Ganymede was volcanic rock like the Moon. Subsequent discoveries have shown that Ganymede's crust is actually almost 90 percent ice or frost, covering a subsurface ocean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59785", "revid": "150280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59785", "title": "IBM System/370", "text": "Family of computers 1970\u20131990\nThe IBM System/370 (S/370) is a range of computers, from entry-level to mainframes, announced as the successors to the System/360 family on June 30, 1970. The series mostly maintains backward compatibility with the S/360, allowing an easy migration path for customers; this, plus improved performance, were the dominant themes of the product announcement.\nEarly 370 systems differed from the 360 largely in their internal circuitry, moving from the Solid Logic Technology hybrid integrated circuits containing separate transistors to more modern monolithic integrated circuits containing multiple transistors per integrated circuit, which IBM called Monolithic System Technology, or MST. The higher density packaging allowed several formerly optional features from the 360 line to be included as standard features of the machines, floating-point support for instance. The 370 also added a small number of new instructions.\nAt the time of its introduction, the development of virtual memory systems had become a major theme in the computer market, and the 370 was considered highly controversial as it lacked this feature. This was addressed in 1972 with the System/370 Advanced Function and its associated dynamic address translation (DAT) hardware. All future machines in the lineup received this option, along with several new operating systems that supported it. Smaller additions were made throughout the lifetime of the line, which led to a profusion of models that were generally referred to by the processor number. One of the last major additions to the line in 1988 were the ESA/370 extensions that allowed a machine to have multiple virtual address spaces and easily switch among them.\nThe 370 was IBM's primary large mainframe offering from the 1970s through the 1980s. In September 1990, the System/370 line was replaced with the System/390. The 390, which was based on a new ESA/390 model, expanded the multiple memory concept to include full hardware virtualization that allowed it to run multiple operating systems at the same time.\nEvolution.\nThe original System/370 line was announced on June 30, 1970, with first customer shipment of the Models 155 and 165 planned for February 1971 and April 1971 respectively. The 155 first shipped in January 1971. System/370 underwent several architectural improvements during its roughly 20-year lifetime.\nThe following features mentioned in the 11th edition of the System/370 Principles of Operation\nare either optional on S/360 but standard on S/370, introduced with S/370 or added to S/370 after announcement.\nInitial models.\nWhen the first System/370 machines, the Model 155 and the Model 165, were introduced, the System/370 architecture was described as an extension, but not a redesign, of IBM's System/360 architecture which was introduced in 1964. The System/370 architecture incorporated only a small number of changes to the System/360 architecture. These changes included:\n* MOVE LONG (MVCL);\n* COMPARE LOGICAL LONG (CLCL);\n thereby permitting operations on up to 2^24-1 bytes (16 MB), vs. the 256-byte limits on the 360's MVC and CLC;\n* SHIFT AND ROUND DECIMAL (SRP), which multiplied or divided a packed decimal value by a power of 10, rounding the result when dividing;\nThese models had core memory and did not include support for virtual storage, as they lacked a DAT (Dynamic Address Translation) box\nLogic technology.\nAll models of the System/370 used IBM's form of monolithic integrated circuits called MST (Monolithic System Technology) making them third generation computers. MST provided System/370 with four to eight times the circuit density and over ten times the reliability when compared to the previous second generation SLT technology of the System/360.\nMonolithic memory.\nOn September 23, 1970, IBM announced the Model 145, a third model of the System/370, which was the first model to feature semiconductor main memory made from monolithic integrated circuits and was scheduled for delivery in the late summer of 1971. All subsequent S/370 models used such memory.\nVirtual storage.\nIn 1972, a very significant change was made when support for virtual storage was introduced with IBM's \"System/370 Advanced Function\" announcement. IBM had initially (and controversially) chosen to exclude virtual storage from the S/370 line. The August 2, 1972 announcement included:\nVirtual storage had in fact been delivered on S/370 hardware before this announcement:\nShortly after the August 2, 1972 announcement, DAT box (address relocation hardware) upgrades for the S/370-155 and S/370-165 were quietly announced, but were available only for purchase by customers who already owned a Model 155 or 165. After installation, these models were known as the S/370-155-II and S/370-165-II. IBM wanted customers to upgrade their 155 and 165 systems to the widely sold S/370-158 and -168. These upgrades were surprisingly expensive ($200,000 and $400,000, respectively) and had long ship date lead times after being ordered by a customer; consequently, they were never popular with customers, the majority of whom leased their systems via a third-party leasing company. This led to the original S/370-155 and S/370-165 models being described as \"boat anchors\". The upgrade, required to run OS/VS1 or OS/VS2, was not cost effective for most customers by the time IBM could actually deliver and install it, so many customers were stuck with these machines running MVT until their lease ended. It was not unusual for this to be another four, five or even six years for the more unfortunate ones, and turned out to be a significant factor in the slow adoption of OS/VS2 MVS, not only by customers in general, but for many internal IBM sites as well.\nSubsequent enhancements.\nLater architectural changes primarily involved expansions in memory (central storage) \u2013 both physical memory and virtual address space \u2013 to enable larger workloads and meet client demands for more storage. This was the inevitable trend as Moore's Law eroded the unit cost of memory. As with all IBM mainframe development, preserving backward compatibility was paramount.\nDual address space.\nIn 1981, IBM added the dual-address-space facility to System/370. This allows a program to have two address spaces; Control Register 1 contains the segment table origin (STO) for the primary address space and CR7 contains the STO for the secondary address space. The processor can run in primary-space mode or secondary-space mode. When in primary-space mode, instructions and data are fetched from the primary address space. When in secondary-space mode, operands whose addresses defined to be logical are fetched from the secondary address space; it is unpredictable whether instructions will be fetched from the primary or secondary address space, so code must be mapped into both address spaces in the same address ranges in both address spaces. The program can switch between primary-space and secondary-space mode with the SET ADDRESS SPACE CONTROL instruction; there are also MOVE TO PRIMARY and MOVE TO SECONDARY instructions that copy a range of bytes from an address range in one address space to an address range in the other address space.\nAddress spaces are identified by an address-space number (ASN). The ASN contains indices into a two-level table, structured similarly to a two-level page table, with entries containing a presence bit, various fields indicating permissions granted for access to the address space, the starting address and length of the segment table for the address space, and other information. The SET SECONDARY ASN instruction makes the address space identified by a given ASN value the current secondary address space.\nExtended real addressing.\nThe initial System/370 architecture has a 24-bit limit on physical addresses, limiting physical memory to 16 MB. Page table entries have 12 bits of page frame address with 4 KB pages and 13 bits of page frame address with 2 KB pages, so combining a 12-bit page frame address with a 12-bit offset within the page or a 13-bit page frame address with an 11-bit offset within the page produces a 24-bit physical address.\nThe extended real addressing feature in System/370 raises this limit to 26 bits, increasing the physical memory limit to 64 MB. Two reserved bits in the page table entry for 4 KB pages were used to extend the page frame address. The extended real addressing is only available with address translation enabled and with 4 KB pages.\nSeries and models.\nModels sorted by date introduced (table).\nThe following table summarizes the major S/370 series and models. The second column lists the principal architecture associated with each series. Many models implemented more than one architecture; thus, 308x processors initially shipped as S/370 architecture, but later offered XA; and many processors, such as the 4381, had microcode that allowed customer selection between S/370 or XA (later, ESA) operation.\nNote also the confusing term \"System/370-compatible\", which appeared in IBM source documents to describe certain products. Outside IBM, this term would more often describe systems from Amdahl Corporation, Hitachi, and others, that could run the same S/370 software. This choice of terminology by IBM may have been a deliberate attempt to ignore the existence of those plug compatible manufacturers (PCMs), because they competed aggressively against IBM hardware dominance.\nModels grouped by Model number (detailed).\nIBM used the name System/370 to announce the following eleven (three-digit) offerings:\nSystem/370 Model 115.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 115 was announced March 13, 1973 as \"an ideal System/370 entry system for users of IBM's System/3, 1130 computing system and System/360 Models 20, 22 and 25.\"\nIt was delivered with \"a minimum of two (of IBM's newly announced) directly attached IBM 3340 disk drives.\" Up to four 3340s could be attached.\nThe CPU could be configured with 65,536 (64K) or 98,304 (96K) bytes of main memory. An optional 360/20 emulator was available.\nThe 115 was withdrawn on March 9, 1981.\nSystem/370 Model 125.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 125 was announced Oct 4, 1972.\nTwo, three or four directly attached IBM 3333 disk storage units provided \"up to 400 million bytes online.\"\nMain memory was either 98,304 (96K) or 131,072 (128K) bytes.\nThe 125 was withdrawn on March 9, 1981.\nSystem/370 Model 135.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 135 was announced Mar 8, 1971. Options for the 370/135 included a choice of four main memory sizes; IBM 1400 series (1401, 1440 and 1460) emulation was also offered.\nA \"reading device located in the Model 135 console\" allowed updates and adding features to the Model 135's microcode.\nThe 135 was withdrawn on October 16, 1979.\nSystem/370 Model 138.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 138 which was announced Jun 30, 1976 was offered with either 524,288 (512K) or 1,048,576 (1 MB) of memory. The latter was \"double the maximum capacity of the Model 135,\" which \"can be upgraded to the new computer's internal performance levels at customer locations.\"\nThe 138 was withdrawn on November 1, 1983.\nSystem/370 Model 145.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 145 was announced Sep 23, 1970, three months after the 155 and 165 models. It first shipped in June 1971.\nThe first System/370 to use monolithic main memory, the Model 145 was offered in six memory sizes. A portion of the main memory, the \"Reloadable Control Storage\" (RCS) was loaded from a prewritten disk cartridge containing microcode to implement, for example, all needed instructions, I/O channels, and optional instructions to enable the system to emulate earlier IBM machines.\nThe 145 was withdrawn on October 16, 1979.\nSystem/370 Model 148.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 148 had the same announcement and withdrawal dates as the Model 138.\nAs with the option to field-upgrade a 135, a 370/145 could be field-upgraded \"at customer locations\" to 148-level performance. The upgraded 135 and 145 systems were \"designated the Models 135-3 and 145-3.\"\nSystem/370 Model 155.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 155 and the Model 165 were announced Jun 30, 1970, the first of the 370s introduced. Neither had a DAT box; they were limited to running the same non-virtual-memory operating systems available for the System/360. The 155 first shipped in January 1971.\nThe \"OS/DOS\" (DOS/360 programs under OS/360), \"1401/1440/1460 and 1410/7010\" and \"7070/7074\" compatibility features were included, and the supporting integrated emulator programs could operate concurrently with standard System/370 workloads.\nIn August 1972 IBM announced, as a field upgrade only, the IBM System/370 Model 155 II, which added a DAT box.\nBoth the 155 and the 165 were withdrawn on December 23, 1977.\nSystem/370 Model 158.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 158 and the 370/168 were announced Aug 2, 1972.\nIt included dynamic address translation (DAT) hardware, a prerequisite for the new virtual memory operating systems (DOS/VS, OS/VS1, OS/VS2).\nA tightly coupled multiprocessor (MP) model was available, as was the ability to loosely couple this system to another 360 or 370 via an optional channel-to-channel adapter.\nThe 158 and 168 were withdrawn on September 15, 1980.\nSystem/370 Model 165.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 165 was described by IBM as \"more powerful\" compared to the \"medium-scale\" 370/155. It first shipped in April 1971.\nCompatibility features included emulation for 7070/7074, 7080, and 709/7090/7094/7094 II.\nSome have described the 360/85's use of microcoded vs hardwired as a bridge to the 370/165.\nIn August 1972 IBM announced, as a field upgrade only, the IBM System/370 Model 165 II which added a DAT box.\nThe 165 was withdrawn on December 23, 1977.\nSystem/370 Model 168.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 168 included \"up to eight megabytes\" of main memory, double the maximum of 4 megabytes on the \n370/158.\nIt included dynamic address translation (DAT) hardware, a pre-requisite for the new virtual memory operating systems.\nAlthough the 168 served as IBM's \"flagship\" system, a 1975 newsbrief said that IBM boosted the power of the 370/168 again \"in the wake of the Amdahl challenge... only 10 months after it introduced the improved 168-3 processor.\"\nThe 370/168 was not withdrawn until September 1980.\nSystem/370 Model 195.\nThe IBM System/370 Model 195 was announced Jun 30, 1970 and, at that time, it was \"IBM's most powerful computing system.\"\nIts introduction came about 14 months after the announcement of its direct predecessor, the 360/195. Both 195 machines were withdrawn Feb. 9, 1977.\nSystem/370-compatible.\nBeginning in 1977, IBM began to introduce new systems, using the description \"A compatible member of the System/370 family.\"\nIBM 303X.\nThe first of the initial high end machines, IBM's 3033, was announced March 25, 1977 and was delivered the following March, at which time a multiprocessor version of the 3033 was announced. IBM described it as \"The Big One.\"\nIBM noted about the 3033, looking back, that \"When it was rolled out on March 25, 1977, the 3033 eclipsed the internal operating speed of the company's previous flagship the System/370 Model 168-3 ...\"\nThe IBM 3031 and IBM 3032 were announced Oct. 7, 1977 and withdrawn Feb. 8, 1985.\nIBM 308X.\nThree systems comprised the next series of high end machines, IBM's 308X systems:\nDespite the numbering, the least powerful was the 3083, which could be field-upgraded to a 3081; the 3084 was the top of the line.\nThese models introduced IBM's Extended Architecture's 31-bit address capability and a set of backward compatible MVS/Extended Architecture (MVS/XA) software replacing previous products and part of OS/VS2 R3.8:\nAll three 308x systems were withdrawn on August 4, 1987.\nIBM 3090.\nThe next series of high-end machines, the IBM 3090, began with models 200 and 400. They were announced Feb. 12, 1985, and were configured with two or four CPUs respectively. IBM subsequently announced models 120, 150, 180, 300, 500 and 600 with lower, intermediate and higher capacities; the first digit of the model number gives the number of central processors.\nStarting with the E models, and continuing with the J and S models, IBM offered Enterprise Systems Architecture/370 (ESA/370), Processor Resource/System Manager (PR/SM) and a set of backward compatible MVS/Enterprise System Architecture (MVS/ESA) software replacing previous products:\nIBM's offering of an optional vector facility (VF) extension for the 3090 came at a time when Vector processing/Array processing suggested names like Cray and Control Data Corporation (CDC).\nThe 200 and 400 were withdrawn on May 5, 1989.\nIBM 4300.\nThe first pair of IBM 4300 processors were Mid/Low end systems announced Jan 30, 1979 as \"compact (and).. compatible with System/370.\"\nThe 4331 was subsequently withdrawn on November 18, 1981, and the 4341 on February 11, 1986.\nOther models were the 4321, 4361 and 4381.\nThe 4361 has \"Programmable Power-Off -- enables the user to turn off the processor under program control\"; \"Unit power off\" is (also) part of the 4381 feature list.\nIBM offered many Model Groups and models of the 4300 family, ranging from the entry level 4331 to the 4381, described as \"one of the most powerful and versatile intermediate system processors ever produced by IBM.\"\nThe 4381 Model Group 3 was dual-CPU.\nIBM 9370.\nThis low-end system, announced October 7, 1986, was \"designed to satisfy the computing requirements of IBM customers who value System/370 affinity\" and \"small enough and quiet enough to operate in an office environment.\"\nIBM also noted its sensitivity to \"entry software prices, substantial reductions in support and training requirements, and modest power consumption and maintenance costs.\"\nFurthermore, it stated its awareness of the needs of small-to-medium size businesses to be able to respond, as \"computing requirements grow,\" adding that \"the IBM 9370 system can be easily expanded by adding additional features and racks to accommodate...\"\nThis came at a time when Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) and its VAX systems were strong competitors in both hardware and software; the media of the day carried IBM's alleged \"VAX Killer\" phrase, albeit often skeptically.\nClones.\nIn the 360 era, a number of manufacturers had already standardized upon the IBM/360 instruction set and, to a degree, 360 architecture. Notable computer makers included Univac with the UNIVAC 9000 series, RCA with the RCA Spectra 70 series, English Electric with the English Electric System 4, and the Soviet ES EVM. These computers were not perfectly compatible, nor (except for the Russian efforts) were they intended to be.\nThat changed in the 1970s with the introduction of the IBM/370 and Gene Amdahl's launch of his own company. About the same time, Japanese giants began eyeing the lucrative mainframe market both at home and abroad. One Japanese consortium focused upon IBM and two others from the BUNCH (Burroughs/Univac/NCR/Control Data/Honeywell) group of IBM's competitors. The latter efforts were abandoned and eventually all Japanese efforts focused on the IBM mainframe lines.\nSome of the era's clones included:\nArchitecture details.\nIBM documentation numbers the bits from high order to low order; the most significant (leftmost) bit is designated as bit number 0.\nS/370 also refers to a computer system architecture specification, and is a direct and mostly backward compatible evolution of the System/360 architecture from which it retains most aspects. This specification does not make any assumptions on the implementation itself, but rather describes the interfaces and the expected behavior of an implementation. The architecture describes mandatory interfaces that must be available on all implementations and optional interfaces which may or may not be implemented.\nSome of the aspects of this architecture are:\nSome of the optional features are:\nIBM took great care to ensure that changes to the architecture would remain compatible for unprivileged (problem state) programs; some new interfaces did not break the initial interface contract for privileged (supervisor mode) programs. Some examples are\nA feature to enhance performance for the MVS/370 operating systems\nA feature to enhance performance for the VM operating systems\nOther changes were compatible only for unprivileged programs, although the changes for privileged programs were of limited scope and well defined. Some examples are:\nA feature to enhance performance for the DOS/VSE operating system.\nA feature to provide a new I/O interface and to support 31-bit virtual and physical addressing\nGreat care was taken in order to ensure that further modifications to the architecture would remain compatible, at least as far as non-privileged programs were concerned. This philosophy predates the definition of the S/370 architecture and started with the S/360 architecture. If certain rules are adhered to, a program written for this architecture will run with the intended results on the successors of this architecture.\nSuch an example is that the S/370 architecture specifies that the 64-bit PSW register bit number 32 has to be set to 0 and that doing otherwise leads to an exception. Subsequently, when the S/370-XA architecture was defined, it was stated that this bit would indicate whether the program was a program expecting a 24-bit address architecture or 31-bit address architecture. Thus, most programs that ran on the 24-bit architecture can still run on 31-bit systems; the 64-bit z/Architecture has an additional mode bit for 64-bit addresses, so that those programs, and programs that ran on the 31-bit architecture, can still run on 64-bit systems.\nHowever, not all of the interfaces can remain compatible. Emphasis was put on having non control programs (called problem state programs) remain compatible. Thus, operating systems have to be ported to the new architecture because the control interfaces can (and were) redefined in an incompatible way. For example, the I/O interface was redesigned in S/370-XA making S/370 program issuing I/O operations unusable as-is.\nS/370 replacement.\nIBM replaced the System/370 line with the System/390 in the 1990s, and similarly extended the architecture from ESA/370 to ESA/390. This was a minor architectural change, and was upwards compatible.\nIn 2000, the System/390 was replaced with the zSeries (now called IBM Z). The zSeries mainframes introduced the 64-bit z/Architecture, the most significant design improvement since the 31-bit transition. All have retained essential backward compatibility with the original S/360 architecture and instruction set.\nGCC and Linux on the S/370.\nThe GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) had a back end for S/370, but it became obsolete over time and was finally replaced with the S/390 backend. Although the S/370 and S/390 instruction sets are essentially the same (and have been consistent since the introduction of the S/360), GCC operability on older systems has been abandoned. GCC currently works on machines that have the full instruction set of System/390 Generation 5 (G5), the hardware platform for the initial release of Linux/390. However, a separately maintained version of GCC 3.2.3 that works for the S/370 is available, known as GCCMVS.\nI/O evolutions.\nI/O evolution from original S/360 to S/370.\nThe block multiplexer channel, previously available only on the 360/85 and 360/195, was a standard part of the architecture. For compatibility it could operate as a selector channel. Block multiplexer channels were available in single byte (1.5 MB/s) and double byte (3.0 MB/s) versions.\nI/O evolution since original S/370.\nAs part of the DAT announcement, IBM upgraded channels to have Indirect Data Address Lists (IDALs). a form of I/O MMU.\nData streaming channels had a speed of 3.0 MB/s over a single byte interface, later upgraded to 4.5 MB/s.\nChannel set switching allowed one processor in a multiprocessor configuration to take over the I/O workload from the other processor if it failed or was taken offline for maintenance. \nSystem/370-XA introduced a channel subsystem that performed I/O queuing previously done by the operating system.\nThe System/390 introduced the ESCON channel, an optical fiber, half-duplex, serial channel with a maximum distance of 43 kilometers. Originally operating at 10 Mbyte/s, it was subsequently increased to 17 Mbyte/s.\nSubsequently, FICON became the standard IBM mainframe channel; FIbre CONnection (FICON) is the IBM proprietary name for the ANSI FC-SB-3 Single-Byte Command Code Sets-3 Mapping Protocol for Fibre Channel (FC) protocol used to map both IBM's antecedent (either ESCON or parallel Bus and Tag) channel-to-control-unit cabling infrastructure and protocol onto standard FC services and infrastructure at data rates up to 16 Gigabits/sec at distances up to 100\u00a0km. Fibre Channel Protocol (FCP) allows attaching SCSI devices using the same infrastructure as FICON.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59786", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59786", "title": "Friday (novel)", "text": "1982 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nFriday is a 1982 science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It is the story of a female \"artificial person\", the eponymous Friday, genetically engineered to be stronger, faster, smarter, and generally better than normal humans. Artificial humans are widely resented, and much of the story deals with Friday's struggle both against prejudice and to conceal her enhanced attributes from other humans. The story is set in a Balkanized 21st century, in which the nations of the North American continent have been split up into a number of smaller states.\n\"Friday\" was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel and the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1983.\nPlot summary.\nThe book's narrator is Friday Jones (often going under cover name Marjorie Baldwin and using both surnames somewhat interchangeably). Friday is a genetically engineered human (known as an Artificial Person or AP) in many ways mentally and physically superior to ordinary humans. There is great prejudice against APs so Friday conceals her nature.\nFriday is employed as a highly self-sufficient \"combat courier in a quasi-military organization\", traveling across the globe and to some of the near-Earth space colonies. She is returning from her latest mission when she is captured, tortured, raped and interrogated by an enemy group. She is rescued by her own people, who tell her that her highly critical mission was successful as her captors failed to find the data she was carrying in her body.\nAfter recovering from the ordeal, Friday takes a vacation to New Zealand to visit her group family, composed of several husbands and wives and many children. In an argument over racism, Friday reveals to her family that she is an AP, and they promptly divorce her.\nOn the way back to her company's headquarters, she meets and befriends a married couple, the Tormeys, and their extra-legal co-husband, Georges. Friday is their house-guest in British Canada (a country in the Balkanized North America) when a worldwide emergency known as Red Thursday occurs. Various groups claim credit for the assassinations and sabotage, but Friday later learns that it is the result of a struggle between rival factions within the ultra-powerful Shipstone corporation.\nWith British Canada under martial law, Friday kills a policeman who tries to arrest her and Georges as non-citizens to be interned. The two become fugitives, and Friday travels through the California Confederacy, the Lone Star Republic (where she parts from Georges), and the Chicago Imperium as she attempts to reach her headquarters. After several adventures, she abandons her attempt to make contact with her employer and then finds that the Tormeys are not at their home. An agent of her employer tracks her down and takes her to her employer's safe house. However, Friday's boss soon dies and the organization disbands, rendering her temporarily homeless and unemployed. Her boss has left her money in trust to be used only for the purpose of relocating to an off-Earth colony of her choosing.\nLiving in Las Vegas Free State, Friday is eventually recruited for a courier job which will incidentally allow her to visit and evaluate several of the colonies she is considering as future homes. However, on an interplanetary cruise ship for her mission, she learns that agents of her new employers are watching her, and that she is a virtual prisoner on the ship. Realizing that her mission is top secret and her employers misled her about it, she fears that they will kill her when it is over. While the ship is in orbit at a rustic colony world, she escapes with the Tormeys, who have been on the run since the policeman's death and happened to be fleeing Earth on the same ship. She is helped and joined in her escape by two of the agents watching her, one of whom was in the group that raped her at the beginning of the story but is now repentant. After evading the ship's crew and the remaining agents, Friday and her friends settle in the colony to lead a quiet life as a group family.\nAllusions and references to other works.\n\"Friday\" is loosely tied to Heinlein's 1949 novella \"Gulf\", since the works share characters\u2014\"Kettle Belly\" Baldwin is Friday's boss, and Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Greene are mentioned as two of Friday's genetic progenitors. The motif of a secret superman society in \"Gulf\", however, is not mentioned in \"Friday\", where the heroine is an artificial person and is not part of a secret society; the principal reason to be secret about her artificial nature is to avoid discrimination. However, Baldwin's bequest to finance her emigration to any planet excludes Olympia, where the \"supermen\" went at some time between the two stories.\nThe Shipstone, the extrasolar colonies Fiddler's Green, Proxima and Botany Bay, and the start of the balkanization of North America are again mentioned in the 1985 \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\". It is stated that Roger and Edith Stone from \"The Rolling Stones\" are now living in Fiddler's Green. The colony named \"Botany Bay\" appears in Heinlein's juvenile \"Time for the Stars\". (There is a planet called \"Halcyon\" in \"Starman Jones\", but it is in a different star system from the one in \"Friday\".)\nLiterary significance and reception.\nThe 1982 \"Library Journal\" review said that Heinlein \"returns to an earlier style of brisk adventure mixed with polemic in the saga of special courier Friday Jones.\"\nDave Pringle reviewed \"Friday\" for \"Imagine\" magazine, and stated that \"I was prepared to like this novel\u2014advance notices and reviews have all trumpeted the fact that it is Heinlein's best in many years\u2014and indeed it moves well, but I found it left a curiously bad taste in my mouth.\"\nJohn Clute in \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" says of it (and the following \"\"): \n\u201cTwo late novels [\u2026] were hailed with some relief by Heinlein admirers despite not equalling the drive and clarity of his best work.\u201d\nCharles Stross has stated that his 2008 novel \"Saturn's Children\" is an homage to \"Friday\".\nJo Walton wrote of \"Friday\" in 2009 as \"The worst book I love\": \"It's a book about passing, about what makes you human. ... What's good about it now? The whole 'passing' bit. The cloning, the attitudes to cloning, the worry about jobs. The economy. It has an interesting future world [...] and as always with Heinlein it's immersive. [...] And it's a fun read, even if it's ultimately unsatisfying. What's wrong with it is that it doesn't have a plot. [...] Heinlein's ability to write a sentence that makes you want to read the next sentence remains unparalleled. But the book as a whole is almost like \"Dhalgren\". Every sentence and every paragraph and page and chapter lead on to the next, but it's just one thing after another, there's no real connection going on. It has no plot, it's a set of incidents that look as if they're going somewhere and don't ever resolve, just stop. [...] It sets things up that it never invokes, most notably Olympia and the connections back to the novella 'Gulf.'\"\nDave Langford reviewed \"Friday\" for \"White Dwarf\" #39, and stated that \"\"Friday\" has a good future background, where all-powerful 'corporate states' on the lines of IBM think nothing of nuking pockets of undue sales resistance; lots to annoy even the least committed feminist (being raped is fine, thinks heroine Friday\u2014if only the guy doesn't have bad breath); and a plotline with all the forceful thrust of overcooked spaghetti.\"\nAwards and nominations.\n\"Friday\" received nominations for the following awards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59787", "revid": "31910160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59787", "title": "Loanword", "text": "Word borrowed from a donor language and incorporated into a recipient language\nA loanword is a word at least partly assimilated from one language (the donor language) into another language (the recipient or target language), through the process of borrowing. Borrowing is a metaphorical term that is well established in the linguistic field despite its acknowledged descriptive flaws: nothing is taken away from the donor language and there is no expectation of returning anything (i.e., the loanword).\nLoanwords may be contrasted with calques, in which a word is borrowed into the recipient language by being directly translated from the donor language rather than being adopted in (an approximation of) its original form. They must also be distinguished from cognates, which are words in two or more related languages that are similar because they share an etymological origin in the ancestral language, rather than because one borrowed the word from the other.\nExamples and related terms.\nA loanword is distinguished from a calque (or loan translation), which is a word or phrase whose meaning or idiom is adopted from another language by word-for-word translation into existing words or word-forming roots of the recipient language. Loanwords, in contrast, are not translated.\nExamples of loanwords in the English language include \"caf\u00e9\" (from French , which means 'coffee'), bazaar (from Persian , which means 'market'), and kindergarten (from German , which literally means 'children's garden'). The word \"calque\" is a loanword, while the word \"loanword\" is a calque: \"calque\" comes from the French noun (\"tracing; imitation; close copy\"); while the word \"loanword\" and the phrase \"loan translation\" are translated from German nouns and ().\nLoans of multi-word phrases, such as the English use of the French term \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\", are known as adoptions, adaptations, or lexical borrowings.\nAlthough colloquial and informal register loanwords are typically spread by word-of-mouth, technical or academic loanwords tend to be first used in written language, often for scholarly, scientific, or literary purposes.\nThe terms substrate and superstrate are often used when two languages interact. However, the meaning of these terms is reasonably well-defined only in second language acquisition or language replacement events, when the native speakers of a certain source language (the substrate) are somehow compelled to abandon it for another target language (the superstrate).\nA Wanderwort is a word that has been borrowed across a wide range of languages remote from its original source; an example is the word \"tea\", which originated in Hokkien but has been borrowed into languages all over the world. For a sufficiently old Wanderwort, it may become difficult or impossible to determine in what language it actually originated.\nMost of the technical vocabulary of classical music (such as concerto, allegro, tempo, aria, opera, and soprano) is borrowed from Italian, and that of ballet from French. Much of the terminology of the sport of fencing also comes from French. Many loanwords come from prepared food, drink, fruits, vegetables, seafood and more from languages around the world. In particular, many come from French cuisine (cr\u00eape, cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e), Italian (pasta, linguine, pizza, espresso), and Chinese (dim sum, chow mein, wonton).\nLinguistic classification.\nLoanwords are adapted from one language to another in a variety of ways.\nThe studies by Werner Betz (1971, 1901), Einar Haugen (1958, also 1956), and Uriel Weinreich (1963) are regarded as the classical theoretical works on loan influence. The basic theoretical statements all take Betz's nomenclature as their starting point. Duckworth (1977) enlarges Betz's scheme by the type \"partial substitution\" and supplements the system with English terms. A schematic illustration of these classifications is given below.\nThe phrase \"foreign word\" used in the image below is a mistranslation of the German \"Fremdwort\", which refers to loanwords whose pronunciation, spelling, inflection or gender have not been adapted to the new language such that they no longer seem foreign. Such a separation of loanwords into two distinct categories is not used by linguists in English in talking about any language. Basing such a separation mainly on spelling is (or, in fact, was) not common except amongst German linguists, and only when talking about German and sometimes other languages that tend to adapt foreign spellings, which is rare in English unless the word has been widely used for a long time.\nAccording to the linguist Suzanne Kemmer, the expression \"foreign word\" can be defined as follows in English: \"[W]hen most speakers do not know the word and if they hear it think it is from another language, the word can be called a foreign word. There are many foreign words and phrases used in English such as bon vivant (French), mutatis mutandis (Latin), and Schadenfreude (German).\" This is not how the term is used in this illustration:\nOn the basis of an importation-substitution distinction, Haugen (1950: 214f.) distinguishes three basic groups of borrowings: \"(1) \"Loanwords\" show morphemic importation without substitution... (2) \"Loanblends\" show morphemic substitution as well as importation... (3) \"Loanshifts\" show morphemic substitution without importation\". Haugen later refined (1956) his model in a review of Gneuss's (1955) book on Old English loan coinages, whose classification, in turn, is the one by Betz (1949) again.\nWeinreich (1953: 47ff.) differentiates between two mechanisms of lexical interference, namely those initiated by simple words and those initiated by compound words and phrases. Weinreich (1953: 47) defines \"simple words\" \"from the point of view of the bilinguals who perform the transfer, rather than that of the descriptive linguist. Accordingly, the category 'simple' words also includes compounds that are transferred in unanalysed form\". After this general classification, Weinreich then resorts to Betz's (1949) terminology.\nIn English.\nThe English language has borrowed many words from other cultures or languages. For examples, see Lists of English words by country or language of origin and Anglicisation.\nSome English loanwords remain relatively faithful to the original phonology even though a particular phoneme might not exist or have contrastive status in English. For example, the Hawaiian word \"\u02bba\u02bb\u0101\" is used by geologists to specify lava that is thick, chunky, and rough. The Hawaiian spelling indicates the two glottal stops in the word, but the English pronunciation, , contains at most one. The English spelling usually removes the \u02bbokina and macron diacritics.\nMost English affixes, such as \"un-\", \"-ing\", and \"-ly\", were used in Old English. However, a few English affixes are borrowed. For example, the verbal suffix \"-ize\" (American English) or \"ise\" (British English) comes from Greek -\u03b9\u03b6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd (\"-izein\") through Latin \"-izare\".\nPronunciation often differs from the original language, occasionally dramatically, especially when dealing with place names. This often leads to divergence when many speakers anglicize pronunciations as other speakers try to maintain the way the name would sound in the original language, as in the pronunciation of Louisville.\nLanguages other than English.\nTransmission in the Ottoman Empire.\nDuring more than 600 years of the Ottoman Empire, the literary and administrative language of the empire was Turkish, with many Persian and Arabic loanwords, called Ottoman Turkish, considerably differing from the everyday spoken Turkish of the time. Many such words were adopted by other languages of the empire, such as Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Greek, Hungarian, Ladino, Macedonian, Montenegrin and Serbian. After the empire fell after World War I and the Republic of Turkey was founded, the Turkish language underwent an extensive language reform led by the newly founded Turkish Language Association, during which many adopted words were replaced with new formations derived from Turkic roots. That was part of the ongoing cultural reform of the time, in turn a part in the broader framework of Atat\u00fcrk's Reforms, which also included the introduction of the new Turkish alphabet.\nTurkish also has taken many words from French, such as \"pantolon\" for \"trousers\" (from French \"pantalon\") and \"komik\" for \"funny\" (from French \"comique\"), most of them pronounced very similarly.\nWord usage in modern Turkey has acquired a political tinge: right-wing publications tend to use more Arabic-originated words, left-wing publications use more words adopted from Indo-European languages such as Persian and French, while centrist publications use more native Turkish root words.\nDutch words in Indonesian.\nAlmost 350 years of Dutch presence in what is now Indonesia have left significant linguistic traces. Though very few Indonesians have a fluent knowledge of Dutch, the Indonesian language inherited many words from Dutch, both in words for everyday life (e.g., \"buncis\" from Dutch \"boontjes\" for (green) beans) and as well in administrative, scientific or technological terminology (e.g., \"kantor\" from Dutch \"kantoor\" for office). The Professor of Indonesian Literature at Leiden University, and of Comparative Literature at UCR, argues that roughly 20% of Indonesian words can be traced back to Dutch words.\nDutch words in Russian.\nIn the late 17th century, the Dutch Republic had a leading position in shipbuilding. Czar Peter the Great, eager to improve his navy, studied shipbuilding in Zaandam and Amsterdam. Many Dutch naval terms have been incorporated in the Russian vocabulary, such as \u0431\u0440\u0430\u0301\u043c\u0441\u0435\u043b\u044c (\"br\u00e1msel\u02b9\") from Dutch for the topgallant sail, \u0434\u043e\u043c\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0301\u0442 (\"domkr\u00e1t\") from Dutch \"dommekracht\" for jack, and \u043c\u0430\u0442\u0440\u043e\u0301\u0441 (\"matr\u00f3s\") from Dutch \"matroos\" for sailor.\nRomance languages.\nA large percentage of the lexicon of Romance languages, themselves descended from Vulgar Latin, consists of loanwords (later learned or scholarly borrowings) from Latin. These words can be distinguished by lack of typical sound changes and other transformations found in descended words, or by meanings taken directly from Classical or Ecclesiastical Latin that did not evolve or change over time as expected; in addition, there are also semi-learned terms which were adapted partially to the Romance language's character. Latin borrowings can be known by several names in Romance languages: in French, for example, they are usually referred to as , in Spanish as , and in Italian as .\nLatin is usually the most common source of loanwords in these languages, such as in Italian, Spanish, French, Portuguese, etc., and in some cases the total number of loans may even outnumber inherited terms (although the learned borrowings are less often used in common speech, with the most common vocabulary being of inherited, orally transmitted origin from Vulgar Latin). This has led to many cases of etymological doublets in these languages.\nFor most Romance languages, these loans were initiated by scholars, clergy, or other learned people and occurred in medieval times, peaking in the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance era- in Italian, the 14th century had the highest number of loans. In the case of Romanian, the language underwent a \"re-Latinization\" process later than the others (see Romanian lexis, ), in the 18th and 19th centuries, partially using French and Italian words (many of these themselves being earlier borrowings from Latin) as intermediaries, in an effort to modernize the language, often adding concepts that did not exist until then, or replacing words of other origins. These common borrowings and features also essentially serve to raise mutual intelligibility of the Romance languages, particularly in academic/scholarly, literary, technical, and scientific domains. Many of these same words are also found in English (through its numerous borrowings from Latin and French) and other European languages.\nIn addition to Latin loanwords, many words of Ancient Greek origin were also borrowed into Romance languages, often in part through scholarly Latin intermediates, and these also often pertained to academic, scientific, literary, and technical topics. Furthermore, to a lesser extent, Romance languages borrowed from a variety of other languages; in particular English has become an important source in more recent times. The study of the origin of these words and their function and context within the language can illuminate some important aspects and characteristics of the language, and it can reveal insights on the phenomenon of lexical borrowing in linguistics as a method of enriching a language.\nCultural aspects.\nAccording to Hans Henrich Hock and Brian Joseph, \"languages and dialects ... do not exist in a vacuum\": there is always linguistic contact between groups. The contact influences what loanwords are integrated into the lexicon and which certain words are chosen over others.\nLeaps in meaning.\nIn some cases, the original meaning shifts considerably through unexpected logical leaps, creating false friends. The English word \"Viking\" became Japanese \u30d0\u30a4\u30ad\u30f3\u30b0 (), meaning \"buffet\", because the first restaurant in Japan to offer buffet-style meals, inspired by the Nordic sm\u00f6rg\u00e5sbord, was opened in 1958 by the Imperial Hotel under the name \"Viking\". The German word \"Kachel\", meaning \"tile\", became the Dutch word \"kachel\" meaning \"stove\", as a shortening of \"kacheloven\", from German \"Kachelofen\", a cocklestove. The Indonesian word primarily means \"spandex clothing\", \"inner bolero\", or \"detachable sleeve\", while its French etymon means \"cuff\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59788", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59788", "title": "Crystal gazing", "text": "Method for seeing visions by gazing at a crystal\nCrystal gazing or crystallomancy is a method for seeing visions achieved through trance induction by means of gazing at a crystal, commonly in the form of a crystal ball. Traditionally, it has been seen as a form of divination or scrying, with visions of the future and of the divine, though research into the content of crystal-visions suggest the visions are related to the expectations and thoughts of the seer.\nMethods and materials.\nThe term crystal gazing denotes several different forms of a variety of objects, and there are several schools of thought as to the sources of the visions seen in the crystal gazing trance. Crystal gazing may be used by practitioners\u2014sometimes called \"readers\" or \"seers\"\u2014for a variety of purposes, including to predict distant or future events, to give character analyses, to tell fortunes, or to help a client make choices about current situations and problems.\nWith respect to the tool or object used to induce the crystal-gazer's trance, this can be achieved with any shiny object, including a crystalline gemstone or a convex mirror\u2014but in common practice, a crystal ball is most often used. The size of ball preferred varies greatly among those who practice crystallomancy. Some gazers use a \"palm ball\" of a few inches in diameter that is held in the hand; others prefer a larger ball mounted on a stand. The stereotypical image of a Romani woman wearing a headscarf and telling fortunes for her clients by means of a very large crystal ball is widely depicted in the media and can be found in hundreds of popular books, advertising pages, and films of the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries. The pervasiveness of this image may have led to the increased use of fairly large crystal balls by those who can afford them.\nBooks of instruction in the art of crystal gazing often suggest that the ball used should be perfectly spherical (that is, without a flat bottom) and should be supported in a wooden or metal stand. If made of glass (e.g. lead crystal), it should be free from air bubbles but may be colored. If carved from natural crystalline stone (such as quartz, beryl, calcite, obsidian, or amethyst), it may display the natural coloring and structure of the mineral from which it was fashioned. Some authors advise students to place a sigil, seal, or talismanic emblem beneath a clear sphere, but most do not. Most authors suggest that the work of crystal gazing should be undertaken in a dimly-lit and quiet room, so as to foster visions and more easily allow the onset of a trance state.\nSome practitioners claim that crystal gazing engenders visionary experiences and preternatural and/or supernatural insight, while other practitioners and researchers assert that the visions arise from the subconscious mind of the crystal gazer. Some authors note that the two positions are not mutually incompatible, and that the possibility of showing the gazer's subconscious mind does not preclude the possibility of seeing the future or other supernatural insight.\nResearch.\nCrystal gazing has been an active topic of research. Organisations like the Society for Psychical Research has published research on the topic. While there is no doubt that many people see visions in crystal balls, there is no scientific evidence to suggest that visions have any clairvoyant content. The psychologists Leonard Zusne, Warren H. Jones in their book \"Anomalistic Psychology: A Study of Magical Thinking\" (1989) have written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Morton Prince (1898, 1922) was an early investigator of crystal gazing and one of the few to ever subject it to scientific scrutiny. He found that the images may be forgotten memory images, that with susceptible subjects the crystal ball could be dispensed with, and that scrying seemed to occur against a background of psychopathology.\nThe psychologist Millais Culpin wrote that crystal gazing allows a form of self-hypnosis with fantasies and memories from the unconscious of the subject appearing as visions in the crystal. Analysis of the content suggest they are a kind of hallucination that visualizes things in memory or of expectations, for example, a subject who was told to expect to see soldiers, saw exactly this when gazing in a crystal ball. The subject had previously experienced hallucinations when looking at reflective surfaces, something which tends to be true of most people who experience visions when gazing at crystals.\nResearcher Edmund Parish believed that crystal-visions were experienced in a state of full consciousness while others think it requires a trance-like state.\nStage magic.\nSome stage magicians use a crystal ball as a prop and crystallomancy as a line of patter in the performance of mentalism effects. This type of presentation is sometimes referred to as a \"C.G. act\"\u2014\"C.G.\" standing for \"crystal gazing\".\nPerhaps the most famous expositor of the C.G. act during the 20th century was Alexander The Crystal Seer, billed as \"The Man Who Knows\". Another stage magician and mentalist who was also a crystal gazer was Julius Zancig, but he did not perform a C.G. act in public\u2014rather, he used the crystal ball in his work as a spiritual counsellor for private clients.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59789", "revid": "38848426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59789", "title": "Derek Parfit", "text": "British philosopher (1942\u20132017)\nDerek Antony Parfit (; 11 December 1942 \u2013 2 January 2017) was a British philosopher who specialised in personal identity, rationality, and ethics. He is widely considered one of the most important and influential moral philosophers of the late 20th and early 21st centuries.\nParfit rose to prominence in 1971 with the publication of his first paper, \"Personal Identity\". His first book, \"Reasons and Persons\" (1984), has been described as the most significant work of moral philosophy since the 1800s. His second book, \"On What Matters\" (2011), was widely circulated and discussed for many years before its publication.\nFor his entire academic career, Parfit worked at the University of Oxford, where he was an Emeritus Senior Research Fellow at All Souls College at the time of his death. He was also a visiting professor of philosophy at Harvard University, New York University, and Rutgers University. He was awarded the 2014 Rolf Schock Prize \"for his groundbreaking contributions concerning personal identity, regard for future generations, and analysis of the structure of moral theories.\"\nEarly life and education.\nParfit was born in 1942 in Chengdu, China, the son of Jessie (n\u00e9e Browne) and Norman Parfit, medical doctors who had moved to Western China to teach preventive medicine in missionary hospitals. The family returned to the United Kingdom about a year after Parfit was born, settling in Oxford. Parfit was educated at the Dragon School and Eton College, where he was nearly always at the top of the regular rankings in every subject except mathematics. From an early age, he endeavoured to become a poet, but he gave up poetry towards the end of his adolescence.\nHe then studied modern history at Balliol College, Oxford, graduating in 1964. In 1965\u201366, he was a Harkness Fellow at Columbia University and Harvard University. He abandoned historical studies for philosophy during the fellowship.\nCareer.\nParfit returned to Oxford to become a fellow of All Souls College. He held this position until age 67, at which point the university's policy mandates retirement. He remained a regular visiting professor at Harvard, New York University, and Rutgers.\nEthics and rationality.\n\"Reasons and Persons\".\nIn \"Reasons and Persons\", Parfit suggested that nonreligious ethics is a young and fertile field of inquiry. He asked questions about which actions are right or wrong and shied away from meta-ethics, which is more concerned with logic and language.\nIn Part I of \"Reasons and Persons\" Parfit discussed self-defeating moral theories, namely the self-interest theory of rationality (\"S\") and two ethical frameworks: common-sense morality and consequentialism. He posited that self-interest has been dominant in Western culture for over two millennia, often making bedfellows with religious doctrine, which united self-interest and morality. Because self-interest demands that we always make self-interest our supreme rational concern and instructs us to ensure that our whole life goes as well as possible, self-interest makes temporally neutral requirements. Thus it would be irrational to act in ways that we know we would prefer later to undo.\nAs an example, it would be irrational for fourteen-year-olds to listen to loud music or get arrested for vandalism if they knew such actions would detract significantly from their future well-being and goals (such as having good hearing, a good job, or an academic career in philosophy).\nMost notably, the self-interest theory holds that it is irrational to commit any acts of self-denial or to act on desires that negatively affect our well-being. One may consider an aspiring author whose strongest desire is to write a masterpiece, but who, in doing so, suffers depression and lack of sleep. Parfit argues that it is plausible that we have such desires which conflict with our own well-being, and that it is not necessarily irrational to act to fulfill these desires.\nAside from the initial appeal to plausibility of desires that do not directly contribute to one's life going well, Parfit contrived situations where self-interest is indirectly self-defeating\u2014that is, it makes demands that it initially posits as irrational. It does not fail on its own terms, but it does recommend adoption of an alternative framework of rationality. For instance, it might be in my self-interest to become trustworthy to participate in mutually beneficial agreements, even though in maintaining the agreement I will be doing what will, other things being equal, be worse for me. In many cases self-interest instructs us precisely not to follow self-interest, thus fitting the definition of an indirectly self-defeating theory.\nParfit contended that to be indirectly individually self-defeating and directly collectively self-defeating is not fatally damaging for S. To further bury self-interest, he exploited its partial relativity, juxtaposing temporally neutral demands against agent-centred demands. The appeal to full relativity raises the question whether a theory can be consistently neutral in one sphere of actualisation but entirely partial in another. Stripped of its commonly accepted shrouds of plausibility that can be shown to be inconsistent, self-interest can be judged on its own merits. While Parfit did not offer an argument to dismiss S outright, his exposition lays self-interest bare and allows its own failings to show through. It is defensible, but the defender must bite so many bullets that they might lose their credibility in the process. Thus a new theory of rationality is necessary. Parfit offered the \"critical present aim theory\", a broad catch-all that can be formulated to accommodate any competing theory. He constructed critical present aim to exclude self-interest as our overriding rational concern and to allow the time of action to become critically important. But he left open whether it should include \"to avoid acting wrongly\" as our highest concern. Such an inclusion would pave the way for ethics. Henry Sidgwick longed for the fusion of ethics and rationality, and while Parfit admitted that many would avoid acting irrationally more ardently than acting immorally, he could not construct an argument that adequately united the two.\nWhere self-interest puts too much emphasis on the separateness of persons, consequentialism fails to recognise the importance of bonds and emotional responses that come from allowing some people privileged positions in one's life. If we were all pure do-gooders, perhaps following Sidgwick, that would not constitute the outcome that would maximise happiness. It would be better if a small percentage of the population were pure do-gooders, but others acted out of love, etc. Thus consequentialism too makes demands of agents that it initially deemed immoral; it fails not on its own terms, for it still demands the outcome that maximises total happiness, but does demand that each agent not always act as an impartial happiness promoter. Consequentialism thus needs to be revised as well.\nSelf-interest and consequentialism fail indirectly, while common-sense morality is directly collectively self-defeating. (So is self-interest, but self-interest is an \"individual\" theory.) Parfit showed, using interesting examples and borrowing from Nashian games, that it would often be better for us all if we did not put the welfare of our loved ones before all else. For example, we should care not only about our own children, but everyone's children.\n\"On What Matters\".\nIn his second book, Parfit argues for moral realism, insisting that moral questions have true and false answers. Further, he suggests that three categories of ethical theory\u2014Kantian deontology, consequentalism, and contractualism\u2014converge on the same answers to moral questions.\nIn the conclusion of the third volume, published shortly after his death, Parfit writes that the affluent have strong moral obligations to the poor:\nOne thing that greatly matters is the failure of we rich people to prevent, as we so easily could, much of the suffering and many of the early deaths of the poorest people in the world. The money that we spend on an evening\u2019s entertainment might instead save some poor person from death, blindness, or chronic and severe pain. If we believe that, in our treatment of these poorest people, we are not acting wrongly, we are like those who believed that they were justified in having slaves. \nSome of us ask how much of our wealth we rich people ought to give to these poorest people. But that question wrongly assumes that our wealth is ours to give. This wealth is legally ours. But these poorest people have much stronger moral claims to some of this wealth. We ought to transfer to these people [...] at least ten per cent of what we earn. He also concludes that responding to risks to humanity's survival is what \"matters most\", with humanity's descendants or successors having the potential to spread through the galaxy and create unprecedented good over billions of years.\nCriticism.\nIn his book \"On Human Nature\", Roger Scruton criticised Parfit's use of moral dilemmas such as the trolley problem and lifeboat ethics to support his ethical views, writing, \"These 'dilemmas' have the useful character of eliminating from the situation just about every morally relevant relationship and reducing the problem to one of arithmetic alone.\" Scruton believed that many of them are deceptive; for example, he does not believe one must be a consequentialist to believe that it is morally required to pull the switch in the trolley problem, as Parfit assumes. He instead suggests that more complex dilemmas, such as Anna Karenina's choice to leave her husband and child for Vronsky, are needed to fully express the differences between opposing ethical theories, and suggests that deontology is free of the problems that (in Scruton's view) beset Parfit's theory.\nPersonal identity.\nParfit was singular in his meticulously rigorous and almost mathematical investigations into personal identity. In some cases, he used examples seemingly inspired by \"Star Trek\" and other science fiction, such as the teletransporter, to explore our intuitions about our identity. He was a reductionist, believing that since there is no adequate criterion of personal identity, people do not exist apart from their components. Parfit argued that reality can be fully described impersonally: there need not be a determinate answer to the question \"Will I continue to exist?\" We could know all the facts about a person's continued existence and not be able to say whether the person has survived. He concluded that we are mistaken in assuming that personal identity is what matters in survival; what matters is rather \"Relation R\": psychological connectedness (namely, of memory and character) and continuity (overlapping chains of strong connectedness).\nFollowing David Hume, Parfit argued that no unique entity, such as a self, unifies a person's experiences and dispositions over time. Therefore personal identity is not \"what matters\" in survival.\nA key Parfitian question is: given the choice between surviving without psychological continuity and connectedness (Relation R) and dying but preserving R through someone else's future existence, which would you choose? Parfit argues the latter is preferable.\nParfit described his loss of belief in a separate self as liberating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My life seemed like a glass tunnel, through which I was moving faster every year, and at the end of which there was darkness. When I changed my view, the walls of my glass tunnel disappeared. I now live in the open air. There is still a difference between my life and the lives of other people. But the difference is less. Other people are closer. I am less concerned about the rest of my own life, and more concerned about the lives of others.\nCriticism of personal identity view.\nFellow reductionist Mark Johnston of Princeton rejects Parfit's constitutive notion of identity with what he calls an \"Argument from Above\". Johnston maintains, \"Even if the lower-level facts [that make up identity] do not in themselves matter, the higher-level fact may matter. If it does, the lower-level facts will have derived significance. They will matter, not in themselves, but because they constitute the higher level fact.\"\nIn this, Johnston moves to preserve the significance of personhood. Parfit's explanation is that it is not personhood itself that matters, but rather the facts in which personhood consists that provide it with significance. To illustrate this difference between himself and Johnston, Parfit used an illustration of a brain-damaged patient who becomes irreversibly unconscious. The patient is certainly still alive even though that fact is separate from the fact that his heart is still beating and other organs are still functioning. But the fact that the patient is alive is not an independent or separately obtaining fact. The patient's being alive, even though irreversibly unconscious, simply consists in the other facts. Parfit explains that from this so-called \"Argument from Below\" we can arbitrate the value of the heart and other organs still working without having to assign them derived significance, as Johnston's perspective would dictate.\nPopulation ethics and future generations.\nNon-identity problem.\nThe non-identity problem arises from the observation that actions taken today can fundamentally alter which future people come into existence. In chapter 16 of \"Reasons and Persons\", Parfit posits that one's existence is intimately related to the time and conditions of one's conception. He calls this \"The Time-Dependence Claim\": \"If any particular person had not been conceived when he was in fact conceived, it is in fact true that he would never have existed\". Like the butterfly effect in chaos theory, small changes in initial conditions can have profound downstream effects on human reproduction. Actions may not just affect the welfare of future individuals, but also cause different individuals to be born. If the moral ramifications of potential policies are considered in person-affecting terms, there is no reason to prefer a sound policy over an unsound one, provided that its effects are not felt by the next few generations.\nParfit eventually became convinced that personal identity is irrelevant to ethics. He wrote about an article in \"The Times\" in which a politician praised a recent decline in teenage pregnancy. A man wrote a letter saying he had had a teenage mother and, although the early years had been hard, he now had a life thoroughly worth living. The man asked whether the politician was suggesting it would have been better if he had never been born. Parfit said the man would waive the right to have such-and-such level of a good start in life merely to exist. He wrote, \"The objection must be that if she had waited, she could have given to some other child a better start in life.\"\nMere addition paradox and repugnant conclusion.\nIn part four of \"Reasons and Persons\", Parfit discusses possible futures for the world. He discusses possible futures and population growth in chapter 17, and argues that both average and total utilitarianism result in unwelcome conclusions when applied to population.\nIn the section titled \"Overpopulation\", Parfit distinguishes between average utilitarianism and total utilitarianism. He formulates average utilitarianism in two ways. One is what Parfit calls the \"Impersonal Average Principle\", which he formulates as \"If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which people's lives go, on average, best.\" The other is what he calls the \"Hedonistic version\"; he formulates this as \"If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which there is the greatest average net sum of happiness, per life lived.\" Parfit then gives two formulations of the total utilitarianism view. The first formulation Parfit calls the \"Hedonistic version of the Impersonal Total Principle\": \"If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which there would be the greatest quantity of happiness\u2014the greatest net sum of happiness minus misery.\" He then describes the other formulation, the \"non-Hedonistic Impersonal Total Principle\": \"If other things are equal, the best outcome is the one in which there would be the greatest quantity of whatever makes life worth living.\"\nApplying total utilitarian standards (absolute total happiness) to possible population growth and welfare leads to what he calls the repugnant conclusion: \"For any possible population of at least ten billion people, all with a very high quality of life, there must be some much larger imaginable population whose existence, if other things are equal, would be better, even though its members have lives that are barely worth living.\" Parfit illustrates this with a simple thought experiment: imagine a choice between two possible futures. In A, 10 billion people would live during the next generation, all with extremely happy lives, lives far happier than anyone's today. In B, there are 20 billion people all living lives that, while slightly less happy than those in A, are still very happy. Under total utility maximisation we should prefer B to A. Therefore, through a regressive process of population increases and happiness decreases (in each pair of cases the happiness decrease is outweighed by the population increase) we are forced to prefer Z, a world of hundreds of billions of people all living lives barely worth living, to A. Even if we do not hold that coming to exist can benefit someone, we still must at least admit that Z is no worse than A.\nParfit and other philosophers have explored a number of potential ways to avoid this \"repugnant conclusion\", many of which are discussed in \"Reasons and Persons\". Parfit himself spent significant time trying to find a coherent ethical theory that would avoid it. One potential objection challenges what life in the A-world would be like and whether life in the Z-world would differ very much from a normal privileged life. Another one proposes that movement from the A-world to the Z-world can be blocked by discontinuity. Negative utilitarians may reject the premise of maximizing happiness, emphasizing the converse, the minimization of suffering. Philosopher Larry Temkin challenges the assumption that the \"better than\" relation is transitive. Others proposed a minimal threshold of liberties and primary social goods to be distributed, or suggested to adopt a deontological approach that looks to values and their transmission through time. Michael Huemer and Torbj\u00f6rn T\u00e4nnsj\u00f6 endorse the conclusion, considering that the repugnance comes from intuitions that should be revised. In 2021, a number of philosophers said that avoiding the repugnant conclusion was receiving excessive focus and should not be considered a necessary condition for an adequate theory of population ethics.\nAgainst average utilitarianism, Parfit also argues that if all that matters is average happiness, then the best population could be arbitrarily small, for example containing only a few extremely happy individuals. Moreover, this would imply that adding people with lives worth living would make the world worse if these are less happy than the average.\nPersonal life.\nParfit met Janet Radcliffe Richards in 1982, and they then began a relationship that lasted until his death. They married in 2010. Richards believes Parfit had Asperger syndrome.\nHe supported effective altruism. He was a member of Giving What We Can and pledged to donate at least 10% of his income to effective charities.\nParfit was an avid photographer who regularly traveled to Venice and St. Petersburg to photograph architecture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59790", "revid": "45032371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59790", "title": "Farm", "text": "Area of land used to produce food and plants\nA farm (also called an agricultural holding) is an area of land that is devoted primarily to agricultural processes with the primary objective of producing food and other crops; it is the basic facility in food production. The name is used for specialized units such as arable farms, vegetable farms, fruit farms, dairy, pig and poultry farms, and land used for the production of natural fiber, biofuel, and other biobased products. It includes ranches, feedlots, orchards, plantations and estates, smallholdings, and hobby farms, and includes the farmhouse and agricultural buildings as well as the land. In modern times, the term has been extended to include such industrial operations as wind farms and fish farms, both of which can operate on land or at sea.\nThere are about 570 million farms in the world, most of which are small and family-operated. Small farms with a land area of fewer than 2 hectares operate on about 12% of the world's agricultural land, and family farms comprise about 75% of the world's agricultural land.\nModern farms in developed countries are highly mechanized. In the United States, livestock may be raised on rangeland and finished in feedlots, and the mechanization of crop production has brought about a great decrease in the number of agricultural workers needed. In Europe, traditional family farms are giving way to larger production units. In Australia, some farms are very large because the land is unable to support a high stocking density of livestock because of climatic conditions. In less developed countries, small farms are the norm, and the majority of rural residents are subsistence farmers, feeding their families and selling any surplus products in the local market.\nEtymology.\nThe word in the sense of an agricultural land-holding derives from the verb \"to farm\" a revenue source, whether taxes, customs, rents of a group of manors or simply to hold an individual manor by the feudal land tenure of \"fee farm\". The word is from the medieval Latin noun \"firma\", also the source of the French word \"ferme\", meaning a fixed agreement, contract, from the classical Latin adjective \"firmus\" meaning strong, stout, firm. As in the medieval age virtually all manors were engaged in the business of agriculture, which was their principal revenue source, so to hold a manor by the tenure of \"fee farm\" became synonymous with the practice of agriculture itself.\nHistory.\nFarming has been innovated at multiple different points and places in human history. The transition from hunter-gatherer to settled, agricultural societies is called the Neolithic Revolution and first began around 12,000 years ago, near the beginning of the geological epoch of the Holocene around 12,000 years ago. It was the world's first historically verifiable revolution in agriculture. Farming spread from the Middle East to Europe and by 4,000 BC people that lived in the central part of Europe were using oxen to pull plows and wagons. Subsequent step-changes in human farming practices were provoked by the British Agricultural Revolution in the 18th century, and the Green Revolution of the second half of the 20th century.\nFarming originated independently in different parts of the world, as hunter-gatherer societies transitioned to food production rather than food capture. It may have started about 12,000 years ago with the domestication of livestock in the Fertile Crescent in western Asia, soon to be followed by the cultivation of crops. Modern units tend to specialize in the crops or livestock best suited to the region, with their finished products being sold for the retail market or for further processing, with farm products being traded around the world.\nTypes of farms.\nA farm may be owned and operated by a single individual, family, community, corporation, or a company, may produce one or many types of produce, and can be a holding of any size from a fraction of a hectare to several thousand hectares.\nA farm may operate under a monoculture system or with a variety of cereal or arable crops, which may be separate from or combined with raising livestock. Specialist farms are often denoted as such, thus a dairy farm, fish farm, poultry farm or mink farm.\nSome farms may not use the word at all, hence vineyard (grapes), orchard (nuts and other fruit), market garden or \"truck farm\" (vegetables and flowers). Some farms may be denoted by their topographical location, such as a hill farm, while large estates growing cash crops such as cotton or coffee may be called plantations.\nMany other terms are used to describe farms to denote their methods of production, as in collective, corporate, intensive, organic or vertical.\nWhere most of the income is from some other employment, and the farm is an expanded residence, the term hobby farm is common. This will allow sufficient size for recreational use but be very unlikely to produce sufficient income to be self-sustaining. Hobby farms are commonly around but may be much larger depending on land prices.\nOther farms may primarily exist for research or education, such as an ant farm, and since farming is synonymous with mass production, the word \"farm\" may be used to describe wind power generation or puppy farm. \nFarm buildings.\nFarms have special buildings. Some buildings, such as barns, may hold animals. There may be separate buildings for chickens and pigs. On dairy farms, a milking parlor is an important building. It is where dairy cows are milked. The milk is kept in a milking parlor until a milk tanker comes to get it. There are also special buildings for keeping grain. A silo is a tall building where grains, such as wheat and oats are stored. Farmers also use small round metal buildings to store their grain. These buildings are called grain bins.\nSpecialized farms.\nDairy farm.\nDairy farming is a class of agriculture, where female cattle, goats, or other mammals are raised for their milk, which may be either processed on-site or transported to a dairy for processing and eventual retail sale There are many breeds of cattle that can be milked some of the best producing ones include Holstein, Norwegian Red, Kostroma, Brown Swiss, and more.\nIn most Western countries, a centralized dairy facility processes milk and dairy products, such as ice cream, yogurt, butter, and cheese. In the United States, these dairies are usually local companies, while in the Southern Hemisphere facilities may be run by very large nationwide or trans-national corporations (such as Fonterra).\nDairy farms generally sell male calves for veal meat, as dairy breeds are not normally satisfactory for commercial beef production. Many dairy farms also grow their own feed, typically including maize, alfalfa, and hay. This is fed directly to the cows, or stored as silage for use during the winter season. Additional dietary supplements are added to the feed to improve milk production. \nPoultry farm.\nPoultry farms are devoted to raising chickens (egg layers or broilers), turkeys, ducks, and other fowl, generally for meat or eggs.\nPig farm.\nA pig farm is one that specializes in raising pigs for bacon, ham, and other pork products. They may be free range, intensive, or both.\nOwnership.\nFarm control and ownership have traditionally been a key indicator of status and power, especially in Medieval European agrarian societies. The distribution of farm ownership has historically been closely linked to a form of government. Medieval feudalism was essentially a system that centralized control of farmland, control of farm labor, and political power, while the early American democracy, in which land ownership was a prerequisite for voting rights, was built on relatively easy paths to individual farm ownership. However, the gradual modernization and mechanization of farming, which greatly increases both the efficiency and capital requirements of farming, has led to increasingly large farms. This has usually been accompanied by the decoupling of political power from farm ownership.\nForms of ownership.\nIn some societies (especially socialist and communist), collective farming is the norm, with either government ownership of the land or common ownership by a local group. Especially in societies without widespread industrialized farming, tenant farming and sharecropping are common; farmers either pay landowners for the right to use farmland or give up a portion of the crops.\nFarms around the world.\nUnited States.\nThe land and buildings of a farm are called the \"farmstead\".\nEnterprises where livestock are raised on rangeland are called \"ranches\". Where livestock are raised in confinement on feed produced elsewhere, the term \"feedlot\" is usually used.\nIn the US, in 1910 there were 6,406,000 farms and 10,174,000 family workers; In 2000 there were only 2,172,000 farms and 2,062,300 family workers. The share of U.S. farms operated by women has risen steadily over recent decades, from 5 percent in 1978 to 14 percent by 2007.In the United States, there are over three million migrant and seasonal farmworkers; 72% are foreign-born, 78% are male, they have an average age of 36 and average education of 8 years. Farmworkers make an average hourly rate of $9\u201310 per hour, compared to an average of over $18 per hour for nonfarm labor. Their average family income is under $20,000 and 23% live in families with incomes below the federal poverty level. One-half of all farmworker families earn less than $10,000 per year, which is significantly below the 2005 U.S. poverty level of $19,874 for a family of four.\nIn 2007, corn acres are expected to increase by 15% because of the high demand for ethanol, both in and outside of the U.S. Producers are expecting to plant 90.5 million acres (366,000\u00a0km2) of corn, making it the largest corn crop since 1944.\nEurope.\nIn the UK, \"farm\" as an agricultural unit, always denotes the area of pasture and other fields together with its farmhouse, farmyard and outbuildings. Large farms, or groups of farms under the same ownership, may be called an estate. Conversely, a small farm surrounding the owner's dwelling is called a smallholding and is generally focused on self-sufficiency with only the surplus being sold.\nIn Europe, traditional family farms are giving way to larger production units where industrial agriculture and mechanization brings large crop yields.\nThe Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is one of the most important policies of the European Union and is helping in the change of farms from traditional family farms to larger production units. The policy has the objectives of increasing agricultural production, providing certainty in food supplies, ensuring a high quality of life for farmers, stabilizing markets, and ensuring reasonable prices for consumers. It was, until recently, operated by a system of subsidies and market intervention. Until the 1990s, the policy accounted for over 60 per cent of the European Union's annual budget, and as of 2013 accounts for around 34 per cent.\nAsia.\nPakistan.\nAccording to the World Bank, \"most empirical evidence indicates that land productivity on large farms in Pakistan is lower than that of small farms, holding other factors constant.\" Small farmers have \"higher net returns per hectare\" than large farms, according to farm\nhousehold income data.\nNepal.\nNepal is an agricultural country and about 80% of the total population are engaged in farming. Rice is mainly produced in Nepal along with fruits like apples. Dairy farming and poultry farming are also growing in Nepal.\nAustralia.\nFarming is a significant economic sector in Australia. A farm is an area of land used for primary production which will include buildings.\nAccording to the UN, \"green agriculture directs a greater share of total farming input expenditures towards the purchase of locally sourced input?(e.g. labour and organic fertilisers) and a local multiplier effect is expected to kick in. Overall, green farming practices tend to require more labour inputs than conventional farming (e.g. from comparable levels to as much as 30 percent more) (FAO 2007 and European Commission 2010), creating jobs in rural areas and a higher return on labour inputs.\"\nOften very small farms used for intensive primary production are referred to by the specialization they are being used for, such as a dairy rather than a dairy farm, a piggery, a market garden, etc. This also applies to feedlots, which are specifically developed for a single purpose and are often not able to be used for more general purpose (mixed) farming practices.\nIn remote areas, farms can become quite large. As with \"estates\" in England, there is no defined size or method of operation at which a large farm becomes a station.\nAfrica.\nA farm in Africa includes various structures. Depending on climate-related areas primarily farming is the raising and breeding of grazing livestock, such as cattle, sheep, ostriches, horses or goats. Predominantly domestic animals are raised for their meat, milk, skin, leather or fiber wool). You might even come across silk farms.\nFurthermore, there are plenty of hunting farms, guest farms and game farms. Arable] or irrigated land is often used for raising crops such as feed grains and hay for animal feeding.\nOn some farms (Astro Farm) star-gazing became very popular because of the excellent optical quality in the desert. The High Energy Stereoscopic System (H.E.S.S.) which investigates cosmic gamma rays is situated on \"Farm G\u00f6llschau\" in Namibia.\nFarm equipment.\nFarm equipment has evolved over the centuries from simple hand tools such as the hoe, through ox- or horse-drawn equipment such as the plough and harrow, to the modern highly technical machinery such as the tractor, baler and combine harvester replacing what was a highly labour-intensive occupation before the Industrial Revolution. Today much of the farm equipment used on both small and large farms is automated (e.g. using satellite guided farming).\nAs new types of high-tech farm equipment have become inaccessible to farmers that historically fixed their own equipment, \"Wired\" magazine reports there is a growing backlash, due mostly to companies using intellectual property law to prevent farmers from having the legal right to fix their equipment (or gain access to the information to allow them to do it). This has encouraged groups such as Open Source Ecology and Farm Hack to begin to make open source hardware for agricultural machinery. In addition on a smaller scale Farmbot and the RepRap open source 3D printer community has begun to make open-source farm tools available of increasing levels of sophistication.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59791", "revid": "45994988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59791", "title": "Trojan", "text": "Trojan or Trojans may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59792", "revid": "45215721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59792", "title": "Family Court of Australia", "text": "Australian government body, 1976\u20132021\nThe Family Court of Australia was a superior Australian federal court of record which deals with family law matters, such as divorce applications, parenting disputes, and the division of property when a couple separate. Together with the Federal Circuit Court of Australia, it covered family law matters in all states and territories of Australia except for Western Australia, which has a separate Family Court. Its core function was to determine cases with the most complex law, facts and parties, to cover specialised areas in family law, and to provide national coverage as the national appellate court for family law matters.\nIn 2021, the Morrison government introduced legislation merging the Family Court with the Federal Circuit Court of Australia to form the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia, effective from 1 September 2021. Since the merger, the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia is the only court which has jurisdiction to deal with purely family law related issues (except for Western Australia).\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe Family Court of Australia was established under Chapter 3 of the Australian Constitution, by the \"Family Law Act 1975\", and commenced operations on 5 January 1976. It currently comprises a Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Appeal Division judges and other judges. In July 2008, there were 44 judges (5 of whom were also Judges of the Family Court of Western Australia), 2 judicial registrars and 1 senior registrar. In December 2017 the number of judges was down to 36, including 8 Judges of the Appeals Division. The Court maintains registries in all Australian states and territories except Western Australia.\nThe Court has had five Chief Justices to date, Elizabeth Evatt (1976\u20131988), Alastair Nicholson (1988\u20132004), Diana Bryant (2004\u20132017), John Pascoe (2017\u20132018) and Will Alstergren , the current Chief Justice who was appointed on 10 December 2018 (having served as Chief Judge of the Federal Circuit Court of Australia since September 2017 and continuing to hold that position). The position of Deputy Chief Justice was previously held by John Faulks until 30 October 2016, but has been filled by former Attorney-General Robert McClelland since 10 December 2018.\nAttacks against.\nFrom 1980 to 1985 a series of shootings and bombings in New South Wales targeted places, judges, and other people associated with the Court. \nOn 23 June 1980, Family Court judge David Opas was shot outside his home and died later that night in hospital.\nOn 6 March 1984, judge Richard Gee, who had taken on Opas' cases after his death, was injured by a bomb at his Belrose home. On 14\u00a0April 1984, the Family Court building in Parramatta was bombed without any injuries. On 4\u00a0July 1984, Pearl Watson, the wife of Family Court judge Ray Watson, was killed when she opened the door of their unit in Greenwich, triggering an improvised explosive device on the doorstep. Judge Watson is believed to have been the target but was only injured. Like Judge Gee, Watson had taken on some Family Court cases from his predecessor after Gee had been injured in the March 1984 bombing. \nThen, on 21 July 1985, Graham Wykes, a Jehovah's Witness minister was killed and another 13\u00a0people injured when their Casula Kingdom Hall was bombed. Also in 1985, an unexploded bomb was found in Northmead under the bonnet of a car. The address was formerly that of a solicitor who acted for a woman in a Family Court case. His name was still listed at that address in the phone book.\nIn 2012, the State Crime Command's homicide squad restarted an investigation into the crimes. In July 2015, Leonard John Warwick was arrested and charged with offences including four counts of murder, one of attempted murder, and 13 counts of burning or maiming with an explosive substance. In July 2020, Warwick was found guilty of the majority of the offences he was charged with, including the murders of Judge Opas, Pearl Watson and Graham Wykes. Warwick died in prison on 14 February 2025.\nBudget.\nThe 2008\u201309 federal budget provided for Family Court expenditure of $137m (including services provided free to the Federal Magistrates' Court).\nJurisdiction.\nCommonwealth family law is dealt with by the \"Family Law Act 1975\", the \"Family Law Regulations 1984\" and the \"Marriage Act 1961\".\nIn 1986\u201387, the states agreed that children should be dealt with under the same legislation. The \"Family Law Act 1975\" was amended in 1988 to reflect this agreement (although this did not happen in relation to Queensland until 1990). Western Australia, however, did not enter into the agreement and has maintained its own separate Family Court which deals with federal legislation (such as the Family Law Act) as well as state legislation such as the Family Court Act (WA).\nThe Court has jurisdiction over all marriage-related cases in all states and territories of Australia, except Western Australia which has its own family court. An avenue of appeal to the Family Court of Australia does however exist in relation to judgments in the Western Australian court.\nIts jurisdiction covers applications for declarations of the validity or nullity of marriages, divorces, residence, contact, maintenance, child support and property issues. This jurisdiction, granted under the Family Law Act 1975, is a Commonwealth responsibility under the \"matrimonial causes\" head of power in Section 51(xxii) of the Australian Constitution. Prior to 1975, jurisdiction over family law matters was held and exercised largely by state Supreme Courts under the \"Matrimonial Causes Act\".\nDifference between relationships.\nThe Commonwealth power to legislate for marriage and \"matrimonial causes\" is supported by sections 51(xxi) and (xxii) of the Constitution, whereas the power to legislate for de facto financial matters largely relies on referrals by States to the Commonwealth in accordance with section 51(xxxvii) of the Australian Constitution. A special cause was created called a \"de facto financial cause\"; see the \"Family Law Amendment (De Facto Financial Matters and Other Measures) Bill 2008\" explanatory Memorandum.\nHowever, the definitions of \"matrimonial cause\" and \"de facto financial cause\" differ in some respects, due to the different sources of Commonwealth power to legislate for these matters. Paragraphs (a) to (d) of the definition of \"de facto financial cause\", in the http:// therefore, limit the proceedings within each of those sections to proceedings taken once the relevant de facto relationship has broken down.\nLimited jurisdiction over de facto relationships.\nHence, from 1 March 2009 a new section in the http:// has limited jurisdiction over de facto relationships that have a geographical connection with a participating State or Territory, sections http://,http:// and http:// of the http://. Participating states and territories are: New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, Norfolk Island, Christmas Island or the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. The states referred de facto matters under Section 51(xxxvii) of the Australian Constitution.\nChildren of de facto relationships.\nThe Family Court also has jurisdiction over the children of de facto couples and those that have never lived together. This jurisdiction was acquired by the Commonwealth through a referral of powers agreed between the Commonwealth and all states except Western Australia). The initial referral referred to custody and access in the breakdown of de facto relationships.\nAppeals from first-instance decisions.\nAppeals from first-instance decisions of the Court are to Appeals Division, which includes the Full Court of the Family Court. From the Full Court, the only avenue of appeal is to the High Court of Australia, an action which requires the grant of special leave by the High Court.\nRelationship with Federal Circuit Court.\nWith the establishment of the Federal Magistrates' Court in 1999 (now the Federal Circuit Court of Australia), the Family Court has concurrent jurisdiction in most areas, with the FCC. The FMC was initially given jurisdiction to hear applications for nullity and dissolution of marriage,\nfamily law property disputes (where the property in dispute was worth less than $0.3m, or property disputes worth more than this if the parties consented), parenting orders providing for matters such as contact, maintenance and specific issues, and where the parties consented, parenting orders providing for the residence of a child. In December 2000, its jurisdiction was extended to encompass \"residence\". The majority of proceedings under the \"Family Law Act\" are now filed in the FMC. In general practice, only the more complex and intractable family law cases are transferred from the Federal Circuit Court to the Family Court.\nProposed changes.\nIn 2008, the federal Attorney-General announced a review of the delivery of family law services by the Family Court of Australia and the Federal Magistrates Court. A November 2008 report set out a possible framework of governance options to achieve a more integrated system of case management practices across the family law jurisdiction, with changes in judicial structures and reporting relationships. The report concluded that \"there exists a significant level of duplication of administrative structures and corporate services across the Family Court and the FMC and that the existing and proposed duplication is not financially sustainable\".\nAccording to the report, all review submissions, with the exception of that provided by the Federal Magistrates' Court, \"considered that the most effective model for the delivery by the Courts of family law services would be a single family court, with two separate judicial divisions serviced by a single administration.\" The proposed model is similar to that of the Family Court of Western Australia, which the \nLaw Council of Australia, in its submission, had noted as providing a useful model of the structure and functioning of an integrated Family Court. The Law Council stated that \"Chapter III courts exercising largely identical jurisdictions, with separate administrations and competing for funds and resources, is wholly unacceptable and that rationalisation and integration of the two federal courts exercising family law jurisdiction is urgently required.\"\nIn her written submission to the Attorney-General, the current Chief Justice, Diana Bryant, noted \"the budgetary pressures facing both existing Courts\", and that as far as litigants and the public were concerned, there appeared to be significant duplication of resources and functions. She noted that \"there are at present two courts with concurrent jurisdiction doing first instance family law work with no legislative differentiation.\" Her submission favoured combining the current family law functions of the Federal Magistrates Court with the Family Court of Australia under a new Court, with a new name.\nLess adversarial trials.\nIn July 2006, under Division 12A of Part VII of the Family Law Act, the Court implemented its model for \"less adversarial trials\" \u2013 to be applied to all new child related proceedings in the Family Court, without the need for consent of the parties. According to the Court, the change from a traditional common law approach to a less adversarial trial \"has significant implications, not only for the conduct of family law litigation, but also for the conduct of litigation as a whole.\"\nAccording to the Family Court, \"in a less adversarial trial:\nMiscellaneous.\nWhen the Family Court was established, an attempt was made to make the court less formal and more \"family friendly\", with a proposal that wigs should not be worn, although gowns would be retained. In 1987, the requirement to wear wigs were reinstated. Judges and judicial registrars of the Family Court of Australia wore a black silk gown, a bar jacket with either bands or a jabot and a bench wig. As of 2025, judges wear a black gown (with a red stripe on appeals and formal sittings).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59794", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59794", "title": "Mission San Antonio de Padua", "text": "18th-century Spanish mission in California\nMission San Antonio de Padua is a Spanish mission established by the Franciscan order in present-day Monterey County, California, near the present-day town of Jolon. Founded on July 14, 1771, it was the third mission founded in Alta California by Father Presidente Jun\u00edpero Serra. The mission was the first use of fired tile roofing in Upper California. Today the mission is a parish church of the Diocese of Monterey and is no longer active in the mission work which it was set up to provide.\nHistory.\nBeginnings of the Mission.\nMission San Antonio de Padua was the third Mission to be founded in Alta California, and was located along the very earliest routing of the Camino Real. This mission was located on a site which was unfortunately somewhat remote from the more reliable water source of what later became known as the Salinas River. In that very early year of the missions, the later more favorable routing of the Camino Real, more closely aligning with the course of the Salinas River, had not yet been discovered or established.\nFather Junipero Serra claimed the site on July 14, 1771, and dedicated the Mission to Saint Anthony of Padua. Saint Anthony was born in 1195 in Lisbon, Portugal and is the patron saint of the poor. Father Serra left Fathers Miguel Pieras and Buenaventura Sitjar behind to continue the building efforts, though the construction of the church proper did not actually begin until 1810.\nIn 1805, the native people at the mission, mostly Northern Salinan (Antoniano) but also some Yokuts and Esselen, had increased to 1,300. By 1810, only 178 Native Americans were living at the Mission, In 1834, after secularization there were 150 Mission Indians remaining. No town grew up around the mission, as was usual at other missions.\nIn 1845, Mexican Governor P\u00edo Pico declared all mission buildings in Alta California for sale, but no one bid for Mission San Antonio. In 1863, after nearly 30 years, the Mission was returned to the Catholic Church. In 1894, roof tiles were salvaged from the property and installed on the Southern Pacific Railroad depot located in Burlingame, California, one of the first permanent structures constructed in the Mission Revival Style.\nRestoration.\nThe first attempt to rebuild the Mission came in 1903 when Andrew Garriga, the pastor of the King City and Gonzales parish, and the California Historical Landmarks League began holding outings at San Antonio. \"Preservation and restoration of Mission San Antonio began. The Native Sons of the Golden West donated $1,400. Tons of debris were removed from the interior of the chapel.the mission was restored 2 times. Breaches in the side wall were filled in.\"\nUnfortunately, the earthquake of 1906 seriously damaged the building. In 1928, Franciscan friars held services at San Antonio de Padua. It took nearly 50 years to completely restore the Mission. The State of California is requiring a $12\u201315 million earthquake retrofit that must be completed by 2015, or the mission will be closed. As of 2011, there were 35 private families keeping the mission open. There is an active campaign to raise funds for the retrofit.\nCurrent use of the old San Antonio Mission.\nDespite its being still referred to as a mission, the Mission San Antonio de Padua is no longer active in Catholic missions and has become more focused as a parish church, fundraiser location, and tourist attraction. In 2005, the Franciscan Friars turned over the mission's caretaking and ownership to the Diocese of Monterey. Under the leadership of the Diocese of Monterey, Mission San Antonio de Padua transformed into a Catholic parish which also hosts group gatherings, gift shops and a museum with picnic grounds.\nPresent day.\nToday, the nearest city is King City, nearly away; Jolon, a small town, is located six miles (10\u00a0km) from the Mission. Historians consider the Mission's pastoral location in the valley of the San Antonio River along the Santa Lucia Mountains as an outstanding example of early mission life.\nThe mission is surrounded by the Fort Hunter Liggett Military Reservation, which was acquired by the U.S. Army from the Hearst family during World War II to train troops. Additional land was acquired from the Army in 1950 to increase the mission area to over . This fort is still actively training troops today.\nMission San Antonio de Padua is one of the designated tour sights of the Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail.\nAs of 2013, Franciscan Friar Jeff Burns OFM, is in charge of the Mission.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59796", "revid": "46528748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59796", "title": "Judiciary Act 1903", "text": "Act of the Parliament of Australia\nThe Judiciary Act 1903 (Cth) is an Act of the Parliament of Australia that regulates the structure of the Australian judicial system and confers jurisdiction on Australian federal courts. It is one of the oldest pieces of Australian federal legislation and has been amended over 70 times.\nAmongst other things, the Act regulates the exercise of the jurisdiction of the High Court of Australia, confers jurisdiction on the Federal Court of Australia, provides for the right of barristers and solicitors to practice in federal courts, and establishes the Australian Government Solicitor.\nThe Act.\nSection 78B of the Act requires Australian courts to ensure that the parties have given notice to the attorneys-general of Australia and of each state before proceeding with any case involving a \"matter arising under the Constitution.\" Each of these governments may then intervene in the case under section 78A of the Act.\nSection 78 and 79 of the Act govern the application of state law by Australian federal courts. The two sections borrow verbiage from the American Rules of Decision Act.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59798", "revid": "5288432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59798", "title": "Plantagenet", "text": ""}
{"id": "59799", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59799", "title": "Mission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel", "text": "18th-century Spanish mission in California\nMission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel () is a Californian mission and historic landmark in San Gabriel, California. It was founded by the Spanish Empire on the Nativity of Mary September 8, 1771, as the fourth of what would become twenty-one Spanish missions in California. The mission was named after the Archangel Gabriel, and often referred to as the \"Godmother of the Pueblo of Los Angeles.\"\nThe mission was designed by Antonio Cruzado, who gave the building its capped buttresses and the tall narrow windows, which are unique among the missions of the California chain. It was completed in 1805. A large stone cross stands in the center of the \"Campo Santo\" (cemetery), first consecrated in 1778 and then again on January 29, 1939. It serves as the final resting place for some 6,000 neophytes.\nAccording to Spanish legend, the founding expedition was confronted by a large group of native Tongva peoples whose intention was to drive the strangers away. One of the priests laid a painting of Our Lady of Sorrows on the ground for all to see, whereupon the natives, designated by the settlers as the \"Gabriele\u00f1os\", immediately made peace with the missionaries, as they were so moved by the painting's beauty. Today, the 300-year-old image hangs in front of and slightly to the left of the old high altar and reredos in the Mission's sanctuary. Resistance to the mission by the Tongva was recorded and how much the neophytes embraced Catholicism remains a subject of debate among scholars.\nHistory.\nIn August 1771, the Portol\u00e0 expedition, which consisted of \"ten Spanish soldiers and two Franciscan priests, encountered armed Tongva Indians on the banks of the Santa Ana River.\" One month later, Mission San Gabriel was founded on September 8, 1771, by Fray \u00c1ngel Fern\u00e1ndez de la Somera and Fray Pedro Benito Camb\u00f3n. The planned site for the Mission was along the banks of the \"R\u00edo de los Temblores\" (the River of the Earthquakes\u2014the Santa Ana River). The priests chose an alternate site on a fertile plain located directly alongside the R\u00edo Hondo in the Whittier Narrows. The site of the \"Misi\u00f3n Vieja\" (or \"Old Mission\") is located near the intersection of San Gabriel Boulevard and Lincoln Avenue.\nThe mission was built and run using what has been described as slave labor from nearby Tongva villages, such as Yaanga and was built on the site of the village of Toviscanga. When the nearby Pueblo de los \u00c1ngeles was built in 1781, the mission competed with the emerging pueblo for control of Indigenous labor.\nThe expedition of Juan Bautista de Anza visited the mission in January and February 1776, having previous been there in 1774. In 1776, a flash flood destroyed much of the crops and ruined the original Mission complex, which was subsequently relocated five miles closer to the mountains in present-day San Gabriel (the Tongva settlement of Toviscanga or 'Iisanchanga). The Tongva village of Shevaanga was also located \"close to the second location of Mission San Gabriel\" after the original site was abandoned due to the flooding.\nOn December 8, 1812, the Feast of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, a series of massive earthquakes shook Southern California. The 1812 San Juan Capistrano earthquake caused the three-bell \"campanario\" adjacent to the chapel's east fa\u00e7ade, to collapse. A larger, six-bell structure was subsequently constructed at the far end of the \"Capilla\". While no pictorial record exists to document what the original structure looked like, architectural historian Rexford Newcomb deduced the design and published a depiction in his 1916 work \"The Franciscan Mission Architecture of Alta (upper) California\".\nOver 25,000 baptisms were conducted at San Gabriel between 1771 and 1834, making it the most prolific in the chain of missions. Tongva people from nearby settlements like Akuranga village were affected by the practices of Franciscan missionaries, who attempted to \"eradicate what they perceived as ills within Tongva society\" through \"religious indoctrination, labor, restructuring of gender structures, and violence,\" which took place at and around the Mission. A missionary during this period reported that three out of four children died at Mission San Gabriel before reaching the age of 2. Nearly 6,000 Tongva lie buried in the grounds of the San Gabriel Mission. \nThere were reports throughout this period of Indigenous peoples fleeing the conditions at the Mission. For example, in 1808, the missionaries sent Spanish soldier Jos\u00e9 Palomares after some neophytes who had fled the mission. Escapees traveled as far as the Serrano village of W\u00e1\u2019peat to escape the Mission. Palomares observed the escapees at the village and attempted to negotiate with the chief of the village for their return. However, the chief refused.\nAlthough San Gabriel once furnished food and supplies to settlements and other missions throughout California, a majority of the Mission structures fell into ruins after it was secularized in November 1834. During part of the 1850s, squatters set upon the mission, converting part of it into a saloon which had both felons and a justice of the peace as customers; it was opened by former San Diego Mayor Joshua Bean.\nThe Mission's chapel functioned as a parish church for the City of San Gabriel from 1862 until 1908, when the Claretian Missionaries came to San Gabriel and began the job of rebuilding and restoring the Mission. In 1874, tracks were laid for Southern Pacific Railroad near the mission. In 2012, artifacts from the mission era were found when the tracks were lowered into a trench known as the Alameda Corridor-East. On October 1, 1987, the Whittier Narrows earthquake damaged the property. A significant portion of the original complex has since been restored.\nFire completely destroyed the roof of the original church sanctuary on July 11, 2020. Prior to the fire, the mission was undergoing renovation, saving some paintings and artifacts. An investigation into the origin of the fire was opened. On May 5, 2021, John David Corey, age 57, was charged with felony counts of arson and burglary for setting the fire. An invitation-only Mass was celebrated in September 2022 with hope of permanently opening the mission by early December. The mission officially reopened in July 2023.\nMission industries.\nThe goal of the missions was to become self-sufficient in relatively short order. Farming was the most important industry of any mission. Prior to the missions, the Native Americans had developed a complex, self-sufficient culture. The mission priests established what they thought of as a manual training school: to teach the Indians their style of agriculture, the mechanical arts, and the raising and care of livestock. The missions, utilizing the labor of the neophytes, produced everything they used and consumed. After 1811, the mission Indians could be said to sustain the entire military and civil government of California.\nRanchos (not to be confused with secular government land-grant ranchos) were established in a wide area for raising cattle, sheep and other livestock. These included; San Pasqual, Santa Anita, Azusa, San Francisquito, Cucumonga, San Antonio, San Bernardino, San Gorgonio, Yucaipa, Jurupa, Guapa, Rincon, Chino, San Jose, Ybarras, Puente, Mission Vieja, Serranos, Rosa de Castilla, Coyotes, Jabonaria, Las Bolsas, Alamitos, and Cerritos. When Rancho San Gorgonio was established in 1824, in what today is known as the San Gorgonio Pass, it became the most distant rancho operated by the San Gabriel Mission.\nMany of the Native Americans lived in communities called rancher\u00edas. \"The names of the rancher\u00edas associated with San Gabriel Mission were: Acuragna, Alyeupkigna, Awigna, Azucsagna, Cahuenga, Chokishgna, Chowigna, Cucomogna, Hahamogna, Harasgna, Houtgna, Hutucgna, Isanthcogna, Maugna, Nacaugna, Pascegna, Pasinogna, Pimocagna, Pubugna, Sibagna, Sisitcanogna, Sonagna, Suangna, Tibahagna, Toviscanga, Toybipet, Yangna.\"\nTo efficiently manage its extensive lands, Mission San Gabriel established several outlying sub-missions, known as \"asistencias\". Several of these became or were included in land grants following the Mexican secularization of the missions in the 1830s, including:\nIn 1816, the Mission built a grist mill on a nearby creek. El Molino Viejo still stands, now preserved as a museum and historic landmark. Other mission industries included cowhide tanning/exporting and tallow-rendering (for making soap and for export), lime kilns, tile making, cloth weaving for blankets and clothing, and adobe bricks.\nMission bells.\nBells were important to daily life at any mission. They were rung to mark mealtimes, to call the Mission residents to work and to religious services, to mark births and funerals, to signal the approach of a ship or a returning missionary, and at other times; novices were instructed in the intricate rituals associated with the ringing of the mission bells. The mission bells were also used to tell time.\nThe actor Gil Frye portrayed Father Miguel S\u00e1nchez in a 1953 episode, \"The Bell of San Gabriel,\" of the syndicated television anthology series \"Death Valley Days,\" hosted by Stanley Andrews. As a child portrayed in the segment by Peter J. Votrian, Miguel provides funds acquired from a wealthy nobleman to sweeten the tone of the bell at Mission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel. Years later, the ringing of the bell saves his life when he is a young monk stranded in the desert in the Death Valley country.\nBurials.\nThe Mission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel Cemetery is the oldest and first Catholic cemetery in the state of California. A large stone cross stands in the center of the \"Campo Santo\" (cemetery), first consecrated in 1778 and then again on January 29, 1939, by the Los Angeles Archbishop John Cantwell. It serves as the final resting place for some 6,000 \"neophytes;\" a small stone marker denotes the gravesite of Jos\u00e9 de los Santos, the last American Indian to be buried on the grounds, at the age of 101 in February 1921. It is the oldest and first cemetery in the state of California.\nAlso interred at the Mission are the bodies of numerous Franciscan priests who died during their time of service, as well as the remains of Reverend Raymond Catalan, C.M.F., who undertook the restoration of the Mission's gardens. Entombed at the foot of the altar are the remains of eight Franciscan priests (listed in order of interment): Miguel S\u00e1nchez, Antonio Cruzado, Francisco Dumetz, Ram\u00f3n Ulibarri, Joaqu\u00edn P. N\u00fa\u00f1ez, Ger\u00f3nimo Boscana, Jos\u00e9 Bernardo S\u00e1nchez, and Blas Ordaz. Buried among the priests is centenarian Eulalia P\u00e9rez de Guill\u00e9n Marin\u00e9, the \"keeper of the keys\" under Spanish rule; her grave is marked by a bench dedicated in her memory, and Victoria Reid, a woman from Comicranga, who was taken to the mission at a young age and became a respected figure in Mexican California. \nThe Tongva people have their own ceremony and traditions after death. A 1724 engraving depicts Native Americans (most likely Tongva) carrying a dead body over a smoky fire.\nExhibits.\nVisitors can tour the church, museum and grounds. The adobe museum building was built in 1812 and was originally used for sleeping quarters and book storage. Exhibits include mission relics, books and religious artifacts. The grounds feature operations from the original mission complex, including indoor and outdoor kitchens, winery, water cisterns, soap and candle vats, tanning vats for preparing cattle hides, and a cemetery. There is also a gift shop.\nMatrimonial Investigation Records.\nAs part of the William McPherson Collection in the Special Collections at the Claremont Colleges' Honnold/Mudd Library, the San Gabriel Mission are a valuable resource for research on the pre-statehood activities of the Mission. William McPherson was a rancher, scholar, and collector from Orange County, California, who donated his extensive collection of mission documents, primarily from the Mission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel, to Special Collections in 1964. \nThe matrimonial records span 1788 to 1861 and are notarized interviews with couples wanting to marry in the Roman Catholic Church, performed to establish the couples' freedom to marry. The collection includes 165 investigations, with 173 men and 170 women. Because the donated records are fragile, they are no longer available to be photocopied. The California Digital Library has an online guide available to search the collection.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
