{"id": "63011", "revid": "2366721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63011", "title": "Nocturnality", "text": "Behavior characterized by activity during the night and sleeping during the day\nNocturnality is a behavior in some non-human animals characterized by being active during the night and sleeping during the day. The common adjective is nocturnal, with \"diurnal\" meaning the opposite.\nNocturnal creatures generally have highly developed senses of hearing, smell, and specially adapted eyesight. Some animals, such as ferrets, have eyes that can adapt to both low-level and bright day levels of illumination (see metaturnal). Others, such as bushbabies and (some) bats, can function only at night. Many nocturnal creatures including tarsiers and some owls have large eyes in comparison with their body size to compensate for the lower light levels at night. More specifically, they have been found to have a larger cornea relative to their eye size than diurnal creatures to increase their visual sensitivity: in the low-light conditions. Nocturnality helps wasps, such as \"Apoica flavissima\", avoid hunting in intense sunlight.\nDiurnal animals, including humans (except for night owls), squirrels and songbirds, are active during the daytime. Crepuscular species, such as rabbits, skunks, domestic cats, tigers and hyenas, are often erroneously referred to as nocturnal. Cathemeral species, such as fossas and lions, are active both in the day and at night.\nOrigins.\nWhile it is difficult to say which came first, nocturnality or diurnality, a hypothesis in evolutionary biology, the nocturnal bottleneck theory, postulates that in the Mesozoic, many ancestors of modern-day mammals evolved nocturnal characteristics in order to avoid contact with the numerous diurnal predators. A recent study attempts to answer the question as to why so many modern day mammals retain these nocturnal characteristics even though they are not active at night. The leading answer is that the high visual acuity that comes with diurnal characteristics is not needed anymore due to the evolution of compensatory sensory systems, such as a heightened sense of smell and more astute auditory systems. In a recent study, recently extinct elephant birds and modern day nocturnal kiwi bird skulls were examined to recreate their likely brain and skull formation. They indicated that olfactory bulbs were much larger in comparison to their optic lobes, indicating they both have a common ancestor who evolved to function as a nocturnal species, decreasing their eyesight in favor of a better sense of smell. The anomaly to this theory were anthropoids, who appeared to have the most divergence from nocturnality of all organisms examined. While most mammals did not exhibit the morphological characteristics expected of a nocturnal creature, reptiles and birds fit in perfectly. A larger cornea and pupil correlated well with whether these two classes of organisms were nocturnal or not.\nAdvantages.\nResource competition.\nBeing active at night is a form of niche differentiation, where a species' niche is partitioned not by the amount of resources but by the amount of time (i.e. temporal division of the ecological niche). Hawks and owls can hunt the same field or meadow for the same rodents without conflict because hawks are diurnal and owls are nocturnal. This means they are not in competition for each other's prey. Another niche that being nocturnal lessens competition within is pollination - nocturnal pollinators such as moths, beetles, thrips, and bats have a lower risk of being seen by predators, and the plants evolved temporal scent production and ambient heat to attract nocturnal pollination. Like with predators hunting the same prey, some plants such as apples can be pollinated both during the day and at night.\nPredation.\nNocturnality is a form of crypsis, an adaptation to avoid or enhance predation. Although lions are cathemeral, and may be active at any time of day or night, they prefer to hunt at night because many of their prey species (zebra, antelope, impala, wildebeest, etc.) have poor night vision. Many species of small rodents, such as the Large Japanese Field Mouse, are active at night because most of the dozen or so birds of prey that hunt them are diurnal. There are many diurnal species that exhibit some nocturnal behaviors. For example, many seabirds and sea turtles only gather at breeding sites or colonies at night to reduce the risk of predation to themselves and/or their offspring. Nocturnal species take advantage of the night time to prey on species that are used to avoiding diurnal predators. Some nocturnal fish species will use the moonlight to prey on zooplankton species that come to the surface at night. Some species have developed unique adaptations that allow them to hunt in the dark. Bats are famous for using echolocation to hunt down their prey, using sonar sounds to capture them in the dark.\nWater conservation.\nAnother reason for nocturnality is avoiding the heat of the day. This is especially true in arid biomes like deserts, where nocturnal behavior prevents creatures from losing precious water during the hot, dry daytime. This is an adaptation that enhances osmoregulation. One of the reasons that (cathemeral) lions prefer to hunt at night is to conserve water. Hamilton's frog, found on Stephens and Maud islands, stays hidden for most of the day when temperatures are warmer and is mainly active at night. They will only come out during the day if there are humid and cool conditions. \nMany plant species native to arid biomes have adapted so that their flowers only open at night when the sun's intense heat cannot wither and destroy their moist, delicate blossoms. These flowers are pollinated by bats, another creature of the night.\nClimate change has led to an increasing number of diurnal species to push their activity patterns closer towards crepuscular or fully nocturnal behavior. This adaptive measure allows species to avoid the day's heat, without having to leave that particular habitat.\nHuman disturbances.\nThe exponential increase in human expansion and technological advances in the last few centuries has had a major effect on nocturnal animals, as well as diurnal species. The causes of these can be traced to distinct, sometimes overlapping areas: light pollution and spatial disturbance.\nLight pollution.\nLight pollution is a major issue for nocturnal species, and the impact continues to increase as electricity reaches parts of the world that previously had no access. Species in the tropics are generally more affected by this due to the change in their relatively constant light patterns, but temperate species relying on day-night triggers for behavioral patterns are also affected as well. Many diurnal species see the benefit of a \"longer day\", allowing for a longer hunting period which is detrimental to their nocturnal prey trying to avoid them.\nOrientation.\nLight pollution can disorient species that are used to darkness, as their adaptive eyes are not as used to the artificial lighting. Insects are the most obvious example, who are attracted by the lighting and are usually killed by either the heat or electrical current. Some species of frogs are blinded by the quick changes in light, while nocturnal migratory birds may be disoriented, causing them to lose direction, tire out, or be captured by predators. Sea turtles are particularly affected by this, adding to a number of threats to the different endangered species. Adults are likely to stay away from artificially lit beaches that they might prefer to lay eggs on, as there is less cover against predators. Additionally, baby sea turtles that hatch from eggs on artificially lit beaches often get lost, heading towards the light sources as opposed to the ocean.\nRhythmic behaviors.\nRhythmic behaviors are affected by light pollution both seasonally and daily patterns. Migrating birds or mammals might have issues with the timing of their movement for example. On a day-to-day basis, species can see significant changes in their internal temperatures, their general movement, feeding and body mass. These small scale changes can eventually lead to a population decline, as well as hurting local trophic levels and interconnecting species. Some typically diurnal species have even become crepuscular or nocturnal as a result of light pollution and general human disturbance.\nReproduction.\nThere have been documented effects of light pollution on reproductive cycles and factors in different species. It can affect mate choice, migration to breeding grounds, and nest site selection. In male green frogs, artificial light causes a decrease in mate calls and continued to move around instead of waiting for a potential mate to arrive. This hurts the overall fitness of the species, which is concerning considering the overall decrease in amphibian populations.\nPredation\nSome nocturnal predator-prey relationships are interrupted by artificial lighting. Bats that are fast-moving are often at an advantage with insects being drawn to light; they are fast enough to escape any predators also attracted to the light, leaving slow-moving bats at a disadvantage. Another example is harbor seals eating juvenile salmon that moved down a river lit by nearby artificial lighting. Once the lights were turned off, predation levels decreased. Many diurnal prey species forced into being nocturnal are susceptible to nocturnal predators and those species with poor nocturnal eyesight often bear the brunt of the cost.\nSpatial disturbance.\nThe increasing amount of habitat destruction worldwide as a result of human expansion has given both advantages and disadvantages to different nocturnal animals. As a result of peak human activity in the daytime, more species are likely to be active at night in order to avoid the new disturbance in their habitat. Carnivorous predators however are less timid of the disturbance, feeding on human waste and keeping a relatively similar spatial habitat as they did before. In comparison, herbivorous prey tend to stay in areas where human disturbance is low, limiting both resources and their spatial habitat. This leads to an imbalance in favor of predators, who increase in population and come out more often at night.\nIn captivity.\nZoos.\nIn zoos, nocturnal animals are usually kept in special night-illumination enclosures to invert their normal sleep-wake cycle and to keep them active during the hours when visitors will be there to see them.\nPets.\nHedgehogs and sugar gliders are just two of the many nocturnal species kept as (exotic) pets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63012", "revid": "46830620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63012", "title": "Pope John I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 523 to 526\nPope John I (; died 18 May 526) was the bishop of Rome from 13 August 523 to his death on 18 May 526. He was a native of Siena (or the \"Castello di Serena\", near Chiusdino), in Italy. He was sent on a diplomatic mission to Constantinople by the Ostrogoth King Theoderic to negotiate better treatment for Arians. Although John was relatively successful, upon his return to Ravenna, Theoderic had him imprisoned for allegedly conspiring with Constantinople. The frail pope died of neglect and ill-treatment.\nEarly life.\nWhile a deacon in Rome, John is known to have been a partisan of the Antipope Laurentius, for in a \"libellus\" written to Pope Symmachus in 506, John confessed his error in opposing him, condemned Peter of Altinum and Laurentius, and begged pardon of Symmachus. He would then be the \"Deacon John\" who signed the \"acta\" (ecclesiastic publication) of the Roman synod of 499 and 502; the fact the Roman church only had seven deacons at the time makes identifying him with this person very likely. He may also be the \"Deacon John\" to whom Boethius, the 6th-Century philosopher, dedicated three of his five religious tractates, or treatises, written between 512 and 520.\nPontificate.\nJohn was very frail when he was elected to the papacy. Despite his protests, Pope John was sent by Theodoric the Great, the Arian king of the Ostrogoths in Italy, to Constantinople to secure the moderation of a decree, issued in 523, of Justin I, emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, against the Arians. King Theoderic threatened that if John should fail in his mission, there would be reprisals against the non-Arian Christians in the West. John proceeded to Constantinople with a considerable entourage: including his fellow bishops Ecclesius of Ravenna, Eusebius of Fanum Fortunae, and Sabinus of Campania. His secular companions were the senators Flavius Theodorus, Inportunus, and the Patrician Agapitus.\nEmperor Justin is recorded as receiving John honorably and promised to do everything the embassy asked of him, with the exception that those converting from Arianism to Orthodoxy would not be \"restored\" (i.e., allowed to retain their place in the Orthodox hierarchy as deacons, priests, or bishops). Although John was successful in his mission, when he returned to Ravenna, Theoderic's capital in Italy, Theoderic had John arrested on the suspicion of having conspired with Emperor Justin. John was imprisoned at Ravenna, where he died of neglect and ill treatment. His body was transported to Rome and buried in the Basilica of St. Peter.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" credits John with making repairs to the cemetery of the martyrs Nereus and Achilleus on the Via Ardeatina, that of Felix and Adauctus, and the cemetery of Priscilla.\nVeneration.\nPope John I is depicted in art as looking through the bars of a prison or imprisoned with a deacon and a subdeacon. He is venerated at Ravenna and in Tuscany. His feast day is 18 May, the anniversary of the day of his death (whereas it had formerly been 27 May).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63014", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63014", "title": "Pope Felix IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 526 to 530\nPope Felix IV (489/490 \u2013 22 September 530) was the bishop of Rome from 12 July 526 to his death on 22 September 530. He was the chosen candidate of Ostrogoth King Theodoric the Great, who had imprisoned Felix's predecessor, John I.\nRise.\nFelix came from Samnium, the son of Castorius. He was elected after a gap of nearly two months after the death of John I, who had died in prison in Ravenna, having completed a diplomatic mission to Constantinople on behalf of the Ostrogoth King Theodoric the Great. The papal electors acceded to the king's demands and chose Felix as pope. Felix's favor in the eyes of the king allowed him to press for greater benefits for the church. However, Theodoric died later that year, allowing Felix to pursue his own policies in peace.\nPontificate.\nFelix built the Santi Cosma e Damiano in the Imperial forums on land donated by Queen Amalasuntha,\nand consecrated no fewer than thirty-nine bishops, during his short tenure of four years. During Felix's pontificate, an imperial edict was passed granting that cases against clergy should be dealt with by the pope or a designated ecclesiastical court. Violation of this ruling would result in a fine, the proceeds of which were designated for the poor. Felix also defined church teaching on grace and free will in response to a request of Faustus of Riez, in Gaul, on opposing Semi-Pelagianism. As such, Felix approved the teachings of the Council of Orange in 529, which also explained original sin.\nFelix attempted to designate his own successor: Pope Boniface II. The reaction of the Senate was to forbid the discussion of a pope's successor during his lifetime or to accept such a nomination. The majority of the clergy reacted to Felix's activity by nominating Dioscorus as Pope. Only a minority supported Boniface. His feast day is celebrated on 30 January. He remains the most recent pope to bear the pontifical name \"Felix\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "63021", "revid": "12602014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63021", "title": "Pope Vigilius", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 537 to 555\nPope Vigilius (died 7 June 555) was the bishop of Rome from 29 March 537 to his death on 7 June 555. He is considered the first pope of the Byzantine papacy. Born into Roman aristocracy, Vigilius served as a deacon and papal \"apocrisiarius\" in Constantinople. He allied with Empress Theodora, who sought his help to establish Monophysitism, and was made pope after the deposition of Silverius. After he refused to sign Emperor Justinian I's edict condemning the Three Chapters, Vigilius was arrested in 545 and taken to Constantinople. He died in Sicily while returning to Rome.\nEarly life.\nVigilius belonged to an aristocratic family from Rome; his father, John, is identified as a consul in the \"Liber pontificalis\", having received that title from the emperor in Constantinople. According to Procopius, his brother Reparatus was one of the senators taken hostage by Witigis, but managed to escape before the Ostrogothic king ordered their slaughter in 537.\nVigilius entered the service of the Church and was ordained a deacon in 531. That year, the Roman clergy agreed to a decree empowering the pope to determine the succession to the Holy See, now considered invalid. Vigilius was chosen by Pope Boniface II as his successor and presented to the clergy assembled in Old St. Peter's Basilica. The opposition to such a procedure led Boniface in the following year to withdraw his designation of a successor and to burn the decree respecting it.\nThe successor of Boniface, Agapetus I (535\u2013536), appointed Vigilius \"apocrisiarius\" at Constantinople. Empress Theodora sought to win him as a confederate to revenge the deposition of the Monophysite Patriarch Anthimus I of Constantinople by Agapetus and also to gain aid for her efforts in behalf of the Monophysites. Vigilius is said to have agreed to the plans of the intriguing empress who promised him the Holy See and 700 pounds of gold.\nRise to papacy.\nWhile Vigilius was in Constantinople, Pope Agapetus died on 22 April 536, and Silverius was made pope through the influence of the king of the Goths. Soon after Silverius was ordained, the Byzantine general Belisarius occupied Rome, which was then besieged by the Goths. Although the Goths were unable to encircle the city completely, both the Byzantine soldiers and the inhabitants feared they would be destroyed. Soon after the siege began, for example, Belisarius ordered the women, children, and unnecessary servants of Rome to leave for Naples, as well as his own army's camp followers. Around the same time, Silverius was accused of offering to betray Rome to the Goths. Belisarius had him deposed, put in a monk's habit and exiled to Greece. Several other senators were also banished from Rome on the same charges.\nWhat part Vigilius played in the deposition of Silverius is unclear in the primary sources. The authors of the \"Liber Pontificalis\", who are hostile to Vigilius, state he delivered to Belisarius the imperial orders to depose Silverius, yet are circumspect about how Silverius was elected and ordained. Procopius, on the other hand, states that Belisarius appointed Vigilius shortly after Silverius was deposed. Vigilius was consecrated and enthroned as pope on 29 March 537. After the death of Silverius, Vigilius was recognized as pope by all the Roman clergy, even though the manner of his elevation was not regular.\nPontificate.\nEmpress Theodora soon learned that she had been deceived. After Vigilius had attained the object of his ambition and been made pope, he maintained the same position as his predecessor against the Monophysites and the deposed Anthimus. A letter purported to be from the pope to the deposed Monophysite patriarchs Anthimus, Severus, and Theodosius seems to indicate that Pope Vigilius accepted the Monophysitism. This letter, however, is not regarded as genuine by most investigators and bears all the marks of forgery. The pope did not restore Anthimus to his office.\nIn the year 540 Vigilius took a stand in regard to Monophysitism, in two letters sent to Constantinople. One of the letters is addressed to Emperor Justinian I, the other to the Patriarch Menas. In both letters the pope supports positively the Synods of Ephesus and Chalcedon, the decisions of his predecessor Pope Leo I, and the deposition of the Patriarch Anthimus. Several other letters written by the pope in the first years of his pontificate give information respecting his interposition in the ecclesiastical affairs of various countries. On 6 March 538, he wrote to Bishop Caesarius of Arles concerning the penance of the Austrasian King Theudebert I on account of his marriage to his brother's widow. On 29 June 538, a decretal was sent to Bishop Profuturus of Braga containing decisions on various questions of church discipline. Bishop Auxanius and his successor, Aurelian of Arles, entered into communication with the pope respecting the granting of the pallium as a mark of the dignity and powers of a papal legate for Gaul; the pope sent suitable letters to the two bishops. In the meantime new dogmatic difficulties had been developing at Constantinople that were to give the pope many hours of bitterness. In 543 Emperor Justinian issued a decree which condemned the various heresies of the Origenists; this decree was sent for signature both to the Eastern patriarchs and to Vigilius.\nThree Chapters controversy.\nIn order to draw Justinian's thoughts from Origenism, Theodore Askidas, bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, called his attention to the fact that the condemnation of various representatives of the Antiochene school, who were said to have inspired Nestorianism, would make union with the Monophysites much easier. The emperor, who laid much stress upon winning over the Monophysites, agreed to this, and in 543 or 544 he issued a new edict condemning the Three Chapters. The \"Three Chapters\" concerned writings of Theodore of Mopsuestia, Theodoret of Cyrus, and a letter of Ibas of Edessa. While all three were, indeed, in error, this was due in some part to a misunderstanding of language used by Cyril of Alexandria against the Nestorians. Both Ibas and Theodoret had been deprived of their bishoprics by heretics, and had been restored by the Holy See and the Council of Chalcedon on anathematizing Nestorius. There were no good precedents for thus dealing harshly with the memory of men who had died in the peace of the Church. Such a condemnation at this point was seen by many of the bishops as potentially undermining the Council of Chalcedon itself.\nThe Eastern patriarchs and bishops signed the condemnation of these Three Chapters, although many signed under duress. In Western Europe, however, the procedure was considered unjustifiable and dangerous, because it was feared that it would detract from the importance of the Council of Chalcedon. Vigilius refused to acknowledge the imperial edict and was called to Constantinople by Justinian, in order to settle the matter there with a synod. According to the \"Liber pontificalis\" on 20 November 545, while the pope was celebrating the Feast of St. Cecilia in the Church of St. Cecilia in Trastevere, and before the service was fully ended, he was ordered by the imperial official Anthimus to start at once on the journey to Constantinople. The pope was taken immediately to a ship that waited in the Tiber in order to be carried to the eastern capital while a part of the populace cursed the pope and threw stones at the ship. Rome was now besieged by the Goths under Totila and the inhabitants fell into the greatest misery. Vigilius sent ships with grain to Rome, but these were captured by the enemy. If the story related by the \"Liber pontificalis\" is essentially correct, the pope probably left Rome on 22 November 545. He remained for a long time in Sicily and reached Constantinople about the end of 546 or in January 547.\nAfter his transfer to Constantinople, Vigilius wrote to his captors: \"Do with me what you wish. This is the just punishment for what I have done.\" and \"You may keep me in captivity, but the blessed Apostle Peter will never be your captive.\"\nWhile in captivity, Vigilius sought to persuade the emperor to send aid to the inhabitants of Rome and Italy who were so hard pressed by the Goths. Justinian's chief interest, however, was in the matter of the Three Chapters, and as Vigilius was not ready to make concessions of this point and wavered frequently in his measures, he had much to suffer. The matter was further complicated by the fact that the Latins, Vigilius among them, were for the most part ignorant of Greek and therefore unable to judge the incriminated writings for themselves. The change in his position is to be explained by the fact that the condemnation of the writings mentioned was essentially justifiable, yet appeared inopportune and would lead to disastrous controversies with Western Europe. Finally, Vigilius acknowledged in a letter of 8 December 553 to the Patriarch Eutychius the decisions of the Second Council of Constantinople and declared his judgment in detail in a \"Constitution\" of 26 February 554. The Pope agreed to condemn the Three Chapters, and thus after a residence of eight years at Constantinople the pope was able, after coming to an understanding with the emperor, to start on his return to Rome in the spring of 555.\nDeath.\nWhile on the journey he died at Syracuse. His body was brought to Rome and buried in the San Martino ai Monti over the Catacomb of Priscilla on the Via Salaria.\nReferences and sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "63022", "revid": "1300340680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63022", "title": "Pope Pelagius I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 556 to 561\nPope Pelagius I (died 3 March 561) was the bishop of Rome from 556 to his death on 3 March 561. A former \"apocrisiarius\" to Constantinople, Pelagius I was elected pope as the candidate of Emperor Justinian I, a designation not well received in the Western Church. Before his papacy, he opposed Justinian's efforts to condemn the \"Three Chapters\" in order to reconcile theological factions within the Church, but later adopted Justinian's position.\nFamily and early career.\nPelagius was born into a noble family from Rome. His father, John, seems to have been vicar of one of the two civil districts into which Italy was then divided.\nPelagius accompanied Pope Agapetus I to Constantinople and was appointed \"apocrisiarius\". As such, Pelagius acquired great influence with Emperor Justinian I. He returned to Rome in 543. In 545, when Pope Vigilius went to Constantinople on Justinian's orders, Pelagius stayed in Rome as the pope's representative. Totila, king of the Goths, had begun to blockade the city. Pelagius poured out his own fortune for the benefit of the famine-stricken people, and tried to induce the king to grant a truce. Though he failed, he afterwards induced Totila to spare the lives of the people when he captured Rome in December 546. Totila sent Pelagius to Constantinople in order to arrange a peace with Justinian I, but the emperor sent him back to say that his general Belisarius was in command in Italy.\nPapacy.\nVigilius died on 7 June 555, and Pelagius was elected to succeed him as pope. Pelagius was the emperor's candidate, a designation not well received by the Western clergy and laity. While before his ordination he opposed Justinian's efforts to condemn the \"Three Chapters\" in order to reconcile theological factions in the Church, afterwards Pelagius adopted Justinian's position.\nPelagius I's pontificate was undermined by rumors that he might have somehow been complicit in the death of Vigilius, and suspicion that his conceding to Justinian indicating a support for monophysitism. To overcome this he worked to maintain public order in Rome, and correct abuses among the clergy. He also labored on behalf of the poor and the victims of famine and war. In response to a request from the garrison commander at Civitavecchia, Pelagius directed Bishop Lawrence of that town, to provide chaplains for the army. He is credited with the construction of the Santi Apostoli, Rome, built to celebrate the complete victory of Narses over the Ostrogoths.\nPelagius I served five years, and upon his death on 3 March 561 was buried in Old St. Peter's Basilica.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63023", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63023", "title": "Precision Club", "text": "Bidding system in the game of contract bridge\nPrecision Club is a bidding system in the game of contract bridge. It is a strong club system developed in 1969 for C. C. Wei by Alan Truscott, and used by Taiwan teams in 1969. Their success in placing second at the 1969 Bermuda Bowl (and Wei's multimillion-dollar publicity campaign) launched the system's popularity.\nThe central feature of the Precision system is that an opening bid of one club is used for any hand with 16 or more high card points (HCP), regardless of distribution. An opening bid of one of a major suit signifies a five-card suit and 11\u201315 HCP. A one notrump opening bid signifies a balanced hand (no five-card major suit) and 13\u201315 HCP.\nPopularity.\nAfter the success of Taiwan teams in 1969 and 1970 Bermuda Bowls with the system, the entire Italian Blue team switched to Precision Club and won yet another World Team Olympiad in 1972. The modifications to the system were made chiefly by Benito Garozzo and he titled it Super Precision. Today, multiple world champions Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell play their own variant known as RM Precision. In North America, Precision is less commonly played than Standard American or 2/1 game forcing, especially at the club level.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nAdvocates of Precision say that it is generally more efficient (and precise, as the name would suggest) than systems such as Standard American. Because all opening bids except 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 are limited, the responder almost immediately knows the hand potential and the chances for a part score, game or slam.\nCritics of Precision question the wisdom of combining a strong club with 5-card majors. This causes certain hand shapes to bid awkwardly, and a high percentage of hands are opened with one diamond, including in some cases hands with only a doubleton diamond.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is so absurd that I wish to go on record in stating that the Big Club cannot be played with any hope of success if you attempt to use it by bidding only 5-card majors.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My opinion on Precision is that combining five-card majors with a forcing club is like trying to mix oil and water, and it has serious structural defects\u2026\"\u2014\u200a\nThe main disadvantage of the strong-club system is its vulnerability to preemptive bids. Knowing that they rarely can make game against a strong-club opening, experienced opponents will compete in the bidding with distributional hands, regardless of strength, and rob bidding space from the opening side.\nPrecision today.\nPrecision has seen several variations since 1969. 3NT is played as \"gambling\" (where it used to show 24\u201327 HCP), 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 \u2013 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2666 is no longer a 4\u20134\u20134\u20131 (\"impossible negative\"), and the \"unusual positive\" is used instead.\nWhen 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 \u2013 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2666 is no longer a 4\u20134\u20134\u20131,\nAlso, modern Precision often uses relay bids or transfer responses to 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 to both try to make the strong hand declarer and saving space in the auction. Other popular Precision variations on opening bids are using a strong 1NT (14\u201316 is most common), using 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 to show only a 6+ club suit and expanding the possible hand patterns for the 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2666 bid to include the usual 4\u20134\u20131\u20134 and 4\u20134\u20130\u20135 as well as 4\u20133\u20131\u20135 and 3\u20134\u20131\u20135,1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2666 bid promises at least 2 diamonds.\nRM (Meckwell) Precision.\nRM Precision is a bidding system played by Eric Rodwell and Jeff Meckstroth (which we will call Meckwell) \u2013 one of the most successful bridge partnerships of all time. Meckwell bidding is highly sophisticated variation of Precision system. Most of RM Precision was developed subsequently in the early '80s with adaptations following more slowly thereafter. Meckwell notes are a guarded secret. Though many conventions has been openly described and used: support double, conventional transfers in many situations, the pass-double inversion, Meckwell Defense...\nThey trade long and verbose Alpha, Beta and Gamma Asking Bids for the shorter and concise descriptive sequences. The convention card is available on the internet.\nEric Kokish nicely outlines the Meckwell system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their trademark is their tendency to open and overcall very light and consistently play routine partscore deals in game, making a far higher percentage of these games than the odds would suggest. Some intermediate jump overcalls (unfavorable vulnerability) and a no-fear two-suited overcall style.\nMeckwell Lite.\nMeckwell Lite is a simplified version of RM Precision popular among students and widely played in many bridge clubs. There are many versions of Meckwell Lite (some are listed in external links). The common goal is to keep the active features of RM Precision and simplify the auction variations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63024", "revid": "1124632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63024", "title": "Strong club system", "text": "Set of bidding conventions and agreements used in the game of contract bridge\nThe Strong Club System is a set of bidding conventions and agreements used in the game of contract bridge and is based upon an opening bid of 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 as being an artificial forcing bid promising a strong hand. The strong 1 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 opening is assigned a minimum strength promising 16 or more high card points. All other bids would therefore be limited to a maximum of 15 high card points. There are several variants of the strong club system and all are classified as artificial because the bids are highly codified.\nStrengths and weaknesses.\nThere are two generally acknowledged strengths of the strong club systems: \nThe generally acknowledged weakness of such systems is the fact that the opponents can aggressively overcall the 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 bid to deprive the stronger opponents of their bidding room, and that the loss of the 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663 opening bid often causes strain on other opening bids, most often 1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2666 and 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2663.\nVariants.\nThere are several types of strong club systems\nHistory.\nThe original strong club system was the Vanderbilt Club, invented in the 1920s by Harold Vanderbilt. For many years, the most popular strong club systems were the Schenken Club in the US and the Neapolitan and Blue Team Club systems in Europe. Both are four-card major systems. The former is patterned closely after the Standard American bidding of the time and the latter is characterized by canap\u00e9 (bidding the second-longer suit) in many situations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63025", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63025", "title": "Variable star", "text": "Star whose brightness fluctuates, as seen from Earth\nA variable star is a star whose brightness as seen from Earth (its apparent magnitude) changes systematically with time. This variation may be caused by a change in emitted light or by something partly blocking the light, so variable stars are classified as either:\nDepending on the type of star system, this variation can include cyclical, irregular, fluctuating, or transient behavior. Changes can occur on time scales that range from under an hour to multiple years. Many, possibly most, stars exhibit at least some oscillation in luminosity: the energy output of the Sun, for example, varies by about 0.1% over an 11-year solar cycle. At the opposite extreme, a supernova event can briefly outshine an entire galaxy. Of the 58,200 variable stars that have been catalogued as of 2023, the most common type are pulsating variables with just under 30,000, followed by eclipsing variables with over 10,000.\nVariable stars have been observed since the dawn of human history. The first documented periodic variable was the eclipsing binary Algol. The periodic variable Omicron Ceti, later named Mira, was discovered in the 17th century, followed by Chi Cygni then R Hydrae. By 1786, ten had been documented. Variable star discovery increased rapidly with the advent of photographic plates. When Cepheid variables were shown to have a period-luminosity relationship in 1912, this allowed them to be used for distance measurement. As a result, it was demonstrated that spiral nebulae are galaxies outside the Milky Way. Variable stars now form several methods for the cosmic distance ladder that is used to determine the scale of the visible universe. The periods of eclipsing binaries allowed for a more precise determination of the mass and radii of their component stars, which proved especially useful for modelling stellar evolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDiscovery.\nAn ancient Egyptian calendar of lucky and unlucky days composed some 3,200 years ago may be the oldest preserved historical document of the discovery of a variable star, the eclipsing binary Algol, but the validity of this claim has been questioned. Aboriginal Australians are also known to have observed the variability of Betelgeuse and Antares, incorporating these brightness changes into narratives that are passed down through oral tradition. Pre-telescope observations of novae and supernovae events were recorded by Babylonian, Chinese, and Arab astronomers, among others.\nOf the modern astronomers in the telescope era, the first periodic variable star was identified in 1638 when Johannes Holwarda noticed that Omicron Ceti (later named Mira) pulsated in a cycle taking 11 months; the star had previously been described as a nova by David Fabricius in 1596. This discovery, combined with supernovae observed in 1572 and 1604, proved that the starry sky was not eternally invariable as Aristotle and other ancient philosophers had taught. In this way, the discovery of variable stars contributed to the astronomical revolution of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries.\nThe second variable star to be described was the eclipsing variable Algol, by Geminiano Montanari in 1669; John Goodricke gave the correct explanation of its variability in 1784. Chi Cygni was identified in 1686 by G. Kirch, then R Hydrae in 1704 by G. D. Maraldi. Eta Aquilae, the first Cepheid variable to be discovered, was spotted by Edward Pigott in 1784. By 1786, ten variable stars were known. John Goodricke himself discovered Delta Cephei and Beta Lyrae. Since 1850, the number of known variable stars has increased rapidly, especially when it became possible to identify variable stars by means of photography. In 1885, Harvard College Observatory began a program of repeatedly photographing the entire sky for the purpose of discovering variable stars.\nIn 1912 Henrietta Swan Leavitt discovered a relationship between the brightness of Cepheid variables and their periodicity. Edwin Hubble used this result in 1924 when he discovered a Cepheid variable in what was then termed the Andromeda nebula. The resulting distance estimate demonstrated that this nebula was an \"island universe\", located well outside the Milky Way galaxy. This ended the Great Debate about the nature of spiral nebulae. In 1930, astrophysicist Cecilia Payne published the book \"The Stars of High Luminosity\", in which she made numerous observations of variable stars, paying particular attention to Cepheid variables. Her analyses and observations of variable stars, carried out with her husband, Sergei Gaposchkin, laid the basis for all subsequent work on the subject.\nThe 2008 edition of the General Catalogue of Variable Stars lists more than 46,000 variable stars in the Milky Way, as well as 10,000 in other galaxies, and over 10,000 'suspected' variables. Amateur astronomers have long played a significant role in variable star observation, with perhaps the oldest such organization being the Variable Star Section of the British Astronomical Association, founded in 1890.\nDetecting variability.\nThe most common kinds of variability involve changes in brightness, but other types of variability also occur, in particular changes in the spectrum and polarization. By combining light curve data with observed spectral changes, astronomers are often able to explain why a particular star is variable.\nVariable star observations.\nVariable stars are generally analysed using photometry, spectrophotometry, spectroscopy, and polarimetry. Measurements of their changes in brightness can be plotted to produce light curves. For regular variables, the period of variation and its amplitude can be very well established; for many variable stars, though, these quantities may vary slowly over time, or even from one period to the next. Peak brightnesses in the light curve are known as maxima, while troughs are known as minima.\nAmateur astronomers can do useful scientific study of variable stars by visually comparing the star with other stars within the same telescopic field of view of which the magnitudes are known and constant. By estimating the variable's magnitude and noting the time of observation a visual lightcurve can be constructed. Organizations like the American Association of Variable Star Observers and the British Astronomical Association collect such observations from participants around the world and share the data with the scientific community.\nFrom the light curve the following data are derived:\nFrom the spectrum the following data are derived:\nIn very few cases it is possible to make pictures of a stellar disk. These may show darker spots on its surface. One such technique is Doppler imaging, which can use the shift of spectral lines to measure velocity, then use it to determine the location of a spot across the surface of a rapidly rotating star.\nInterpretation of observations.\nCombining light curves with spectral data often gives a clue as to the changes that occur in a variable star. For example, evidence for a pulsating star is found in its shifting spectrum because its surface periodically moves toward and away from us, with the same frequency as its changing brightness.\nAbout two-thirds of all variable stars appear to be pulsating. In the 1930s astronomer Arthur Stanley Eddington showed that the mathematical equations that describe the interior of a star may lead to instabilities that cause a star to pulsate. This mechanism was known as the Eddington valve, but is now more commonly called the Kappa\u2013mechanism. The most common type of instability is related to oscillations in the degree of ionization in outer, convective layers of the star. Most stars have two layers where hydrogen and helium ionization occurs, respectively. These are referred to as partial ionization zones. The location of these layers determine the pulsational properties of the star. The pulsation of cepheids is known to be driven by oscillations in the ionization of helium (from He++ to He+ and back to He++).\nWhen the star is in the swelling phase, the partial ionization zone expands, causing it to cool. Because of the decreasing temperature the degree of ionization also decreases. This makes the plasma more transparent, and thus makes it easier for the star to radiate its energy. This in turn makes the star start to contract. As the gas is thereby compressed, it is heated and the degree of ionization again increases. This makes the gas more opaque, and radiation temporarily becomes captured in the gas. This heats the gas further, leading it to expand once again. Thus a cycle of expansion and compression (swelling and shrinking) is maintained.\nIn many cases, a predictive mathematical model can be constructed of the variable behavior. Typically an assumption is made of a constant period of variability. The model can then be used to construct an O-C diagram, which is a plot of the observed (O) behavior minus the computed (C) behavior model over a period of time, or folded over multiple cycles. If the model produces a good fit, this diagram can be used to detect a change in period, apsidal rotation, the effect of the Applegate mechanism, random period changes, or the interaction of a binary system with a third body.\nNomenclature.\nIn a given constellation, the first variable stars discovered were designated with letters R through Z, e.g. R Andromedae. This system of nomenclature was developed by Friedrich W. Argelander, who gave the first previously unnamed variable in a constellation the letter R, the first letter not used by Bayer. Letters RR through RZ, SS through SZ, up to ZZ are used for the next discoveries, e.g. RR Lyrae. Later discoveries used letters AA through AZ, BB through BZ, and up to QQ through QZ (with J omitted to avoid confusion with I). Once those 334 combinations are exhausted, variables are numbered in order of discovery, starting with the prefixed V335 onwards.\nClassification.\nVariable stars may be either \"intrinsic\" or \"extrinsic\".\nThese subgroups themselves are further divided into specific types of variable stars that are usually named after their prototype. For example, dwarf novae are designated \"U Gem\" stars after the first recognized star in the class, \"U Geminorum\".\nThe population of stars in the Milky Way galaxy is divided into two groups based on their age, chemical abundances, and motion through the galaxy. Population I stars are limited to the flat plane of the galactic system, known as thin disk stars. These originate in open clusters and often display high abundances of elements produced by stellar fusion processes \u2013 their metallicity. The Population II stars are more often distributed in the thick disk, the galactic halo, globular clusters, and galactic bulge. These are much older stars that show lower abundances of elements more massive than helium. In some cases the classification system of variable stars and their behavior is determined by their population membership.\nIntrinsic variable stars.\nExamples of types within these divisions are given below.\nPulsating variable stars.\nPulsating stars swell and shrink, affecting their brightness and spectrum. Pulsations are generally split into: radial, where the entire star expands and shrinks as a whole; and non-radial, where one part of the star expands while another part shrinks.\nDepending on the type of pulsation and its location within the star, there is a natural or fundamental frequency which determines the period of the star. Stars may also pulsate in a harmonic or overtone which is a higher frequency, corresponding to a shorter period. Pulsating variable stars sometimes have a single well-defined period, but often they pulsate simultaneously with multiple frequencies and complex analysis is required to determine the separate interfering periods. In some cases, the pulsations do not have a defined frequency, causing a random variation, referred to as stochastic. The study of stellar interiors using their pulsations is known as asteroseismology.\nThe expansion phase of a pulsation is caused by the blocking of the internal energy flow by material with a high opacity, but this must occur at a particular depth of the star to create visible pulsations. If the expansion occurs below a convective zone then no variation will be visible at the surface. If the expansion occurs too close to the surface the restoring force will be too weak to create a pulsation. The restoring force to create the contraction phase of a pulsation can be pressure if the pulsation occurs in a non-degenerate layer deep inside a star, and this is called an acoustic or pressure mode of pulsation, abbreviated to p-mode. In other cases, the restoring force is gravity and this is called a g-mode. Pulsating variable stars typically pulsate in only one of these modes.\nCepheids and cepheid-like variables.\nThe Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram is a scatter plot of stars showing the relationship between the absolute magnitude and the spectral class (luminosity vs. effective temperature). Most ordinary stars like the Sun occupy a band called the main sequence that runs from lower right to upper left on this diagram. Several kinds of these pulsating stars occupy a box called the Cepheid instability strip that crosses the main sequence in the region of A- and F-class stars, then proceeds vertically and to the right on the H\u2013R diagram, finally crossing the track for supergiants. These stars swell and shrink very regularly, caused by the star's own mass resonance, generally by the fundamental frequency. The Eddington valve mechanism for pulsating variables is believed to account for cepheid-like pulsations.\nThe pulsational instability of Cepheid variables correlates with variations in the spectral class, effective temperature, and surface radial velocity of the star. Each of the subgroups on the instability strip has a fixed relationship between period and absolute magnitude, as well as a relation between period and mean density of the star. The period-luminosity relationship makes these high luminosity Cepheids very useful for determining distances to galaxies within the Local Group and beyond.\nThe Cepheids are named only for Delta Cephei, while a completely separate class of variables is named after Beta Cephei.\nLong period variables.\nThe long period variables are cool evolved stars that pulsate with periods in the range of weeks to several years. All giant stars cooler than spectral type K5 are variable because of radial pulsations. Many variables of this class show longer period secondary variations that run for several hundred to several thousand days. This may change the brightness by up to several magnitudes although it is often much smaller, with the more rapid primary variations superimposed. The reasons for this type of secondary variation are not clearly understood, being variously ascribed to pulsations, binarity, and stellar rotation.\nBeta Cephei variables.\nBeta Cephei (\u03b2 Cep) variables (sometimes called Beta Canis Majoris variables, especially in Europe) undergo short period pulsations in the order of 0.1\u20130.6 days with an amplitude of 0.01\u20130.3 magnitudes (1% to 30% change in luminosity). They are at their brightest during minimum contraction. Many stars of this kind exhibits multiple pulsation periods.\nSlowly pulsating B-type stars.\nSlowly pulsating B (SPB) stars are hot main-sequence stars slightly less luminous than the Beta Cephei stars, with longer periods and larger amplitudes. They have masses in the range of , and non-radial pulsation periods from \u00a0days. Many are rapid rotators, which can cause them to appear cooler and, in some cases, lie outside instability strip.\nVery rapidly pulsating hot (subdwarf B) stars.\nThe prototype of this rare class is V361 Hydrae, a 15th magnitude subdwarf B star. They pulsate with periods of a few minutes and may simultaneous pulsate with multiple periods. They have amplitudes of a few hundredths of a magnitude and are given the GCVS acronym RPHS. They are p-mode pulsators.\nPV Telescopii variables.\nStars in this rare class are chemically peculiar type B (Bp) supergiants with a period of 0.1\u20131 day and an amplitude of 0.1 magnitude on average. Their spectra are peculiar by having weak hydrogen but extra strong carbon and helium lines, making this a type of extreme helium star. The prototype for this category of variable is PV Telescopii, which undergoes small but complex luminosity variations and radial velocity fluctuations.\nAlpha Cygni variables.\nAlpha Cygni (\u03b1 Cyg) variables are nonradially pulsating supergiants of spectral classes B to A. Their periods range from several days to several weeks, and their amplitudes of variation are typically of the order of 0.1 magnitudes. The light changes, which often seem irregular, may be caused by the superposition of many oscillations with close periods. The progenitors of these stars have at least 14 solar masses. At least for the brighter members, these variables appear to have returned to the blue supergiant region of the H\u2013R diagram after losing considerable mass as red supergiants. Deneb, in the constellation of Cygnus is the prototype of this class.\nGamma Doradus variables.\nGamma Doradus (\u03b3 Dor) variables are non-radially pulsating main-sequence stars of spectral classes F to late A, with luminosity classes of IV-V or V. Their periods are 0.3 to 3 days and their amplitudes typically of the order of 0.1 magnitudes or less. This variable type occupies a narrow range near the low-luminosity part of the instability strip, which partially overlaps the range of Delta Scuti variables. The physical properties of Gamma Doradus variables are similar to long-period Delta Scuti variables. Their slow period and low amplitudes makes Gamma Doradus variables difficult to discover from the ground; most have been spotted by space missions.\nSolar-like oscillations.\nThe Sun oscillates with very low amplitude in a large number of modes having periods around 5 minutes. The study of these oscillations is known as helioseismology. Oscillations in the Sun are driven stochastically by convection in its outer layers. The term solar-like oscillations is used to describe oscillations in other stars that are excited in the same way and the study of these oscillations is one of the main areas of active research in the field of asteroseismology. Stars with surface convection layers that can produce solar-like oscillations are generally cooler than the right edge of the instability strip, which includes the lower main sequence along with subgiants and red giants. However, solar-like oscillations can also be excited by stellar pulsations, such as by Cepheids.\nFast yellow pulsating supergiants.\nA fast yellow pulsating supergiant (FYPS) is a luminous yellow supergiant with pulsations shorter than a day. They are thought to have evolved beyond a red supergiant phase, but the mechanism for the pulsations is unknown. The class was named in 2020 through analysis of TESS observations.\nPulsating white dwarfs.\nThese non-radially pulsating stars have short periods of hundreds to thousands of seconds with tiny fluctuations of 0.001 to 0.2 magnitudes. Known types of pulsating white dwarf (or pre-white dwarf) include the \"DAV\", or \"ZZ Ceti\", stars, with hydrogen-dominated atmospheres and the spectral type DA; \"DBV\", or \"V777 Her\", stars, with helium-dominated atmospheres and the spectral type DB; and \"GW Vir\" stars, with atmospheres dominated by helium, carbon, and oxygen. GW Vir stars may be subdivided into \"DOV\" and \"PNNV\" stars.\nBLAP variables.\nA Blue Large-Amplitude Pulsator (BLAP) is a very rare class of radially-pulsating star characterized by changes of 0.2 to 0.4 magnitudes with typical periods of 7 to 75 minutes. They are thought to be the small helium core of a red giant that has had the remainder of its atmosphere stripped away by a binary companion. It has been hypothesized that they are the long-sought surviving companions of Type Ia supernovae. Alternatively, they may form from the merger of two low-mass white dwarfs. BLAP are effectively pre-white dwarf bodies with an effective temperature between 20,000 and 35,000\u00a0K. Most of these objects are in the medium or late stage of helium fusion.\nEruptive variable stars.\nEruptive variable stars show unpredictable brightness variations caused by material being lost from the star, or in some cases being accreted to it. Despite the name, these are distinguished from cataclysmic variables because the eruptions are due to non-thermonuclear processes.\nYoung stellar object.\nProtostars are young objects that have not yet completed the process of contraction from a gas nebula to a veritable star. During this phase, the object is deeply embedded in an optically thick envelope, so that the variability induced by the rapid accretion process is primarily visible in the infrared. Once the object has expelled most of this nascent cocoon of gas and dust, it stabilizes in mass and becomes a pre\u2013main-sequence star that is contracting toward the main sequence. The luminosity of this object is derived from gravitational contraction. These objects often exhibit irregular brightness variations in association with strong magnetic fields.\nGiants and supergiants.\nLarge, more luminous stars with lower surface gravity lose their matter relatively easily. Mass loss rates are greater in higher luminosity stars, with the stellar wind being propelled by radiation pressure, and in cool, low mass giants, by radiation pressure on dust grains and by pulsations. For this reason variability due to eruptions and mass loss is more common among giants and supergiants.\nWolf\u2013Rayet variables.\nClassic population I Wolf\u2013Rayet (WR) stars are massive hot stars that sometimes show variability, probably due to several different causes including binary interactions and rotating gas clumps around the star. While evolving they underwent intense mass loss, leaving behind a hot helium core with little hydrogen in the outer layers. They exhibit broad emission line spectra with helium, nitrogen, carbon and oxygen lines. Variations in some WR stars appear to be stochastic while others show multiple periods.\nGamma Cassiopeiae variables.\nGamma Cassiopeiae (\u03b3 Cas) variables are non-supergiant fast-rotating B class emission line-type stars that fluctuate irregularly by up to 1.5 magnitudes (4 fold change in luminosity). This is caused by the ejection of matter at their equatorial regions due to the rapid rotational velocity. Gamma Cas variables are a source of bright X-ray emission, which may be due to gas accretion onto a white dwarf companion.\nFlare stars.\nFlare stars are defined by the observation of a flare event, which is a brief but dramatic increase in stellar luminosity. In main-sequence stars major eruptive variability is uncommon. Flare activity is more likely among young stars that are spinning rapidly. The frequency of flares is more common and their prominence is more apparent among UV Ceti variables, which are very faint main-sequence stars with stronger magnetic fields. They increase in brightness by several magnitudes in just a few seconds, and then fade back to normal brightness in half an hour or less. Several nearby red dwarfs are flare stars, including Proxima Centauri and Wolf 359.\nA superflare is a class of energetic, short duration flare that has been observed on Sun-like stars. It has a typical energy of at least , which is greater than the strongest observed solar flare: the 1859 Carrington Event with an estimated energy of . The Kepler space telescope light curves showed over 2,000 superflares on 250 G-type dwarfs. The occurrence rate is higher on younger, faster rotating stars.\nRS Canum Venaticorum variables.\nThese are detached binary systems with at least one of the components having a highly active chromosphere, including huge sunspots and flares, believed to be enhanced by the close companion. The former is usually an evolved star, while the latter is a lower mass star, either main-sequence or a subdwarf. Tidal forces between the stars has locked their rotation period to the orbital period, giving them a high rotation rate of a few days. They display emission lines from the chromosphere and X-ray output from the corona. Variability scales ranges from days, close to the orbital period and sometimes also with eclipses, to years as sunspot activity varies.\nCataclysmic or explosive variable stars.\nThese variables display outbursts from thermonuclear bursts at the surface or near the core. The category also includes nova-like objects that display outbursts like a nova from a rapid release of energy, or because their spectrum resembles that of a nova at minimum light.\nSupernovae.\nSupernovae are the most dramatic type of cataclysmic variable, being some of the most energetic events in the universe. A supernova can briefly emit as much energy as an entire galaxy, brightening by more than 20 magnitudes (over one hundred million times brighter). The supernova explosion is caused by a white dwarf or a star core reaching a certain mass/density limit, the Chandrasekhar limit, causing the object to collapse in a fraction of a second. This collapse \"bounces\" and causes the star to explode and emit this enormous energy quantity. The outer layers of these stars are blown away at speeds of many thousands of kilometers per second.\nThe expelled matter may form nebulae called \"supernova remnants\". A well-known example of such a nebula is the Crab Nebula, left over from a supernova that was observed in China and elsewhere in 1054. The progenitor object may either disintegrate completely in the explosion, or, in the case of a massive star, the core can become a neutron star (generally a pulsar) or a black hole.\nSupernovae can result from the death of an extremely massive star, many times heavier than the Sun. At the end of the life of this massive star, a non-fusible iron core is formed from fusion ashes. The mass of this iron core is pushed towards the Chandrasekhar limit until it is surpassed and therefore collapses. One of the most studied supernovae of this type is SN 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud.\nA supernova may also result from mass transfer onto a white dwarf from a star companion in a double star system. The Chandrasekhar limit is surpassed from the infalling matter. The absolute luminosity of this latter type is related to properties of its light curve, so that these supernovae can be used to establish the distance to other galaxies.\nLuminous red nova.\nLuminous red novae are stellar explosions caused by the merger of two stars. They are not related to classical novae. For a brief period prior to the merger event the two components share a common envelope, which is followed by a mass ejection event that expels the envelope. They have a characteristic red appearance and a lengthy plateau phase following the initial outburst. The luminosity of these transient events lies between those of novae and supernovae, and their evolution lasts from several weeks to months. The galactic rate of these events is 0.2 per year.\nNovae.\nClassical novae are the result of dramatic explosions, but unlike supernovae these events do not result in the destruction of the progenitor star. They form in close binary systems, with one component being a white dwarf accreting matter from the other ordinary star component, and may recur over periods of decades to centuries or millennia. Novae ignite from the sudden onset of runaway thermonuclear fusion at the base of the accreted matter, which under certain high pressure conditions (degenerate matter) accelerates explosively. They are categorised by their speed class, which range from \"very fast\" to \"very slow\", depending on the time for the nova to decrease by 2 or 3 visual magnitudes from peak brightness. Several naked eye novae have been recorded, V1500 Cygni being the brightest in the recent history, reaching 2nd magnitude in 1975.\nRecurrent novae are defined as having undergone more than one such event in recorded history. These tend to occur on higher mass white dwarfs and have smaller ejecta mass. M31N 2008-12a, a recurrent nova in the Andromeda Galaxy, erupts as often as every 12 months. It has an estimated mass close to the Chandrasekhar limit, and thus is a Type Ia supernova progenitor candidate.\nDwarf novae.\nDwarf novae are double stars involving a white dwarf in which matter transfer between the component gives rise to regular outbursts. They are dimmer and repeat more often than \"classical\" novae. There are three types of dwarf nova:\nZ Andromedae variables.\nThese symbiotic binary systems are composed of a red giant and a compact star (typically a white dwarf) enveloped in a cloud of gas and dust. They undergo nova-like outbursts with amplitudes of 1\u20133 magnitudes, and are caused by accretion rates greater than is needed to maintain stable fusion. The prototype for this class is Z Andromedae.\nAM CVn variables.\nAM CVn variables are symbiotic binaries where a white dwarf is accreting helium-rich material from either another white dwarf, a helium star, or an evolved main-sequence star. They can undergo complex variations, or at times no variations, with ultrashort periods. The orbital periods of these systems are in the range of \u00a0minutes, with those between \u00a0minutes showing outburst behavior that increases the brightness by \u00a0magnitudes. The last is due to instabilities in the accretion disk.\nVariable X-ray sources.\nThese optically variable binary systems are sources of intense X-ray emission that do not belong to one of the other variable star categories. One of the components is an accreting compact object: either a white dwarf, neutron star, or stellar mass black hole. A notable example of such a variable X-ray source is Cygnus X-1.\nDQ Herculis variables.\nDQ Herculis systems are interacting binaries in which a low-mass star transfers mass to a highly magnetic white dwarf. The white dwarf spin period is significantly shorter than the binary orbital period and can sometimes be detected as a photometric periodicity. An accretion disk usually forms around the white dwarf, but its innermost regions are magnetically truncated by the white dwarf. Once captured by the white dwarf's magnetic field, the material from the inner disk travels along the magnetic field lines until it accretes. In extreme cases, the white dwarf's magnetism prevents the formation of an accretion disk.\nAM Herculis variables.\nIn these cataclysmic variables, the white dwarf's magnetic field is so strong that it synchronizes the white dwarf's spin period with the binary orbital period. Instead of forming an accretion disk, the accretion flow is channeled along the white dwarf's magnetic field lines until it impacts the white dwarf near a magnetic pole. Cyclotron radiation beamed from the accretion region can cause orbital variations of several magnitudes. BY Cam-type systems are known as asynchronous polars due to a slight (1\u20132%) difference between the rotation period and the orbital period. This asynchronity is believed to be caused by flare activity on the accreting white dwarf.\nX-ray binaries.\nHigh mass X-ray binaries consist of a Be star or a supergiant in a relatively close orbit with a neutron star companion. Mass is being transferred to the accreting compact object from the donor star, which results in X-ray emission. In the case of a Be star, a gaseous disk orbiting the star at the equator is responsible for the optical variability, while the interaction of the companion is truncating the disk.\nExtrinsic variable stars.\nThere are two main groups of extrinsic variables: rotating stars and eclipsing stars.\nRotating variable stars.\nStars with sizeable sunspots may show significant variations in brightness as they rotate, and brighter areas of the surface are brought into view. Bright spots also occur at the magnetic poles of magnetic stars. Stars with ellipsoidal shapes may also show changes in brightness as they present varying areas of their surfaces to the observer.\nNon-spherical stars.\nRotating stars can vary in brightness due to their shape.\nMagnetic fields.\nThese variables have a magnetic field but lack significant chromospheric activity.\nEclipsing binaries.\nExtrinsic variables have variations in their brightness, as seen by terrestrial observers, due to some external source. One of the most common reasons for this is the presence of a binary companion star, so that the two together form a binary star. When seen from certain angles, one star may eclipse the other, causing a reduction in brightness. One of the most famous eclipsing binaries, and the first to be discovered, is Algol, or Beta Persei (\u03b2 Per).\nDetached, double-lined eclipsing binaries are a useful tool for testing the validity of stellar evolution models. By examining the spectral types of the components and their combined light curve, the masses and radii of both stars can be precisely determined. Under the assumption that both stars formed at the same time, the model can then be used to extrapolate their history and see if it matches the current radii of the components.\nAlgol variables.\nAlgol variables undergo eclipses with one or two minima separated by periods of nearly constant light. The prototype of this class is Algol in the constellation Perseus. Most systems with Algol-type light curves are detached binaries. However, some definitions of Algol variables apply to semi-detached binary systems, where one of the components has filled its Roche lobe and is transferring mass to the companion star. These are dubbed classical Algol systems, with Algol itself being one such semi-detached system.\nDouble Periodic variables.\nDouble periodic variables (DPVs) are Algol-like, consisting of a semidetached binary system where the primary has at least seven times the mass of the Sun and the secondary, now with 1\u20133 times the mass of the Sun, is overflowing its Roche lobe. The primary component is orbited by a massive, optically-thick accretion disk. The system shows a long period of photometric variation that is about 35 times the orbital period. The smaller donor star is tidally locked to the orbital period, and this rapid rotation may be driving a magnetic dynamo. This in turn may be causing the longer period variation by modulating the mass transfer rate. An example of a DPV is V393 Scorpii.\nBeta Lyrae variables.\nBeta Lyrae (\u03b2 Lyr) variables are close eclipsing binaries, named after the prototype star Beta Lyrae, or Sheliak. The gravitational interaction of the components causes at least one member to form an ellipsoidal shape, resulting in a light curve that varies continually even outside the eclipse. In the Beta Lyrae system, one of the components is overflowing its Roche lobe, creating a mass exchange. This flow of material is adding features to the light curve. Many Beta Lyrae-type variables are also double periodic variables, including Beta Lyrae itself.\nW Serpentis variables.\nW Serpentis is the prototype of a class of semi-detached binaries including a giant or supergiant transferring material to a massive more compact star. The latter star has an optically-thick accretion disk, and the mass transfer rate is higher than in Algol variables. They are characterised, and distinguished from the similar \u03b2 Lyr systems, by strong UV emission from accretions hotspots on a disc of material. The light curve can be noisy and the orbital period is often variable.\nW Ursae Majoris variables.\nThe stars in the W UMa group of eclipsing variables show periods of less than a day. The components are so closely situated to each other that their surfaces are almost in contact with each other. They are termed over-contact eclipsing binaries, and they share a common envelope. As a result, the spectral type does not change during an orbit. Their orbit is circular and the components are in synchronous rotation with the orbital period.\nPlanetary transits.\nStars with planets show brightness variations if their planets pass between Earth and the star. For the Sun, this occurs with the planets inferior to the Earth, namely Mercury and Venus. With exoplanets, these variations are much smaller than those seen with stellar companions, but are detectable using photometric observations with a sufficiently high signal-to-noise ratio. Examples include HD 209458, WASP-43, and all of the planets and planet candidates detected by the Kepler and TESS space-based missions."}
{"id": "63026", "revid": "1292918600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63026", "title": "Pope John III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 561 to 574\nPope John III (; died 13 July 574), born Catelinus, was the bishop of Rome from 17 July 561 to his death on 13 July 574.\nFamily.\nCatelinus was born in Rome to a distinguished family. His father, Anastasius, was a \"vir illustris\", a high-ranking member of the Roman Senate. He may be identical with the subdeacon John who made a collection of extracts from the Greek Fathers and completed the translation of the \"Vitae patrum\" into Latin which Pope Pelagius I had begun.\nPapacy.\nCatelinus was elected to succeed Pelagius I and was consecrated as pope on 17 July 561. He took the name John on his accession to the papacy.\nJohn's pontificate is characterized by two major events over which he had no control. The first was the death of Emperor Justinian I in 565, after which the Eastern Roman Empire turned its attention from Rome and the rest of Italy to pressing problems in the Balkans, from the Avars, Persians and the Arabs. The other major event was the Lombard invasion of Italy, which began in 568. Much of northern Italy was overrun, as well as the central spine of the peninsula, making a shambles of the imperial administration. The Lombards threatened the survival of Rome itself, besieging it repeatedly. Their entrance reintroduced the Arian belief, which threatened the predominance of Trinitarian Christianity.\nAs the Lombards poured south into Italy, the newly appointed governor Longinus sat powerless in Ravenna, unable to stop them. Pope John took it upon himself to go to Naples, where the former governor Narses was preparing to return to the imperial capital, Constantinople, and beg him to take charge. He had been recalled by the new emperor, Justin II, in response to Italian petitions over his oppressive taxation. Narses agreed to this, and returned to Rome. However, popular hatred of Narses was then extended to John for inviting him back. This unrest reached such a pitch that the pope was forced to retire from Rome and take up residence at the catacombs along the Via Appia two miles outside the city. There he carried out his duties, including the consecration of bishops.\nOne recorded act of Pope John involved two bishops, Salonius of Embrun and Sagittarius of Gap, who had been condemned in a synod at Lyons (c. 567). This pair succeeded in persuading King Guntram of Burgundy that they had been condemned unjustly, and appealed to the pope. Influenced by Guntram's letters, John decided that they should be restored to their sees.\nJohn III died on 13 July 574 and was succeeded by Benedict I.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63027", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63027", "title": "Mauthausen, Upper Austria", "text": "Mauthausen is a small market town in the Austrian state of Upper Austria. It is located at about 20 kilometres east of the city of Linz. The town lies on the banks of the Danube river, opposite the town of Enns, where the major Danube tributary of Enns joins it. During World War II, the town was the site of the Mauthausen concentration camp.\nHistory.\nThe area of Mauthausen has been settled for many millennia, as shown by archaeological discoveries dating back to the Neolithic age. During the time of the Roman Empire, it was at the crossroads of two trade routes.\nAt the end of the 10th century, it became a toll (\"Maut\" in German) station for ships, and the name \"Muthusen\" for the settlement is first mentioned in 1007.\nA village that had developed by the Third Crusade was ordered burned on 16 May 1189 by Emperor Frederick Barbarossa when it levied a tax on his army as it marched towards Vienna.\nDuring the First World War, a prisoner of war camp existed to the east of Mauthausen. Italian, Serbian and Russian (at times 40,000 men) soldiers were imprisoned there, around 10,000 of whom died in the camp, mostly Serbs and Italians. A war cemetery exists in their memory. The prison had guards especially from Hungary who were known for their barbaric tortures of the soldiers.\nDuring the Second World War, from 1938 to 1945, one of the first massive concentration camp complexes in Nazi Germany was set up to the west of the town. Inmates were subjected to barbaric conditions, the most infamous of which was being forced to carry heavy stone blocks up 186 steps from the camp quarry. The steps became known as the \"Stairway to Death\". A new museum was opened at the camp in 2003.\nMauthausen experienced flooding from the River Danube in 1954 and 2002.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTourism.\nPlaces of interest in and around Mauthausen include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63028", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63028", "title": "Pope Pelagius II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 579 to 590\nPope Pelagius II (died 7 February 590) was the bishop of Rome from 26 November 579 to his death on 7 February 590.\nLife.\nPelagius was a native of Rome, but probably of Ostrogothic descent, as his father's name was Winigild. Pelagius became Pope Benedict I's successor on 26 November 579, without imperial confirmation.\nPelagius appealed for help from Emperor Maurice against the Lombards, but to no avail, forcing Pelagius to \"buy\" a truce and turn to the Franks, who invaded Italy, but left after being bribed by the Lombards.\nPelagius labored to promote clerical celibacy, and he issued stringent regulations on this matter. During his pontificate, the bishop of Milan, who had broken communion with Rome in the Schism of the Three Chapters, returned to full communion around 581, while other bishops in Northern Italy remained in schism.\nPelagius ordered the construction of the Basilica di San Lorenzo fuori le Mura, a church shrine over the place where Saint Lawrence was martyred. During his reign, the Visigoths of Spain converted, but he also faced conflict with the See of Constantinople over the adoption of the title of \"Ecumenical Patriarch,\" which Pelagius believed to undermine the authority of the papacy.\nPelagius fell victim to the plague that devastated Rome at the end of 590. His successor, Gregory I, thought his regulations of clerical celibacy too strict, and modified them to some extent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63030", "revid": "9182658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63030", "title": "Pope Severinus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 640\nPope Severinus (died 2 August 640) was the bishop of Rome elected in October 638. He was caught up in a power struggle with Byzantine Emperor Heraclius, who pressured him to accept Monothelitism. Severinus refused, which for over eighteen months hindered his efforts to obtain imperial recognition of his election. His pontificate was finally sanctioned on 28 May 640, but he died two months later.\nEarly career.\nSeverinus was a Roman. His father was named Avienus, according to the \"Liber Pontificalis\". The name of the father suggests descent from members of the Roman Senate. A previous Avienus was Roman consul in 501. Already an old man, Severinus was elected to succeed Honorius I as pope in mid-October 638.\nMonothelite controversy.\nPatriarch Sergius I of Constantinople had drawn up the \"Ecthesis\" in response to the orthodox synodical letter of Patriarch Sophronius of Jerusalem. On learning of the death of Honorius, Sergius convinced Emperor Heraclius to issue this document as an imperial edict in December 638, thus valid across the entire empire. Eustachius, the \"magister militum\", carried it to Isaac the Armenian, the exarch of Ravenna, with instructions that he was to ensure the new pope's acceptance of the Monothelite teaching. With its declaration of Jesus Christ only possessing one will, Severinus refused to sign it. The exarch therefore refused to confirm the papal election in the emperor's name, a situation that endured for over eighteen months.\nIsaac was determined to achieve his aim, so he commissioned Maurice, the \"chartoularios\", to plunder the Lateran Palace and force Severinus to agree to the \"Ecthesis\". Maurice gathered together a party of local discontented nobles and approached the local soldiers, the \"exercitus Romanus\", and convinced them that the pope had withheld their pay and was keeping the arrears in the Lateran. A mob soon formed and they rushed en masse to the palace. Severinus managed to keep the hostile forces out of the palace. Maurice tried another tactic and three days later he was admitted into the palace with the city judges whom he won over to his side. They sealed up the treasures, and Maurice sent word to the exarch that he was free to come to the palace and help himself to the accumulated riches. Isaac soon appeared, and after exiling the leading clergy within the Lateran, spent the next eight days looting the palace, prudently sending a share to the emperor at Constantinople to prevent his displeasure.\nMeanwhile, at Constantinople, the papal legates had continued to seek the confirmation of Severinus. Emperor Heraclius still refused to grant his confirmation unless Severinus signed the \"Ecthesis\". At first they were clearly told that unless they would go back and persuade the pope to accept the \"Ecthesis\", they were wasting their time. The legates sought to persuade an unwell and slowly dying Heraclius that they were not there to make professions of faith, but to transact business. The envoys were unwilling to agree to this demand, but they were also unwilling to allow the Roman See to remain vacant indefinitely, so they offered to show Severinus the document and ask him to sign it if he thought it was correct. They made it clear that if the emperor was going to force Severinus to sign it, that all the clergy of the See of Rome would stand together, and such a route would only end in a lengthy and destructive stalemate. This offer was apparently satisfactory, and imperial recognition of the papal election was granted on 28 May 640.\nDeath and legacy.\nSeverinus died on 2 August 640, two months after his pontificate had finally started. In the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Severinus was described as a kind, generous and mild holy man, a benefactor to the clergy, and a friend to the poor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63031", "revid": "50540885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63031", "title": "Hound", "text": "Type of hunting dog\nA hound is a type of hunting dog used by hunters to track or chase prey. What makes hounds unique is the way they hunt; some, known as scent hounds, follow trails with their powerful noses, while others, called sighthounds, rely on their sharp vision and speed to spot and chase prey across open land. Breeds like the Beagle, Bloodhound, Basset Hound, Afghan Hound and Greyhound are well-known examples.\nHistorically, hounds played an important role in rural life, especially in Europe during the Middle Ages, when hunting was not only a source of food but also a social activity among nobles. Today, while many hounds are still used for hunting in some parts of the world, they are equally valued as companions, admired for their loyalty, energy, and strong bond with their owners.\nDescription.\nHounds can be contrasted with gun dogs that assist hunters by identifying prey and/or recovering shot quarry. The hound breeds were the first hunting dogs. They have either a powerful sense of smell, great speed, or both. There are three types of hound, with several breeds within each type:\nList of hound breeds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63032", "revid": "50969275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63032", "title": "Southwest Airlines", "text": "Airline of the United States\nSouthwest Airlines Co., or simply Southwest, is a major low cost airlines of the United States. It is headquartered in the Love Field neighborhood of Dallas, Texas. It is the fourth-largest airline in North America when measured by passengers carried, as of 2023. With its all-Boeing 737 fleet, Southwest serves over 100 destinations in 42 states, Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico, and ten other countries near the southern United States in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea regions: Aruba, the Bahamas, Belize, the Cayman Islands, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Jamaica, and Turks and Caicos.\nThe airline was established on March 9, 1967, by Herb Kelleher and Rollin King as Air Southwest Co. and adopted its current name, Southwest Airlines Co., in 1971, when it began operating as an intrastate airline wholly within the state of Texas, first flying between Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio. It began regional interstate service in 1979, expanding nationwide in the following decades.\nNetwork.\nSouthwest uses a point-to-point system combined with a rolling-hub model in its base cities, in contrast to the hub-and-spoke system of other major airlines. {{As of|2024|1}}, Southwest Airlines flies to over 100 destinations in 42 states, Puerto Rico, Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. This system means that the airline has no real hubs, but rather some airports with more destinations than others.\nInterline agreements.\nSouthwest currently has interline agreements with Icelandair , Taiwan's China Airlines , EVA Air. and Philippine Airlines.\nPassenger experience.\nSouthwest Airlines solely offers economy class seating and does not have business class or first class cabins on its aircraft.\nSouthwest offers free snacks and non-alcoholic beverages inflight and offers alcoholic beverages for sale for $7\u20139 per beverage. Free alcoholic drinks are offered to passengers on some holidays such as Valentine's Day and Halloween. Southwest has become known for colorful boarding announcements and crews who sometimes burst out in song.\nSouthwest currently has an open seating policy, scheduled to end on January 26, 2026, and uses a unique boarding process. Passengers are given a group letter (A, B or C) and a number (1 through 60). Passengers lineup in numerical order within each letter group and choose any open seat on the aircraft. A 2012 study on the television series \"MythBusters\", found this to be the fastest method currently in use for passengers to board a plane; on average, it is 10 minutes faster than the standard method. \nSouthwest has a \"customer of size\" policy in which the cost of a second seat is refunded for any plus-sized travelers who take up more room than one seat.\nOn May 1, 2025, Southwest introduced the first aircraft with new extra-legroom seating as part of a phased update to its cabin layout. These seats will be installed in the first five rows and near exit doors on retrofitted Boeing 737-800 and MAX 8 aircraft. During the initial rollout, the seats will be available at no additional cost as the airline continues to operate under an open seating policy. The airline plans to complete these upgrades before operating flights with assigned seats on January 27, 2026. \nIn-flight entertainment.\nAs of December 2024, Southwest offers free streaming of live television, movies, music, in-app messaging (iMessage and WhatsApp), and real-time flight tracking. Full Internet access is available for an $8 fee for most passengers but is free for Business Select and A-List Preferred passengers. As of March 9, 2023, Southwest began upgrading Wi-Fi hardware on its existing aircraft equipped with Anuvu Wi-Fi and began rolling out Viasat Wi-Fi on all new deliveries.\nRapid Rewards.\nSouthwest first began to offer a frequent-flyer program on June 18, 1987, calling it \"The Company Club\". The program credited for trips flown regardless of distance. Southwest Airlines renamed its frequent-flyer program \"Rapid Rewards\" on April 25, 1996.\nThe original Rapid Rewards program offered one credit per one-way flight from an origin to a destination, including any stops or connections on Southwest Airlines. When 16 credits were accumulated in a 24-month period, Southwest awarded one free round-trip ticket that was valid for 12 months.\nOn March 1, 2011, Rapid Rewards changed to a points system based on ticket cost. Members earn and redeem points based on a four-tier fare scale multiplier and the cost of the ticket. Changes also included no blackout dates, seat restrictions, or expiring credits. Since October 18, 2019, Rapid Rewards points do not expire as long as the member is alive. It also adds more options to use points.\nCorporate affairs.\nBusiness trends.\nThe key trends for Southwest Airlines are (as of the end of the calendar year):\nHeadquarters.\nThe Southwest Airlines headquarters are located on the grounds of Dallas Love Field in Dallas. \nOn September 17, 2012, Southwest broke ground on a new Training and Operational Support building, across the street from its current headquarters building.\nOn June 2, 2016, Southwest broke ground on its new office and training facility known as Wings. The newest addition to the corporate campus is composed of a 420,000-square-foot, six-story office building, and a 380,000-square-foot adjoining structure called the Leadership Education and Aircrew Development (LEAD) Center that serves as the new pilot training facility. The LEAD Center has the capacity to house and support 18 flight simulators. It is designed to be expanded to accommodate up to 26 simulator bays. The building opened on April 3, 2018.\nOn August 16, 2019, Southwest announced an expansion of the LEAD Center to accommodate eight additional simulators for future operational and training demands. On January 2, 2020, it was announced that Southwest would be purchasing an additional {{convert|3|acre|ha}} of land adjacent to its Wings and LEAD facilities. No additional details were disclosed.\nEmployment.\nBob Jordan became Southwest's sixth CEO on February 1, 2022, replacing Gary C. Kelly. Kelly continues as chairman of Southwest Airlines. Kelly replaced Jim Parker on July 15, 2004, and assumed the title of president on July 15, 2008, replacing former president Colleen Barrett.\nIn September 2024, in response to pressure from Elliott Investment Management, Kelly announced that he would not seek reelection as executive chairman in 2025. Jordan is expected to remain as CEO.On October 24, 2024, Kelly announced he will accelerate his retirement, which \u2013 along with the previously announced retirements of six other Southwest Directors \u2013 will go into effect on November 1, 2024. Rakesh Gangwal was announced as independent Chair of the Board of Directors three days later. Gangwal stepped down as Chair on August 1, 2025, and Doug Brooks was announced as the new independent Chair of the Board.\nAbout 83% of Southwest employees are members of a union. The Southwest Airline Pilots' Association, a union not affiliated with the Air Line Pilots Association, represents the airline's pilots. The aircraft maintenance technicians are represented by the Aircraft Mechanics Fraternal Association. Customer service agents and reservation agents are represented by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers Union. Flight dispatchers, flight attendants, ramp agents, and operations agents are represented by the Transport Workers Union.\nThe company has appeared on various \"best places to work\" list, with its employee culture mentioned by \"Travel and Leisure\", CNBC, and \"Forbes\". The company has also been named to \"Fortune\" magazine's \"Most Admired Companies\" list, reaching number 14 in 2021.\nSouthwest has never furloughed an employee. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the company launched voluntary separation and extended time-off programs in 2020, and around 16,900 employees volunteered to take an early retirement or long-term leave. Roughly 24% were pilots and 33% were flight attendants. In late 2020, the airline issued some WARN Act notices and announced incipient pay cuts for many employees in response to pandemic impacts, but these measures were rescinded after the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 was enacted on December 27, 2020, providing additional financial aid to US airlines.\nThe latest five year labor contract for Southwest Airlines pilots was approved in January 2024.\nFollowing a board takeover in February 2025 Southwest laid off 1750 of its non-contract staff, approximately 15% of its corporate workforce.\nImpact on carriers.\nSouthwest and its business model have had an influence on other low-cost carriers (LCC's). The competitive strategy combines a high level of employee and aircraft productivity with low unit costs by reducing aircraft turnaround time, particularly at the gate. Europe's EasyJet and Ryanair are two of the best-known airlines to follow Southwest's business strategy in that continent. Other airlines with a business model based on Southwest's system include Canada's WestJet, Malaysia's AirAsia (the first and biggest LCC in Asia), India's IndiGo, Australia's Jetstar, a subsidiary of Qantas (although Jetstar now operates three aircraft types), Philippines' Cebu Pacific, Thailand's Nok Air, Mexico's Volaris, Indonesia's Lion Air and Turkey's Pegasus Airlines.\nLobbying against high-speed rail.\nIn the early 1990s, Southwest Airlines actively opposed proposals to develop high-speed rail in Texas, viewing the project as a competitor to its short-haul flights. The proposed rail system would have connected Dallas, San Antonio, and Houston. Southwest lobbied both the United States Congress and the Texas Legislature, and filed multiple lawsuits aimed at halting the initiative. In a 1991 statement to Texas officials, the airline argued that high-speed rail would only be feasible if it displaced existing airline services and received substantial public subsidies. The project was cancelled in 1994 with many observers citing Southwest\u2019s lobbying efforts as a significant factor in its failure.\nAdvertising.\nThe company has always employed humor in its advertising. Former slogans include \"Love Is Still Our Field\", \"Just Plane Smart\", \"The Somebody Else Up There Who Loves You\", \"You're Now Free to Move About the Country\", \"THE Low Fare Airline\", \"Grab your bag, It's On!\", and \"Welcome Aboard\". The airline's slogan (as of 2022) is \"Low fares. Nothing to hide. That's TransFarency!\"\nIn March 1992, shortly after Southwest started using the \"Just Plane Smart\" motto, \"Stevens Aviation\", which had been using \"Plane Smart\" for its motto, advised Southwest that it was infringing on its trademark. Instead of a lawsuit, the CEOs for both companies staged an arm-wrestling match, dubbed as \"Malice in Dallas\". It was held at the now-demolished Dallas Sportatorium and set for two out of three rounds, the loser of each round was to pay $5,000 to the charity of his choice, with the winner gaining the use of the trademarked phrase. A promotional video was created showing the CEOs \"training\" for the bout (with CEO Herb Kelleher being helped up during a sit-up where a cigarette and glass of Wild Turkey 101 whiskey was waiting) and distributed among the employees and also as a video press release along with the video of the match itself. Herb Kelleher lost the match for Southwest, with Stevens Aviation winning the rights to the phrase. Kurt Herwald, CEO of Stevens Aviation, immediately granted the use of \"Just Plane Smart\" to Southwest Airlines. The net result was both companies having use of the trademark.\nAccidents and incidents.\nSouthwest Airlines has been involved in 11 accidents, including three aircraft hull losses and four fatalities: one accidental passenger death in flight, two non-passenger deaths on the ground, and one passenger who died from injuries sustained after being restrained by others while attempting to enter the cockpit. No passenger has died as a result of a crash.\nControversies and passenger incidents.\nIn October 2019, a Southwest flight attendant filed a lawsuit against the airline, claiming that two pilots had livestreamed footage from a camera hidden in the plane's toilet to an iPad, and that one of the pilots said that such cameras were a \"top-secret security measure\" installed in all of the airline's 737-800 aircraft. Southwest and the pilot union stated that the film was a hoax and a \"poor attempt at humor\" by one of the pilots, who had previously recorded himself on a different aircraft, fully clothed.\nIn February 2020, a report conducted by the DOT inspector general found that Southwest was flying airplanes with safety concerns and that the Federal Aviation Administration was failing to properly oversee the airline.\nCiting four whistleblowers, federal investigators with the US Office of Special Counsel released a report on July 27, 2022, that follows up on the 2020 DOT inspector general's report. The 2022 report claims that Southwest stonewalled Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) investigations into maintenance and piloting safety lapses, and criticized the FAA for failing to adequately oversee the airline, stating that senior FAA staff \"mismanaged and interfered\" with investigations \"in the face of SWA's intimidation tactics\". The report accuses Southwest of misusing the FAA's Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) to hide pilot errors, while accusing the FAA of failing to adequately oversee Southwest's mechanics, and of failing to adequately vet maintenance records provided by the airline for forty-nine 737 aircraft purchased from foreign carriers whose documentation practices did not meet FAA standards.\nDecember 2022 holiday meltdown.\nThe airline experienced severe delays and thousands of flight cancellations starting on December 21, 2022, and continuing through the Christmas holiday. While many cancellations were due to bad weather from the severe late December winter storm across much of the United States, industry experts and SWAPA also blamed inadequate staffing and the airline's \"outdated\" employee scheduling system, citing reports of pilots waiting on hold on the telephone for up to eight hours awaiting work assignments. On December 26, the airline initiated a massive system \"reset\", preemptively canceling thousands of flights and halting ticket sales over concerns that travelers might buy tickets for flights that were subsequently canceled. Federal officials criticized the airline and US Department of Transportation (USDOT) Secretary Pete Buttigieg announced a formal investigation. Some experts attributed the crisis to the lack of scheduling flexibility inherent in the airline's point-to-point operations model. Paul Krugman in \"The New York Times\" suggested the turmoil was not as much about corporate greed as some might expect and noted that despite an increasingly digitalized world, \"there's a lot of physical action, and real-world labor, going on behind the scenes.\" Another writer on the paper's opinion pages, Elizabeth Spiers, said this was an example of the airlines knowing they are offering passengers a poor deal but that many people have little choice given the alternatives. In December 2023, the airline reached a settlement and received a record-setting $140 million fine from the USDOT, the largest fine ever imposed by the agency by a factor of roughly 30, and has reported losses exceeding $1.1 billion stemming from the crisis."}
{"id": "63034", "revid": "1316511660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63034", "title": "Strigidae", "text": "Family of birds\nThe true owls or typical owls (family Strigidae) are one of the two generally accepted families of owls, the other being the barn owls and bay owls (Tytonidae). This large family comprises 230 living or recently extinct species in 24 genera. The Strigidae owls have a cosmopolitan distribution and are found on every continent except Antarctica.\nMorphology.\nWhile typical owls (hereafter referred to simply as owls) vary greatly in size, with the smallest species, the elf owl, being a hundredth the size of the largest, the Eurasian eagle-owl and Blakiston's fish owl, owls generally share an extremely similar body plan. They tend to have large heads, short tails, cryptic plumage, and round facial discs around the eyes. The family is generally arboreal (with a few exceptions like the burrowing owl) and obtain their food on the wing. The wings are large, broad, rounded, and long. As is the case with most birds of prey, in many owl species females are larger than males.\nBecause of their nocturnal habits, they tend not to exhibit sexual dimorphism in their plumage. Specialized feathers and wing shape suppress the noise produced by flying, both taking off, flapping and gliding. This silent flight allows owls to hunt without being heard by their prey. Owls possess three physical attributes that are thought to contribute to their silent flight capability. First, on the leading edge of the wing, there is a comb of stiff feathers. Second, the trailing edge of the wing contains a flexible fringe. Finally, owls have downy material distributed on the tops of their wings that creates a compliant but rough surface (similar to that of a soft carpet). All these factors result in significant aerodynamic noise reductions. The toes and tarsi are feathered in some species, and more so in species at higher latitudes. Numerous species of owls in the genus \"Glaucidium\" and the northern hawk-owl have eye patches on the backs of their heads, apparently to convince other birds they are being watched at all times. Numerous nocturnal species have ear-tufts, feathers on the sides of the head that are thought to have a camouflage function, breaking up the outline of a roosting bird. The feathers of the facial disc are arranged in order to increase sound delivered to the ears. Hearing in owls is highly sensitive and the ears are asymmetrical allowing the owl to localise a sound in multiple directions. Owls can pinpoint the position of prey, such as a squeaking mouse, by computing when the sound from the object reaches the owl's ears. If the sound reaches the left ear first, the mouse must be to the left of the owl. The owl's brain will then direct the head to directly face the mouse. In addition to hearing, owls have massive eyes relative to their body size. Contrary to popular belief, however, owls cannot see well in extreme dark and are able to see well in the day.\nOwls are also able to rotate their heads by as much as 270 degrees in either direction without damaging the blood vessels in their necks and heads, and without disrupting blood flow to their brains. Researchers have found four major biological adaptations that allow for this unique capability. First, in the neck there is a major artery, called the vertebral artery, that feeds the brain. This artery passes through bony holes in the vertebra. These bony holes are ten times larger in diameter than the artery that passes through them (extra space in the transverse foramina) which creates air pockets that allow for more movement of the artery when twisted. Twelve of the fourteen cervical vertebrae in the owl's neck have this adaptation. This vertebral artery also enters the neck higher up than it does in other birds. Instead of going in at the 14th cervical vertebrae, it enters in at the 12th cervical vertebrae. Finally, the small vessel connection between the carotid and the vertebral arteries allow the exchanging of blood between two blood vessels. These cross connections allow for uninterrupted blood flow to the brain. This means that even if one route is blocked during extreme head rotations, another route can continue blood circulation to the brain.\nSeveral owl species also have fluorescent pigments called porphyrins under their wings. A large group of pigments defined by nitrogen-containing pyrole rings, including chlorophyll and heme (in animal blood), make up the porphyrins. Other bird species will use porphyrins to pigment eggshells in the oviduct. Owl species, however, use porphyrins as a pigment in their plumage. Porphyrins are most prevalent in new feathers and are easily destroyed by sunlight. Porphyrin pigments in feathers fluoresce under UV light, allowing biologists to more accurately classify the age of owls. The relative ages of the feathers are differentiated by the intensity of fluorescence that they emit when the primaries and secondaries are exposed to black light. This method helps to detect the subtle differences between third and fourth generation feathers, whereas looking at wear and color makes age determination difficult.\nNiche competition.\nIt has been noted that there is some competition for niche space between the spotted owl and the barred owl (both of which are true owls) . This competition is related to deforestation, and therefore a reduction in niche quantity and quality. This deforestation is more specifically the result of overlogging and forest fires. These two species of owl are known to traditionally live in mature forests of old and tall trees, which are now mostly limited to public lands. As niche overlap is occurring in these two families, there is a concern with the barred owls encroaching on the spotted owl's North American habitats, causing a decline of the spotted owl. As noted above, these species prefer mature forests which, due to deforestation, are at limited supply and take a long time to reestablish after deforestation has occurred. Because the northern spotted owl shares its territories and competes with other species, it is declining at a more rapid pace. This invasion by barred owls occurred about 50 years ago in the Pacific Northwest, and despite their low numbers, they are considered an invasive species because of the harm done to native spotted owls. In this competition for resources, hunting locations and general niches, the barred owl is pushing the spotted owl to local extinction. It is thought that the rapid decrease in population size of spotted owls will cause a trophic cascade, since the spotted owls help provide a healthy ecosystem.\nBehaviour.\nOwls are generally nocturnal and/or crepuscular and spend much of the day roosting. They are often misperceived as 'tame' since they allow humans to approach quite closely before taking flight, but in reality they are attempting to avoid detection through stillness. Their cryptic plumage and the inconspicuous locations they adopt are an effort to avoid predators and mobbing by small birds.\nCommunication.\nOwls, such as the eagle-owl, will use visual signaling in intraspecific communication (communication within the species), both in territorial habits and parent-offspring interactions. Some researchers believe owls can employ various visual signals in other situations involving intraspecific interaction. Experimental evidence suggests that owl feces and the remains of prey can act as visual signals. This new type of signaling behavior could potentially indicate the owls' current reproductive state to intruders, including other territorial owls or non-breeding floaters. Feces are an ideal material for marking due to its minimal energetic costs, and can also continue to indicate territorial boundaries even when occupied in activities other than territorial defense. Preliminary evidence also suggests that owls will use feces and the feathers of their prey to signal their breeding status to members within the same species.\nMigration.\nSome species of owl are migratory. One such species, the northern saw-whet owl, migrates south even when food and resources are ample in the north.\nHabitat, climate and seasonal changes.\nSome owls have a higher survival rate and are more likely to reproduce in a habitat that contains a mixture of old growth forests and other vegetation types. Old growth forests provide ample dark areas for owls to hide from predators Like many organisms, spotted owls rely on forest fires to create their habitat and provide areas for foraging. Unfortunately, climate change and intentional fire suppression have altered natural fire habits. Owls avoid badly burned areas but they benefit from the mosaics of heterogeneous habitats created by fires. This is not to say that all fires are good for owls. Owls only thrive when fires are not of high severity and not large stand-replacing (high-severity fires that burn most of the vegetation) which create large canopy gaps that are not adequate for owls.\nParasites.\nAvian malaria or \"Plasmodium relictum\" affects owls and specifically, 44% of northern and Californian spotted owls harbor 17 strains of the parasite. As mentioned in the niche competition section above, spotted owls and barred owls are in competition so their niche overlap may be resulting in the plasmodium parasite having more hosts in a concentrated area but this is not certain.\nPredators.\nThe main predators of owls are other species of owls. An example of this occurs with the northern saw-whet owl that lives in the northern U.S. and lives low to the ground in brushy areas typically of cedar forests. These owls eat mice, and perch in trees at eye level. Their main predators are barred owls and great horned owls.\nSystematics.\nThe family Strigidae was introduced by the English zoologist William Elford Leach in a guide to the contents of the British Museum published in 1819.\nA molecular phylogenetic study of the owls by Jessie Salter and collaborators published in 2020 found that the family Strigidae was divided into two sister clades and some of the traditional genera were paraphyletic. The placement of three monotypic genera remained uncertain due to the degraded nature of the available DNA. Based on these results Frank Gill, Pamela Rasmussen and David Donsker updated the online list of world birds that they maintain on behalf of the International Ornithological Committee (IOC).\nThe cladogram below is based on the results of the study by Salter and collaborators published in 2020. The subfamilies are those defined by Edward Dickinson and James Van Remsen Jr. in 2013. A genetic study published in 2021 suggested that the genus \"Scotopelia\" may be embedded within \"Ketupa\".\nThe 235 extant or recently extinct species are assigned to 23 genera:\nFossil record.\nThe fossil database for Strigiformes is highly diverse and shows an origin from ~60\u00a0Mya into the Pleistocene. The maximum age range for the Strigiformes clade extends to 68.6\u00a0Mya.\nPlacement unresolved:\nThe supposed fossil heron \"\"Ardea\" lignitum\" (Late Pliocene of Germany) was apparently a strigid owl, possibly close to \"Bubo\". The Early\u2013Middle Eocene genus \"Palaeoglaux\" from west-central Europe is sometimes placed here, but given its age, it is probably better considered its own family for the time being.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63043", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63043", "title": "Harlequin (disambiguation)", "text": "Harlequin is a comic servant character.\nHarlequin may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63047", "revid": "39165258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63047", "title": "Gas van", "text": "Vehicle used for mass murder, especially during the Holocaust\nA gas van or gas wagon (, lit.\u2009'soul killer'; ; ) was a truck re-equipped as a mobile gas chamber. During World War II and the Holocaust, Nazi Germany developed and used gas vans on a large scale to kill inmates of asylums, Poles, Romani people, Jews, and prisoners in occupied Poland, Belarus, Nedi\u0107's Serbia, the Soviet Union, and other regions of German-occupied Europe. There are several documented cases of gas vans used by Soviet NKVD during the Great Purge.\nHistory.\nNazi Germany.\nThe use of gas vans by Germans to kill Jews, Poles, Romani people, the mentally ill people, and prisoners in occupied territories during World War II originated with \"Aktion T4\" in 1939. Ordered to find a suitable method to kill, the \"Technical Institute for the Detection of Crime\" (\"Kriminaltechnisches Institut der Sicherheitspolizei\" (), abbreviated KTI) of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt (RSHA) decided to gas victims with carbon monoxide.\nIn October 1939, the Nazis started gassing prisoners at Fort VII near Posen. The first victims were Polish and Jewish inmates of asylums for the mentally ill. Witnesses report that from December 1939, mobile gas chambers were used to murder the inmates of asylums in Pomerania, Eastern Prussia and Poland. The vans were built for the \"Sonderkommando\" Lange and their use was supposed to speed up the killings. Instead of transporting the victims to the gas chambers, the gas chambers were transported to the victims. They were most likely devised by specialists from the Referat II D of the RSHA. These mobile gas chambers worked on the same principles as the stationary gas chambers: through a rubber hose the driver released pure CO from steel cylinders into the air tight special construction that was shaped like a box and placed on the carrier. The vans resembled moving vans or delivery lorries and were labelled \"Kaiser's Kaffee Gesch\u00e4ft\" () (\"Kaiser's Coffee Shop\") for camouflage. They were not called \"gas vans\" at the time, but \"Sonder-Wagen\", \"Spezialwagen\" (special vans) and \"Entlausungswagen\" (delousing vans). The Lange commando killed patients in numerous hospitals in the Wartheland in 1940. They drove to the hospitals, collected patients, loaded them into the vans and gassed them while they were driving them away. From 21 May to 8 June 1940 the Sonderkommando Lange murdered 1558 sick people from Soldau concentration camp.\nIn August 1941, SS chief Heinrich Himmler attended a demonstration of a mass-shooting of Jews in Minsk that was arranged by Arthur Nebe, after which he vomited. Regaining his composure, Himmler decided that alternative murder techniques should be found. He ordered Nebe to explore more \"convenient\" ways of killing, less stressful for the killers. Nebe decided to conduct his experiments by murdering Soviet mental patients, first with explosives near Minsk, and then with automobile exhaust at Mogilev. Nebe's experiments led to the development of the gas van.&lt;ref name=\"Browning/essays\"&gt;https://&lt;/ref&gt; This vehicle had already been used in 1940 for the gassing of East Prussian and Pomeranian mental patients in the Soldau concentration camp.\nGas vans were used, particularly at the Che\u0142mno extermination camp, until gas chambers were developed as a more efficient method for murdering large numbers of people. Two types of gas vans were used by the \"Einsatzgruppen\" in the East. The \"Opel-Blitz\", which weighed 3.5 tons, and the larger \"Saurerwagen\", which weighed 7 tons. In Belgrade, the gas van was known as \"Du\u0161egupka\" and in the occupied parts of the USSR similarly as \"\u0434\u0443\u0448\u0435\u0433\u0443\u0431\u043a\u0430\" (\"dushegubka\", literally \"soul killer\" or \"exterminator\"). The SS used the euphemisms \"Sonderwagen\", \"Spezialwagen\" or \"S-Wagen\" (\"special vehicle\") for the vans. The gas vans were specifically designed to direct deadly exhaust fumes via metal pipes into the airtight cargo compartments, where the intended victims had been forcibly stuffed to capacity. When the gas was released, victims screamed and knocked on the walls, begging for the Germans to release them. After their deaths, their bodies were \"thrown out blue, wet with sweat and urine, the legs covered with excrement and menstrual blood\". These gruesome symptoms were one of the reasons why Rudolf H\u00f6ss chose Zyklon B as the primary killing method for Jews. Ironically, Zyklon B inflicted similar symptoms.\nBy June 1942 the main producer of gas vans, Gaubschat Fahrzeugwerke GmbH, had delivered 20 gas vans in two models (for 30\u201350 and 70\u2013100 individuals) to Einsatzgruppen, out of 30 that were ordered from that company. Not one gas van was extant at the end of the war. The existence of gas vans first came to light in 1943 during the trial of Nazi collaborators who had been involved in the murder of civilians in Krasnodar. A group of 30 to 60 civilians were gassed on August 21 and 22, 1942 by members of \"SS-Sonderkommando 10a of Einsatzgruppe D, who were supported by local collaborators. Subsequently, gas vans were used for murder of Roma people and ill persons. The total number of gas van killings is unknown.\nThe gas vans are extensively discussed in some of the interviews in Claude Lanzmann's film \"Shoah\".\nSoviet Union.\nAccording to historian Robert Gellately, \"the Soviets sometimes used a gas van (\"dushegubka\"), as in Moscow during the 1930s, but how extensive that was needs further investigation.\" while Nazi killers have \"invented the first gas van, which began operations in the Warthegau on January 15, 1940, under Herbert Lange\".\nDuring the Great Purge in the Soviet Union, NKVD officer Isaj D. Berg used a specially adapted airtight van for gassing prisoners to death on an experimental basis. The prisoners were gassed on the way to Butovo, a phony firing range, where the NKVD executed its prisoners and buried them. According to testimony given by NKVD officer Nikolai Kharitonov in 1956, Isaj Berg had been instrumental in the production of gas vans. Berg had become chief of the administrative economic department in Moscow's NKVD in the summer of 1937. In October 1937 he was charged with the supervision of the Butovo firing range. Berg had to prepare Butovo for the mass execution of people from greater Moscow and to ensure that these executions would take place smoothly. According to testimony given by Fjodor Tschesnokov, a member of Berg's execution team, in 1956, trucks were used, which were equipped with valves through which the gas could be directed inside the vehicles. The interrogations revealed that the prisoners were stripped naked, tied up, gagged and thrown into the trucks. Their property was stolen. Berg was arrested on 3 August 1938 and sentenced to death for participating in a \"counter-revolutionary conspiracy within the NKVD\" and executed on 3 March 1939.\nThe scale at which these trucks were used is unknown. Author Tomas Kizny assumes that they were in use while Berg oversaw the executions (October 1937 to 4 August 1938). He points to archaeological excavations conducted in 1997. Then 59 corpses were exhumed who most likely had been murdered during Berg's tenure. Only four of these victims had been shot in the head, which leads Kizny to conclude that at least some of them had been gassed. FSB officers Alexander Mikhailov and Mikhail Kirillin, and historian Lydia Golovkova, recounted the testimony of one witness at a mass execution site outside Moscow. As many as 50 prisoners were loaded into trucks whose exhaust pipes were turned into the trucks, which Muscovites called \"soul killers\" and which were said to have been invented by Berg. Prisoners were \"half dead\" when they arrived at the site, where most were subsequently executed.\nInvention of the gas van?\nHistorians of the Holocaust like Henry Friedlander argue that the mobile gas chambers were invented in Germany in 1940, and they were first used to murder patients of Wartheland hospitals. Katrin Reichelt names Albert Widmann and Arthur Nebe as having developed the method. The vans themselves were modified by Walter Rauff, Friedrich Pradel and Harry Wentritt. Matthias Beer calls gas vans \"a special product of the Third Reich\".\nRobert Gellately points out that during a euthanasia program in occupied Poland the Nazi killers sought a more efficient and secretive killing process and thus \"invented the first gas van, which began operations in the Warthegau on January 15, 1940, under Herbert Lange\". He also notes, that \"the Soviets sometimes used a gas van (dushegubka), as in Moscow during the 1930s, but how extensive that was needs further investigation. They used crematoriums to dispose of thousands of bodies, but had no gas chambers.\"\nJournalist Yevgenia Albats maintains that gas vans were a \"Soviet invention\". Kizny names Berg as the \"inventor\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63048", "revid": "11", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63048", "title": "5-Hydroxytryptamine", "text": ""}
{"id": "63050", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63050", "title": "Eosinophilia\u2013myalgia syndrome", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nEosinophilia\u2013myalgia syndrome is a rare, sometimes fatal neurological condition linked to the ingestion of the dietary supplement L-tryptophan. The risk of developing EMS increases with larger doses of tryptophan and increasing age. Some research suggests that certain genetic polymorphisms may be related to the development of EMS. The presence of eosinophilia is a core feature of EMS, along with unusually severe myalgia (muscle pain).\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe initial, acute phase of EMS, which last for three to six months, presents as trouble with breathing and muscle problems, including soreness and spasm, but which may also be intense. Muscle weakness is not a feature of this phase, but some people experience muscle stiffness. Additional features can include cough, fever, fatigue, joint pain, edema, and numbness or tingling, usually in the limbs, hands and feet.\nThe chronic phase follows the acute phase. Eosinophilic fasciitis may develop, primarily in the limbs. Central nervous system signs may appear, including numbness, increased sensation, muscle weakness, and sometimes cardiac or digestive dysfunction. Fatigue is present to some degree, while the muscle pain (which may be extremely intense) and dyspnea continue in this phase.\nCauses.\nSubsequent epidemiological studies suggested that EMS was linked to specific batches of L-tryptophan supplied by a single large Japanese manufacturer, Showa Denko. It eventually became clear that recent batches of Showa Denko's L-tryptophan were contaminated by trace impurities, which were subsequently thought to be responsible for the 1989 EMS outbreak. The L-tryptophan was produced by a bacterium grown in open vats in a Showa Denko fertilizer factory. While a total of 63 trace contaminants were eventually identified, only six of them could be associated with EMS. The compound EBT (1,1'-ethylidene-bis-L-tryptophan, also known as \"Peak E\") was the only contaminant identifiable by initial analysis, but further analysis revealed PAA (3-(phenylamino)-L-alanine, also known as \"UV-5\"), and peak 200 (2[3-indolyl-methyl]-L-tryptophan). Two of the remaining uncharacterized peaks associated with EMS were later determined to be 3a-hydroxy-1,2,3,3a,8,8a-hexahydropyrrolo-[2,3-b]-indole-2-carboxylic acid (peak C) and 2-(2-hydroxy indoline)-tryptophan (peak FF). These were characterized using accurate mass LC\u2013MS, LC\u2013MS/MS and multistage mass spectrometry (MSn). The last of the six contaminants (peak AAA/\"UV-28\", being \"the contaminant most significantly associated with EMS\" has been characterized as two related chain-isomers; peak AAA1 ((S)-2-amino-3-(2-((S,E)-7-methylnon-1-en-1-yl)-1H-indol-3-yl)propanoic acid, a condensation product between L-tryptophan and 7-methylnonanoic acid) and peak AAA2 ((S)-2-amino-3-(2-((E)-dec-1-en-1-yl)-1H-indol-3-yl)propanoic acid, a condensate between L-tryptophan and decanoic acid). No consistent relationship has ever been firmly established between any specific trace impurity or impurities identified in these batches and the effects of EMS. While EBT in particular has been frequently implicated as the culprit, there is no statistically significant association between EBT levels and EMS. Of the 63 trace contaminants, only the two AAA compounds displayed a statistically significant association with cases of EMS (with a p-value of 0.0014).\nAs most research has focused on attempts to associate individual contaminants with EMS, there is a comparative lack of detailed research on other possible causal or contributing factors. Tryptophan itself has been implicated as a potentially major contributory factor in EMS. While critics of this theory have argued that this hypothesis fails to explain the near-absent reports of EMS prior to and following the EMS outbreak, this fails to take into account the sudden rapid increase in tryptophan's usage immediately prior to the 1989 outbreak, and ignores the strong influence of the EMS outbreak's legacy and the extended FDA ban on later usage of tryptophan. Crucially, this also ignores the existence of a number of cases of EMS that developed both prior to and after the primary epidemic, including at least one case where the tryptophan was tested and found to lack the contaminants found in the contaminated lots of Showa Denko's tryptophan, as well as cases with other supplements inducing EMS, and even a case of EMS induced by excessive dietary L-tryptophan intake via overconsumption of cashew nuts. A major Canadian analysis located a number of patients that met the CDC criteria for EMS but had never been exposed to tryptophan, which \"brings causal interpretations of earlier studies into question\". Other studies have highlighted numerous major flaws in many of the epidemiological studies on the association of tryptophan with EMS, which cast serious doubt on the validity of their results. As the FDA concluded, \"other brands of L-tryptophan, or L-tryptophan itself, regardless of the levels or presence of impurities, could not be eliminated as causal or contributing to the development of EMS\". Even animal studies have suggested that tryptophan itself \"when ingested by susceptible individuals either alone or in combination with some other component in the product, results in the pathological features in EMS\".\nAt the time of the outbreak, Showa Denko had recently made alterations to its manufacturing procedures that were thought to be linked to the possible origin of the contaminants detected in the affected lots of tryptophan. A key change was the reduction of the amount of activated charcoal used to purify each batch from &gt;20\u00a0kg to 10\u00a0kg. A portion of the contaminated batches had also bypassed another filtration step that used reverse-osmosis to remove certain impurities. Additionally, the bacterial culture used to synthesize tryptophan was a strain of \"Bacillus amyloliquefaciens\" that had been genetically engineered to increase tryptophan production. Although the prior four generations of the genetically engineered strain had been used without incident, the fifth generation used for the contaminated batches was thought to be a possible source of the impurities that were detected. This has been used to argue that the genetic engineering itself was the primary cause of the contamination, a stance that was heavily criticized for overlooking the other known non-GMO causes of contamination, as well as for its use by anti-GMO activists as a way to threaten the development of biotechnology with false information. The reduction in the amount of activated carbon used and the introduction of the fifth generation \"Bacillus amyloliquefaciens\" strain were both associated with the development of EMS, but due to the high overlap of these changes, the precise independent contribution of each change could not be determined (although the bypass of the reverse-osmosis filtration for certain lots was determined to be not significantly associated with the contaminated lots of tryptophan). While Showa Denko claimed a purity of 99.6%, it was noted that \"the quantities of the known EMS associated contaminants, EBT and PAA, were remarkably small, of the order of 0.01%, and could easily escape detection\".\nRegulatory response.\nThe FDA loosened its restrictions on sales and marketing of tryptophan in February 2001, but continued to limit the importation of tryptophan not intended for an exempted use until 2005.\nDiagnosis.\nThere is not a universally accepted diagnostic criteria for EMS. A diagnosis is commonly established when there is swelling, induration, and thickening of the skin and subcutaneous tissue as well as fascial thickening with accumulation of lymphocytes and macrophages with or without eosinophilic infiltration. Minor criteria also includes eosinophilia &gt; 0.5 \u00d7 109/L, hypergammaglobulinemia &gt; 1.5 g/L, muscle weakness, elevated aldolase levels, Groove sign and/or peau d/orange, and hyperintense fascia on MR T2-weighted images. MRI is considered the best imaging modality to show increased signal intensity within the fascia. Alternatives are positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) for diagnosis and ultrasonography for clinical follow-up.\nTreatment.\nTreatment is withdrawal of products containing L-tryptophan and the administration of glucocorticoids. Most patients recover fully, remain stable, or show slow recovery, but the disease is fatal in up to 5% of patients.\nHistory.\nThe first case of eosinophilia\u2013myalgia syndrome was reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in November 1989, although some cases had occurred as early as 2\u20133 years before this. In total, more than 1,500 cases of EMS were reported to the CDC, as well as at least 37 EMS-associated deaths. After preliminary investigation revealed that the outbreak was linked to intake of tryptophan, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recalled tryptophan supplements in 1989 and banned most public sales in 1990, with other countries following suit. This FDA restriction was loosened in 2001, and fully lifted in 2005. Since the initial ban on L-tryptophan, a normal metabolite of the compound in mammals, 5-hydroxtryptophan (5-HTP) has become a popular replacement dietary supplement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63052", "revid": "15956914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63052", "title": "L-tryptophan", "text": ""}
{"id": "63054", "revid": "21678789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63054", "title": "Florence (disambiguation)", "text": "Florence is the capital city of the region of Tuscany, Italy, in the Metropolitan City of Florence.\nFlorence may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63059", "revid": "31642291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63059", "title": "Slugging percentage", "text": "Hitting statistic in baseball\nIn baseball statistics, slugging percentage (SLG) is a measure of the batting productivity of a hitter. It is calculated as total bases divided by at-bats, through the following formula, where \"AB\" is the number of at-bats for a given player, and \"1B\", \"2B\", \"3B\", and \"HR\" are the number of singles, doubles, triples, and home runs, respectively:\n formula_1\nUnlike batting average, slugging percentage gives more weight to extra-base hits such as doubles and home runs, relative to singles. Batters who excel at getting extra-base hits are sometimes referred to as sluggers. Plate appearances resulting in walks, hit-by-pitches, catcher's interference, and sacrifice bunts or flies are specifically excluded from this calculation, as such an appearance is not counted as an at-bat (these are not factored into batting average either).\nThe name is a misnomer, as the statistic is not a percentage but an average of how many bases a player achieves per at bat. It is a scale of measure whose computed value is a number from 0 to 4. A Major League Baseball player's slugging percentage is almost always less than 1 because a majority of at bats result in either 0 or 1 base. The stat awards a double twice the value of a single, a triple three times the value, and a home run four times. The slugging percentage would have to be divided by 4 to actually be a percentage (of bases achieved per at bat out of total bases possible). As a result, it is occasionally called slugging average, or simply slugging, instead.\nA slugging percentage is usually expressed as a decimal to three decimal places and is generally spoken as if multiplied by 1000. For example, a slugging percentage of .589 would be spoken as \"five eighty-nine.\" The slugging percentage can also be applied as an evaluative tool for pitchers. This is not as common but is referred to as \"slugging-percentage against\".\nIn Major League Baseball.\nAs an example: with the New York Yankees in 1920, Babe Ruth had 458 at bats during which he recorded 172 hits: 73 singles, 36 doubles, 9 triples, and 54 home runs. This was (73 \u00d7 1) + (36 \u00d7 2) + (9 \u00d7 3) + (54 \u00d7 4) = 388 total bases. His total number of bases (388) divided by his total at-bats (458) is .847, which constitutes his slugging percentage for the season.\nRuth's 1920 figure set a record in Major League Baseball (MLB), which stood until 2001 when Barry Bonds achieved 411 bases in 476 at-bats for a slugging percentage of .863. Josh Gibson, who played in Negro league baseball, had a slugging percentage of .974 in 1937.\nUntil the 2024 incorporation of Negro league statistics into major league records, the MLB career leader in slugging percentage was Ruth (.6897), followed by Ted Williams (.6338) and Lou Gehrig (.6324). Ruth was displaced by Josh Gibson, who has a career slugging percentage of .718.\nThe maximum possible slugging percentage is 4.000. A number of MLB players have had a 4.000 career slugging percentage for a short amount of time by hitting a home run in their first major league at bat. However, no player in MLB history has ever retired with a 4.000 slugging percentage. Four players have tripled in their only MLB plate appearance and therefore share the record\u2014without consideration of a minimum number of games played or plate appearances\u2014of a career slugging percentage of 3.000. They are Eric Cammack (2000 Mets); Scott Munninghoff (1980 Phillies); Eduardo Rodr\u00edguez (1973 Brewers); and Chuck Lindstrom (1958 White Sox).\nFor the 2023 season, the average slugging percentage for all players in MLB was .414. The highest single-season league average was .437 in 2000, and the lowest was .305 in 1908.\nSignificance.\nLong after it was invented, slugging percentage gained new significance when baseball analysts realized that it combined with on-base percentage (OBP) to form a very good measure of a player's overall offensive production (OBP + SLG was originally referred to as \"production\" by baseball writer and statistician Bill James). A predecessor metric was developed by Branch Rickey in 1954. Rickey, in \"Life\" magazine, suggested that combining OBP with what he called \"extra base power\" (EBP) would give a better indicator of player performance than typical Triple Crown stats. EBP was a predecessor to slugging percentage.\nAllen Barra and George Ignatin were early adopters in combining the two modern-day statistics, multiplying them together to form what is now known as \"SLOB\" (Slugging \u00d7 On-Base). Bill James applied this principle to his runs created formula several years later (and perhaps independently), essentially multiplying SLOB \u00d7 at bats to create the formula:\n formula_2\nIn 1984, Pete Palmer and John Thorn developed perhaps the most widespread means of combining slugging and on-base percentage: on-base plus slugging (OPS), which is a simple addition of the two values. Because it is easy to calculate, OPS has been used with increased frequency in recent years as a shorthand form to evaluate contributions as a batter.\nIn a 2015 article, Bryan Grosnick made the point that \"on base\" and \"slugging\" may not be comparable enough to be simply added together. \"On base\" has a theoretical maximum of 1.000 whereas \"slugging\" has a theoretical maximum of 4.000. The actual numbers do not show as big a difference, with Grosnick listing .350 as a good \"on base\" and .430 as a good \"slugging.\" He goes on to say that OPS has the advantages of simplicity and availability and further states, \"you'll probably get it 75% right, at least.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63060", "revid": "36761478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63060", "title": "Irish National Liberation Army", "text": "Irish republican paramilitary group formed in 1974\nThe Irish National Liberation Army (INLA, ) is an Irish republican socialist paramilitary group formed on 8 December 1974, during the 30-year period of conflict known as \"the Troubles\". The group seeks to remove Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom and create a socialist republic encompassing all of Ireland. With membership estimated at 80\u2013100 at their peak, it is the paramilitary wing of the Irish Republican Socialist Party (IRSP).\nThe INLA was founded by former members of the Official Irish Republican Army who opposed that group's ceasefire. It was initially known as the People's Liberation Army. The INLA waged a paramilitary campaign against the British Army and Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) in Northern Ireland. It was also active to a lesser extent in the Republic of Ireland, Great Britain and mainland Europe. High-profile attacks carried out by the INLA include the Droppin Well bombing, the 1994 Shankill Road killings and the assassinations of Airey Neave in 1979 and Billy Wright in 1997. However, it was smaller and less active than the main republican paramilitary group, the Provisional IRA. It was also weakened by feuds and internal tensions. Members of the group used the cover names People's Liberation Army, People's Republican Army, and Catholic Reaction Force for attacks its volunteers carried out but the INLA did not want to claim responsibility for. The INLA became a proscribed group in the United Kingdom on 3 July 1979 under the 1974 Prevention of Terrorism Act.\nAfter a 24-year armed campaign, the INLA declared a ceasefire on 22 August 1998. In August 1999, it stated that \"There is no political or moral argument to justify a resumption of the campaign\". In October 2009, the INLA formally vowed to pursue its aims through peaceful political means and began decommissioning its weapons.\nThe IRSP supports a \"No First Strike\" policy, that is allowing people to see the perceived failure of the peace process for themselves without military actions.\nThe INLA is a proscribed organisation in the United Kingdom under the Terrorism Act 2000 and an illegal organisation in the Republic of Ireland.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nDuring the 1960s, the Irish Republican Army (led by chief-of-staff Cathal Goulding) and Sinn F\u00e9in radically re-assessed their ideology and tactics after the dismal failure of the IRA's Border Campaign in the years 1956\u201362. They were heavily influenced by popular-front ideology and drew close to communist thinking. A key intermediary body was the Communist Party of Great Britain's organisation for Irish exiles, the Connolly Association. Marxist analysis saw the conflict in Northern Ireland as a \"bourgeois nationalist\" one between the Ulster Protestant and Irish Catholic working classes, fomented and continued by the ruling class. The effect of this conflict was to depress wages, since worker could be set against worker. They concluded that the first step on the road to a 32-county socialist republic in Ireland was the \"democratisation\" of Northern Ireland (i.e., the removal of discrimination against Catholics) and radicalisation of the southern working-class. This would allow \"class politics\" to develop, eventually resulting in a challenge to the hegemony both of what they termed \"British imperialism\" and of the respective unionist and Irish nationalist establishments north and south of the Irish border.\nIn August 1969 a major outbreak of intercommunal violence occurred in Northern Ireland, with eight deaths, six of them Catholics. On 14\u201315 August loyalists burned out several Catholic streets in Belfast in the Northern Ireland riots of August 1969. IRA units offered resistance, however very few weapons were available for the defence of Catholic areas. These events and the dissatisfaction of more traditional and militant republicans with the political direction taken by the IRA leaders, particularly their moves to end Abstentionism, led to a split and the formation of the Provisional IRA.\nThe \"Official\" IRA units who remained loyal to Goulding occasionally fought the British Army and the RUC throughout 1970 (as well as the Provisional IRA during a 1970 feud). In August 1971, after the introduction of internment without trial, Official IRA (OIRA) units fought numerous gun-battles with British troops who were deployed to arrest suspected republicans. However, the OIRA declared a ceasefire in 1972. The ceasefire, announced on 30 May, followed a number of armed actions which had been politically damaging. The organisation bombed the headquarters of the Parachute Regiment (the main perpetrators of Bloody Sunday) in Aldershot, but killed only five female cleaners, a gardener and an army chaplain. After the killing of William Best, a Catholic British soldier home on leave in Derry, the OIRA declared a ceasefire. In addition, the death of several militant OIRA figures such as Joe McCann in confrontations with British soldiers, enabled the Goulding faction to call off their armed campaign, which it had never supported wholeheartedly.\nAs time passed, discontent with the ceasefire in the movement grew. Seamus Costello, IRA veteran, operations officer for \"general headquarters staff\" (GHQ) and an elected representative on both Bray Urban District Council and Wicklow County Council, became the figurehead of those within the Official movement opposed to it. In 1972 an Official IRA army convention voted to endorse Costello's position of continued support for armed struggle in Northern Ireland. However, supporters of Costello did not have the numbers on the Army Council to enable what was voted for at the convention. At Official Sinn F\u00e9in Ardfheis in 1972 and 1973 Costello's policy was accepted by the rank and file but blocked by the party executive. A smear campaign was initiated against Costello and he was marginalised within the movement; some of his prominent associates were expelled. Costello himself was dismissed from Sinn F\u00e9in after ignoring an order not to stand in local elections or to attend meetings of the two local authorities of which he was a member. In spring 1974 Costello was also court-martialled by the Official IRA. Meanwhile, Costello's emerging anti-ceasefire faction, amongst them several Belfast men (including Ronnie Bunting, a Protestant nationalist), carried out a series of robberies in the Republic to pay for arms. At the Sinn F\u00e9in Ardfheis in Dublin on 1 December 1974, a Costello sympathiser proposed a motion overturning his dismissal. However, many of Costello's supporters had been blocked from entering, including the most articulate who would have been able to sway the members gathered. The motion was defeated by 197 votes to 15 and a split now appeared inevitable. Local branches of Official Sinn F\u00e9in throughout the island of Ireland announced they were resigning from the party, and on 8 December the dissidents met in the Spa Hotel in Lucan, Dublin.\nFoundation.\nThe Irish Republican Socialist Party was founded on 8 December 1974 in the Spa Hotel in Lucan, Dublin and the movement's military wing, the Irish National Liberation Army, was founded later the same day. The IRSP's foundation was made public but the INLA's was kept a secret until the group could operate effectively. One delegate suggested the armed wing be named the Irish Citizen Army after the paramilitary group founded by James Connolly that participated in the 1916 Easter Rising but this was rejected by Costello because of sectarian attacks carried out in Northern Ireland by another group using the same name. Costello advocated the name \"National Liberation Army\" and this appeared in some subsequent claims of responsibility for attacks, although delegates settled on \"Irish National Liberation Army\". Unlike the Provisional IRA, and the Official IRA who also saw themselves as inheritors of the tradition, by no longer claiming to be the \"Irish Republican Army\" the INLA abandoned a series of perceived political inheritances which constructed a legal continuity from the Second D\u00e1il.\nAt a press conference five days later Costello read a statement outlining how the IRSP would seek to build a \"broad front\" on the basis of demanding a British declaration of intent to withdraw from Northern Ireland, the release of all internees and sentenced \"political prisoners\", abolish all repressive legislation, outlaw discrimination of all kinds, and \"agree to compensate the Irish People for the exploitation which has already occurred.\" In the statement, Costello summarised the \"broad front\" strategy:\nIt shall be the policy of the Irish Republican Socialist Party to seek an active working alliance of all radical forces within the context of the Broad Front in order to ensure the ultimate success of the Irish Working Class in their struggle for Socialism.\nThe IRSP also called for an end to sectarian murders \"on the basis of united action by Catholic and Protestant working class against British Imperialism in Ireland\", opposition to Ireland joining the European Economic Community, nationalisation of natural resources, and the \"formation of people's organisations to combat rising prices an unemployment\". Costello explained that the IRSP did not practice abstentionism and would consider contesting an election depending on a \"thorough analysis of the conditions prevailing at the time\". Prominent republican activist Bernadette Devlin McAliskey attended the press conference as County Tyrone's representative on the party's executive, giving the new organisation republican credibility.\nShortly after it was founded, the INLA/IRSP came under attack from their former comrades in the Official IRA, who wanted to destroy the new grouping before it could get off the ground. On 20 February 1975, Hugh Ferguson, an INLA member and an Irish Republican Socialist Party (IRSP) branch chairperson, was the first person to be killed in the feud. One of the first military operations of the INLA was the shooting of OIRA leader Sean Garland in Dublin on 1 March. Although shot six times, he survived. After several more shootings (according to the RUC the feud had claimed two lives and wounded nineteen others up to this point) a truce was arranged, but fighting started again. The most prominent victim of the restarted feud was Billy McMillen, the commander of the OIRA in Belfast, shot by INLA member Gerard Steenson. His murder was unauthorised and was condemned by Costello. This was followed by several more assassinations on both sides, the most prominent victim being Seamus Costello, who was shot dead on the North Strand Road in Dublin on 5 October 1977. Costello's death was a severe blow to the INLA, as he was their most able political and military leader. The Official and Provisional IRAs both denied responsibility and Sinn F\u00e9in/The Workers' Party issued a statement condemning the killing. Members of an opposing INLA faction in Belfast also denied the killing. However, the INLA eventually deemed Official IRA member Jim Flynn the person responsible, and he was shot dead in June 1982 in the North Strand, Dublin, very close to the spot where Costello died.\nIt has been claimed by some in the Republican Socialist Movement that one of their members killed in 1975, Brendan McNamee (who was involved in the killing of Billy McMillen), was actually killed by Provisional IRA members. The Officials had denied involvement at the time of the killing and had instead blamed it on the Provisionals, who also denied involvement.\nThe inter-republican violence had a negative effect on the growth of the fledgling IRSP; its first Ardfheis, scheduled for the end of March, had to be cancelled. Bernadette McAliskey and others left the IRSP in late 1975 after a dispute over a number of issues, most urgent being the question of whether the armed wing should be subordinate to the IRSP's political leadership. It was later reported McAliskey had attempted to initiate a discussion to clarify the status of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), what would later become the INLA, but the motion was defeated by majority vote and Costello insisted the PLA was a separate organisation from the IRSP and discussing its affairs was improper. After her resignation McAliskey accused the IRSP of \"being objectively indistinguishable from either wing of the republican movement and possibly combining the worst elements of both\". At the end of its first year in existence the IRSP had not progressed as Costello had hoped; ten members of the Ard-Chomhairle had resigned, the organisation in Derry had lost many members, Belfast was at odds with the leadership, and recruitment overall had been hurt by the bloody feud with the Official IRA.\nArmed campaign.\nThe National Liberation Army (NLA) announced its existence and claimed responsibility for several attacks on British security forces in a press release published in November 1975, sent to newspapers and diplomatic missions in London, although the statement was issued too late to be included in the December issue of \"The Starry Plough\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We wish to issue the following press statement on behalf of the Army Council of the National Liberation Army. The NLA was recently formed with the aim of ending British Imperialist rule in Ireland and creating a 32 county Democratic Socialist Republic. As revolutionaries, we recognise the paramount necessity for the existence of an armed Anti-Imperialist organisation, which will play an effective role in the current struggle. We totally reject the right of Britain to interfere in Irish affairs and we are determined to resist any British-imposed solution, through the use of armed force against British Occupation Forces and their allies in Ireland.\nIn February 1976 a statement was issued declaring that the \"National Liberation Army\" and \"People's Liberation Army\" (the nom de guerre employed by the INLA during its feud with the Official IRA) had merged to form a single organisation. Reportedly the People's Liberation Army name was chosen without the oversight of the group's Dublin-based leadership, although apparently throughout 1976 the INLA in Derry was still known to its own members and outsiders as the PLA. In July 1976 the PLA in Derry issued a lengthy statement concurring with a recent IRSP statement on recovering from the November split, and stressed the necessity of the PLA as a socialist alternative to the Provisional IRA in the fight against British imperialism. Journalists had already deduced the Irish National Liberation Army was the military wing of the IRSP following their November 1975 release, although the IRSP would only admit that they had accepted \"protection\" from \"armed groups\" in their feud with the Official IRA.\nThe INLA from its inception adopted a republican-paramilitary structure similar to the IRA. Under a chief of staff was an eight-man army council, the ultimate decision-making body of the organisation. All major operations were supposed to be sanctioned by the army council. Under the army council was \"general headquarters staff\" (GHQ). They acted as couriers, supplying INLA units with what they dubbed \"gear\" or \"logistics\" - weapons and explosives. In return, GHQ received information on potential targets and proceeds from robberies. Next came the \"brigades\", which were generally much smaller than those of the Provisional IRA. The INLA did not re-organise its brigades into smaller cells as the Provisional IRA did in the late-Seventies, which proved extremely damaging during the supergrass trials of the mid-Eighties. The INLA leadership later admitted that their failure to do this was a serious weakness, but argued to maintain recruitment and pursue its political ambitions it had to stay in touch with the \"civilian\" population. In January 1983 the INLA leadership said they hoped to implement a more cellular system throughout the year but it's unlikely this plan to come to fruition in the wake of damaging police penetration. However, interviewed in late 1983, then INLA leader Dominic McGlinchey asserted the cell system had been introduced throughout the organisation.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, the INLA developed into a modest organisation in Northern Ireland, operating primarily from the Divis Flats in west Belfast, which, as a result, became colloquially known as \"the planet of the Irps\" (a reference to the IRSP and the film \"Planet of the Apes\"). They also had a large presence in Derry and the surrounding area, and all three of the INLA prisoners who died in the 1981 Irish hunger strike were from County Londonderry. Northern County Armagh reportedly had a significant INLA/IRSP presence also. In the Republic of Ireland the INLA/IRSP was primarily based in Dublin and Munster. From 1982 onwards the INLA also established units in Newry, Downpatrick and several rural border areas. The first member of the security forces to be killed by the INLA was an RUC officer, Noel Davis, killed on 24 May 1975 by a booby trap bomb left in a car in Ballinahone, near Maghera, County Londonderry. During this period, the INLA competed with the Provisional IRA for members, with both groups in conflict with the British Army and the Royal Ulster Constabulary. The INLA leader in Belfast, Ronnie Bunting, called in claims of responsibility to the media by the code name \"Captain Green\".\nThe first action to bring the INLA to international notice was its assassination on 30 March 1979 of Airey Neave, the British Conservative Party's spokesman on Northern Ireland and one of Margaret Thatcher's closest political supporters. Through the 1970s Neave, an influential Tory Member of the House of Commons, had been advocating within British political circles for an abandonment of the British Government's strategy of a containment of Irish paramilitary violence in Northern Ireland against the British State, and for the adoption of a strategy of waging a military offensive against it seeking its martial defeat. This brought him to the attention of both the Provisional IRA and the INLA as a potential threat to their organisations and activities. The INLA issued a statement regarding the attack in the August 1979 edition of its publication \"The Starry Plough\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In March, retired terrorist and supporter of capital punishment, Airey Neave, got a taste of his own medicine when an INLA unit pulled off the operation of the decade and blew him to bits inside the 'impregnable' Palace of Westminster. The nauseous Margaret Thatcher snivelled on television that he was an 'incalculable loss' \u2013 and so he was \u2013 to the British ruling class.\nThe attention the INLA received following the death of Airey Neave led to it being declared an illegal organisation in Britain and Northern Ireland. However, despite the \"success\" of the 30 March action, the INLA was facing internal turmoil. IRSP chairperson Miriam Daly threatened to resign over policy disagreements and perceived failings of the IRSP to raise funds, run in elections, and enact policy. Senior IRSP member Michael Plunkett was arrested after garda\u00ed found bomb-making equipment in his flat in Dublin and later jumped bail and fled to Paris. A series of botched Middle East arms importation attempts precipitated tensions between Belfast and Dublin representatives to the INLA GHQ and Dessie Grew considered assassinating the leader of the Belfast faction opposed to the INLA chief of staff. Before the conflict broke out there were attempts to recruit veteran Provisional IRA leader Se\u00e1n Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in as INLA chief of staff in the hope he would help stabilise the organisation. He was interested and met with INLA Army Council representatives on several occasions between 1978 and 1979 but nothing materialised. The unauthorised kidnapping of a Dublin bank manager from his home in January 1980 led to further internal anger and an operation in England was planned to demonstrate that the INLA was still capable of carrying on its war. An INLA Active service unit planted two 10 lb bombs at Netheravon British Army camp in the Salisbury Plain Training Area. Although only one bomb detonated &amp; caused damage starting a fire, and injuring two soldiers, this action helped bind the organisation together.\nThe INLA lost another of its founding leadership in 1980, when Ronnie Bunting was assassinated at his home. Noel Lyttle, another Protestant member of the IRSP, was killed in the same incident. The Ulster Defence Association, an Ulster loyalist paramilitary, claimed responsibility for both killings. Miriam Daly, who had resigned from the IRSP four months earlier, was killed by loyalist assassins in the same year. Although no group claimed responsibility, the INLA claimed that the Special Air Service (SAS) was involved in the killings of Bunting and Little. All three were strongly identified with the campaign against criminalisation of republican paramilitary prisoners.\nHunger strike.\nIRA and INLA prisoners convicted after March 1976 did not have Special Category Status applied in prison. Defending paramilitary prisoners' right to special category status, i.e. political status was an issue the IRSP and INLA advocated for from the outset, both within the prisons and on outside, when others, including the Provisional IRA and Sinn F\u00e9in, seemed reluctant to do so. This could be partly attributed to IRSP/INLA prisoners being immediately forced into confrontation with prison staff as soon as the movement was formed. Because IRSP prisoners were not members of the Official IRA or Provisional IRA they were denied political status while it was still granted and in summer 1975 twenty IRSP prisoners went on hunger strike for the right to wear their own clothes, to associate freely, refuse to do prison work, and to elect their own spokesmen. These would later become the core of the five demands of the H-Block protest and the 1981 hunger strike was fought. As the 1 March 1976 deadline for the removal of special category status approached the Northern Ireland Office met with a council of representing all paramilitary organisations, loyalist and republican, inside Long Kesh prison. The British offered concessions in return for the removal of special category status. Only the IRSP would go on to flatly refuse the offer.\nOn 14 November the first IRSP/INLA prisoner, James Connolly Brady of Derry, joined the blanket protest. Both the INLA and IRA attacked prison staff outside the prison. However, unlike Sinn F\u00e9in, the IRSP engaged in popular agitation on the streets in Dublin, Belfast, Cork, and elsewhere. Behind the public rhetoric, there was deep concern within the IRSP about the commitment of the IRA/Sinn F\u00e9in to the H-Block protest; Sinn F\u00e9in had voted at its Ard Chomhairle to prohibit cooperation with the IRSP in protest activities in the South and in June 1978 Sinn F\u00e9in protests stopped as it emerged the IRA were in secret negotiations with mediators. According to Holland and McDonald, \"as conditions inside the H-Blocks deteriorated, so did relations between the IRSP and the Provisionals.\" The Sinn F\u00e9in Ard-Chomhairle put out a directive in September 1978 banning any IRSP speaker from sharing a Provisional speaker, and at a meeting held in Liberty Hall to discuss the prison crisis all the Provisionals walked out when Mick Plunkett stood up to speak. The IRA regarded the prisons campaign as a distraction from the armed struggle and were reluctant to get too involved in any protest movement they could not control. However, hunger strike publicity events in continental Europe received an enthusiastic reception.\nOn 27 October 1980, republican prisoners in HM Prison Maze began a hunger strike. One hundred and forty-eight prisoners volunteered to be part of the strike, but a total of seven were selected to match the number of men who signed the Easter 1916 Proclamation of the Republic. The group consisted of IRA members Brendan Hughes, Tommy McKearney, Raymond McCartney, Tom McFeeley, Sean McKenna, Leo Green, and INLA member John Nixon. This hunger strike ended a week before Christmas. In January 1981, it became clear that the prisoners' demands had not been conceded. Prison authorities began to supply the prisoners with officially issued civilian clothing, whereas the prisoners demanded the right to wear their own clothing. In addition, the militancy of INLA blanket men, who were refusing to withdraw from the protest, was causing problems. On 27 January INLA prisoners rioted because the INLA Officer Commanding Patsy O'Hara was not permitted by the authorities to see his own men. The stage was set for another confrontation and in March the 1981 Irish hunger strike began. Three INLA members died during the latter hunger strike \u2013 Patsy O'Hara, Kevin Lynch, and Michael Devine, along with seven Provisional IRA members. The hunger strike leader Bobby Sands and Anti H-Block activist Owen Carron were elected to the British Parliament, and two other protesting prisoners were elected to the D\u00e1il. In addition, there were work stoppages and large demonstrations all over Ireland in sympathy with the hunger strikers. It was reported the turnout for Patsy O'Hara's funeral was equal to that of Bloody Sunday.\nThere was a bitter clash over the IRSP's share of money raised in an American fund-raising tour undertaken by three of the hunger-strikers' relatives, Liz O'Hara, Malachy McCreesh, and Se\u00e1n Sands. The tour had been organised by Noraid, the Provisional IRA's support group in the United States. Noraid had objected to O'Hara being on the tour because her brother Patsy was a \"communist\" and would sully the image republicans had in the United States. However, the other relatives refused to go unless she accompanied them. There were disputes over the exact amount of money raised but the only certainty is INLA prisoners received none of it. IRSP member Se\u00e1n Flynn travelled to New York where he met Martin Galvin, a leading Noraid spokesman. The meeting devolved into a shouting match with Galvin denouncing Flynn as a communist and having him thrown out of the house. Flynn toured the United States as a representative of the H-Block committee but Noraid was told to stay away from any meeting he was speaking at. A wealthy Noraid supporter who did attend a meeting was so disgusted by Flynn's sympathy for Native Americans and African Americans that he tore up a previously promised cheque for $10,000. He allegedly told Flynn \"I don't like niggers\".\nThe INLA unit which operated in the Lower Falls area of Belfast, led by Gerard Steenson, were particularly active at this time. However, the Belfast INLA was increasingly at odds with the Dublin leadership for personal and political reasons. By the beginning of 1982, this faction had shot and wounded the INLA's northern organiser Jackie Goodman, IRSP Belfast city councillor Sean Flynn and Flynn's brother Harry Flynn, hiding out in Dublin after escaping from the Maze prison in 1976. Steenson's faction claimed they were the true INLA. In response, the old Dublin INLA leadership declared they be shot on sight.\nDominic McGlinchey.\nIn summer 1982 in a \"rare moment of tactical expediency\" what was left of the INLA's Belfast leadership, a group with close contacts with the Lower Falls gang, patched up their differences with the old INLA leadership and agreed on the composition of a new army council, chief of staff and Belfast commander. In early 1982 IRA veteran Dominic McGlinchey was released from Portlaoise Prison having served five years. McGlinchey had defected to the INLA in prison and after he was freed quickly rose up the ranks to become director of operations. He made an immediate impact, ruthlessly putting an end to dissent within the organisation and recruiting new members. Based in the Dundalk area, McGlinchey began to organise the INLA in Armagh, Newry, Tyrone, South Londonderry, and South West Antrim. His release coincided with the theft of of Frangex commercial explosives from the Tara mines in County Tipperary, enabling the organisation to carry out an \"intensive\" bombing campaign. Throughout 1982 the INLA stepped up its attacks on Unionist leaders with a swathe of bomb attacks on their homes and offices. Attacks against British security forces continued also, but a number of operations killed Catholic children, with three dying in Belfast as a result of INLA explosions in a five-month period. These were propaganda disasters for the INLA, and, say authors Holland and McDonald, \"gave the INLA a reputation for recklessness\". Other offensive INLA actions at this time included the bombing of the Mount Gabriel radar station in County Cork, which the INLA believed was providing assistance to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation in violation of Irish neutrality, although this was disputed by the Irish government. Their deadliest attack came on 6 December 1982 \u2013 the Ballykelly disco bombing of the Droppin' Well Bar in Ballykelly, County Londonderry, which catered to British military personnel, in which 11 soldiers on leave and 6 civilians were killed. Shortly afterwards, the INLA issued a statement of responsibility:\nWe believe that it is only attacks of such a nature that bring it home to people in Britain and the British establishment. The shooting of an individual soldier, for the people of Britain, has very little effect in terms of the media or in terms of the British administration.\nOn 20 November 1983, three members of the congregation in the Mountain Lodge Pentecostal Church, Darkley, (near Keady, County Armagh) were shot dead during a Sunday service. The attack was claimed by the Catholic Reaction Force, a cover name for a small group of people, including one member of the INLA. The weapon used came from an INLA arms dump, but Tim Pat Coogan claims in his book \"The IRA\" that the weapon had been given to the INLA member to assassinate a known loyalist and the attack on the church was not sanctioned. The INLA's then-chief of staff, Dominic McGlinchey, came out of hiding to condemn the attack.\nOn 17 March 1984, Dominic McGlinchey and three other INLA members were surrounded by armed Garda detectives at a safe house in Newmarket-on-Fergus, County Clare. Over one hundred bullets were exchanged in a shootout before Gardai of the Special Branch task force made their way into the farmhouse, subsequently causing McGlinchey to call for a priest in surrender. On going into jail McGlinchey handed over his position as Chief of Staff to a Newry ally; the INLA Army Council was not consulted on this decision.\nSupergrass.\nIn the mid-1980s, the INLA was greatly weakened by splits and criminality within its own ranks, as well as the conviction of many of its members under the supergrass scheme. Harry Kirkpatrick, an INLA volunteer, was arrested in February 1983 on charges of five murders and subsequently agreed to give evidence against other INLA members.\nThe INLA kidnapped Kirkpatrick's wife Elizabeth, and later kidnapped his sister and his stepfather too. All were released physically unharmed. INLA Chief of Staff Dominic McGlinchey is alleged to have killed Kirkpatrick's lifelong friend Gerard 'Sparky' Barkley because he may have revealed the whereabouts of the Kirkpatrick family members to the police.\nIn May 1983, 10 men were charged with various offences on the basis of evidence from Kirkpatrick. Those charged included IRSP vice-chairman Kevin McQuillan and former councillor Sean Flynn. IRSP chairman and INLA member James Brown was charged with the murder of a police officer. Others escaped; Jim Barr, an IRSP member named by Kirkpatrick as part of the INLA, fled to the US where, having spent 17 months in jail, he won political asylum in 1993.) \nIn December 1985, 27 people were convicted on the basis of Kirkpatrick's statements. By December 1986, 24 of those convictions had been overturned. Gerard Steenson was given five life sentences for the deaths of the same five people that Kirkpatrick himself had been convicted of, these included Ulster Defence Regiment soldier Colin Quinn, shot in Belfast in December 1980.\nHolland and McDonald summarise the impact the supergrass trials had on the INLA:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFeuds and splits.\nHolland and McDonald argue the \"frenzy of activity generated under the rule of Dominic McGlinchey\" had \"masked the seriousness of the situation facing the IRSP and INLA. By 1984 the movement had \"degenerated into a loosely knit group of often mutually suspicious fiefdoms.\" The IRSP took a more rigidly Marxist/Leninist line than that ever previously adopted by the movement in an attempt to delineate the IRSP/INLA more clearly from the Sinn F\u00e9in and the Provisional IRA. The adoption of this rigid line meant the effective abandonment of the broad front strategy as initially conceived by Seamus Costello. Widespread criminality and ruthless racketeering by the INLA in Belfast after the imprisonment of key activists following the supergrass trials brought the movement into further disrepute and the INLA leadership moved against the new Officer Commanding (OC) of the Belfast INLA. The INLA carried out a number of bomb attacks in 1985 but the INLA was more concerned with the internal battle for control of the disintegrating organisation. John O'Reilly, former OC of the Markets area of Belfast, emerged as the winner and usurped the Dundalk man McGlinchey had appointed to become chief of staff. John O'Reilly was regarded with suspicion by some within the INLA, he was dismissed from the organisation by Ronnie Bunting in the late 1970s after an internal inquiry into allegations of O'Reilly being a police informant.\nIn jail, the INLA began to break up into warring factions. By late 1984 they could be divided into three broad groupings; one centred around Gerard Steenson, a second that opposed him, and a third that associated with Tom McAllister. Steenson's men, who included Jimmy Brown, were angry and disillusioned at the way the INLA had developed since their arrest. Incidents such as the Darkley killings and the police penetration and corruption in Belfast convinced them that the INLA was beyond reform. Those opposed to Steenson were the de facto INLA leadership including Ta Power and John O'Reilly. Their priority was to preserve the INLA as an organisation. McAllister at first leaned towards O'Reilly but later veered towards those opposed to him.\nO'Reilly saw the remnants of the original INLA organisation based in Dublin and Munster as a threat to his legitimacy as chief of staff. Harry Flynn and Gerry Roche were released from Portlaoise Prison in 1984 and set about trying to reconstruct the organisation founded by Costello. Gerry Roche won an agreement by a very narrow majority, on the Ard Comhairle of the lRSP to publish a newspaper. He wanted to call the paper \"The Broad Front\" and although permission was not granted he went ahead anyway, calling the paper \"Freedom Struggle\". In the editorial in the first and only issue, Flynn made reference to the tradition of Connolly, Mellowes and Costello but no mention was made of Marx, Engels or Lenin; this was viewed as a reflection of his disagreement with the new Marxist/Leninist line. In response, the O'Reilly faction tried to assassinate both Flynn and Roche. The old arms links were re-activated by the Dublin-Munster grouping as part of an effort to either create a new republican socialist movement or reform the existing INLA; between 1984 and late 1986 they held meetings with Al-Fatah and other Arab sympathisers in Prague, East Berlin, Warsaw, and Tunisia. In 1984 guns started coming into Ireland in modest amounts; \u0160korpion machine pistols, VZOR pistols, and grenades were smuggled, as well as some \"remotes\" for bomb detonators. Seamus Ruddy from Newry joined the INLA in Dublin in the 1970s. He was arrested in 1978 for smuggling arms but was acquitted. After dissension among local members, Ruddy drifted away from the main organisation and in 1983 went to Paris where he taught English. He disappeared in late May 1985, after a meeting with three leading members of the INLA, one of them being John O'Reilly. The three were searching for arms and believed that Ruddy knew where they could be found. At the time, the INLA denied that it was involved with his disappearance and resisted pressure from the Ruddy family to help it locate his whereabouts. In late 1993, a former high-ranking member of the INLA, Peter Stewart, finally admitted that the INLA had killed Ruddy in Paris. Ruddy's remains were found there in 2017.\nIn 1987, the INLA and its political wing, the IRSP came under attack from the Irish People's Liberation Organisation (IPLO), an organisation founded by disaffected INLA members centred around Tom McAllister, Gerard Steenson, Jimmy Brown and Martin \"Rook\" O'Prey who had resigned or been expelled from the INLA. The IPLO's initial aim was to destroy the INLA and replace it with their organisation. Five members of the INLA were killed by the IPLO, including leaders Ta Power and John O'Reilly. The INLA retaliated with several killings of their own. After the INLA killed the IPLO's leader, Gerard Steenson in 1987, a truce was reached. Although severely damaged by the IPLO's attacks, the INLA continued to exist. The IPLO, which was heavily involved in drug dealing, was forcibly disbanded by the Provisional IRA in a large-scale operation in 1992.\nDirectly after the feud in October 1987, the INLA received more damaging publicity when Dessie O'Hare, an erstwhile INLA volunteer, set up his own group called the \"Irish Revolutionary Brigade\" and kidnapped a Dublin dentist named John O'Grady. O'Hare cut off two of O'Grady's fingers and sent them to his family in order to secure a ransom. O'Grady was eventually rescued and O'Hare's group arrested after several shootouts with armed Garda\u00ed. The INLA disassociated itself from the action, issuing a statement saying O'Hare \"is not a member of the INLA\". O'Hare later rejoined the INLA while in prison.\nFollowing the feud the IRSP embraced a more explicitly left-wing ideological stance; declaring in the December 1987 issue of the \"Starry Plough\" the necessity to \"break away from Left Republicanism and embrace the scientific socialism of Marx and Engels in order to analyse and thus formulate a political programme for the Irish revolution\" and move beyond \"republicanism/militarism.\" The politically minded faction within the movement hoped to build a left-republican alternative to Sinn F\u00e9in. However, militarist elements within the INLA were intent on a renewed armed campaign against British security forces and loyalists. A protracted internal power struggle ensued and in 1992 the main political spokespersons for the IRSP departed. In the early 1990s the INLA, particularly in Belfast, effectively became a proxy force for the Provisional IRA, carrying out attacks on loyalist paramilitaries using IRA intelligence. Many shootings were perceived as openly sectarian attacks on Protestants.\nOn 14 April 1992, the INLA carried out its first killing in England after the death of Airey Neave, when they shot dead a recruiting army sergeant in Derby while he was leaving a British Army recruiting office. In June 2010, Declan Duffy was charged with the killing, although he was released in March 2013, under the terms of the 1998 Good Friday Agreement.\nDominic McGlinchey was killed in 1994 by unknown assailants after being released from prison the previous year.\nOn 16 June 1994 the INLA's Belfast Brigade shot dead three members of the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF); high-ranking UVF Belfast Brigade figure Trevor King and two other UVF members, on the Shankill Road in west Belfast, close to the Belfast headquarters of the UVF.\nIn 1995, four members of the INLA, including chief of staff Hugh Torney, were arrested by Garda\u00ed in Balbriggan while trying to smuggle weapons from Dublin to Belfast. Torney, with the support of two of his co-accused, called a ceasefire in exchange for favourable treatment by the Irish Government. Since Torney, who was chief of staff, under the INLA's rules lacked the authority to call a ceasefire (because he was incarcerated), he and the two men who supported him were expelled from the INLA.\nTorney and one of those men, Dessie McCleery, as well as founder-member John Fennell, did not wish to surrender the leadership of the organisation. Their faction, known as the INLA/GHQ, assassinated the new INLA chief of staff, Gino Gallagher. After the INLA killed both McCleery and Torney in 1996, the rest of Torney's faction quietly disbanded.\nINLA gunmen opened fire on British soldiers in the Ardoyne area of North Belfast on 7 July 1997, when the Drumcree conflict triggered six days of fierce riots and widespread violence in several nationalist areas of Northern Ireland.\nKilling of Billy Wright.\nBilly Wright was the founder and leader of the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF). Since July 1996, the group had launched a string of attacks on Catholic civilians, killing at least five. In April 1997, Wright was sentenced to eight years in the Maze Prison. On the morning of 27 December 1997, he was assassinated by three INLA prisoners \u2013 Christopher \"Crip\" McWilliams, John \"Sonny\" Glennon and John Kennaway \u2013 who were armed with two pistols. He was shot as he travelled in a prison van (alongside another LVF prisoner, Norman Green and one prison officer) from one part of the prison to another. Kennaway held the driver hostage and Glennon gave cover with a .22 Derringer pistol while McWilliams opened the side door and fired seven shots at Wright with his PA63 semi-automatic. After killing Wright, the three volunteers handed themselves over to prison guards. They also handed over a statement, which read: {\nThat night, LVF gunmen opened fire on a disco in a mainly nationalist area of Dungannon. Four civilians were wounded and a former Provisional IRA volunteer was killed in the attack.\nThe nature of Wright's killing led to speculation that prison authorities colluded with the INLA to have him killed, as he was a danger to the peace process. The INLA strongly denied these rumours, and published a detailed account of the assassination in the March/April 1999 issue of \"The Starry Plough\" newspaper.\nCeasefire.\nThe INLA opposed the 1998 Good Friday Agreement and continued to carry out attacks during the talks process that preceded the agreement and the confirmatory referendum that followed. The INLA claimed responsibility for a car bomb which exploded on 24 June in the Armagh border village of Newtownhamilton. The bombing was interpreted as a \"protest attack\" as it happened the day before the election for the new Northern Ireland Assembly that took place on 25 June 1998. The RUC believed the Real IRA supplied the INLA with semtex commercial explosive which was thought to have been used as a component in making the bomb. INLA members assisted the bombing campaign being carried out by the dissident republican groups the Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA) and Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) by providing stolen cars that could be transformed into car bombs. On 15 August 1998 the RIRA exploded a car bomb in the centre of Omagh, County Tyrone killing 29 people and injuring 220 others, in what became the deadliest attack of the Troubles inside Northern Ireland.\nThe INLA declared a ceasefire on 22 August 1998. When calling its ceasefire, the INLA acknowledged the \"faults and grievous errors in our prosecution of the war\". The INLA admitted that innocent people had been killed and injured \"and at times our actions as a liberation army fell far short of what they should have been\". The INLA went on to accept the large vote in favour of the Good Friday Agreement \u2013 which it had opposed during the 1998 referendums \u2013 by the people of both parts of Ireland. It said \"The will of the Irish people is clear. It is now time to silence the guns and allow the working classes the time and the opportunity to advance their demands and their needs.\"\nAlthough the INLA does not support the Good Friday Agreement, it does not call for a return to armed struggle on behalf of republicans either. An INLA statement released in 1999 declared, \"we do not see a return to armed struggle as a viable option at the present time\".\nPost-ceasefire activities.\nThe INLA maintains a presence in parts of Northern Ireland and has carried out punishment beatings on alleged petty criminals.\nThe Independent Monitoring Commission (IMC), which monitored paramilitary activity in Northern Ireland, stated in a November 2004 report that the INLA was heavily involved in criminality. In 1997, an INLA man named John Morris was shot dead by Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na (the Republic's police force) in Dublin during the attempted robbery of a newspaper distributor's depot in Inchicore. Three other INLA members were arrested in the incident. In 1999, the INLA in Dublin became involved in a feud with a criminal gang in the city. After a young INLA man named Patrick Campbell was killed by drug dealers, the INLA carried out several shootings in reprisal, including at least one killing. Journalist Paul Williams has also stated the INLA, especially in Dublin, is now primarily a front for organised crime. The IRSP and INLA deny these allegations, arguing that no one has been simultaneously convicted of membership in the INLA and of drug offences. The IRSP and the INLA have both strongly denied any involvement with drug dealing, stating that the INLA has threatened criminals who it stated have falsely used its name.\nThe October 2006 IMC report stated that the INLA \"was not capable of undertaking a sustained campaign [against the United Kingdom], nor does it aspire to\".\nIn December 2007, disturbances broke out at an INLA parade in the Bogside in Derry between spectators and Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) officers attempting to arrest four of the marchers.\nIn the Seventeenth and Eighteenth IMC reports the INLA was said to remain a threat, with a desire to mount attacks that could well be more dangerous in the future, but was characterized as being largely a criminal enterprise at that time. The INLA killed Brian McGlynn on 3 June 2007 during the span of the first of these reports. This killing was said to have occurred because the victim used the INLA name in the drug trade. On 24 June 2008, the INLA was said to have murdered Emmett Shiels, although the IMC report did indicate the investigation was continuing.\nIt was also said to be partaking in \"serious crimes\" such as drug dealing, extortion, robbery, fuel laundering and smuggling. Furthermore, the INLA and Continuity IRA were stated to have co-operated.\nOn 15 February 2009 the INLA claimed responsibility for the shooting death of Derry drug dealer Jim McConnell.\nIn March 2009 it was reported that the INLA had stood down its Dublin Brigade in order to allow its army council to carry out an internal investigation into allegations of drug dealing and criminality. The INLA denied it as an organisation was involved in drug dealing and went on to say that \"As a result of evidence presented to us, we are investigating the activities of people associated with us in [Dublin]. Pending that outcome, we have stood down several people.\" A short time later the INLA's Dublin Commander, Declan \"Whacker\" Duffy, publicly disassociated himself from the organisation. Duffy criticized the INLA leadership stating that \"You would imagine if there was a thorough investigation being carried out by the INLA they would have at least came and spoke to me.\" He went on to state that: \"I can't deny that I'm disappointed with the way the INLA has handled things but at the same time I'm not going to get into a sniping match with them.\"\nOn 19 August 2009, the INLA shot and wounded a man in Derry. The INLA claimed that the man was involved in drug dealing although the injured man and his family denied the allegation. However, in a newspaper article on 28 August the victim retracted his previous statement and admitted that he had been involved in small scale drug dealing but has since ceased these activities.\nIn October 2015 the Assessment on Paramilitary Groups in Northern Ireland, commissioned by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland on the structure, role and purpose of paramilitary organisations reported the structures of the INLA remain in existence but there is little indication of centralised control from the leadership. Some members are active in politics through the IRSP however INLA members are \"heavily involved\" in criminal activity including extortion, drug dealing, distribution of stolen goods, and fraud. The INLA also continues to carry out punishment attacks. Although the INLA's leadership recognises the futility of a return to armed struggle, there is cooperation between INLA members and dissident republicans, including the provision of weaponry and \"paramilitary-style assaults.\"\nIn July 2024, A Belfast Councillor for the TUV accused the INLA of attacking the Welcome Organisation, a homeless charity in West Belfast, following graffiti painted nearby stating any workmen repairing the centre would be shot. It is unknown how true this claim is, as local residents have been vocal about their demands for the centre to be relocated due to anti-social behaviour (primarily street fights, drug abuse and sexual acts in public). Following the attack, the IRSP reiterated calls for its relocation to a more suitable location.\nEnd of armed campaign.\nOn 11 October 2009, speaking at the graveside of its founder Seamus Costello in Bray, the INLA formally announced an end to its armed campaign, stating the current political framework allowed for the pursuit of its goals through peaceful, democratic means. Martin McMonagle from Derry said: \"The Republican Socialist Movement has been informed by the INLA that following a process of serious debate\u00a0... it has concluded that the armed struggle is over. The objective of a 32-county socialist republic will be best achieved through exclusively peaceful political struggle\".\nThe governments of Britain and Ireland were informed before the announcement. Sinn F\u00e9in's Gerry Adams was doubtful but added: \"However, if it is followed by the actions that are necessary, this is a welcome development\". On 6 February 2010, days before the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning (IICD) was due to disband, the INLA revealed that it had decommissioned its weapons over the preceding few weeks. Had the INLA retained its weapons beyond 9 February, the date on which the legislation under which the IICD operated ended, then they would have been treated as belonging to common criminals rather than remnants from the Troubles.\nThe decommissioning was confirmed by General John de Chastelain of the IICD on 8 February 2010. On the same day INLA spokesman Martin McMonagle said that the INLA made \"no apology for [its] part in the conflict\" but they believed in the \"primacy of politics\" to \"advance the working class struggle in Ireland\".\nFinance.\nIn 2002, the Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee estimated the INLA's annual running costs at \u00a325-30,000 against an annual fundraising capability of \u00a3500,000.\nArms importation.\nObtaining arms was one of the greatest difficulties faced by the INLA in its early years. Their avowed Marxism made them beyond help from Catholic Irish-America, who had traditionally been a lifeline for funds and weapons for Irish republicans engaged in armed struggle against British rule in Ireland. Lack of weapons in the mid-Seventies led to numerous internal rows, and Costello himself was even threatened by INLA members for his failure to provide guns. At a time when the IRA seemed replete with Armalites, the INLA was mainly armed with shotguns, which the rank and file wryly took to calling \"Costello-ites\" after their leader. The INLA's main source of arms early on was from sympathizers in the Middle East, from where they imported a contingent of AK-pattern rifles in 1978. An arms smuggling network was later established where guns would be channelled from a Palestinian source based in Lebanon via West Germany (and later Switzerland) to a left-wing sympathiser in France and then to Ireland. The first shipment arrived in July 1979 consisting of six FN pistols, 35 automatic pistols, and 4 Uzi submachine guns. In later years Palestinian sources would provide the INLA with hundreds of Czechoslovak VZOR pistols as well as Chinese-made SKS rifles, Rhodesian submachine-guns and Browning pistols. The INLA also acquired \u0160korpion machine pistols from Fatah free of charge. The INLA also acquired Soviet-made plastic explosives, which were used in the assassination of Airey Neave. Later smaller-scale arms smuggling was carried out through a new conduit linked to the French far-left terrorist group Action Directe. This new network was established by the INLA faction loyal to Gerard Steenson, the original Middle East arms route remained in the hands of the older Dublin-based leadership. In July 1983 INLA member Colm Murphy was arrested in the US after attempting to buy a consignment of M60 machine guns to be shipped to Ireland. Testifying in court, informer Harry Kirkpatrick later recounted how the INLA faction in Belfast under the leadership of Gerard Steenson had during the 1981 Hunger Strike independently purchased arms in the United States, using money acquired from an armed robbery.\nBy the mid-1980s, separate INLA factions were trying to acquire arms. The old arms links were re-activated by remnants of the original INLA organisation based in Dublin and Munster as part of an effort to either create a new republican socialist movement or reform the existing INLA. Between 1984 and late 1986 they held meetings with Fatah and other Arab sympathisers in Prague, East Berlin, Warsaw, and Tunisia. In 1984, a modest amount of arms started flowing into Ireland again, including \u0160korpion machine pistols and VZOR pistols; grenades were smuggled as well, as were remotes for bomb detonators. The 1986 United States bombing of Libya generated an anti-Western mood in the Arab world that led to a breakthrough for INLA arms procurement efforts. A large arms haul was secured through a Palestine Liberation Organization contact in Prague which included a hundred man-portable anti-tank weapons, forty AK-47 rifles, three 12.7mm heavy machine guns, and two 80mm mortars. However, four INLA members (amongst them Harry Flynn) were arrested in France as they prepared to receive the shipment. The judge at their trial was sympathetic and recognised they were acting on political motives. By 1988 though the weapons were still available for import neither the INLA nor the IPLO splinter group had the means to do so.\nBetween 1977 and 1983 the INLA received weaponry from a sympathiser in Australia. The network had been activated by Seamus Costello and consisted of shipments of rifles of several types; Ruger Mini-14s, a Springfield Armory M1A, M1 Garands, Egyptian Mauser rifles and SKS rifles. In late 1983, however, the Australian network was exposed after Garda\u00ed found Seamus Ruddy in possession of a document that led to the discovery of the fourth (and last) Australian guns shipment which contained five M14-type rifles, one M1 Garand, three Mini-14's, an SKS, and over 1,700 rounds of ammunition. An Irish immigrant who had lived in Australia since 1968 and had become an Australian citizen in 1973 was arrested and convicted of arms running in 1984.\nIn the summer of 1994 the INLA smuggled a quantity of explosives from New Zealand, hidden in tea chests.\nDeaths as a result of activity.\nAccording to Malcolm Sutton's \"Index of Deaths from the Conflict in Ireland\", part of the Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN), the INLA was responsible for at least 120 killings during the Troubles, between 1975 and 2001. This includes those claimed by the \"People's Liberation Army\" and \"People's Republican Army\". According to the book \"Lost Lives\" (2006 edition), the INLA was responsible for 127 killings.\nOf those killed by the INLA:\nThe CAIN database says there were 39 INLA members killed during the conflict, while \"Lost Lives\" says there were 44 killed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63064", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63064", "title": "Bengal cat", "text": "Breed of cat\nVariety of cat\nThe Bengal cat is a breed of hybrid cat created from crossing of an Asian leopard cat (\"Prionailurus bengalensis\") with domestic cats, especially the spotted Egyptian Mau. It is then usually bred with a breed that demonstrates a friendlier personality, because after breeding a domesticated cat with a wildcat, its friendly personality may not manifest in the kitten. The breed's name derives from the leopard cat's taxonomic name.\nBengals have varying appearances. Their coats range from spots, rosettes, arrowhead markings, to marbling.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest mention of an Asian leopard cat\u00a0\u00d7 domestic cross was in 1889, when Harrison Weir wrote of them in \"Our Cats and All About Them\".\nBengals as a breed.\nJean Mill of California is given credit for the modern Bengal breed. She made the first known deliberate cross of an Asian leopard cat with a domestic cat (a black California tomcat). Bengals as a breed did not really begin in earnest until much later.\nCat registries.\nIn 1986, the breed was accepted as a \"new breed\" by The International Cat Association; Bengals gained TICA championship status in 1991. The Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF) accepted Bengal cats in 1997. F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale F\u00e9line (FIFe) in 1999 accepted the breed into their registry. Also in 1999, Bengals were accepted into the Australian Cat Federation (ACF). The Cat Fanciers' Association accepted the Bengal in CFA's \"Miscellaneous\" in 2016, under the restrictions that \"it must be F6 or later (6 generations removed from the Asian leopard cat or non-Bengal domestic cat ancestors)\".\nEarly generations.\nBengal cats from the first three generations of breeding (F1, F2, and F3) are considered \"foundation\" or \"early-generation\" Bengals. The early-generation males are frequently infertile. Therefore, female early-generation Bengals are bred to fertile domestic Bengal males of later generations. Nevertheless, as the term was used incorrectly for many years, many people and breeders still refer to the cats as F2, F3, and F4, even though the term is considered incorrect.\nPopularity.\nThe Bengal breed was more fully developed by the 1980s. \"In 1992 The International Cat Association had 125 registered Bengal Breeders.\" By the 2000s, Bengals had become a very popular breed. In 2019, there were nearly 2,500 Bengal breeders registered in TICA worldwide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAppearance.\nMarkings.\nColors.\nBengals come in a variety of coat colors. The International Cat Association (TICA) recognizes several Bengal colors: brown spotted, seal lynx point (snow), sepia, silver, and mink spotted tabby.\nSpotted rosetted.\nThe Bengal cat is the only domestic breed of cat that has rosette markings.\nMarble.\nDomestic cats have four distinct and heritable coat patterns \u2013 ticked, mackerel, blotched, and spotted \u2013 these are collectively referred to as tabby markings.\nChristopher Kaelin, a Stanford University geneticist, has conducted research that has been used to identify the spotted gene and the marble gene in domestic Bengal cats. Kaelin studied the color and pattern variations of feral cats in Northern California, and was able to identify the gene responsible for the marble pattern in Bengal cats.\nLegal restrictions.\nIn Australia, G5 (fifth-generation) Bengals are not restricted, but their import is complex.\nBengals were regulated in the United Kingdom. In 2007, however, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs removed the previous licensing requirements.\nIn the United States, legal restrictions and even bans sometimes exist at the state and municipal level. In Hawaii, Bengal cats are prohibited by law (as are all wild cat species, and all other hybrids of domestic and wild animals). In Connecticut, it is also illegal to own any generation of Bengal cat. In Alaska, Bengal cats must be four generations removed from the Asian leopard cat. A permit and registered pedigree that indicates the previous four generations are required. In California, the code of regulations Title\u00a014, section\u00a0K, Asian leopards are not specifically listed as a restricted species. In Delaware, a permit is required to own Bengal cats. Bengals of the F1\u2013G4 generations are also regulated in New York state, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Indiana. Various cities have imposed restrictions; in New York City, Bengals are prohibited, and there are limits on Bengal ownership in Seattle, Washington, and in Denver, Colorado. Except where noted above, Bengal cats with a generation of G5 and beyond are considered domestic, and are generally legal in the US.\nIn New Zealand's Southland District, the Bengal cat requires a permit to own and is completely banned on any off-shore islands including Stewart Island.\nHealth.\nHypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).\nHypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a major concern in the Bengal cat breed. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a disease in which the heart muscle (myocardium) becomes abnormally thick (hypertrophied). A thick heart muscle makes it difficult for the cat's heart to pump blood. \nHCM is a common genetic disease in Bengal cats and there is no genetic testing available as of 2018. In the United States, the current practice of screening for HCM involves bringing Bengal cats to a board certified veterinary cardiologist where an echocardiogram is completed. Bengal cats that are used for breeding should be screened annually to ensure that no hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is present. As of January 2019, the North Carolina State University is attempting to identify genetic markers for HCM in the Bengal Cat.\nOne study published in the \"Journal of Internal Veterinary Medicine\" has claimed the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Bengal cats is 16.7% (95% CI = 13.2\u201346.5%).\nBengal progressive retinal atrophy (PRA-b).\nBengal cats are known to be affected by several genetic diseases, one of which is Bengal progressive retinal atrophy, also known as Bengal PRA or PRA-b. Anyone breeding Bengal cats should carry out this test, since it is inexpensive, noninvasive, and easy to perform. A breeder stating their cats are \"veterinarian tested\" should not be taken to mean that this test has been performed by a vet: it is carried out by the breeder, outside of a vet office (rarely, if ever, by a vet). The test is then sent directly to the laboratory.\nErythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency (PK-deficiency or PK-def).\nPK deficiency is a common genetic diseases found in Bengal cats. PK deficiency is another test that is administered by the breeder. Breeding Bengal Cats should be tested before breeding to ensure two PK deficiency carriers are not mated. This is a test that a breeder must do on their own. A breeder uses a cotton swab to rub the inside of the cat's mouth and then mails the swab to the laboratory.\nUlcerative nasal dermatitis.\nA unique form of ulcerative dermatitis affecting the nasal planum (rhinarium or nose leather) of Bengal cats was first reported in 2004. The condition first presents between the ages of 4\u201312 months, beginning as a dry scale and progressing to crusts and fissures typical of hyperkeratosis. The exact cause remains unclear; it is considered hereditary and incurable, but can respond favorably to topical steroid treatments such as prednisolone and tacrolimus ointment.\nLife expectancy.\nA UK study looking at veterinary records found the Bengal to have a life expectancy of 8.51 years compared to 11.74 years overall.\nBengal blood-type.\nThe UC Davis Veterinary Genetics Laboratory has studied domestic cat blood-types. They conclude that most domestic cats fall within the AB\u00a0system. The common blood-types are A and B and some cats have the rare AB\u00a0blood-type. There is a lack of sufficient samples from Bengals, so the genetics of the AB\u00a0blood-group in Bengal cats is not well understood.\nOne Bengal blood-type study that took place in the U.K. tested 100\u00a0Bengal cats. They concluded that all 100 of the Bengal cats tested had type\u00a0A blood.\nShedding and grooming.\nBengals are often claimed by breeders and pet adoption agencies to be a hypoallergenic breed \u2013 one less likely to cause an allergic reaction. The Bengal cat is said to produce lower than average levels of allergens, though this has not been scientifically proven as of 2020.\nCat geneticist Leslie Lyons, who runs the University of Missouri's Feline and Comparative Genetics Laboratory, discounts such claims, observing that there is no such thing as a hypoallergenic cat. Alleged hypoallergenic breeds thus may still produce a reaction among those who have severe allergies.\nBengal Longhair (Cashmere Bengal).\nSome long-haired Bengals (more properly, semi-long-haired) have always occurred in Bengal breeding. Many different domestic cats were used to create the Bengal breed, and it is theorized that the gene for long hair came from one of these backcrossings. UC Davis has developed a genetic test for long hair so that Bengal breeders could select Bengal cats with a recessive long-hair gene for their breeding programs.\nSome Bengal cats used in breeding can carry a recessive gene for long-haired. When a male and female Bengal each carry a copy of the recessive long hair gene, and those two Bengals are mated with each other, they can produce long-haired Bengals. \"(See Cat coat genetics#Genes involved in fur length and texture.)\" In the past, long-haired offspring of Bengal matings were spayed or neutered until some breeders chose to develop the long-haired Bengal (which are sometimes called a Cashmere Bengal).\nLong-haired Bengals are starting to gain more recognition in some cat breed registries but are not widely accepted. Since 2013, they have \"preliminary\" breed status in the New Zealand Cat Fancy (NZCF) registry, under the breed name Cashmere Bengal. Since 2017 The International Cat Association (TICA) has accepted the Bengal Longhair in competitions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63065", "revid": "44231696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63065", "title": "Novosibirsk", "text": "City and administrative centre of Novosibirsk Oblast, Russia\nNovosibirsk is the largest city and administrative centre of Novosibirsk Oblast and the Siberian Federal District in Russia. As of the 2021 census, it had a population of 1,633,595, making it the most populous city in Siberia and the third-most populous city in Russia after Moscow and Saint Petersburg. Additionally, it is the largest city in the Asian part of Russia and the most populous city in the country that does not have the status of a federal subject. Novosibirsk is located in southwestern Siberia, on the banks of the Ob River.\nNovosibirsk was founded in 1893 on the Ob River crossing point of the future Trans-Siberian Railway, where the Novosibirsk Rail Bridge was constructed. Originally named Novonikolayevsk in honor of Emperor Nicholas II, the city rapidly grew into a major transport, commercial, and industrial hub. Novosibirsk was ravaged by the Russian Civil War but recovered during the early Soviet period and gained its present name, \"Novosibirsk\", in 1926. Under the leadership of Joseph Stalin, Novosibirsk became one of the largest industrial centers of Siberia. Following the outbreak of World War II, the city hosted many factories relocated from the Russian core.\nNovosibirsk is home to many notable places such as the neo-Byzantine Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, the Novosibirsk Opera and Ballet Theatre, as well as the Novosibirsk Zoo. It is served by Tolmachevo Airport, the busiest airport in Siberia.\nHistory.\nNovosibirsk was founded on the right side of the Ob, near an area traditionally inhabited by Chat Tatars (Chertovo gorodishche). The Russian town originated on 30 April 1893 at the future site of a Trans-Siberian Railway bridge crossing the great Siberian river, and in 1895 became known as Novonikolayevsk (), in honor both of Saint Nicholas and of the new reigning Tsar, Nicholas\u00a0II. It superseded Bolshoye Krivoshchyokovo village, located on the opposite side of the Ob, which was founded in 1696 and was resettled in 1893 due to the construction of the Novosibirsk Rail Bridge. The bridge, completed in the spring of 1897, made the new settlement a regional transport hub. The importance of the city further increased with the completion of the Turkestan\u2013Siberia Railway in the early 20th century. The new railway connected Novonikolayevsk directly with Central Asia and the Caspian Sea.\nAt the time of the bridge's opening, Novonikolayevsk had a population of 7,800\u00a0people. The settlement developed rapidly. Its first bank opened in 1906, and a total of five banks were operating by 1915. In 1907, Novonikolayevsk, now with a population exceeding 47,000, was granted town status with full rights for self-government. During the pre-revolutionary period, the population of Novonikolayevsk reached 80,000. The city had steady and rapid economic growth, becoming one of the largest commercial and industrial centers of Siberia. It developed a significant agricultural-processing industry, as well as a power station, iron foundry, commodity market, several banks, and commercial and shipping companies. By 1917, the city had seven Orthodox churches and one Roman Catholic Church, along with several cinemas, forty primary schools, a high school, a teaching seminary, and the Romanov House non-classical secondary school. In 1913, Novonikolayevsk became one of the first places in Russia to institute compulsory primary education.\nThe Russian Civil War of 1917\u20131923 took a toll on the city. Wartime epidemics, especially typhus and cholera, claimed thousands of lives. In the course of the war, the Ob River Bridge was destroyed. For the first time in the city's history, the population of Novonikolayevsk began to decline. The Soviet Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies of Novonikolayevsk took control of the city in December 1917. In May 1918, the Czechoslovak Legion rose in opposition to the revolutionary government and, together with the White Guards, captured Novonikolayevsk (26 May 1918). The Red Army took the city in 1919, retaining it throughout the rest of the Civil War.\nNovonikolayevsk began reconstruction in 1921 at the start of Lenin's New Economic Policy period (1921\u20131928). The city formed part of Tomsk Governorate and served as its administrative center from 23 December 1919 to 14 March 1920. Between 13 June 1921 and 25 May 1925, it served as the administrative center of Novonikolayevsk Governorate, which was separated from Tomsk Governorate. The city received its present name on 12 September 1926, -\"Novosibirsk\", which, in the Russian language, translates roughly as \"New Siberian [town]\".\nAfter the Soviet Union abolished governorates in 1929, the city served as the administrative center of the Siberian Krai until 23 July 1930, and of West Siberian Krai until 28 September 1937, when that krai was split into Novosibirsk Oblast and Altai Krai. Since then, it has served as the administrative center of Novosibirsk Oblast.\nBetween 1929 and 1951 the NKVD interrogation centre No. 1 in Novosibirsk was one of the main transit prisons in the USSR. In the 1990s there was a campaign to create a memorial on the site but remains found there were not reburied.\nThe Monument to the Heroes of the Revolution, erected in the center of the city in 1922, became one of the chief historic sites (essentially every child had to visit the monument on school field-trips during the Soviet years). Neglect in the 1990s while other areas were redeveloped helped preserve it in the post-Soviet era.\nDuring Stalin's industrialization effort, Novosibirsk secured its place as one of the largest industrial centers of Siberia. Several massive industrial facilities developed, including the 'Sibkombain' plant, specializing in the production of heavy mining equipment. Additionally, a metal-processing plant, a food-processing plant, and other industrial enterprises and factories were built, as well as a new power station. The great Soviet famine of 1932\u201333 resulted in more than 170,000 rural refugees seeking food and safety in Novosibirsk. They were settled in barracks at the outskirts of the city, giving rise to slums. Reflecting international recognition of its rapid growth and industrialization, in the US media Novosibirsk was referred to as the \"Chicago of Siberia\".\nTram rails were laid down in 1934, by which time the population had reached 287,000, making Novosibirsk the largest city in Siberia. The following year the original road bridge over the Ob River was replaced by the new Kommunalny bridge.\nBetween 1941 and 1942, the Soviets crated up and relocated more than 50 substantial factories from western Russia to Novosibirsk in order to reduce the risk of their destruction through war, and at this time the city became a major supply base for the Red Army. During this period the city also received more than 140,000 refugees.\nThe rapid growth of the city prompted the construction during the 1950s of a hydroelectric power station with a capacity of 400 megawatts, necessitating the creation of a giant water reservoir, now known as the Ob Sea. As a direct result of the station's construction, vast areas of fertile land were flooded, as were relic pine woods in the area; additionally, the new open space created by the reservoir's surface caused average wind speeds to double, increasing the rate of soil erosion.\nIn the 1950s, the Soviet Government directed the building of a center for scientific research in Novosibirsk, and in 1957 the multi-facility scientific research complex of Akademgorodok was constructed about south of the city center. The Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences (formerly the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union) has its headquarters in Akademgorodok, and the town hosts more than 35 research institutes and universities, among them Novosibirsk State University, one of the top Russian schools in natural sciences and mathematics. Although it possesses a fully autonomous infrastructure, Akademgorodok is administered by Novosibirsk.\nOn 2 September 1962, the population of Novosibirsk reached one million. At that time, it was the youngest city in the world with the population exceeding one million. Novosibirsk took fewer than seventy years to achieve this milestone. On 8 June 1965, the city was the scene of a dramatic aerial stunt when Lieutenant Valentin Privalov flew his MiG-17 under the October Bridge; an image which purportedly showed the event was later found to be a photocollage. In 1979, work began on the Novosibirsk Metro Transit System, culminating in the opening of the first line in 1985.\nOn 1 August 2008, Novosibirsk was in the center of the path of a solar eclipse, with a duration of 2 minutes and 20 seconds.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nNovosibirsk is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Novosibirsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as the City of Novosibirsk\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the City of Novosibirsk is incorporated as Novosibirsk Urban Okrug.\nCity districts.\nThe Administrative divisions of Novosibirsk consists of 10 districts:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 Russian census, the population of Novosibirsk is 1,633,595. This is an increase compared to the 2010 census, when the population of the city was\u00a01,473,754.\nPeople from over eighty ethnicities and nationalities reside in Novosibirsk. The largest groups are Russian, Tajik, Tatar, Uzbek, Ukrainian and Kyrgyz.\nEcology.\nFlora.\nThe best-known trees native to Novosibirsk are birch, pine, and aspen. Some mountain ash, hawthorn, spruce, and fir are present as well. European species of apple, ash, elm, linden, and oak have been successfully introduced.\nGeography.\nUrban layout.\nThe layout of the modern city is based on the planning of the post-revolution period. Before 1917, there was no traditional city center in Novo-nikolayevsk. The main buildings of the railway management and the nearby railway station as well as the most important cathedral and the complex of the city's government were spread throughout the city. This changed following the revolution, with Lenin House built in 1925 in what was traditionally the main avenue, Krasny Prospekt while the first Lenin monument was built in Barnaulskaya Street, closer to the railway station. And thus, until the late 1920s, Novosibirsk did not have a clearly defined city center. The 1930s brought many changes to the development of the city: Its former Bazarnaya Ploschad (Market Square) was chosen as the site for the construction of the Opera House which started in 1931. The Stalin Park of Culture and Rest was established some distance from the main avenue and the city's administrative buildings and park created a radial around the Bazarnaya Ploschad.\nThere are 3 road (Kommunalny, Dimitrovsky, Bugrinsky), 2 railway (First, Komsomolsky), and 1 metro bridges within the city limits. The dam of the Novosibirsk Hydroelectric Station located on the territory of the city is also used for road traffic.\nLocation.\nThe city stands on the banks of the Ob River in the West Siberian Plain. The southern boundary of the city runs through the Novosibirsk reservoir, which is formed by the dam of the Novosibirsk Hydroelectric Station and cuts through the Ob Plateau.\nThe nearest major cities are Omsk, Barnaul, Kemerovo, Tomsk. Novosibirsk is located about 2,811 kilometres from Moscow.\nClimate.\nThe climate in Novosibirsk is typical of Siberia, with dry winters and far-below-freezing winter temperatures. Among the reasons for these temperatures are the absence of a nearby ocean and the lack of tall mountains at the north of Novosibirsk that could have held back freezing Arctic winds. In fact, Novosibirsk is the second-farthest substantially populated city from the ocean, the first being \u00dcr\u00fcmqi in China.\nThe climate is humid continental (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"), with warm summers and bitterly cold winters. Snow is frequent, falling on almost half of all winter days, but individual snowfalls are usually light. On average temperatures range in summer from to and in winter from to . However, winter temperatures can go as low as to , and summer temperatures can go as high as to . The difference between the highest- and lowest-recorded temperatures is .\nTravellers coming from countries with mild climates may find Novosibirsk's winter extremely cold, but it is a lot less severe than further east in Siberia and the Russian Far East, especially considering its latitude of 55\u00b0N. For example, Novosibirsk is less cold during winter nights than Spassk-Dalny at eleven degrees lower latitude. It also is less cold in winter than the largest far eastern city of Khabarovsk and during nights even the Pacific coastal town of Sovetskaya Gavan, both at less than 49\u00b0N, and slightly milder than the Chinese city of Harbin, the capital of Manchuria and Heilongjiang province in China, at only 45\u00b0N. Sometimes bitter cold may hold for some days, but temperatures of and lower do not occur every year. Its overall temperatures are very similar to that of Winnipeg, Canada, at about 50 degrees north.\nBroadcasting.\nNovosibirsk is home to Russia's most powerful shortwave relay station east of the Ural mountains. This relay station can reach most of South Asia, West Asia, and China. The Magadan and Vladivostok relay stations when operated in conjunction with Novosibirsk can guarantee that the Voice of Russia or any other broadcaster renting time at Novosibirsk is heard in the intended target area.\nTransportation.\nInternational and intercity transportation.\nAirports.\nThe city is served by Novosibirsk Tolmachevo Airport, which connects Novosibirsk with most of Russia's largest cities and most countries of Europe and Asia. Tolmachevo is the hub for S7 Airlines.\nThere is also the auxiliary Yeltsovka Airport.\nA smaller field for general aviation at Novosibirsk Severny Airport was closed in 2012. In August 2008, the First World Aerobatics Championship in Yak-52 aircraft was held at the airport.\nRailway stations.\nNovosibirsk is a major stop on the Trans-Siberian Railway and the north end of Turkestan\u2013Siberia Railway. The main railway station of Novosibirsk is Novosibirsk-Glavny station (\"Glavny\" means \"Main\") which is located in the centre of the right bank part of the city. There are also Novosibirsk-Zapadny (\"Zapadny\" means \"Western\"), Novosibirsk-Vostochny (\"Vostochny\" means \"Eastern\"), and Novosibirsk-Yuzhny (\"Yuzhny\" means \"Southern\") railway stations in Novosibirsk. All intercity trains passing through the aforementioned stations stop at these stations. In addition, there are halts where only suburban trains stops, for example Inskaya, Seyatel, Razyezd Inya, and many others.\nThe many regular intercity trains connect Novosibirsk with Russian cities in Siberia, the Far East, Ural, and European Russia. International trains connect the city with China, Mongolia, Belarus, and countries in Central Asia.\nBus stations.\nThe old Novosibirsk Bus Station located on Krasny Avenue in the right bank part of the city near Kommunalny Bridge was opened in 1964 and eventually closed on 6 April 2020. There is a plan to build some new bus stations on the periphery of the city; the first of these new bus stations was built on Gusinobrodskoe \u0421haussee and was opened on 18 December 2019. Until the completion of remaining new bus stations, some bus stops in the city are being used by intercity bus services.\nThe many regular intercity/international bus routes connect Novosibirsk with most cities of the southern part of Western Siberia and major cities of Central Asia.\nRiver passenger terminals.\nThe building of Novosibirsk river passenger terminal (Russian: \u0420\u0435\u0447\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u0432\u043e\u043a\u0437\u0430\u043b) on the Ob river was opened in 1974. Later, the self-titled metro station was opened near the building of the terminal. On 7 March 2003, there was the strong fire in the building of the terminal. The part of the building was beyond repair and was demolished.\nAt present day, only two regular passenger lines are operational: Novosibirsk - Kudryash island - Yagodnaya - Cheremushki - Novaya Zarya - Bibikha - Sedova Zaimka and Novosibirsk - Berdsk. There are also cruises on the Ob river and the Novosibirsk Reservoir including to Tomsk and Barnaul. River ships use the Novosibirsk Shipping Canal, equipped with a single triple-chamber shipping lock and located in Novosibirsk along its entire length, for the passage from the river to the reservoir and from the reservoir to the river.\nUsually, the period of navigability is opened in late April or early May and is closed in late September or early October.\nCity public transportation.\nMetro.\n\u0421hronologically, Novosibirsk was the fourth city in Russia in which a metro system was established, after Moscow, Saint Petersburg, and Nizhny Novgorod. It was therefore also the first city in Siberia. The Novosibirsk Metro was opened in 1985. As of 2022, the system has 2 dual track lines (Leninskaya (red) and Dzerzhinskaya (green)) and 13 stations.\nTram system.\nThe Novosibirsk tram system was launched in 1934. As of 2022, the network has 10 routes: 6 of them are situated in left-bank part of the city, 4 of them are situated in right-bank of the city.\nTrolleybus system.\nThe Novosibirsk trolleybus system was launched in 1957. As of 2022,[ [update]] the network has 14 routes.\nBus system.\nThe Novosibirsk bus system was launched in 1923. As of 2022,[ [update]] system consists of 52 routes served by buses over 10 metres long and 17 routes served by smaller buses.\nWaterbus system.\nAs of 2021, the Novosibirsk waterbus system includes the following routes:\nUsually, the period of navigability is opened in late April or early May and is closed in late September or early October.\nRoute taxi.\nThe Novosibirsk fixed-route taxi system (marshrutka), which utilizes minibuses, has operated in the city since late 1970s. In 1989, the first private carriers appeared after the passage of the Law on Cooperatives. There are 56 marshrutkas routes in Novosibirsk. In recent years the number of minibus routes in this system have been in decline, generally being replaced with bus routes.\nEconomy.\nNovosibirsk is a large industrial center. The industrial complex consists of 214 large and average-sized industrial enterprises. These produce more than two-thirds of all industrial output of the Novosibirsk region. Leading industries are aerospace (Chkalov's Novosibirsk Aircraft Plant), nuclear fuel (Novosibirsk Chemical Concentrates Plant), turbo and hydroelectric generators (NPO ELSIB), textile machinery (Textilmach), agriculture machinery (NPO \"Sibselmash\"), electronics components and devices production (Novosibirsk Factory and Design Bureau of Semiconductor Devices NZPP, OXID Novosibirsk Plant of Radio components), and metallurgy and metalworking (Kuzmina's Novosibirsk Metallurgical Plant, Novosibirsk Tin Plant OJSC, and JSC Plant of Rare Metals).\nAccording to the television station RBC, Novosibirsk took third place in 2008 in the list of Russian cities most attractive to businesses (in 2007 it was placed thirteenth).\nThe Rich Family multi-national retailer was founded in Novosibirsk in 2002 and continues to maintain their headquarters in the city. Before the relocation of its headquarters to Ob, S7 Airlines had its head office in Novosibirsk.\nThe headquarters of a number of large Russian companies are located in Novosibirsk:\nGovernance.\nUntil 2023, the head of the city (mayor) was elected by universal suffrage among city residents. This position was held by Anatoly Lokot (Communist Party of the Russian Federation) from 23 April 2014. In February 2023, deputies of the Legislative Assembly of the Novosibirsk Oblast, in two readings, adopted a bill to abolish direct elections of the heads of Novosibirsk and the scientific settlement of Koltsovo; the election of heads of municipal administrations will take place on a competitive basis. On 28 December 2023, the governor of Novosibirsk Oblast, Andrey Travnikov, announced that Anatoly Lokot was going on vacation with subsequent dismissal. First Deputy Mayor Oleg Klemeshov was appointed acting mayor. On 16 April 2024, based on the results of voting by deputies of the Novosibirsk City Council of Deputies, Deputy Governor of the Novosibirsk Region (United Russia) was elected mayor of Novosibirsk.\nSport.\nProfessional sports clubs active in the city:\nNovosibirsk is the home town of several former Olympians, including Aleksandr Karelin, a twelve-time world Greco-Roman wrestling champion who has been voted the greatest Greco-Roman wrestler of the twentieth century by the sport's international governing body of FILA.\nThe city also hosts a number of national and international Ice Speedway events. Siberia Novosibirsk competed in the Russian Ice Speedway Premier League in 2012/13, and 2013/2014. The speedway venue known as the Motordrome ROSTO is located on Ulitsa Tul'skaya, 205 at ().\nThe Siberia Novosibirsk motorcycle speedway team regularly participated in the Soviet Union Championship from its inaugural edition in 1962 through to 1992 and then from 1993 to 1995 in the Russian Championship. The team were champions of the Soviet Union in 1980.\nMusic.\nSeveral contemporary classical violinists, such as Vadim Repin, the late Alexander Skwortsow, Natalia Lomeiko, and Maxim Vengerov, are natives of Novosibirsk. Also born in the city were punk legend, poet and singer-songwriter Yanka Dyagileva, tragic punk rocker Dmitry Selivanov, folk/folk-rock singer Pelageya Khanova, and cellist Tatjana Vassiljeva. The career of poet and singer-songwriter Tatyana Snezhina was connected with Novosibirsk.\nThe city possesses the Novosibirsk State Conservatory, named in honor of the composer Mikhail Glinka; Novosibirsk State Philharmony, home to Novosibirsk Academic Symphony Orchestra, Novosibirsk Philharmonic Chamber Orchestra, Russian Academic Orchestra of Folk Instruments, and other musical groups; Novosibirsk Opera and Ballet Theater; and several notable music venues.\nEducation.\nNovosibirsk is home to the following institutions of higher education:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdditionally, there are more than 50 vocational schools in Novosibirsk.\nAkademgorodok is a remote part of Novosibirsk dedicated to science. It houses the Siberian branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences and is the location of Novosibirsk State University and Novosibirsk Higher Military Command School. All other higher education institutions are located in the central part of the city of Novosibirsk on both banks of the Ob river.\nThe Quality Schools International QSI International School of Novosibirsk, previously located in Akademgorodok, opened in 2008.\nCulture.\nLibraries.\nThere are many libraries in Novosibirsk. The most significant libraries are the following:\nPhilharmonic.\nNovosibirsk State Philharmonic Society was founded in 1937. It holds about 60 concerts per month using the following halls:\nPlaces of entertainment.\nCinemas.\n16 cinemas, including Cinema Park which supports IMAX and IMAX 3D.\nCircus.\nModern building of the Novosibirsk Circus was built in 1971.\nZoo.\nThe Novosibirsk Zoo is a world-renowned scientific institution as well as a popular tourist attraction.\nThe zoo has over 11,000 animals from 738 species and is an active participant in thirty-two different captive breeding programmes for endangered species. Since 2016, the Center of oceanography and marine biology \"Dolphinia\" has been part of the zoo.\nOn average, around 1.5 million people visit the zoo each year.\nChildren's railway.\nSmall West Siberian Railway is the children's railway located in Zayeltsovsky Park.\nIt has 5 stations: Zayeltsovskiy Park, Razyezd Lokomotiv, Sportivnaya, Razyezd Eltsovskiy, Zoopark.\nThe railway is operational in summer.\nBotanical gardens.\nCentral Siberian Botanic Garden is located in Akademgorodok.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nNovosibirsk is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable residents.\nViolinist Mikhail Simonyan, playwright and prose writer Nina Mikhailovna Sadur, three-time Olympic Greco-Roman wrestling champion Aleksandr Karelin, pop singer Shura, singer and The Voice judge Pelageya, rapper Allj and top model Sofia Steinberg were born and raised in Novosibirsk. Maxim Vengerov, an Israeli violinist, violist, and conductor was born here. Aleksandr Akimov, who was also born here, was the night shift supervisor on duty for Reactor 4 of the Chernobyl Nuclear Plant at the time of the explosion in April 1986. Stanislav Pozdnyakov, fencer and president of the Russian Olympic Commission, was born here.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63066", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63066", "title": "Startsida", "text": ""}
{"id": "63067", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63067", "title": "Akademgorodok", "text": "Academic campus in Sovetsky District of the city of Novosibirsk\nAkademgorodok (Russian: , , \"Academic Town\") is a part of the Sovetsky District of the city of Novosibirsk, Russia, located south of the city center and about west of Koltsovo. It is the educational and scientific centre of Siberia.\nIt is surrounded by a birch and pine forest on the shore of the Ob Sea, an artificial reservoir on the river Ob. Formally it is a part of Novosibirsk city, and has never been a closed city.\nLocated within Akademgorodok is Novosibirsk State University, 35 research institutes, a medical academy, apartment buildings and houses, and a variety of community amenities including stores, hotels, hospitals, restaurants and cafes, cinemas, clubs and libraries. The House of Scientists (), a social center of Akademgorodok, hosts a library containing 100 thousand volumes\u00a0\u2013 Russian classics, modern literature and also many American, British, French, German, Polish books and magazines. The House of Scientists also includes a picture gallery, lecture halls and a concert hall.\nHistory.\nThe town was founded in 1957 under the auspices of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Academician Mikhail Alexeyevich Lavrentyev, a mechanician and mathematician, the first Chairman of the Siberian Branch of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, played a prominent role in establishing Akademgorodok. At its peak, Akademgorodok was home to 65,000 scientists and their families, and was a privileged area to live in.\nDuring the Soviet period (1961\u20131991), due to the peculiarity of the Soviet economic system, monetary rewards did not always translate into a higher standard of living. To offset this, a special compensation system was devised in Akademgorodok for its residents and leading scientists. For example, residents of Akademgorodok had access to special food ration distribution outlets (') that provided, most of the time, an access to some basic subsidized foodstuffs, which were not always easily obtainable elsewhere. Scientists who had obtained a doctorate (a post-Ph.D. degree under the Russian system) were rewarded by the authorities with the special food delivery service ('), which provided access to a wider selection of groceries than available to the general population; some of the scientists, despite being eligible, refused it on moral grounds.\nFull and corresponding members of the Academy of Sciences had access to still higher level of service (\"\") and were eligible to live in single-family residences (called \"cottages\"), considered luxurious by Soviet standards, as most of the population lived in apartments in nine- and four-story multi-apartment buildings.\nDuring the early years residents enjoyed great freedom from the rules and restraints of the Soviet Union, with a modernist cultural centre exhibiting works by banned Soviet artists, risqu\u00e9 poetry evenings, and other activities allowed nowhere else. Scientific research in areas dismissed as dangerous pseudoscience in Moscow, such as cybernetics and genetics, flourished. However, freedoms were severely curtailed in the 1970s during the Brezhnev era.\nAkademgorodok in the post-Soviet era.\nThe collapse of the Soviet Union saw many scientists, including whole cadres of Russia's top minds in the physical and theoretical sciences, reduced to penury. Beginning in the mid-1990s, as economic reforms allowed private investment in Russia, Akademgorodok saw the beginnings of venture funding. In 1992, a software company called Novosoft was founded here, and its chief client was IBM. Around this time CFT started, which specializes in banking and financial software. By 1997, private investment reached US$10 million; by 2006, it was $150 million, reaching about $1 billion by 2015.\nIntel and Schlumberger have brought work to Akademgorodok, and other companies are following them into the area. Many scientists, including Lavrentyev's son, also named Mikhail and also an accomplished mathematician in his own right, were deeply involved in this renaissance. Currently its population stands at over 100,000 and there are over 40 research institutes located within Akademgorodok. While still minuscule by the standards of other countries, the private venture effort in Akademgorodok has breathed new life into what was once one of the Soviet Union's premier scientific centers.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], 300 companies had been set up since 2011, employing about 9,000 people and generating 17bn roubles (\u00a3175M) annually.\nThe area is sometimes called \"Silicon Forest\" or \"Silicon Taiga\". A much larger technology center in the former Soviet Union is the Skolkovo Innovation Center, conveniently located on the outskirts of Moscow, a $4bn state project with annual revenues of $1bn.\nList of research and education facilities in Akademgorodok.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe QSI International School of Novosibirsk, previously located in Akademgorodok, opened in 2008.\nSightseeing.\nThe Technopark (Academpark) has a distinctive headquarters, constructed in 2013. It has two inclined towers connected by an overhead passage on the 13-14th floor level. Its unique form is the source of its nickname, \"the geese\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63069", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63069", "title": "Omsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "63071", "revid": "18024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63071", "title": "Classless interdomain routing", "text": ""}
{"id": "63072", "revid": "43393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63072", "title": "Creative accounting", "text": "Euphemism referring to unethical accounting practices\nCreative accounting is a euphemism referring to accounting practices that may follow the letter of the rules of standard accounting practices, but deviate from the spirit of those rules with questionable accounting ethics\u2014specifically distorting results in favor of the \"preparers\", or the firm that hired the accountant. They are characterized by excessive complication and the use of novel ways of characterizing income, assets, or liabilities, and the intent to influence readers towards the interpretations desired by the authors. The terms \"innovative\" or \"aggressive\" are also sometimes used. Another common synonym is \"cooking the books\". Creative accounting is oftentimes used in tandem with outright financial fraud (including securities fraud), and lines between the two are blurred. Creative accounting practices have been known since ancient times and appear world-wide in various forms.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Every company in the country is fiddling its profits. Every set of published accounts is based on books which have been gently cooked or completely roasted. The figures which are fed twice a year to the investing public have all been changed in order to protect the guilty. It is the biggest con trick since the Trojan horse.\u00a0... In fact this deception is all in perfectly good taste. It is totally legitimate. It is creative accounting.\"\nIan Griffiths in 1986, describing creative accounting\n The term as generally understood refers to systematic misrepresentation of the true income and assets of corporations or other organizations. \"Creative accounting\" has been at the root of a number of accounting scandals, and many proposals for accounting reform\u2014usually centering on an updated analysis of capital and factors of production that would correctly reflect how value is added.\nNewspaper and television journalists have hypothesized that the stock market downturn of 2002 was precipitated by reports of \"accounting irregularities\" at Enron, Worldcom, and other firms in the United States. According to critic David Ehrenstein, the term \"creative accounting\" was first used in 1968 in the film \"The Producers\" by Mel Brooks, where it is also known as Hollywood accounting.\nMotivations behind creative accounting.\nThe underlining purpose for creative accounting is to \"present [a] business in the best possible light\" typically by manipulating recorded profits or costs. Company managers who participate in creative accounting can have a variety of situational motivations for doing so, including: \nTypes/examples of creative accounting schemes.\nEarnings management.\nCreative accounting can be used to manage earnings. Earnings management occurs when managers use judgment in financial reporting and in structuring transactions to alter financial reports to either mislead some stakeholders about the underlying economic performance of a company or influence contractual outcomes that depend on reported accounting numbers.\nHollywood accounting.\nPracticed by some Hollywood film studios, creative accounting can be used to conceal earnings of a film to distort the profit participation promised to certain participants of the film's earnings. Essentially, participants in the gross revenue of the film stay unaffected but profit participants are presented with a deflated or negative number on profitability, leading to less or no payments to them following a film's success. Famous examples of deceiving good faith profit participants involve Darth Vader actor David Prowse (with $729M adjusted gross earnings on \"Return of the Jedi\") and \"Forrest Gump\" novel writer Winston Groom (with $661M gross theatrical revenue)\u2014both of whom have been paid $0 on their profit participation due to the films \"being in the red\".\nTobashi schemes.\nThis form of creative accounting\u2014now considered a criminal offense in Japan, where it originated\u2014involves the sale, swap or other form of temporary trade of a liability of one company with another company within the holding's portfolio, often solely created to conceal losses of the first firm. These schemes were popular in the 1980s in Japan before the government instituted harsher civil laws and eventually criminalized the practice. The Enron scandal revealed that Enron had extensively made use of sub-corporations to offload debts and hide its true losses in a Tobashi fashion.\nLehman Brothers' Repo 105 scheme.\nLehman Brothers utilized repurchase agreements to bolster profitability reports with their Repo 105 scheme under the watch of the accounting firm Ernst &amp; Young. The scheme consisted of mis-reporting a repurchase agreement (a promise to re-buy a liability or asset after selling it) as a sale, and timing it exactly in a way that half of the transaction was completed before a profitability reporting deadline, half after\u2014hence bolstering profitability numbers on paper. Public prosecutors in New York filed suit against EY for allowing the \"accounting fraud involving the surreptitious removal of tens of billions of dollars of fixed income securities from Lehman's balance sheet in order to deceive the public about Lehman's true liquidity condition\".\nEnron had done exactly the same about 10 years earlier; in their case, Merrill Lynch aided Enron in bolstering profitability close to earnings periods by willfully entering repurchase agreements to buy Nigerian barges from Enron, only for Enron to buy them back a few months later. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filed charges and convicted multiple Merrill Lynch executives of aiding the fraud.\nCurrency swap concealment of Greek debt by Goldman Sachs.\nIn 2001\u20132002, Goldman Sachs aided the government of Greece after its admission to the Eurozone to better its deficit numbers by conducting large currency swaps. These transactions, totaling more than 2.3 billion Euros, were technically loans but concealed as currency swaps in order to circumvent Maastricht Treaty rules on member nations deficit limits and allowed Greece to \"hide\" an effective 1 billion euro loan. After Goldman Sachs had engineered the financial instrument and sold it to the Greeks\u2014simply shifting the liabilities in the future and defrauding investors and the European Union, the investment bank's president Gary Cohn pitched Athens another deal. After Greece refused the second deal, the firm sold its Greek swaps to the Greek national bank and made sure its Short and Long positions towards Greece were in balance\u2014so that a potential Greek default would not affect Goldman Sachs.\nParmalat's mis-accounted credit-linked notes.\nItalian dairy giant Parmalat employed a number of creative accounting and wire fraud schemes before 2003 that lead to the largest bankruptcy in European history. It sold itself Credit-linked notes with the help of Merrill Lynch through a Cayman Islands special-purpose entity and over-accounted for their value on the balance sheet. It also forged a $3.9Bn check from Bank of America. The publicly listed company stated to investors that it had about $2Bn in liabilities (this figure was accepted by its auditors Deloitte and Grant Thornton International), but once audited more vigorously during the bankruptcy proceedings, it was discovered that the company's debt turned out to actually be $14.5Bn. This massive debt was largely caused by failed operations in Latin America and increasingly complex financial instruments used to mask debt\u2014such as Parmalat \"billing itself\" through a subsidiary called Epicurum. It was also discovered that its CEO Calisto Tanzi had ordered the creation of shell accounts and diverted 900M Euros worth into his private travel company.\nOffshoring and tax avoidance.\nIn order to avoid taxes on profits, multinational corporations often make use of offshore subsidiaries in order to employ a creative accounting technique known as \"Minimum-Profit Accounting\". The subsidiary is created in a tax haven\u2014often just as a shell company\u2014then charges large fees to the primary corporation, effectively minimizing or wholly wiping out the profit of the main corporation. Within most of the European Union and the United States, this practice is legal and often executed in sight or with explicit approval of tax regulators. \nNike, Inc. used this method by selling its Swoosh logo to a Bermuda-based special-purpose entity subsidiary for a nominal amount, and then went on to \"charge itself\" licensing fees that Nike Inc. had to pay to the subsidiary in order to use its own brand in Europe. The Dutch tax authorities accepted this siphoning structure, but did not publish the private agreement they had with Nike. The licensing fees totaled $3.86Bn over the course of three years and were discovered due to an unrelated U.S.-based lawsuit as well as the Paradise Papers. In 2014, the Bermuda deal with Dutch authorities expired, and Nike moved the profits to another offshore subsidiary, a Netherlands-based Limited Liability Partnership (CV, short for , generally known as a Kommanditgesellschaft). Through a Dutch tax loophole, CV's owned by individuals that are residing in the Netherlands are tax-free. Exploiting this structure saved Nike more than $1Bn in taxes annually and reduced its global tax rate to 13.1%; the company is currently being pursued for billions of dollars of back taxes in litigation by multiple governments for this multinational tax avoidance.\nIn popular media.\nA number of \u00a0 center around financial scandals and securities fraud that involved creative accounting practices:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63073", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63073", "title": "Mika H\u00e4kkinen", "text": "Finnish racing driver (born 1968)\nMika Pauli H\u00e4kkinen (; born 28 September 1968) is a Finnish former racing driver who competed in Formula One from to . Nicknamed \"the Flying Finn\", H\u00e4kkinen won two Formula One World Drivers' Championship titles, which he won in and with McLaren, and won 20 Grands Prix across 11 seasons.\nBorn and raised in Vantaa, H\u00e4kkinen began his career in karting aged five, winning several regional and national championships before graduating to junior formulae in 1987. A prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of World Drivers' Champion Keke Rosberg, H\u00e4kkinen won his first title in Nordic Formula Ford before winning the 1990 British Formula Three Championship with West Surrey Racing. A member of the Marlboro driver academy, H\u00e4kkinen signed for Lotus in , making his Formula One debut at the United States Grand Prix. After two seasons with limited success, H\u00e4kkinen moved to McLaren as a test driver in , replacing Michael Andretti for the final three rounds of the season to partner Ayrton Senna; he achieved his maiden podium at the Japanese Grand Prix.\nAmidst reliability issues with the Peugeot-powered MP4/9, H\u00e4kkinen scored several podiums and finished fourth in . After further winless seasons for McLaren in and , he achieved his maiden victory at the European Grand Prix in . Amidst a fierce title battle with Michael Schumacher in , H\u00e4kkinen won his first championship at the final race of the season, becoming the second World Drivers' Champion from Finland. He successfully defended his title in , beating Eddie Irvine by two points in lieu of an injured Schumacher. H\u00e4kkinen won several races during his campaign, where he was unable to beat Schumacher to a third title. H\u00e4kkinen\nretired at the conclusion of the season\u2014taking his final victory at the United States Grand Prix\u2014having achieved 20 race wins, 26 pole positions, 25 fastest laps and 51 podiums in Formula One.\nAfter retiring from Formula One, H\u00e4kkinen competed in the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters from 2005 to 2007 for HWA. Upon his retirement from motor racing in 2007, he moved into driver management and became a brand ambassador for Mercedes-AMG. Since 2022, H\u00e4kkinen has been a commentator and pundit for Viaplay.\nEarly life and career.\nH\u00e4kkinen was born in Helsingin maalaiskunta, Finland, on 28 September 1968 to Harri, a shortwave radio operator and a part-time taxi driver, and Aila H\u00e4kkinen, who worked as a secretary. He has one sister, Nina, who ran a fan site for him until its closure in 1998. H\u00e4kkinen lived in the same street as Mika Salo with the two later becoming friends. As a child, H\u00e4kkinen played ice hockey and football.\nWhen H\u00e4kkinen was five years old, his parents rented a go-kart for him to take to a track near their home. Despite an early crash, H\u00e4kkinen wished to continue racing, and his father bought him his first go-kart, one that Henri Toivonen had previously competed with. He later won his first karting race in 1975 at the Keimola Motor Stadium where he raced in the regional karting championships in 1978 and 1979, winning the Keimola Club Championship in both years. H\u00e4kkinen found further success in 1980 when he won the Swedish Lapland Cup and finished fourth in the 85cc class of the Lapland Karting Championship. Around this time, H\u00e4kkinen also drove a Volkswagen Beetle on the frozen lakes of Finland with friend Mika Sohlberg.\nIn 1981, H\u00e4kkinen won his first major karting title, the 85cc class of the Finnish Karting Championship. The following year, he finished runner-up in the 85cc class of the Formula Mini series and later won the Ronnie Peterson Memorial event and the Salpauselka Cup in Lahti. H\u00e4kkinen moved to the Formula Nordic 100cc class for 1983, where he became the champion on his first attempt and also participated in the A Junior Team Races for Finland alongside Taru Rinne, Jaana Nyman and Marko Mankonen, with the line-up taking the championship.\nIn 1984, H\u00e4kkinen won the 100cc Formula Nordic title and later participated in the World Kart Championship race held in Liedolsheim. He took his second consecutive 100cc Formula Nordic Championship in 1985 ahead of Jukka Savolainen. He took part in the Nordic Championship A-Class in the same year, finishing runner-up to Tom Kristensen. H\u00e4kkinen went to Parma to participate in the World Kart Championship where he retired before the event's final heat due to a mechanical problem. In 1986, he reached his third consecutive Formula Nordic 100cc title and also took part in karting events across Europe. To further fund his career, H\u00e4kkinen got a job with a friend repairing bicycles.\nIn 1987, H\u00e4kkinen made the transition from karting to car racing when he purchased a 1986 Reynard Formula Ford 1600 from fellow Finn JJ Lehto. In that year, he entered the Finnish, Swedish and Nordic Formula Ford Championships, winning each title on his first attempt and won nine races combined. H\u00e4kkinen also entered two races of the EDFA 1600 Championship and raced in the Formula Ford Festival held at Brands Hatch, where he finished in seventh position. In 1988, H\u00e4kkinen entered the GM Vauxhall-Lotus Challenge with the Dragon team, where he secured three victories and finished the runner-up in the championship, behind Allan McNish. He later entered the Opel-Lotus EDFA Euroseries in the same year, taking four victories and became Champion with 126 points, ahead of nearest rival Henrik Larsen.\nGoing into 1989, H\u00e4kkinen moved from the Euroseries into the British Formula 3 Championship driving a Reynard 893 chassis for Dragon. He finished seventh position in the championship, scoring 18 points. He was later invited to participate in the Cellnet Formula Three SuperPrix for West Surrey Racing as a guest driver where he secured pole position and the victory. He also raced in the tenth round of the French Formula 3 championship at Le Mans-Bugatti on 24 September and finished third behind \u00c9ric H\u00e9lary and Laurent Daumet.\nIn 1990, H\u00e4kkinen applied to become a member of the \"Marlboro World Championship Team\" through what was akin to a fully sponsored racing driver academy. Its members were short-listed for testing by a judging panel including Marlboro McLaren team principal Ron Dennis, Formula One World Drivers' Champion James Hunt, and Formula 3000 team bosses, Mike Earle and Hugues de Chaunac. H\u00e4kkinen was also a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of World Drivers' Champion Keke Rosberg. In an April 2015 interview, Earle recounted that H\u00e4kkinen's application was the last one that he reviewed at the end of a long day, despite protests by Hunt who had already made plans to head to a pub for a beer. H\u00e4kkinen performed strongly in his test and went on to secure Marlboro's sponsorship. That same year, therefore, H\u00e4kkinen left Dragon and moved to the West Surrey Racing team and won the British Formula 3 series, by taking nine victories en route to the Championship, with 121 points, ahead of fellow Finn Salo. In November, H\u00e4kkinen entered the Macau Grand Prix where he drove to pole position and won the first heat of the event. He retired from the second heat due to a last-lap collision with German Formula Three driver and future Formula One rival Michael Schumacher, who was classified as the overall winner.\nFormula One career.\nTeam Lotus (1991\u20131992).\n1991.\nH\u00e4kkinen made his first test in a Formula One car with the Benetton team driving 90 laps around the Silverstone Circuit and set quicker lap times than regular driver Alessandro Nannini. He found it difficult to fit into the Benetton but liked the steering and throttle response. H\u00e4kkinen expected not to be offered a seat at Benetton and he decided to sign with the Lotus team for the 1991 season. Making his debut in the United States Grand Prix alongside teammate Julian Bailey, H\u00e4kkinen qualified thirteenth on the grid and suffered an engine failure on the sixtieth lap and was classified thirteenth. The next race in Brazil saw him finish ninth, and scored his first Formula One points by reaching fifth place in San Marino. H\u00e4kkinen suffered from a dip in race form as he encountered consecutive retirements in the next two races\u2014his car suffered from an oil leak in Monaco and spun out in Canada. Before Canada, Bailey lost his seat at Lotus due to a lack of funding, so H\u00e4kkinen was partnered by Johnny Herbert and Michael Bartels throughout the remainder of the season.\nAlthough H\u00e4kkinen secured a ninth-place finish in Mexico, he did not qualify for the French Grand Prix. Over the remainder of the season, he did not finish four of the nine races he entered. H\u00e4kkinen finished his debut season sixteenth in the Drivers' Championship, scoring two points.\n1992.\nH\u00e4kkinen remained at Lotus for 1992 and was partnered by Herbert. At the opening round of the season in South Africa, H\u00e4kkinen finished in ninth position, which he followed up with his first points of the season in Mexico. He took a further finish in Brazil, although he did not qualify for the San Marino Grand Prix and suffered consecutive retirements in the following two races. At Monaco, Lotus introduced their new car, the Lotus 107. H\u00e4kkinen later gathered further consecutive points in the following two races, before he was forced into retirement at the German Grand Prix due to an engine failure. A similar pattern followed in the next three races, which was broken when he finished fifth in Portugal and suffered a retirement at the penultimate round of the year in Japan. H\u00e4kkinen concluded the season with a seventh-place finish in Australia.\nDuring the season, H\u00e4kkinen became embroiled in a contract dispute. H\u00e4kkinen, who was under contract to Lotus, opted to join Williams. However, Williams had not submitted their entry for the 1993 season, and H\u00e4kkinen was unable to join the team when he learnt that Lotus team principal Peter Collins would veto the Williams team entry if they had signed H\u00e4kkinen. H\u00e4kkinen later approached Ligier although his contract contained a clause of which his manager Keke Rosberg disagreed. He later approached McLaren team principal Ron Dennis for a contract with the team, which was drafted at Courchevel Airport. The dispute eventually went to the Formula One Contract Recognition Board, who ruled in favour of McLaren after two days of deliberation.\nMcLaren (1993\u20132001).\n1993.\nFor 1993, H\u00e4kkinen joined McLaren, originally as a race driver, although he became the team's official test driver when CART driver Michael Andretti was hired by the team. Apart from regular testing duties, H\u00e4kkinen entered two Porsche Supercup races, held as a support race for the Monaco Grand Prix, where he started at pole position and took victory in both races. He was promoted to a Formula One race seat after the Italian Grand Prix, when Andretti left Formula One. H\u00e4kkinen entered the Portuguese Grand Prix where he out-qualified regular driver Ayrton Senna. During the race, he retired due to collision with a concrete wall. At the next race held in Japan, H\u00e4kkinen claimed the first podium of his career with a third-place finish, and ended the season when his McLaren car suffered a brake pipe failure in Australia. H\u00e4kkinen concluded the season with 15th in the Drivers' Championship, scoring 4 points. In December, McLaren confirmed that H\u00e4kkinen would remain with the team on a three-year contract from the 1994 season onwards.\nDuring 1993, H\u00e4kkinen, along with Senna, tested the Lamborghini V12 engine in a modified version of the McLaren MP4/8 race car dubbed the \"MP4/8B\" at both Estoril and Silverstone. Both drivers were impressed with the engine, with H\u00e4kkinen reportedly lapping Silverstone some 1.4 seconds faster in the MP4/8B with its V12 engine than he had with the team's race car fitted with the Ford V8.\n1994.\nH\u00e4kkinen stayed at McLaren for 1994 and was partnered by experienced driver Martin Brundle. He endured a torrid start: at the first two races of the season, H\u00e4kkinen retired as his car developed engine problems in the Brazilian Grand Prix and gearbox issues in the Pacific Grand Prix which included a collision with Senna on the first lap. He later reached his first podium finish of the season at the San Marino Grand Prix, although he suffered a dip in form as he was forced into consecutive retirements in the next four races.\nH\u00e4kkinen raced to a further podium finish at the British Grand Prix, despite a last-lap collision with Jordan driver Rubens Barrichello for which he received a one-race ban, suspended for three races. The ban was enforced after the German Grand Prix, where H\u00e4kkinen collided with Williams driver David Coulthard with the Finn's car sliding into another group of cars. He was replaced by Philippe Alliot for the next race in Hungary.\nH\u00e4kkinen returned for the Belgian Grand Prix, initially coming third but was later promoted to second after the disqualification of Benetton driver Michael Schumacher. He got consecutive 3rd-place podium finishes in the next three races, before rounding off the season by finishing the final two races in Japan and Australia, albeit outside of the points scoring positions. H\u00e4kkinen managed a fourth place in the Drivers' Championship, scoring 26 points.\n1995.\nH\u00e4kkinen remained at McLaren for 1995, and was partnered by Nigel Mansell. During pre-season testing, H\u00e4kkinen and teammate Mansell complained the car, the McLaren MP4/10, was not wide enough to fit in, resulting in their hands and elbows striking the sides of the cockpit. Mansell was forced to miss the opening two rounds, so H\u00e4kkinen was partnered with Mark Blundell.\nH\u00e4kkinen started off the season by finishing fourth in Brazil, and later retired in Argentina due to a collision which punctured his left rear tyre that followed a spin. He took a further points finish with a 5th place at San Marino, before suffering from consecutive retirements in the next three races. For the French Grand Prix, McLaren introduced a revised version of their car, the McLaren MP4/10B. This did not revive H\u00e4kkinen's fortunes as he did not finish in the points scoring positions, and later suffered consecutive retirements in the next four races, but got second place at the Italian Grand Prix. He was forced to miss the Pacific Grand Prix due to an operation for appendicitis and was replaced by Jan Magnussen. He returned for the Japanese Grand Prix, with a second-place finish.\nAt the season finale held in Australia, H\u00e4kkinen's car suffered a tyre failure during the event's first qualifying session on Friday, which resulted in his car becoming airborne and crashing sideways into the crash barrier on the outside of Brewery corner, the fastest corner of the Adelaide Street Circuit, at an estimated speed of 120\u00a0mph. The session was suspended with H\u00e4kkinen being critically injured due to sustaining a skull fracture, internal bleeding and a blockage of his airway. His life was saved by the efforts of the trackside medical team, including the President of the FIA Institute for Motor Sport Safety, Sid Watkins, and volunteer doctors Jerome Cockings and Steve Lewis, from the Royal Adelaide Hospital. Cockings performed an emergency tracheotomy on the track, delivering oxygen to enable H\u00e4kkinen to breathe. Watkins later arrived in the medical car, allowing the doctors to continue, restarting H\u00e4kkinen's heart twice. H\u00e4kkinen was immediately transported by ambulance to the nearby Royal Adelaide Hospital which was located about half a kilometre from the circuit. There he remained in a critical condition under care of the Trauma Service, the Neurosurgical Unit, and the Intensive Care Unit and remained in the hospital for approximately two months. He eventually made a remarkable recovery. As an expression of thanks for the elite class medical attention he received, H\u00e4kkinen donated a substantial undisclosed sum of money to help build a much-needed helipad for The Royal Adelaide Hospital, and made a special trip to Australia for the official opening ceremony in March 1997.\nH\u00e4kkinen finished the 1995 season seventh in the Drivers' Championship, with 17 points.\n1996.\nThe 1996 season was the first in which H\u00e4kkinen was the more experienced driver in his team and was partnered by David Coulthard. H\u00e4kkinen was confident going into the season and set himself a target of winning races. To ensure his fitness, H\u00e4kkinen spent time training in Bali and in February, McLaren conducted a secret test at the Paul Ricard Circuit. In the event that H\u00e4kkinen was not prepared, McLaren had Magnussen to replace him should the need arise. The season started well for H\u00e4kkinen: He earned consecutive points-scoring positions in the opening two rounds, before he suffered his first retirement of the season in Argentina as his car developed a throttle problem. He later finished the next two races, albeit outside of the points scoring positions, before returning consecutive finishes inside of the points in the following four races.\nIn the following race held in Britain where McLaren brought a revised version of the car, their McLaren MP4/11B, H\u00e4kkinen reached his first podium finish of the season with third place. However, he retired from the next race held in Germany due to a gearbox failure. This marked a turning point in H\u00e4kkinen's season as he finished the next three races, including consecutive third-place finishes in Belgium and Italy. In September, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would remain at McLaren for 1997, having previously been linked to Williams and Benetton. He retired from the penultimate round in Portugal resulting a collision with teammate Coulthard, damaging H\u00e4kkinen's front wing and eventually led to his retirement on the 52nd lap of the race. He rounded off the season with a third-place finish in season finale held in Japan. H\u00e4kkinen finished the season fifth in the Drivers' Championship, scoring 31 points.\n1997.\nH\u00e4kkinen again remained at McLaren for 1997 and Coulthard remained his teammate. H\u00e4kkinen's season got off to a good start: In the season-opening race in Australia, he drove up to the third position and later scored further consecutive finishes inside of the points scoring positions in the next three races. He suffered his first retirement of the season at the Monaco Grand Prix when he was involved in a collision with Benetton driver Jean Alesi. H\u00e4kkinen later took ninth position at the Spanish Grand Prix, but later suffered three consecutive retirements in the next three races\u2014a collision with Ferrari driver Eddie Irvine in Canada and engine failures in France and Britain. At the latter race, he had seemed set for his first win, but his engine blew while he was holding off eventual winner Jacques Villeneuve.\nH\u00e4kkinen secured another podium finish with third place in Germany and later retired from an hydraulic problem in Hungary. He later secured third place in the Belgian Grand Prix but was later disqualified when it was discovered that his car used an illegal type of fuel during the event. He secured a ninth-place finish in Italy and later suffered from consecutive retirements in the next two races\u2014engine failures in the Austrian Grand Prix and the Luxembourg Grand Prix while leading both races. H\u00e4kkinen ended the season with a fourth position in the penultimate round in Japan and raced to his first Formula One victory at the season closing European Grand Prix. H\u00e4kkinen ended the season sixth in the Drivers' Championship, with 27 points.\n1998.\nH\u00e4kkinen remained at McLaren for 1998, partnered by Coulthard. H\u00e4kkinen was confident going about the challenge for the World Championship into the season, citing the involvement of technical director Adrian Newey. The season started off with controversy in Australia when teammate Coulthard let H\u00e4kkinen past to win the race. H\u00e4kkinen had earlier been called into the pit lane by an engineer by mistake. Coulthard later revealed a pre-race agreement by the team that whoever led into the first corner on the first lap would be allowed to win the race. Despite this, H\u00e4kkinen took back-to-back victories by winning the next race in Brazil. He maintained his good form at the Argentine Grand Prix where he finished second, although he retired from the San Marino Grand Prix when his car's gearbox failed. However, H\u00e4kkinen managed consecutive victories in the next two rounds, which was followed by a retirement from the race in Canada as his car suffered another gearbox failure.\nH\u00e4kkinen followed this up by taking consecutive podiums in the next two rounds\u2014third in France and second in Britain. He managed further consecutive victories in the next two rounds, and followed this up with a sixth-place finish in Hungary. In August, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen and Coulthard would be retained for 1999. H\u00e4kkinen retired from the following race held in Belgium when Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher collided with the Finn and was also hit by Sauber driver Johnny Herbert. He later managed a fourth position in Italy despite suffering from brake problems resulting from a spin. H\u00e4kkinen finished the season by taking victory in the final two rounds at the Luxembourg Grand Prix and the Japanese Grand Prix, which ensured he took enough points to clinch the 1998 World Championship, with 100 points, ahead of nearest rival Schumacher. H\u00e4kkinen was awarded the Autosport International Racing Driver Award for 1998. He was also named the Finnish Sports Personality of the Year by journalists. The Finnish Post Office issued stamps to commemorate H\u00e4kkinen's World Championship in January 1999.\n1999.\nH\u00e4kkinen remained at McLaren for 1999, with Coulthard partnering him for the upcoming season. The team suffered problems with their car, the McLaren MP4/14, during pre-season testing, resulting in a lack of preparation. Despite these setbacks, H\u00e4kkinen was confident going into the season, saying: \"I've gained confidence and experience and am more relaxed. With this title I no longer have to tell myself every morning I can win, to put pressure on myself.\"\nAt the opening round in Australia, H\u00e4kkinen was forced into retiring as his car developed a throttle issue. However, he managed his first victory of the season in Brazil, despite his car developing a gearbox problem early in the race. H\u00e4kkinen retired from the race in San Marino when he collided with a barrier while leading. At the Monaco Grand Prix, H\u00e4kkinen finished in third place, having slid on oil left on the track surface in the race. He followed up the results by having consecutive victories in the races held in Spain and Canada. H\u00e4kkinen took a second-place finish in France, and was forced into another retirement in Britain, as a result of a wheel failure. During the Austrian Grand Prix, H\u00e4kkinen who started from pole position, was hit by Coulthard from behind and rejoined at the back of the field. H\u00e4kkinen eventually finished in 3rd place.\nDuring the German Grand Prix, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would remain at McLaren for 2000. H\u00e4kkinen encountered further bad fortunes in the race when his car's right rear tyre exploded at high speed, forcing his car into a 360\u00b0 spin before resting on a tyre wall. He managed his fourth victory of the year at Hungary, and followed up the result with a second place in Belgium. H\u00e4kkinen retired from the following race held in Italy, due to a spin while leading the race. He finished further with fifth place at the European Grand Prix, and achieved a podium finish with third place in Malaysia. At the season finale held in Japan, H\u00e4kkinen took victory, which ensured he took enough points to win the 1999 World Championship, with 76 points, ahead of nearest rival Eddie Irvine. In November, H\u00e4kkinen was ranked seventh in the Reuters Sports Personality of the Year Poll scoring 46 out of a possible 260 points. He was also awarded his second consecutive Autosport International Racing Driver Award for 1999. In November, H\u00e4kkinen was announced as one of the seven men shortlisted for the Finnish Sports Personality of the Year. At the awards ceremony on 28 December, H\u00e4kkinen was awarded second place behind skier Mika Myllyl\u00e4.\n2000.\nFor 2000, H\u00e4kkinen set himself new limits along with physical and psychological preparations for the upcoming season. He also believed that he along with Schumacher and Coulthard would be the key drivers of 2000. He endured a bad start: at the opening round in Australia, both McLaren cars retired with engine failure after completing less than half of the race distance; and in the following race in Brazil, H\u00e4kkinen was forced into retirement when his car's oil pressure became problematic. However, this marked a turning point as H\u00e4kkinen took consecutive second-place finishes in the next two rounds, and later reached his first victory of the season in Spain.\nH\u00e4kkinen finished in second position at the European Grand Prix, having traded the lead position with Schumacher throughout the race. He followed up the result by taking sixth place at Monaco, fourth in Canada and a podium finish with second position in France. The day after the French Grand Prix, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would remain at McLaren for 2001. H\u00e4kkinen won the following race held in Austria, although his team were stripped of constructors' points due to a missing seal on the electronic control unit in H\u00e4kkinen's car. He took another podium finish with a second place in Germany, and later had another victory at the Hungarian Grand Prix where he took the lead of the World Drivers' Championship from Schumacher. H\u00e4kkinen raced to his second consecutive victory in Belgium, which included a simultaneous pass on Schumacher and Ricardo Zonta in the \"Kemmel straight\". H\u00e4kkinen later took second place in Italy, and retired with an engine failure in the United States. He rounded off the year with a second place in Japan where he conceded the World Championship to Schumacher, and held fourth position in the season closing race held in Malaysia.\n2001.\nFor 2001, H\u00e4kkinen pledged to make a challenge for the World Championship, citing inspiration from the birth of his son Hugo. He also added that he was under less pressure to compete, saying that results over the previous year increased his desire to win. The season started badly for H\u00e4kkinen, as he was forced into retirement in the opening round held in Australia due to a failure with his car's suspension resulting in his car spinning violently into a tyre barrier. The McLaren cars were off the pace in Malaysia, with H\u00e4kkinen managing to end at the 6th place. He retired from the following race in Brazil when his car stalled on the starting grid, Further points came at the San Marino Grand Prix. At the Spanish Grand Prix, H\u00e4kkinen looked on course to win his first victory of the season, until the final lap of the race, when his car was hampered with a clutch failure and was classified ninth.\nHe suffered further consecutive retirements in Austria where he stalled his car on the starting grid, and Monaco where his car's steering failed after fifteen laps of the race. At the following race held in Canada, H\u00e4kkinen took his first podium of the season with a third-place finish. He finished sixth at the European Grand Prix, and was unable to start the French Grand Prix as his car developed a gearbox problem. However, this marked a brief turning point for H\u00e4kkinen as he gained a victory in the British Grand Prix. He was forced into another retirement in Germany when his engine failed, later managing fifth position in Hungary and fourth place in Belgium.\nBefore the Italian Grand Prix, H\u00e4kkinen announced that he would be on a sabbatical for the 2002 season, citing the reason to spend more time with his family. His seat was taken by fellow countryman Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen in 2002. H\u00e4kkinen later stated that fear after crashes during practice for the 1995 Australian Grand Prix and the 2001 Australian Grand Prix as well as a loss of a desire to compete for race victories were factors. He was forced into another retirement during the race due to a gearbox issue. He raced to his final victory of his career in the United States despite incurring a grid penalty, and ended the season with a fourth-place finish in Japan. H\u00e4kkinen finished the season fifth in the Drivers' Championship, with 37 points.\nPost-Formula One (2002\u20132004).\nIn July 2002, nine months into his sabbatical, H\u00e4kkinen announced that he would be retiring from Formula One. It was later revealed that H\u00e4kkinen approached McLaren team principal Ron Dennis during the 2001 Monaco Grand Prix and agreed a sabbatical, then returned to Monaco the following year to discuss and agree full-time retirement with Dennis. In October, H\u00e4kkinen made his first appearance as a commentator for pay-for-view channel Canal Digital at the United States Grand Prix.\nIn December 2002, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would be participating in the Finnish Rally Championship driving a Mitsubishi Lancer Evolution WRC2 with his co-driver Arto Kapanen. He also stated that he would not move full-time into rallying and learn about driver control, although he later stated he would enter more rally events if he finished within the top two. Making his debut in the Arctic Rally, H\u00e4kkinen was delayed by four minutes as his team changed a tyre and eventually finished 30th. He once again entered the event in 2004 driving a Toyota Corolla with co-driver Risto Pietil\u00e4inen and finished seventh.\nDuring 2004, rumors circulated that H\u00e4kkinen was making a possible return to Formula One to fill in the vacant Williams seat left by Juan Pablo Montoya. In May, McLaren team principal Ron Dennis dismissed the rumors, stating that H\u00e4kkinen was not prepared for a comeback. H\u00e4kkinen held talks with BAR and Williams and later decided against returning to Formula One saying in 2005: \"It's impossible to think that I would race a Formula One car again because as time passes my reactions become slower and my eyesight gets worse \u2013 that's life\".\nDeutsche Tourenwagen Masters.\n2005.\nOn 6 November 2004, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would make his debut in the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters (DTM) series for the HWA Team in the 2005 season. He was partnered by Gary Paffett, Jean Alesi and Bernd Schneider. H\u00e4kkinen had previous experience of driving touring cars in July 2001 at the Brno Circuit alongside Schneider. In January, H\u00e4kkinen once again participated in the Arctic Rally driving a Toyota Corolla with co-driver Risto Pietil\u00e4inen. H\u00e4kkinen retired when he slid off the road on the eleventh stage.\nH\u00e4kkinen's debut DTM season started well: He secured eighth position in his first race at the Hockenheimring; and in the following race at the EuroSpeedway Lausitz, held his first podium in his DTM career. Two weeks later at Spa-Francorchamps, H\u00e4kkinen qualified on pole position and later took his first DTM win after only three starts. Despite the early success, he did not score points in the next three races which included consecutive retirements at Oschersleben and the Norisring. He later scored a further points position at the race held at the N\u00fcrburgring, before further consecutive 12th-place finishes in the next two races. H\u00e4kkinen ended the 2005 season by taking a second-place finish at Istanbul Park and finished outside of the points scoring positions with 15th place at Hockenheim. H\u00e4kkinen finished the season fifth in the Drivers' Championship, with 30 points.\n2006.\nOn 15 November 2005, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would remain with HWA for the 2006 season, and was partnered by Alesi, Spengler and Jamie Green. For the upcoming season, H\u00e4kkinen set his target of winning the championship, although he believed the competition from Audi would make the title challenge difficult. Outside of DTM, H\u00e4kkinen participated in his fourth Arctic Rally, driving a Mitsubishi Lancer Evolution VII with co-driver Risto Pietil\u00e4inen. He finished 36th overall.\nH\u00e4kkinen's season got off well: At the opening race held at Hockenheim, he finished in fourth position; and in the following race held at the EuroSpeedway Lausitz, he drove to his first podium of the season with third place. H\u00e4kkinen did not score points in the next two consecutive races, although he later held another podium position with third place at the Norisring. In the next three races, he was unable to score more points, although he had another podium position at the Bugatti Circuit. H\u00e4kkinen concluded his season with a retirement at the Hockenheimring when his car's diffuser became damaged. H\u00e4kkinen ended the year sixth in the Drivers' Championship, scoring 25 points.\nIn November, H\u00e4kkinen tested a McLaren MP4-21 for one day at the Circuit de Catalunya where he completed 79 laps. To prepare himself, H\u00e4kkinen spent time at the McLaren Technology Centre to acquaint himself with Formula One's revised regulations. In a 2017 retrospective interview H\u00e4kkinen revealed that he had been in advanced talks with McLaren for a return in the 2007 season. He had however been frustrated by problems with McLaren's car in the test, which had reminded him of the reasons why he had taken the sabbatical in the first place, so the plans had collapsed.\n2007.\nOn 28 January 2007, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would remain in DTM for the 2007 season for HWA, and was partnered by Spengler, Green and Schneidler. H\u00e4kkinen stated that during 2006, his team's potential was not realised and aimed during 2007 to improve on his results. He started the season by earning consecutive finishes in the first two races, albeit outside of the points scoring positions. At the third race of the season held at EuroSpeedway Lausitz, H\u00e4kkinen won his first race of the season although only half points were awarded due to errors made by race organisers, resulting in the official race result remaining provisional. He held pole for the following race at Brands Hatch where he finished in fourth position, and followed the result with a ninth-place finish at the Norisring.\nH\u00e4kkinen had his second victory of the season at Mugello, after starting from 15th position. He later managed 7th place at Zandvoort and later finished with a 10th-place finish at the N\u00fcrburgring. At the race held at the Circuit de Catalunya, H\u00e4kkinen was involved in a collision with Audi driver Martin Tomczyk. H\u00e4kkinen was penalised with a \u20ac20,000 fine, received a ten-place grid penalty for the next round and was disqualified from the race. He finished the season with a 17th-place finish at the Hockenheimring. H\u00e4kkinen finished the season 7th place in the Championship, with 22 points.\nRetirement (2008\u2013present).\nH\u00e4kkinen announced his retirement from competitive motorsport in November 2007. He was quoted as saying that the decision \"was not an easy one\", but added that \"racing is still in my blood and this decision does not mean that this will prevent me from racing for pleasure\".\nIn November 2008, it was announced that H\u00e4kkinen would start a new career in driver management and would work alongside Didier Coton in his firm Aces Associate Group. H\u00e4kkinen contested his fifth Arctic Rally event in January 2009 driving a Mitsubishi Lancer Evolution IX alongside co-driver Ilkka Kivim\u00e4ki and finished 19th overall. H\u00e4kkinen made his debut in sports cars when Team AMG China entered a Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG in November 2011 to participate in the Intercontinental Le Mans Cup at the 6 Hours of Zhuhai race alongside Lance David Arnold and Cheng Congfu. During the event, the team retired after completing two hours. In October 2013, H\u00e4kkinen participated in the GT Asia series for the two races held at the Zhuhai International Circuit, driving a Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG 300 alongside co-driver Matthew Solomon. H\u00e4kkinen drove to victory in the first race after starting from sixth position. The victory resulted in a 15-second handicap during his mandatory pitstop for his second race and finished in fourth position.\nOn 16 March 2017, McLaren announced that H\u00e4kkinen had rejoined the team as partner ambassador. In November 2021, H\u00e4kkinen helped McLaren IndyCar driver Pato O'Ward prepare for his test of the McLaren MCL35M by familiarizing O'Ward on his championship winning MP4/13 around Laguna Seca.\nIn August 2019, H\u00e4kkinen raced in the 2019 Suzuka 10 Hours, the fourth round of the 2019 Intercontinental GT Challenge driving a McLaren 720S GT3 alongside two-time Super Formula champion Hiroaki Ishiura and Japanese Formula 3 racer Katsuaki Kubota, with Planex Smacam Racing.\nH\u00e4kkinen and Emma Kimil\u00e4inen competed together for Team Finland at the Race of Champions on 5\u20136 February 2022. He is set to again compete in the race in 2023 alongside Formula One driver Valtteri Bottas, who was originally going to be his partner at the 2022 edition before backing out.\nIn December 2021, H\u00e4kkinen was announced as a Formula One analyst for the sports broadcaster Viaplay. From 2022 onwards, H\u00e4kkinen became part of a permanent team of analysts on-site at the Grands Prix. In the team of analysts, H\u00e4kkinen is accompanied by David Coulthard and Jos Verstappen.\nDriving style and personality.\nJournalist Peter Windsor analysed H\u00e4kkinen's driving style for an article in \"F1 Racing\" magazine, writing that H\u00e4kkinen was an \"oversteering\" driver, which made him faster on slippery surfaces and meant that \"tail-happy\" cars suited him. This allowed him to perform better at circuits that have medium-speed corners. During his karting career, H\u00e4kkinen developed the habit of using the brake pedal with his left foot. He reverted to using his right foot when he participated in DTM, but became uncomfortable with this style and switched again to left-foot braking in mid-2006. He became known as a \"late season driver\"; the second half of a season suited H\u00e4kkinen due to experience on these tracks and allowed time for his car to be altered towards his preference.\nH\u00e4kkinen was criticized for being a poor car developer, though this may have been exaggerated due to his initial struggles with the English language early in his career. Adrian Newey, the designer of H\u00e4kkinen's championship-winning McLarens, described an instance of H\u00e4kkinen's approach to input on car development when H\u00e4kkinen kept telling him during the initial testing of the McLaren MP4/13 that the car was understeering. Newey subsequently adjusted the car to correct for understeer, but this only made it slower. After digging deeper into the test data and listening closely to what H\u00e4kkinen was describing Newey realized the car was not understeering but had rear end biased instability on corner entry that H\u00e4kkinen was compensating for with understeer. This experience proved crucial for Newey's relationship with H\u00e4kkinen during their run together at McLaren, as after that Newey no longer had issues understanding H\u00e4kkinen's inputs on car development. Newey said that H\u00e4kkinen's countryman, protege, and future McLaren driver Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen had a similar approach to input on car development.\nDuring his Formula One career, H\u00e4kkinen was regarded as taciturn, taking lengthy pauses before giving terse responses to questions. Since his retirement, he has often been voted among the greatest Formula One drivers. Michael Schumacher has stated that H\u00e4kkinen was the driver whom he gained the most satisfaction of racing against.\nPersonal life.\nH\u00e4kkinen has lived in Monaco since 1991. He also owns properties in France and Finland. On 18 May 2008, his newly completed mansion in France was burned down after a light in one of his trophy cabinets short circuited. No injuries were reported, although H\u00e4kkinen's collection of Formula One trophies was destroyed.\nH\u00e4kkinen married Erja Honkanen, a former TV journalist, in 1998. The couple have one son and one daughter. They divorced in 2008. H\u00e4kkinen also has two daughters and a son with his Czech second wife Mark\u00e9ta Reme\u0161ov\u00e1. One of his daughters, Ella, is a kart racer who competes in the Champions of the Future Academy Program. In November 2025, Ella was signed to the McLaren Driver Development Programme.\nH\u00e4kkinen joined Johnnie Walker as Global Responsible Drinking Ambassador for Diageo in September 2006, campaigning for the message of responsible drinking. He also led the organisation's Join the Pact campaign to spread consumer commitments for the prevention of drunk driving. He is also brand ambassador for Mercedes-Benz and UBS. In 2016, he became an official brand ambassador for Nokian Tyres.\nRacing record.\nComplete Formula One results.\n\u2020 Did not finish, but was classified as he had completed more than 90% of the race distance.\nComplete DTM results.\n\u2021 Half points were awarded in the race due to several errors made by the race officials.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "63074", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63074", "title": "Stock market crash", "text": "Sudden widespread decline of stock prices\nA stock market crash is a sudden dramatic decline of stock prices across a major cross-section of a stock market, resulting in a significant loss of paper wealth. Crashes are driven by panic selling and underlying economic factors. They often follow speculation and economic bubbles.\nA stock market crash is a social phenomenon where external economic events combine with crowd psychology in a positive feedback loop where selling by some market participants drives more market participants to sell. Generally speaking, crashes usually occur under the following conditions: a prolonged period of rising stock prices (a bull market) and excessive economic optimism, a market where price\u2013earnings ratios exceed long-term averages, and extensive use of margin debt and leverage by market participants. Other aspects such as wars, large corporate hacks, changes in federal laws and regulations, and natural disasters within economically productive areas may also influence a significant decline in the stock market value of a wide range of stocks. Stock prices for corporations competing against the affected corporations may rise despite the crash.\nThere is no numerically specific definition of a stock market crash but the term commonly applies to declines of over 10% in a stock market index over a period of several days. Crashes are often distinguished from bear markets (periods of declining stock market prices that are measured in months or years) as crashes include panic selling and abrupt, dramatic price declines. Crashes are often associated with bear markets; however, they do not necessarily occur simultaneously. Black Monday (1987), for example, did not lead to a bear market. Likewise, the bursting of the Japanese asset price bubble occurred over several years without any notable crashes. Stock market crashes are not common.\nCrashes are generally unexpected. As Niall Ferguson stated, \"Before the crash, our world seems almost stationary, deceptively so, balanced, at a set point. So that when the crash finally hits \u2013 as inevitably it will \u2013 everyone seems surprised. And our brains keep telling us it\u2019s not time for a crash.\"\nExamples.\nTulip Mania.\nTulip Mania (1634\u20131637), in which some single tulip bulbs allegedly sold for more than 10 times the annual income of a skilled artisan, is often considered to be the first recorded economic bubble.\nPanic of 1907.\nIn 1907 and in 1908, stock prices fell by nearly 50% due to a variety of factors, led by the manipulation of copper stocks by the Knickerbocker Trust Company. Shares of United Copper rose gradually up to October, and thereafter crashed, leading to panic. Several investment trusts and banks that had invested their money in the stock market fell and started to close down. Further bank runs were prevented due to the intervention of J. P. Morgan. The panic continued to 1908 and led to the formation of the Federal Reserve in 1913.\nWall Street Crash of 1929.\nThe economy grew for most of the Roaring Twenties. It was a technological golden age, as innovations such as the radio, automobile, aviation, telephone, and the electric power transmission grid were deployed and adopted. Companies that had pioneered these advances, including Radio Corporation of America (RCA) and General Motors, saw their stocks soar. Financial corporations also did well, as Wall Street bankers floated mutual fund companies (then known as investment trusts) like the Goldman Sachs Trading Corporation. Investors were infatuated with the returns available in the stock market, especially by the use of leverage through margin debt (i.e., borrowing money from your stockbroker to finance part of your purchase of stocks, using the bought securities as collateral).\nOn August 24, 1921, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) was at 63.9. By September 3, 1929, it had risen more than sixfold to 381.2. It did not regain this level for another 25 years. By the summer of 1929, it was clear that the economy was contracting, and the stock market went through a series of unsettling price declines. These declines fed investor anxiety, and events came to a head on October 24, 28, and 29 (known respectively as Black Thursday, Black Monday, and Black Tuesday).\nOn Black Monday, the DJIA fell 38.33 points to 260, a drop of 12.8%. The deluge of selling overwhelmed the ticker tape system that normally gave investors the current prices of their shares. Telephone lines and telegraphs were clogged and were unable to cope. This information vacuum only led to more fear and panic. The technology of the New Era, previously much celebrated by investors, now deepened their suffering.\nThe following day, Black Tuesday, was a day of chaos. Forced to liquidate their stocks because of margin calls, overextended investors flooded the exchange with sell orders. The Dow fell 30.57 points to close at 230.07 on that day. The glamour stocks of the age saw their values plummet. Across the two days, the DJIA fell 23%.\nBy the end of the weekend of November 11, 1929, the index stood at 228, a cumulative drop of 40% from the September high. The markets rallied in succeeding months, but it was a temporary recovery that led unsuspecting investors into further losses. The DJIA lost 89% of its value before finally bottoming out in July 1932. The crash was followed by the Great Depression, the worst economic crisis of modern times, which plagued the stock market and Wall Street throughout the 1930s.\nOctober 19, 1987.\nThe mid-1980s were a time of strong economic optimism. From August 1982 to its peak in August 1987, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) rose from 776 to 2722. The rise in market indices for the 19 largest markets in the world averaged 296% during this period. The average number of shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange rose from 65 million shares to 181 million shares.\nThe crash on October 19, 1987, Black Monday, was the climactic culmination of a market decline that had begun five days before on October 14. The DJIA fell 3.81% on October 14, followed by another 4.60% drop on Friday, October 16. On Black Monday, the DJIA plummeted 508 points, losing 22.6% of its value in one day. The S&amp;P 500 Index dropped 20.4%, falling from 282.7 to 225.06. The NASDAQ Composite lost only 11.3%, not because of restraint on the part of sellers, but because the NASDAQ market system failed. Deluged with sell orders, many stocks on the NYSE faced trading halts and delays. Of the 2,257 NYSE-listed stocks, there were 195 trading delays and halts during the day. The NASDAQ market fared much worse. Because of its reliance on a \"market making\" system that allowed market makers to withdraw from trading, liquidity in NASDAQ stocks dried up. Trading in many stocks encountered a pathological condition where the bid price for a stock exceeded the ask price. These \"locked\" conditions severely curtailed trading. On October 19, trading in Microsoft shares on the NASDAQ lasted a total of 54 minutes.\nThe crash was the greatest single-day loss that Wall Street had ever suffered in continuous trading up to that point. Between the start of trading on October 14 to the close on October 19, the DJIA lost 760 points, a decline of over 31%.\nIn October 1987, all major world markets crashed or declined substantially. The FTSE 100 Index lost 10.8% on that Monday and a further 12.2% the following day. The least affected was Austria (a fall of 11.4%) while the most affected was Hong Kong with a drop of 45.8%. Out of 23 major industrial countries, 19 had a decline greater than 20%.\nDespite fears of a repeat of the Great Depression, the market rallied immediately after the crash, posting a record one-day gain of 102.27 the very next day and 186.64 points on Thursday, October 22. It took only two years for the Dow to recover completely; by September 1989, the market had regained all of the value it had lost in the 1987 crash. The DJIA gained 0.6% during calendar year 1987.\nNo definitive conclusions have been reached on the reasons behind the 1987 Crash. Stocks had been in a multi-year bull run and market price\u2013earnings ratios in the U.S. were above the post-war average. The S&amp;P 500 was trading at 23 times earnings, a postwar high and well above the average of 14.5 times earnings. Herd behavior and psychological feedback loops play a critical part in all stock market crashes but analysts have also tried to look for external triggering events. Aside from the general worries of stock market overvaluation, blame for the collapse has been apportioned to such factors as program trading, portfolio insurance and derivatives, and prior news of worsening economic indicators (i.e. a large U.S. merchandise trade deficit and a falling U.S. dollar, which seemed to imply future interest rate hikes).\nOne of the consequences of the 1987 Crash was the introduction of the circuit breaker or trading curb on the NYSE. Based upon the idea that a cooling-off period would help dissipate panic selling, these mandatory market shutdowns are triggered whenever a large pre-defined market decline occurs during the trading day.\n2008 financial crisis.\n \nOn September 15, 2008, the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the collapse of Merrill Lynch along with a liquidity crisis of American International Group, all primarily due to exposure to packaged subprime loans and credit default swaps issued to insure these loans and their issuers, rapidly devolved into a global crisis. This resulted in several bank failures in Europe and sharp reductions in the value of stocks and commodities worldwide. The failure of banks in Iceland resulted in a devaluation of the Icelandic kr\u00f3na and threatened the government with bankruptcy. Iceland obtained an emergency loan from the International Monetary Fund in November. In the United States, 15 banks failed in 2008, while several others were rescued through government intervention or acquisitions by other banks. On October 11, 2008, the head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) warned that the world financial system was teetering on the \"brink of systemic meltdown\".\nThe economic crisis caused countries to close their markets temporarily.\nOn October 8, the Indonesian stock market halted trading, after a 10% drop in one day.\n\"The Times\" of London reported that the meltdown was being called the \"Crash of 2008\", and older traders were comparing it with Black Monday in 1987. The fall that week of 21% compared to a 28.3% fall 21 years earlier, but some traders were saying it was worse. \"At least then it was a short, sharp, shock on one day. This has been relentless all week.\" Other media also referred to the events as the \"Crash of 2008\".\nFrom October 6\u201310, 2008, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) closed lower in all five sessions. Volume levels were record-breaking. The DJIA fell over 1,874 points, or 18%, in its worst weekly decline ever on both a points and percentage basis. The S&amp;P 500 fell more than 20%. The week also set three top-ten NYSE Group Volume Records with October 8 at #5, October 9 at #10, and October 10 at #1.\nHaving been suspended for three successive trading days (October 9, 10, and 13), the Icelandic stock market reopened on 14 October, with the main index, the OMX Iceland 15, closing at 678.4, which was about 77% lower than the 3,004.6 at the close on October 8. This reflected that the value of the three big banks, which had formed 73.2% of the value of the OMX Iceland 15, had been set to zero.\nOn October 24, 2008, many of the world's stock exchanges experienced the worst declines in their history, with drops of around 10% in most indices. In the U.S., the DJIA fell 3.6%, although not as much as other markets. The United States dollar and Japanese yen soared against other major currencies, particularly the British pound and Canadian dollar, as world investors sought safe havens. Later that day, the deputy governor of the Bank of England, Charlie Bean, suggested that \"This is a once in a lifetime crisis, and possibly the largest financial crisis of its kind in human history.\"\nBy March 6, 2009, the DJIA had dropped 54% to 6,469 from its peak of 14,164 on October 9, 2007, over a span of 17 months, before beginning to recover.\n2010 Flash Crash.\nAmidst the Greek debt crisis, stock indices fell nearly 7% in minutes, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average losing almost 600 points and falling almost 1000 points (about 9%), from its previous close, with almost $1 trillion leaving the market, before recovering most of its decline within 20 minutes. The crash was blamed on a mutual fund company Waddell &amp; Reed selling a large amount of S&amp;P 500 E-Mini contracts. Following the crash, the SEC reduced the amount needed to trigger a circuit breaker from a 10% decline to a 7% decline.\n2011 Market Crash.\nFollowing Standard &amp; Poor's downgrade of the United States' credit rating on August 5th, 2011, the S&amp;P 500 plunged 6.68%, wiping out nearly $2.5 trillion in market value.\nCOVID-19 pandemic (2020).\nDuring the week of February 24\u201328, 2020, stock markets dropped as the COVID-19 pandemic spread globally. The FTSE 100 dropped 13%, while the DJIA and S&amp;P 500 Index dropped 11\u201312% in the biggest downward weekly drop since the 2008 financial crisis.\nOn Monday, March 9, 2020, after the launch of the 2020 Russia\u2013Saudi Arabia oil price war, the FTSE and other major European stock market indices fell by nearly 8%. Asian markets fell sharply and the S&amp;P 500 Index dropped 7.60%. The Italian FTSE MIB fell 2,323.98 points, or 11.17%.\nOn March 12, 2020, a day after US President Donald Trump announced a travel ban from Europe, stock prices again fell sharply. The DJIA declined 9.99% \u2013 the largest daily decline since Black Monday (1987) \u2013 despite the Federal Reserve announcing it would inject $1.5 trillion into money markets. The S&amp;P 500 and the Nasdaq each dropped by approximately 9.5%. The major European stock market indexes all fell over 10%.\nOn March 16, 2020, after it became clear that a recession was inevitable, the DJIA dropped 12.93%, or 2,997 points, the largest point drop since Black Monday (1987), surpassing the drop in the prior week, the Nasdaq Composite dropped 12.32%, and the S&amp;P 500 Index dropped 11.98%.\nBy the end of May 2020, the stock market indices briefly recovered to their levels at the end of February 2020.\nIn June 2020 the Nasdaq surpassed its pre-crash high followed by the S&amp;P 500 in August and the Dow in November.\n2025 stock market crash.\nThe 2025 stock market crash was a major stock market crash in the United States which began on April 2, 2025 as a result of the worldwide tariffs put in place by US President Donald Trump. The crash is the largest decline in the US stock market since the COVID-19 pandemic.\nOn March 21, Trump announced \"Liberation Day\", a day meant for imposing universal tariffs on all imported goods excluding pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, and lumber. On April 2, Trump announced his trade policy with 10% tariffs on all imported goods, with additional reciprocal tariffs targeting 90 countries such as China with a 34% tariff on all goods imported and a 20% tariff on all E.U imports. These measures took effect on April 9, 2025. The following day after this announcement at the opening bell, the Dow lost over 1,344.50 points and was down 3.22% and the S&amp;P 500 lost 176.96 points and was down 3.15%.\nShortly after the tariffs were announced, the US stock market lost more than $3 trillion. By the second week of May 2025, the market had recovered.\nMathematical theory.\nRandom walk theory.\nThe conventional assumption is that stock markets behave according to a random log-normal distribution. This implies that the expected volatility is the same all the time. Among others, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot suggested as early as 1963 that the statistics prove this assumption incorrect. Mandelbrot observed that large movements in prices (i.e. crashes) are much more common than would be predicted from a log-normal distribution. Mandelbrot and others suggested that the nature of market moves is generally much better explained using non-linear analysis and concepts of chaos theory. This has been expressed in non-mathematical terms by George Soros in his discussions of what he calls reflexivity of markets and their non-linear movement. George Soros said in late October 1987, \"Mr. Robert Prechter's reversal proved to be the crack that started the avalanche.\"\nSelf-organized criticality.\nResearch at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology suggests that there is evidence that the frequency of stock market crashes follows an inverse cubic power law. This and other studies such as Didier Sornette's work suggest that stock market crashes are a sign of self-organized criticality in financial markets.\nL\u00e9vy flight.\nIn 1963, Mandelbrot proposed that instead of following a strict random walk, stock price variations executed a L\u00e9vy flight. A L\u00e9vy flight is a random walk that is occasionally disrupted by large movements. In 1995, Rosario Mantegna and Gene Stanley analyzed a million records of the S&amp;P 500 Index, calculating the returns over a five-year period. Researchers continue to study this theory, particularly using computer simulation of crowd behavior, and the applicability of models to reproduce crash-like phenomena.\nResult of investor imitation.\nIn 2011, using statistical analysis tools of complex systems, research at the New England Complex Systems Institute found that the panics that lead to crashes come from a dramatic increase in imitation among investors, which always occurred during the year before each market crash. When investors closely follow each other's cues, it is easier for panic to take hold and affect the market. This work is a mathematical demonstration of a significant advance warning sign of impending market crashes.\nTrading curbs and trading halts.\nOne mitigation strategy has been the introduction of trading curbs, also known as \"circuit breakers\", which are a trading halt in the cash market and the corresponding trading halt in the derivative markets triggered by the halt in the cash market, all of which are affected based on substantial movements in a broad market indicator. Since their inception after Black Monday (1987), trading curbs have been modified to prevent both speculative gains and dramatic losses within a small time frame.\nUnited States.\nThere are three thresholds, which represent different levels of decline in the S&amp;P 500 Index: 7% (Level 1), 13% (Level 2), and 20% (Level 3).\nFrance.\nFor the CAC 40 stock market index in France, daily price limits are implemented in cash and derivative markets. Securities traded on the markets are divided into three categories according to the number and volume of daily transactions. Price limits for each security vary by category. For instance, for the most liquid category, when the price movement of a security from the previous day's closing price exceeds 10%, trading is suspended for 15 minutes. If the price then goes up or down by more than 5%, transactions are again suspended for 15 minutes. The 5% threshold may apply once more before transactions are halted for the rest of the day. When such a suspension occurs, transactions on options based on the underlying security are also suspended. Further, when stocks representing more than 35% of the capitalization of the CAC40 Index are halted, the calculation of the CAC40 Index is suspended and the index is replaced by a trend indicator. When stocks representing less than 25% of the capitalization of the CAC40 Index are halted, trading on the derivative markets are suspended for half an hour or one hour, and additional margin deposits are requested.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63075", "revid": "32589484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63075", "title": "Cha\u00efm Soutine", "text": "French, Jewish Belarusian painter (1893\u20131943)\nCha\u00efm Soutine (; ; ; 13 January 1893 \u2013 9 August 1943) was a French painter of Belarusian-Jewish origin of the School of Paris, who made a major contribution to the Expressionist movement while living and working in Paris.\nInspired by classic painting in the European tradition, exemplified by the works of Rembrandt, Chardin and Courbet, Soutine developed an individual style more concerned with shape, color, and texture than representation, which served as a bridge between more traditional approaches and the developing form of Abstract Expressionism.\nEarly life.\nSoutine was born Chaim-Iche Solomonovich Sutin, in Smilavichy (Yiddish: \u05e1\u05de\u05d9\u05dc\u05d0\u05b8\u05d5\u05d5\u05d9\u05e5, romanized: Smilovitz) in the Minsk Governorate of the Russian Empire (present-day Belarus). He was Jewish and the 10th of 11 children born to parents Zalman (also reported as Solomon and Salomon) Moiseevich Sutin (1858\u20131932) and Sarah Sutina (n\u00e9e Khlamovna) (died in 1938). From 1910 to 1913 he studied in Vilnius at a small art Academy. In 1913, with his friends Pinchus Kr\u00e9m\u00e8gne and Michel Kikoine, he emigrated to Paris, where he studied at the under Fernand Cormon. He soon developed a highly personal vision and painting technique.\nEarly life and arrival in Paris.\nLa Ruche and Montparnasse.\nFor a time, he and his friends lived at La Ruche, a residence for struggling artists in Montparnasse in Paris. Since 1900, the Montparnasse district, popularized by Apollinaire, had supplanted Montmartre as the epicenter of an intellectual and artistic life in Paris. It was the meeting place of writers, painters, sculptors, and actors, often struggling financially, who exchanged and created art and literature whilst sitting and chatting in cafes.\nLa Ruche \u2014 whose rotunda stands on Dantzig Passage in the 15th arrondissement, not far from Montparnasse, a cosmopolitan commune where painters and sculptors from all over, many from Eastern Europe \u2014 rented small studios at a low cost. There, Soutine encountered, among others, Archipenko, Zadkine, Brancusi, Chapiro, Kisling, Epstein, Chagall, Nina Niss-Goldman, Chana Orloff, as well as Lipchitz who introduced Amadeo Modigliani to Soutine.\nThe two became friends. Modigliani painted Soutine's portrait several times, most famously in 1917, on a door of an apartment belonging to L\u00e9opold Zborowski, who was their art dealer. Until he acquired his own studio, he slept and worked at various places, including that of Kr\u00e9m\u00e8gne and Kiko\u00efne, fellow Jewish painters of the School of Paris. His poverty was such that he even slept in stairways and on benches.\nUpon his arrival in Paris, Soutine eagerly immersed himself in his exploration of the French capital. \"In a filthy hole like Smilovitchi,\" he claimed, where, he also said, they are unaware of the existence of a piano, \"one cannot imagine that there are cities like Paris, or music like that of Bach.\" As soon as he has a few pennies in his pocket, he would spend them in order to \"immerse himself\" in music at Colonne or Lamoureux concerts, with a preference for Baroque music. He haunted the galleries of the Louvre, either hugging the walls or jumping at the slightest approach, and contemplated for hours his favorite painters: \"If he loves Fouquet, Raphael, Chardin, and Ingres, it is especially in the works of Goya and Courbet, and more than any other, in those of Rembrandt, that Soutine recognizes himself.\" Chana Orloff recounted that, seized by a \"respectful fear\" in front of a Rembrandt, he could also go into ecstasy and exclaim, \"It's so beautiful that it drives me mad!\".\nSoutine took French lessons, often in the back of La Rotonde, managed at the time by Victor Libion. Libion, who acted as a sort of artists' patron, allowed artists to warm up from the cold in La Rotonde and discuss for hours without requiring them to make additional purchases. After learning French, Soutine \u2014 an avid reader of Russian novels \u2014 also began to enthusiastically read and immerse himself in French literature, reading Balzac, Baudelaire, and Rimbaud, and later, Montaigne.\nZborowski supported Soutine through World War I, taking the struggling artist with him to Nice to escape the possible German invasion of Paris.\nThe Interwar period.\nAfter the war Paul Guillaume, a highly influential art dealer, began to champion Soutine's work. In 1923, in a showing arranged by Guillaume, the prominent American collector Albert C. Barnes, bought 60 of Soutine's paintings on the spot. Soutine, who had been virtually penniless in his years in Paris, immediately took the money, ran into the street, hailed a Paris taxi, and ordered the driver to take him to Nice, on the French Riviera, more than 400 miles away.\n\u00c9lie Faure, who was called \"the greatest art critic of the 1920s and 30s ... shared a brief and almost romantically intense friendship\" with Soutine\". Faure said, \"Soutine is one of the rare religious painters the world has known because Soutine's material is one of the most carnal that painting has expressed\".\nC\u00e9ret.\nSoutine lived for several years in Le Midi, initially between Vence and Cagnes-sur-Mer; he then abandoned the French Riviera for the Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales in 1919, specifically for C\u00e9ret. Regardless of his frequent trips to Paris\u2014particularly in October 1919 to obtain his identity card, mandatory for foreigners\u2014he changed residences and studios several times. One of his places of residence was the Maison Laverny, 5 rue de l'h\u00f4pital (rue Pierre Rameil). There Soutine was nicknamed by the locals as \"el pintre brut\" (\"the dirty painter\"), due to his miserable living conditions on allowances from Zborowski.\nDuring a visit to Le Midi, Zborowski wrote to a friend regarding Soutine: \"He gets up at three in the morning, walks twenty kilometers loaded with canvases and colors to find a site he likes, and goes back to bed forgetting to eat. But he unfastens his canvas and, having spread it on the one from the day before, he falls asleep next to it\" Soutine indeed only owned one canvas. The locals took pity at times and at times sympathized with the painter. Soutine painted portraits of the locals, in his works alluding to certain famous series such as those of men in prayer or pastry chefs and caf\u00e9 boys, whom he represented facing forward, their working hands often disproportionately depicted. Between 1920 and 1922, he painted around 200 canvases there.\nAlthough Soutine eventually grew to dislike the place and the works he created there, this period is generally considered a key stage in the evolution of his art. Soutine's art at the period is no longer hesitant; here, he \"inject[ed] his own emotions into the subjects and figures of his paintings.\" Especially, he imparted extreme deformations to the landscapes, carrying them away in a \"rotary movement\" already perceived by Waldemar-George in still lifes: under the pressure of internal forces that seem to compress them, the forms spring forth twisting, and the masses rise \"as if caught in a maelstrom\" as described by Jover.\nCarcass paintings.\nSoutine once horrified his neighbors by keeping an animal carcass in his studio so that he could paint it (\"Carcass of Beef\"). The stench drove them to send for the police, whom Soutine promptly lectured on the relative importance of art over hygiene. There is a story that Marc Chagall saw the blood from the carcass leak out onto the corridor outside Soutine's room, and rushed out screaming, \"Someone has killed Soutine.\" Soutine painted 10 works in this series, which have since become his most well-known. His carcass paintings such as \"The Flayed Ox\" were inspired by Rembrandt's still life of the same subject, \"Slaughtered Ox\", which he discovered while studying the Old Masters in the Louvre.\nSoutine produced the majority of his works from 1920 to 1929. From 1930 to 1935, the interior designer Madeleine Castaing and her husband welcomed him to their summer home, the mansion of L\u00e8ves, becoming his patrons, so that Soutine could hold his first exhibition in Chicago in 1935. He seldom showed his works, but he did take part in the important exhibition \"The Origins and Development of International Independent Art\" held at the Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume in 1937 in Paris, where he was at last hailed as a great painter.\nBetween Paris and Le Midi.\nBy 1926, five of Soutine's paintings were sold at Drouot for amounts ranging from 10,000 to 22,000 francs. However, this did not prevent him from boycotting the opening in June 1927 of the first exhibition of his works by Henri Bing in Bing's gallery on Rue La Bo\u00e9tie. On the other hand, he reportedly eagerly accepted the opportunity to create set designs for a ballet by Diaghilev\u2014a project that never materialized due to the sudden death of the impresario in 1929.\nGerman invasion.\nSoon afterwards France was invaded by German troops. As a Jew, Soutine had to escape from the French capital and hide to avoid arrest by the Gestapo. From the beginning of 1941, he moved from one place to another and was sometimes forced to seek shelter in forests, sleeping outdoors. Leaving his companion Marie-Berthe Aurenche's home on Littr\u00e9 Street, he sought refuge on Rue des Plants, where she had friends, the painter Marcel Lalo\u00eb and his wife. Fearing denunciation by their caretaker, they later assisted in the couple's escape, with fake documents, to a village in Indre-et-Loire, Champigny-sur-Veude. Expelled from several inns where their untidiness or Marie-Berthe's outbursts were criticized, the couple eventually found a house for rent on the way to Chinon, where friends discreetly visited them.\nThere, despite intense stomach pains that soon forced him to subsist solely on porridge, the painter resumed his work, supplied with canvases and colors by the painter Marcel Lalo\u00eb. The landscapes from the years 1941\u20131942 seem to have abandoned warm tones, such as the \"Landscape of Champigny\". \"The Big Tree\" painted in Richelieu strained Soutine's relationship with the Castaings as he reduced the canvas size before delivering it to them. However, he also tackled new and lighter subjects like \"The Pigs\" or \"The Return from School after the Storm\". He also created portraits of children and more serene maternity scenes.\nIllness and death.\nSuffering from a stomach ulcer and bleeding badly, Soutine left a safe hiding place for Paris for emergency surgery, which failed to save his life. On 9 August 1943, he died of a perforated ulcer. He was interred in Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse, Paris.\nLegacy.\nIn February 2006, an oil painting of his controversial and iconic series \"Le B\u0153uf \u00c9corch\u00e9\" (1924) sold for a record \u00a37.8 million ($13.8 million) to an anonymous buyer at a Christie's auction held in London\u2014after it was estimated to fetch \u00a34.8 million. In February 2007, a 1921 portrait of an unidentified man with a red scarf (\"L'Homme au Foulard Rouge\") sold for $17.2 million\u2014a new record\u2014at Sotheby's London auction house.\nOne of the beef paintings, known as \"Le b\u0153uf\", circa 1923, was sold for $1 million in 2004 and resold six months later for twice that price to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. Heirs of the first seller sued to have the painting returned, claiming the price was unfairly low, and a complex settlement in 2009 required the painting to be transferred to them. In May 2015, \"Le B\u0153uf\" achieved a record price for the artist of $28,165,000 at the Christie's curated auction \"Looking forward to the past\".\nRoald Dahl placed him as a character in his 1952 short story \"Skin\".\nThe Jewish Museum in New York has presented major exhibitions of Soutine's work in \"An Expressionist in Paris: The Paintings of Chaim Soutine\" (1998) and \"Chaim Soutine: Flesh\" (2018).\nIn 2020, Soutine's painting \"Eva\" became a symbol of pro-democracy protests in Belarus.\nArtistic style.\n\"Expression is in the touch\" declared Soutine, meaning expression is found in the movement in the rhythm and the passion applied by the pencil against the surface of the canvas. It is said Soutine rapidly moved from linear and rigid drawing of his still life in order to discover \"his true element, the touch of color and its sinuous bending\".\nGallery.\nPortraits and figures\nStill Lifes\nLandscapes\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63076", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63076", "title": "Max Jacob", "text": "French poet, painter, writer and critic\nMax Jacob (; 12 July 1876 \u2013 5 March 1944) was a French poet, painter, writer, and critic.\nLife and career.\nAfter spending his childhood in Quimper, Brittany, he enrolled in the Paris Colonial School, which he left in 1897 for an artistic career. He was one of the first friends Pablo Picasso made in Paris. They met in the summer of 1901, and it was Jacob who helped the young artist learn French. Later, on the Boulevard Voltaire, he shared a room with Picasso, who remained a lifelong friend (and was represented as the monk in his painting \"Three Musicians\", which Picasso painted in 1921). Jacob introduced him to Guillaume Apollinaire, who in turn introduced Picasso to Georges Braque. He would become close friends with Jean Cocteau, Jean Hugo, Christopher Wood and Amedeo Modigliani, who painted his portrait in 1916. He also befriended and encouraged the artist Romanin, otherwise known as French politician, and future Resistance leader Jean Moulin. Moulin's famous \"nom de guerre\" Max is presumed to be selected in honor of Jacob.\nJacob, who was Jewish, claimed to have had a vision of Christ in 1909, and converted to Catholicism. He was hopeful that this conversion would alleviate his homosexual tendencies.\nMax Jacob is regarded as an important link between the symbolists and the surrealists, as can be seen in his prose poems \"Le cornet \u00e0 d\u00e9s\" (\"The Dice Box\", 1917 \u2013 the 1948 Gallimard edition was illustrated by Jean Hugo) and in his paintings, exhibitions of which were held in New York City in 1930 and 1938.\nHis writings include the novel \"Saint Matorel\" (1911), the free verses \"Le laboratoire central\" (1921), and \"La d\u00e9fense de Tartuffe\" (1919), which expounds his philosophical and religious attitudes.\nThe famous psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan attributed the quote \"The truth is always new\" to Jacob.\nDeath.\nHaving moved outside Paris in May 1936, to settle in Saint-Beno\u00eet-sur-Loire, Loiret, Max Jacob was arrested on 24 February 1944 by the Gestapo, and interned at Orl\u00e9ans prison (prisoner #15872). Jewish by birth, Jacob's brother Gaston had been previously arrested in January 1944, and deported to the concentration camp Auschwitz along with their sister Myrthe-Lea; her husband was also deported by the Nazis at this time. A cousin, Andr\u00e9e Jacob, survived by living under an assumed name and worked in the Resistance movement Noyautage des administrations publiques. Following his incarceration at Orl\u00e9ans, Max was then transferred to Drancy internment camp from where he was to be transported in the next convoy to Auschwitz. However, said to be suffering from bronchial pneumonia, Max Jacob died on 5 March in the infirmary of La Cit\u00e9 de la Muette, a former housing block which served as the internment camp known as Drancy.\nFirst interred in Ivry after the war ended, his remains were transferred in 1949 by his artist friends Jean Cassou and Ren\u00e9 Ich\u00e9 (who sculpted the tomb of the poet) to the cemetery at Saint-Beno\u00eet-sur-Loire in the Loiret d\u00e9partement.\nPseudonyms.\nAs well as his \"nom d'\u00e9tat civil\", or regular name, Jacob worked under at least two pseudonyms, L\u00e9on David and Morven le Ga\u00eblique.\nIn popular culture.\nGerman actor Udo Kier plays Jacob in the 2004 film \"Modigliani\". In the 2006 film \"\", which deals with the life of Jacob from the First World War until his death, he was played by Jean-Claude Brialy; this was Brialy's last film. In the 2013 Spanish film , Jacob is played by Lionel Abelanski.\nT. R. Knight portrays Jacob in the 2018 season of the television series \"Genius\", which focuses on the life and career of Pablo Picasso.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63077", "revid": "45565320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63077", "title": "Stock market bubble", "text": "Economic bubble in a stock market\nA stock market bubble is a type of economic bubble taking place in stock markets when market participants drive stock prices above their value in relation to some system of stock valuation.\nBehavioral finance theory attributes stock market bubbles to cognitive biases that lead to groupthink and herd behavior. Bubbles occur not only in real-world markets, with their inherent uncertainty and noise, but also in highly predictable experimental markets. Other theoretical explanations of stock market bubbles have suggested that they are rational, intrinsic, and contagious.\nHistory.\nHistorically, early stock market bubbles and crashes have their roots in financial activities of the 17th-century Dutch Republic, the birthplace of the first formal (official) stock exchange and market in history. The Dutch tulip mania, of the 1630s, is generally considered the world's first recorded speculative bubble (or economic bubble).\nExamples.\nTwo famous early stock market bubbles were the Mississippi Scheme in France and the South Sea bubble in England. Both bubbles came to an abrupt end in 1720, bankrupting thousands of unfortunate investors. Those stories, and many others, are recounted in Charles Mackay's 1841 popular account, \"\"Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds\".\"\nThe two most famous bubbles of the twentieth century, the bubble in American stocks in the 1920s just before the Wall Street crash of 1929 and the following Great Depression, and the Dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, were based on speculative activity surrounding the development of new technologies. The 1920s saw the widespread introduction of a range of technological innovations including radio, automobiles, aviation and the deployment of electrical power grids. The 1990s was the decade when Internet and e-commerce technologies emerged\u2014many of which had minimal sales and earnings profiles. \nOther stock market bubbles of note include the Encilhamento occurred in Brazil during the late 1880s and early 1890s, the Nifty Fifty stocks in the early 1970s, Taiwanese stocks in 1987\u201389 and Japanese stocks in the late 1980s.\nStock market bubbles frequently produce hot markets in initial public offerings, since investment bankers and their clients see opportunities to float new stock issues at inflated prices. These hot IPO markets misallocate investment funds to areas dictated by speculative trends, rather than to enterprises generating longstanding economic value. Typically when there is an over abundance of IPOs in a bubble market, a large portion of the IPO companies fail completely, never achieve what is promised to the investors, or can even be vehicles for fraud.\nWhether rational or irrational.\nEmotional and cognitive biases (see behavioral finance) seem to be the causes of bubbles, but often, when the phenomenon appears, pundits try to find a rationale, so as not to be against the crowd. Thus, sometimes, people will dismiss concerns about overpriced markets by citing a new economy where the old stock valuation rules may no longer apply. This type of thinking helps to further propagate the bubble whereby everyone is investing with the intent of finding a greater fool. Still, some analysts cite the wisdom of crowds and say that price movements really do reflect rational expectations of fundamental returns. Large traders become powerful enough to rock the boat, generating stock market bubbles.\nTo sort out the competing claims between behavioral finance and efficient markets theorists, observers need to find bubbles that occur when a readily available measure of fundamental value is also observable. The bubble in closed-end country funds in the late 1980s is instructive here, as are the bubbles that occur in experimental asset markets. According to the efficient-market hypothesis, this doesn't happen, and so any data is wrong. For closed-end country funds, observers can compare the stock prices to the net asset value per share (the net value of the fund's total holdings divided by the number of shares outstanding). For experimental asset markets, observers can compare the stock prices to the expected returns from holding the stock (which the experimenter determines and communicates to the traders).\nIn both instances, closed-end country funds and experimental markets, stock prices clearly diverge from fundamental values. Nobel laureate Dr. Vernon Smith has illustrated the closed-end country fund phenomenon with a chart showing prices and net asset values of the Spain Fund in 1989 and 1990 in his work on price bubbles. At its peak, the Spain Fund traded near $35, nearly triple its Net Asset Value of about $12 per share. At the same time the Spain Fund and other closed-end country funds were trading at very substantial premiums, the number of closed-end country funds available exploded thanks to many issuers creating new country funds and selling the IPOs at high premiums.\nIt only took a few months for the premiums in closed-end country funds to fade back to the more typical discounts at which closed-end funds trade. Those who had bought them at premiums had run out of \"greater fools\". For a while, though, the supply of \"greater fools\" had been outstanding.\nPositive feedback.\nA rising price on any share will attract the attention of investors. Not all of those investors are willing or interested in studying the intrinsics of the share and for such people the rising price itself is reason enough to invest. In turn, the additional investment will provide buoyancy to the price, thus completing a positive feedback loop.\nLike all dynamic systems, financial markets operate in an ever-changing equilibrium, which translates into price volatility. However, a self-adjustment (negative feedback) takes place normally: when prices rise more people are encouraged to sell, while fewer are encouraged to buy. This puts a limit on volatility. However, once positive feedback takes over, the market, like all systems with positive feedback, enters a state of increasing disequilibrium. This can be seen in financial bubbles where asset prices rapidly spike upwards far beyond what could be considered the rational \"economic value\", only to fall rapidly afterwards.\nEffect of incentives.\nInvestment managers, such as stock mutual fund managers, are compensated and retained in part due to their performance relative to peers. Taking a conservative or contrarian position as a bubble builds results in performance unfavorable to peers. This may cause customers to go elsewhere and can affect the investment manager's own employment or compensation. The typical short-term focus of U.S. equity markets exacerbates the risk for investment managers that do not participate during the building phase of a bubble, particularly one that builds over a longer period of time. In attempting to maximize returns for clients and maintain their employment, they may rationally participate in a bubble they believe to be forming, as the benefits outweigh the risks of not doing so.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63078", "revid": "11612968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63078", "title": "Tsuguharu Foujita", "text": "Japanese-French painter (1886\u20131968)\n was a Japanese-French painter. After studying Western-style painting in Japan, Foujita travelled to Paris, where he encountered the international modern art scene of the Montparnasse neighbourhood and developed an eclectic style that borrowed from both Japanese and European artistic traditions.\nWith his unusual fashion and distinctive figurative style, Foujita reached the height of his fame in 1920s Paris. His watercolour and oil works of nudes, still lifes, and self-portraits were a commercial success and he became a notable figure in the Parisian art scene.\nFoujita spent three years travelling through South and North America before returning to Japan in 1933, documenting his observations in sketches and paintings. Upon his return home, Foujita became an official war artist during World War II, illustrating battle scenes to raise the morale of the Japanese troops and citizens. His oil paintings won him acclaim during the war, but public perception of him became mixed following the Japanese defeat.\nWithout significant prospects in the post-war Japanese art scene, Foujita returned to France in 1950, where he would spend the rest of his life. He received French nationality in 1955 and converted to Catholicism in 1959. His latter years were spent working on the frescoes for a small, Romanesque chapel in Reims that he had constructed. He died in 1968, shortly after the chapel officially opened.\nIn France, Foujita is remembered as part of the ann\u00e9es folles of the 1920s, but public opinion of him in Japan remains mixed due to his monumental depictions of the war. Retrospective exhibitions organised since 2006 in Japan have sought to establish Foujita's place in Japanese twentieth-century art history.\nBiography.\nEarly life in Japan and career beginnings: 1886\u20131913.\nFoujita was born in 1886 in Ushigome, a former ward of Tokyo that is now part of the Shinjuku Ward. He was the son of Fujita Tsuguakira Fujita, an Army Medical Director. Two years after his birth, the family moved to Kumamoto, on the island of Kyushu. Following the premature death of his mother and his father's subsequent remarriage, the family moved back to Tokyo in 1892.\nFoujita developed an interest in painting in primary school and as an adolescent decided to become a painter. When he was fourteen, one of Foujita's watercolors was exhibited at the Exposition Universelle in Paris as one of the representative artworks by Japanese middle schoolers.\nFoujita began studying French as a high schooler and hoped to study in France after finishing school. However, his father, after consulting with his friend \u014cgai Mori, a surgeon and novelist who had previously lived in Germany, encouraged him to continue his studies in fine art in Japan. He enrolled in 1905 at what is now the Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and Music and studied under Seiki Kuroda, who taught \"y\u014dga\", western-style painting. He also took courses on \"nihonga\", Japanese-style painting, led by Seih\u014d Takeuchi and Gyokush\u014d Kawabata.\nFoujita met his first wife, Tomiko Tokita, a school teacher, during a voyage to Chiba Prefecture during which he realized a number of paintings for his diploma, including the artist's first known self-portrait. The two married in 1911.\nFoujita graduated in 1910. He exhibited in 1910 as part of the Salon Hakuba-Kai (White Horse Association), organized by Seiki Kuroda, which sought to popularize \"y\u014dga\" with the Japanese public, and later at the first two exhibitions organized by Tokyo Kangyo, a structure that promoted art and industry. However, his paintings were refused for three consecutive years at the salon Bunten, an annual exhibition organized by the Ministry of Education. Foujita's paintings at this time\u2014before he moved to France\u2014were often signed \"Fujita\", rather than the francized \"Foujita\" which he later adopted.\nUnsure of his personal style and never having lost sight of his dream to travel to Paris, Foujita decided to leave in 1913, when he was 27 years old. It was decided that he would receive an annuity from his father for three years, so that the artist would return to his home and his wife in Japan at the age of 30.\nArrival in Paris: 1913\u20131917.\nFoujita moved to Paris in 1913, at a time when foreign artists flourished, hoping to develop their artistic sensibilities and gain recognition in the European art capital. He settled in Montparnasse, and quickly became part of the eclectic art scene there that, lacking a clear style or discipline, later became known as the \"\u00c9cole de Paris\" (School of Paris). He moved into the artists' residences at Bateau-Lavoir. He quickly made friends with the Japanese painter Riichir\u014d Kawashima, who had many connections in the Paris art scene, as they shared a studio. Foujita also developed a friendship with photographer Shinzo Fukuhara, who piqued Foujita's interest in photography.\nWhile many Japanese artists who came to Paris tended to live amongst themselves and struggled to adjust to the Parisian lifestyle, Foujita made great efforts to adapt to his new surroundings. He began signing his paintings with the French-looking spelling of his name, Foujita, rather than Fujita, and improved his French language skills. He also distinguished himself from many of his Japanese confr\u00e8res, who sought to affirm their mastery of oil paint, as Foujita worked primarily in watercolor.\nHis network soon included artists of many nationalities. After moving his studio to the Cit\u00e9 Falgui\u00e8re, he met painters Amedeo Modigliani and Chaim Soutine, he took dance classes with Raymond Duncan, and he visited the studios of Pablo Picasso and Diego Rivera. This fruitful encounter, during which Foujita discovered cubism, led to his acquaintance with Guillaume Apollinaire, Georges Braque, Fernand L\u00e9ger, Erik Satie, Kees van Dongen, Jean Metzinger, Andr\u00e9 Derain and Pierre Bonnard. His visit to Picasso's studio introduced him to the \"na\u00efve\" style of Henri Rousseau, as Picasso owned one of Rousseau's works and had it hanging on his wall.\n1914 marked the outbreak of World War I and the beginning of a complicated period for Foujita. Many foreign artists left Paris to fight in the war. Most Japanese artists also chose to return home. However, after having purchased a plot of land on the outskirts of Paris where they built a modest home, Foujita and Kawashima decided to stay. In the coming months, the two artists would work as volunteers, alongside sculptor Ossip Zadkine, for the Red Cross. In September, they returned to their home to find it destroyed. Additionally, Foujita had a financially difficult time because his father was no longer able to send him his annuity due to the war.\nFollowing the departure of Kawashima for Tokyo in 1915, Foujita moved to London in January 1916. During this period, Foujita ended his relationship with his wife Tomiko. He also informed his father that he no longer needed financial support and would be staying indefinitely in Europe. Foujita returned to Paris in early 1917. In March, he met Fernande Barrey, who had been a model for Modigliani, in the Caf\u00e9 de la Rotonde. Thirteen days later, Foujita and Fernande were married.\nArtistic development and success: 1917\u20131930.\nFernande was instrumental in the artist's first professional success in Paris. A few weeks after marrying Foujita, she showed the art dealer Georges Ch\u00e9ron some of Foujita's drawings. Ch\u00e9ron went to Foujita's studio and bought all the works he was shown. She also secured an arrangement between Foujita and the Galerie Ch\u00e9ron, where he had his first solo exhibitions. His first solo show, in which he presented 110 of his watercolors, was a great success. The artist began exhibiting more frequently in Paris and in 1920 became a member of the Salon d'Automne. \nThis success coincided with the arrival of the Roaring Twenties in Paris, a time of relative economic prosperity that fueled a strong art market and thriving nightlife. Foujita was a regular at popular clubs and events, immediately recognizable thanks to his signature bowl-cut and round glasses.\nFoujita's production in the early 1920s began to concentrate into three distinct genres: self-portraits, interior scenes (including many still lifes), and nudes. There was great interest in Foujita's style, which was often perceived as marrying \"Eastern\" and \"Western\" elements in an original manner.\nJapanese artists in Paris who practiced Western-style painting were generally described by contemporary critics as simple copyists, or, in the words of Andr\u00e9 Warnod, \"wanting to be European at all costs\".38 Yet, Foujita was deemed the exception to this rule. Warnod states that Foujita \"knew how to look with his own eyes and paint according to his temperament, without worrying too much about others\": compared to other Japanese painters, Foujita was seen as having \"personality\".39 Art historian Asato Ikeda has argued that \"in contrast to other Japanese artists in the city, Fujita [targeted] his paintings to French audiences by successfully negotiating the artistic heritage of his country and making something original from the perspective of European art history\".\nFoujita's works in the late 1910s incorporated a blend of styles. From the beginning of his stay in Paris, Foujita took advantage of his proximity to the Louvre to study artists such as Raphael, Rembrandt, and Leonardo da Vinci.40 In 1917, Foujita began drawing figures in a highly stylized manner, often in profile, which appear to draw on both medieval primitive painting, as well as Amadeo Modigliani's simplified portraits. The artist, heavily inspired by Italian painting, also depicted Christian themes like the Virgin and Child and the Crucifixion of Christ. These themes would soon disappear from Foujita's oeuvre, but they later dominated his artistic production from 1951 onwards.\nHis works were appreciated as the harmonious meeting of Japanese and European aesthetics. One such painting, \"Reclining Nude with Toile de Jouy\", for which French model Kiki de Montparnasse posed, was met with great success at the 1922 Salon d'Automne. This work referenced the classical genre of the nude, as well as more recent French examples like Edouard Manet's \"Olympia\". He drew inspiration from \"ukiyo-e\" artists such as Suzuki Harunobu and Kitagawa Utamaro, who left their female figures' skin uncolored, though he painted the Black artists' model and performer A\u00efcha Goblet in a more Cubist style. Foujita wrote that the objective of his nudes was to \"represent the quality of the most beautiful material there is: that of human skin\".\nFoujita received an important Parisian commission in the late 1920s that showcased his capacity to create in the Japanese artistic tradition. Painted at the Cercle de l'Union Interalli\u00e9e, an exclusive social and dining club, it features two \"kach\u014d-ga\", or bird and flower painting panels created in a \"yamato-e\" style.\nIn 1922, Foujita met Lucie Badoul, who he called \"Youki\", the Japanese word for \"snow\", and she became one of his models. In 1924, he divorced Fernande, and in 1929, he married Youki. Around the time of his marriage to Youki, Foujita was having serious financial woes. He had been living a luxurious life of celebrity in Paris but he had not been paying taxes since 1925. Now, the tax authorities caught up with him and demanded full payment. Foujita left for Japan with Youki, hoping he might be able to recoup his losses by exhibiting there. Foujita's reception in Japan was mixed. The general public packed his first one-man show there, and his works sold well, but the critics panned him as a mediocre artist imitating Western style. Foujita returned to France via the United States, travelling to Hawai'i, San Francisco, and New York. While in New York, he learned about the Wall Street Crash. He once again briefly returned to New York to organize a one-man exhibition at the Paul Reinhardt Gallery, but the show was not successful.\nTravels, 1930\u20131933.\nWhen Foujita returned to Paris in 1930, he was still short on funds, and shared a place with Robert Desnos whom he had met in 1928. During this time, Foujita experimented with painting in a more surrealist style. By 1931, Youki and Desnos had become a couple, and Foujita, who continued to have problems with his back taxes and suffered bankruptcy, left for South America with Madeleine Lequeux, a former dancer known as Mady Dormans who worked at the Casino de Paris.\nFoujita and Madeleine traveled together to Brazil, staying in Rio de Janeiro for four months. During this time, they met Ismael Nery, who painted Foujita's portrait. After Brazil, they then went to Argentina. His exhibition in Buenos Aires was very successful and he stayed for five months. Afterwards, they traveled to Bolivia, Peru, and Cuba.\nFoujita then went to Mexico, arriving in November 1932, where he would stay for seven months. Foujita found himself inspired by the Mexican Mural Movement, led by Diego Rivera, whom he had befriended in Paris. Impressed by the collaborative effort undertaken by the government and local artists, Foujita, as art historian Asato Ikeda describes, \"claimed that art should not be produced just for wealthy individuals but also for the masses and the general public. In other words, his trip to South America made him aware of the social and political roles that large public art could play.\" \nHe also visited the artist Tamiji Kitagawa at his home in Taxco. Foujita had learned about Kitagawa through an exhibit of his student's plein-air works that had traveled through Europe. Foujita was so impressed by Kitagawa's students' works that he had sixty of the canvases brought back to Japan for an exhibition that was held in 1936. After his visit to Mexico, Foujita traveled through the Southwest of the United States, and then went on to San Francisco and Los Angeles, where he continued to exhibit and be treated as a celebrity.\nReturn to Japan and war painting: 1933\u20131949.\nFoujita returned to Japan with Madeleine at the end of 1933. Madeleine found the transition to Japanese culture difficult. In February 1935, she went back to Paris, but returned a year later. In June 1936, she unexpectedly died. Soon afterwards, Foujita began a relationship with Kimiyo Horiuchi, who in 1954 became his fifth wife.\nDuring this time, Foujita's paintings began to be dominated by classical Japanese subjects, such as geisha, sumo wrestlers, and fishermen. His watercolors and oils received negative press when they were exhibited at the 21st Salon Nika in 1934. Critics felt as if his vision of Japan was old-fashioned and resembled that of a foreigner, with one critic noting that \"the people and the scenes represented by this painter are not from the living and current Japan, but worn-out remnants from the past\".51 Foujita's taste for bygone Japan was further confirmed in 1937 when he constructed a traditional Japanese home.56\n1937 marked the beginning of the second Sino-Japanese war. Foujita sought to contribute to the war effort by going to the front, and these civilian volunteers formed the Association of War Artists of Imperial Japan.313 In 1938, Foujita began working with the Imperial Navy Information Office establishment as a war artist and created his first war painting (\"sens\u014d ga\"), \"Nanchang Airport Fire\".\nIn April 1939, the army reorganized the Association of War Artists of Imperial Japan as the Army Art Association, which commissioned monumental war paintings under the supervision of a new chairman, Matsui Iwane, who was an active military officer.313170 Foujita and his fellow artist, Sabur\u014d Miyamoto were prominent members, and in 1943 Foujita became vice-chairman.319 In spite of his strong connections with the Army Art Association, Foujita decided to return to Paris in April 1939. He and Kimiyo stayed there for slightly more than a year, leaving France and returning to Japan in May 1940 after the German invasion of Belgium.\nUpon return to Tokyo, Foujita dedicated himself as an artist supporting the war effort.172 He became the nation's leading war artist during World War II, creating a prolific number of war paintings and overseeing special exhibits for the military. He received important commissions, like the \"Battle of Nomonhan\", painted in 1941, a monumental painting measuring .175 Despite the painting's depiction of one of the largest military defeats the Japanese had experienced up to that time, it focuses on glorifying the bravery of the Japanese soldiers.\nMasaaki Ozaki divides Foujita's wartime production into two periods: the paintings of the first period, like \"Battle of Nomonhan\", were supposed to document the war and boost the morale of troops.58 The second period, however, was a time in which the Japanese were experiencing more defeat than victory. The Japanese people began to lose confidence and the war effort became more desperate. The sources for Foujita's paintings were not the battlefields themselves, but his imagination, resulting in shocking dramatic compositions that Ozaki compares to representations of hell found in classical Japanese painting.58 Art historian Aya Louise McDonald also points out that his compositions were further enriched by Foujita's knowledge of 19th-century French painting in the Louvre.180\nHis most famous painting from this period is \"Last Stand at Attu\", completed in August 1943, which depicts a battle against American troops on the Aleutian Islands. Rather than surrendering to the Americans, the Japanese soldiers remaining in battle killed themselves. The work received visceral responses from viewers, who wept or prayed in front of it, as if it were an altar.34 Foujita made paintings in a similar vein to \"Last Stand at Attu\" until the war's end in 1945.\nFollowing Japan's defeat, the Allied Powers in Japan made an effort to collect all war paintings to be sent to the United States, with Foujita's help.36 The paintings have never been officially \"returned\" to Japan, but they were placed on \"indefinite loan\" to the National Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo, which received the paintings from 1970 to 1977.36\nFoujita received much public criticism after the war in Japan. He defended himself by asserting that artists were pacifists in nature, but the Japan Art Association (\"Nihon Bijutsu-kai\") listed him as an artist responsible for the war in 1946. Although Foujita's name did not appear on the list of war criminals published by the General Headquarters in 1947, his reputation suffered, partly due to using his art to serve as propaganda for the Imperial Japanese military and his refusal to confront accusations about his role as a war artist. The American poet Harry Roskolenko tried to support Foujita by putting on an exhibit of his paintings at the Kennedy and Company Galleries in New York, but none of the paintings were sold. Foujita and Roskolenko blamed Yasuo Kuniyoshi, who described Foujita as a fascist, imperialist, and expansionist. Ultimately, Foujita decided to leave Japan definitively.\nTime in America and final years in France: 1949\u20131968.\nFoujita was able to get a visa to the United States with the help of Henry Sugimoto and took up a teaching position at the Brooklyn Museum Art School in March 1949. Foujita put on another show, but was once more labelled a fascist by artists, including Ben Shahn, who organized a demonstration against him. His paintings of the time reflect a nostalgia for Paris. Unhappy and unwelcome in New York, Foujita sought to return to Paris, and once his visa was granted, Foujita and Kimiyo moved back to France in January 1950. Foujita declared that he would never leave again.\nThe couple moved to Montparnasse where Foujita began painting street scenes that he called \"Paris Landscapes\". He briefly became involved with costume design, creating the \"Japanese\" outfits for the May 1951 performance of Madame Butterfly at La Scala, and did illustrations for a book by Ren\u00e9 H\u00e9ron de Villefosse In 1954, Foujita married Kimiyo. They gained French nationality in 1955, renouncing their Japanese nationality, and Foujita was made an officer of the Legion of Honor by the French state in 1957. The couple converted to Catholicism and were baptised in Reims Cathedral on 14 October 1959, with Ren\u00e9 Lalou, the head of the Mumm Champagne House, and Fran\u00e7oise Taittinger as his godfather and godmother. Foujita took the Christian name of L\u00e9onard.\nAfter his conversion in 1959, Foujita dedicated most of his production to the creation of religious subjects. In 1962, Foujita created a plan to construct and decorate his own chapel, as Matisse had done before him. Foujita hoped that the structure, named the Chapel of Our Lady of Peace and built with the help of Lalou's funding, would symbolize the completion of his career. As it turned out, the chapel would also be the artist's final project. From 1963 until its opening to the public in 1966, he designed almost every aspect of the structure, decorating the interior with frescoes of biblical scenes, many of which illustrated the life of Christ.\nOnly a few months after the opening of the chapel, Foujita was diagnosed with cancer. He died on 29 January 1968 in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland. He was first interred in the chapel, but Kimiyo had his body transferred to the Cimeti\u00e8re de Villiers-le-B\u00e2cle, near her. In 2003, his coffin was reinterred at the Foujita Chapel under the flagstones in the position he originally intended when constructing the chapel.\nLegacy and collections.\nAfter the war, Foujita had a reputation in Japan as a war criminal. Writing in 1972, the artist Kikuhata Mokuma published an essay in the art magazine \"Bijutsu tech\u014d\" arguing that Foujita was one of many artists responsible for the horrors of war, describing Foujita as a narcissistic artist who took pleasure in depicting death. Foujita's reputation, and his place in Japanese twentieth-century art history, remains a contested subject in Japan today. A successful retrospective of his work was held at the National Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo, in 2006, entitled \"L\u00e9onard Foujita: Non-Japanese Who Fascinated Paris,\" and others have followed, indicating the will of Japanese museums to engage with Foujita's oeuvre. The 2006 retrospective featured five war paintings in an effort to address his war responsibility.\nIn France, Foujita remains associated primarily with the \"\u00c9cole de Paris\" and the \"ann\u00e9es folles\" of the roaring twenties. He is known for his lighthearted and dainty subjects: Parisian streetscapes, cats, voluptuous women, everyday objects. An important exhibition of his work at the Mus\u00e9e Maillol in 2018, \"Foujita: peindre dans les ann\u00e9es folles\" focused on his production before his return to Japan.\nAn exhibition presenting the ensemble of Foujita's work, including his wartime production, was organized by the Centre Pompidou and the Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo in 1980, but was canceled at the last minute.17 In 2019, the exhibition \"Foujita 1886\u20131968. \u0152uvres d'une vie\" organized at the Japanese Culture House of Paris and based on the exhibition \"Foujita: A Retrospective\", shown at the Tokyo Metropolitan Art Museum in 2018, presented for the first time in France an overview of Foujita's sixty years of artistic production. It included two of the artist's war paintings, shown for the first time outside of Japan, permitting the French public to understand Foujita's career beyond his years in Montparnasse.16\nIn 1990, Kimiyo Foujita donated the home she shared with the artist to the Departmental Council of Essonne so that Foujita's atelier could become a museum, the https://. In Japan, Foujita's works can be found in the Artizon Museum and the Museum of Contemporary Art in Tokyo, with more than 100 in the Hirano Masakichi Art Museum in Akita. His works are also part of major French collections, such as those of the Centre Pompidou, the Mus\u00e9e d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris, and Paris' Fonds national d'art contemporain. Further works can also be found at the Mus\u00e9e d'art moderne et contemporain of Strasbourg, the Mus\u00e9e de Grenoble, and the Mus\u00e9e de la Piscine in Roubaix. Foujita's nephew donated some of his works and writings to the Mus\u00e9e des beaux-arts of Reims in 2012.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63080", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63080", "title": "L\u00e9on-Paul Fargue", "text": "French poet and essayist\nL\u00e9on-Paul Fargue (, 4 March 1876\u00a0\u2013 24 November 1947) was a French poet and essayist.\nHe was born in Paris, France, on rue Coquilli\u00e9re. As a poet he was noted for his poetry of atmosphere and detail. His work spanned numerous literary movements. Before he reached 19 years of age, Fargue had already published in \"L'Art litt\u00e9raire\" in 1894 and his important poem \"Tancr\u00e8de\" appeared in the magazine \"Pan\" in 1895.\nAs an opponent of the surrealists, he became a member of the Symbolist poetry circle connected with \"Le Mercure de France.\" Rilke, Joyce and others declared that Fargue was at the very forefront of modern poetry.\nHe was also a poet of Paris, and later in his career he published two books about the city, \"D'apr\u00e8s Paris\" (1931) and \"Le pi\u00e9ton de Paris\" (1939). His earliest work is divided between Paris prowlings and intimate scenes of childhood and nature.\nHe was a great social lion in the literary scene of Paris in the 1920s and 30s. Walter Benjamin (who called Fargue \"the greatest living poet in France\") met him on a visit to the city in January 1930, and recounted an evening enlivened by charisma, wit, and incomparable storytelling. Fargue related to Benjamin the story of a dinner he held for Proust, his old friend, and James Joyce \u2013 the only time the two met.\n\"Fargue\", wrote Leon-Pierre Quint in November 1929, \"is one of those people who write as they speak; he constantly utters works that remain unwritten-perhaps from indolence, perhaps from contempt for writing. An endless sequence of unforced flashes of wit and puns-this was the only way he was capable of speaking. He has a childlike love of Paris, with its godforsaken little cafes, its bars, its streets, and its nightlife that never ends. He must be in robust health and have a highly resilient character. During the day he works as an industrialist, and at night he is always on the move. He is constantly seen with elegant women, Americans. He is close to fifty years of age, yet leads the life of a gigolo by night, hypnotizing everyone he meets with the charm of his speech.\"\nFargue published a book of recollections about his friend, the composer Ravel. He was a member of the Apaches and remained a lifelong friend of Ravel. One of his poems, \"R\u00eaves\", was set to music by Ravel in 1927.\nHe died in Paris in 1947 and is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse. Federico Mompou dedicated No. 12 of his \"Can\u00e7ons i Danses\" to Fargue's memory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63082", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63082", "title": "Market trend", "text": "Perceived financial market movement tendency over time\nA market trend is a perceived tendency of the financial markets to move in a particular direction over time. Analysts classify these trends as \"secular\" for long time-frames, \"primary\" for medium time-frames, and \"secondary\" for short time-frames. Traders attempt to identify market trends using technical analysis, a framework which characterizes market trends as predictable price tendencies within the market when price reaches support and resistance levels, varying over time.\nA future market trend can only be determined in hindsight, since at any time prices in the future are not known. This fact makes market timing inherently a game of educated guessing rather than a certainty. Past trends are identified by drawing lines, known as trendlines, that connect price action making higher highs and higher lows for an uptrend, or lower lows and lower highs for a downtrend.\nMarket terminology.\nThe terms \"bull market\" and \"bear market\" describe upward and downward market trends, respectively, and can be used to describe either the market as a whole or specific sectors and securities. The terms come from London's Exchange Alley in the early 18th century, where traders who engaged in naked short selling were called \"bear-skin jobbers\" because they sold a bear's skin (the shares) before catching the bear. This was simplified to \"bears,\" while traders who bought shares on credit were called \"bulls.\" The latter term might have originated by analogy to bear-baiting and bull-baiting, two animal fighting sports of the time. Thomas Mortimer recorded both terms in his 1761 book \"Every Man His Own Broker\". He remarked that bulls who bought in excess of present demand might be seen wandering among brokers' offices moaning for a buyer, while bears rushed about devouring any shares they could find to close their short positions. An unrelated folk etymology supposes that the terms refer to a bear clawing downward to attack and a bull bucking upward with its horns.\nSecular trends.\nA secular market trend is a lasting long-term trend that lasts 5 to 25 years and consists of a series of primary trends. A secular bear market consists of smaller bull markets and larger bear markets; a secular bull market consists of larger bull markets and smaller bear markets.\nIn a secular bull market, the prevailing trend is \"bullish\" or upward-moving. The United States stock market was described as being in a secular bull market from about 1983 to 2000 (or 2007), with brief upsets including Black Monday and the Stock market downturn of 2002, triggered by the crash of the dot-com bubble. Another example is the 2000s commodities boom.\nIn a secular bear market, the prevailing trend is \"bearish\" or downward-moving. An example of a secular bear market occurred in gold from January 1980 to June 1999, culminating with the Brown Bottom. During this period, the market price of gold fell from a high of $850/oz ($30/g) to a low of $253/oz ($9/g). The stock market was also described as being in a secular bear market from 1929 to 1949.\nPrimary trends.\nA primary trend has broad support throughout the entire market, across most sectors, and lasts for a year or more.\nBull market.\nA bull market is a period of generally rising prices. The start of a bull market is marked by widespread pessimism. This point is when the \"crowd\" is the most \"bearish\". The feeling of despondency changes to hope, \"optimism\", and eventually euphoria as the bull runs its course. This often leads the economic cycle, for example, in a full recession, or earlier.\nGenerally, bull markets begin when stocks rise 20% from their low and end when stocks experience a 20% drawdown. However, some analysts suggest a bull market cannot happen within a bear market.\nAn analysis of Morningstar, Inc. stock market data from 1926 to 2014 revealed that, on average, a typical bull market lasted 8.5 years with a cumulative total return averaging 458%. Additionally, annualized gains for bull markets ranged from 14.9% to 34.1%.\nIndia's Bombay Stock Exchange Index, BSE SENSEX, experienced a major bull market trend from April 2003 to January 2008. It increased from 2,900 points to 21,000 points, representing a more than 600% return in 5 years.\nNotable bull markets characterized the 1925\u20131929, 1953\u20131957, and 1993\u20131997 periods when the U.S. and many other stock markets experienced significant growth. While the first period ended abruptly with the start of the Great Depression, the end of the later time periods were mostly periods of soft landing, which became large bear markets. (see: Recession of 1960\u201361 and the dot-com bubble in 2000\u20132001)\nBear market.\nA bear market is a general decline in the stock market over a period of time. It involves a transition from high investor optimism to widespread investor fear and pessimism. One generally accepted measure of a bear market is a price decline of 20% or more over at least a two-month period.\nA decline of 10% to 20% is classified as a correction.\nBear territory always precedes a bear market. Typically, as a market enters bear territory, there are indicators other than a correction. The Cboe Volatility Index (VIX), a key measure of market volatility, increases, indicating heightened investor anxiety. Additionally, consumer sentiment drops, with expectations for unemployment rising and economic outlooks declining. Most recently (as of April 12, 2025), in April 2025, the United States stock market entered bear territory. The S&amp;P 500 Index declined over 20% from its recent peak, meeting the technical definition of entering bear territory. This downturn is primarily attributed to escalating trade tensions and tariff policies under the Trump administration, which have led to significant market volatility and investor uncertainty. Ultimately, when a market enters bear territory, it almost always leads that stock market into a bear market.\nBear markets conclude when stocks recover, reaching new highs. The bear market is then assessed retrospectively from the recent highs to the lowest closing price, and its recovery period spans from the lowest closing price to the attainment of new highs. Another commonly accepted indicator of the end of a bear market is indices gaining 20% or more from their low.\nFrom 1926 to 2014, the average duration of a bear market was 13 months, accompanied by an average cumulative loss of 30%. Annualized declines for bear markets ranged from \u221219.7% to \u221247%.\nExamples.\nSome examples of a bear market include:\nMarket top.\nA market top (or market high) is usually not a dramatic event. The market has simply reached the highest point that it will, for some time. This identification is retrospective, as market participants are generally unaware of it when it occurs. Thus prices subsequently fall, either slowly or more rapidly.\nAccording to William O'Neil, since the 1950s, a market top is characterized by three to five distribution days in a major stock market index occurring within a relatively short period of time. Distribution is identified as a decline in price with higher volume than the preceding session.\nExamples.\nThe peak of the dot-com bubble, as measured by the NASDAQ-100, occurred on March 24, 2000, when the index closed at 4,704.73. The Nasdaq peaked at 5,132.50 and the S&amp;P 500 Index at 1525.20.\nThe peak of the U.S. stock market before the 2008 financial crisis occurred on October 9, 2007. The S&amp;P 500 closed at 1,565 and the NASDAQ at 2,861.50.\nMarket bottom.\nA market bottom marks a trend reversal, signifying the end of a market downturn and the commencement of an upward-moving trend (bull market).\nIdentifying a market bottom, often referred to as 'bottom picking,' is a challenging task, as it's difficult to recognize before it passes. The upturn following a decline may be short-lived, and prices might resume their descent, resulting in a loss for the investor who purchased stocks during a misperceived or 'false' market bottom.\nBaron Rothschild is often quoted as advising that the best time to buy is when there is 'blood in the streets'\u2014that is, when the markets have fallen drastically and investor sentiment is extremely negative.\nExamples.\nSome more examples of market bottoms, in terms of the closing values of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) include:\nSecondary trends.\nSecondary trends are short-term changes in price direction within a primary trend, typically lasting for a few weeks or a few months.\nBear market rally.\nSimilarly, a bear market rally, sometimes referred to as a 'sucker's rally' or 'dead cat bounce', is characterized by a price increase of 5% or more before prices fall again. Bear market rallies were observed in the Dow Jones Industrial Average index after the Wall Street Crash of 1929, leading down to the market bottom in 1932, and throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s. The Japanese Nikkei 225 has had several bear-market rallies between the 1980s and 2011, while undergoing an overall long-term downward trend.\nCauses of market trends.\nThe price of assets, such as stocks, is determined by supply and demand. By definition, the market balances buyers and sellers, making it impossible to have 'more buyers than sellers' or vice versa, despite the common use of that expression. During a surge in demand, buyers are willing to pay higher prices, while sellers seek higher prices in return. Conversely, in a surge in supply, the dynamics are reversed.\nSupply and demand dynamics vary as investors attempt to reallocate their investments between asset types. For instance, investors may seek to move funds from government bonds to 'tech' stocks, but the success of this shift depends on finding buyers for the government bonds they are selling. Conversely, they might aim to move funds from 'tech' stocks to government bonds at another time. In each case, these actions influence the prices of both asset types.\nIdeally, investors aim to use market timing to buy low and sell high, but in practice, they may end up buying high and selling low. Contrarian investors and traders employ a strategy of 'fading' investors' actions\u2014buying when others are selling and selling when others are buying. A period when most investors are selling stocks is known as distribution, while a period when most investors are buying stocks is known as accumulation.\n\"According to standard theory, a decrease in price typically leads to less supply and more demand, while an increase in price has the opposite effect. While this principle holds true for many assets, it often operates in reverse for stocks due to the common mistake made by investors\u2014buying high in a state of euphoria and selling low in a state of fear or panic, driven by the herding instinct. In cases where an increase in price leads to an increase in demand, or a decrease in price leads to an increase in supply, the expected negative feedback loop is disrupted, resulting in price instability. This phenomenon is evident in bubbles or market crashes.\nMarket sentiment.\nMarket sentiment is a contrarian stock market indicator.\nWhen an extremely high proportion of investors express a bearish (negative) sentiment, some analysts consider it to be a strong signal that a market bottom may be near. David Hirshleifer observes a trend phenomenon that follows a path starting with under-reaction and culminating in overreaction by investors and traders.\nIndicators that measure investor sentiment may include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "63083", "revid": "42407475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63083", "title": "Henry Miller", "text": "American novelist (1891\u20131980)\nHenry Valentine Miller (December 26, 1891 \u2013 June 7, 1980) was an American novelist, short story writer and essayist. He broke with existing literary forms and developed a new type of semi-autobiographical novel that blends character study, social criticism, philosophical reflection, stream of consciousness, explicit language, sex, surrealist free association, and mysticism. His most characteristic works of this kind are \"Tropic of Cancer\", \"Black Spring\", \"Tropic of Capricorn\", and the trilogy \"The Rosy Crucifixion\", which are based on his experiences in New York City and Paris, and all of which were banned in the United States until 1961. He also wrote travel memoirs and literary criticism and painted watercolors.\nEarly life.\nMiller was born at his family's home, 450 East 85th Street, in the Yorkville section of Manhattan, New York City. He was the son of Lutheran German parents, Louise Marie (Neiting) and tailor Heinrich Miller. As a child, he lived for nine years at 662 Driggs Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, known at that time (and referred to frequently in his works) as the Fourteenth Ward. In 1900, his family moved to 1063 Decatur Street in Brooklyn's Bushwick neighborhood. Although his family remained in Bushwick, Miller attended Eastern District High School in Williamsburg after finishing elementary school. As a young man, he was active with the Socialist Party of America (his \"quondam idol\" was the black Socialist Hubert Harrison). He attended the City College of New York for one semester.\nCareer.\nBrooklyn, 1917\u20131930.\nMiller married his first wife, Beatrice Sylvas Wickens, in 1917; their divorce was granted on December 21, 1923. Together they had a daughter, Barbara, born in 1919. They lived in an apartment at 244 6th Avenue in Park Slope, Brooklyn. At the time, Miller was working at Western Union; he worked there from 1920 to 1924 as personnel manager in the messenger department. In March 1922, during a three-week vacation, he wrote his first novel, \"Clipped Wings\". It has never been published, and only fragments remain, although parts of it were recycled in other works, such as \"Tropic of Capricorn\". A study of twelve Western Union messengers, \"Clipped Wings\" was characterized by Miller as \"a long book and probably a very bad one.\"\nIn 1923, while still married to Beatrice, Miller met and became enamored of a mysterious dance-hall ing\u00e9nue who was born Juliet Edith Smerth but went by the stage-name June Mansfield. She was 21 at the time. They began an affair, and married on June 1, 1924. In 1924 Miller quit Western Union to dedicate himself completely to writing. He described this time\u2014his struggles to become a writer, his sexual escapades, his failures, his friends, his philosophy\u2014in his autobiographical trilogy \"The Rosy Crucifixion\".\nMiller's second novel, \"\", was written in 1927\u201328, initially under the guise of a novel by his wife Juliet (June). A rich older admirer of June, Roland Freedman, paid her to write the novel; she would show him pages of Miller's work each week, pretending it was hers. The book was unpublished until 1992, 65 years after it was written and 12 years after Miller's death. \"Moloch\" is based on Miller's first marriage and his years working at the Western Union office in Lower Manhattan. A third novel written around this time, \"Crazy Cock\", was also unpublished until after Miller's death. Initially titled \"Lovely Lesbians\", \"Crazy Cock\" (along with his later novel \"Nexus\") told the story of June's close relationship with the artist Marion, whom June renamed Jean Kronski. Kronski lived with Miller and June from 1926 until 1927, when June and Kronski went to Paris together, leaving Miller behind, which upset him greatly. Miller suspected the two of having a sexual relationship. While in Paris, June and Kronski did not get along, and June returned to Miller several months later. Kronski died by suicide around 1930.\nParis, 1930\u20131939.\nIn 1928, Miller spent several months in Paris with June, a trip financed by Freedman. One day on a Paris street, Miller met another author, Robert W. Service, who recalled the story in his autobiography: \"Soon we got into conversation which turned to books. For a stripling he spoke with some authority, turning into ridicule the pretentious scribes of the Latin Quarter and their freak magazine.\" In 1930, Miller moved to Paris unaccompanied. Soon thereafter, he began work on \"Tropic of Cancer\", writing to a friend, \"I start tomorrow on the Paris book: First person, uncensored, formless\u2014fuck everything!\" Miller had little or no money the first year in Paris, but things began to change after he met Ana\u00efs Nin, who, with Hugh Guiler, paid his entire way through the 1930s, including the rent for an apartment at 18 Villa Seurat. Nin became his lover and financed the first printing of \"Tropic of Cancer\" in 1934 with money from Otto Rank. She wrote extensively in her journals about her relationship with Miller and June; the first volume, covering the years 1931\u201334, was published in 1966. Late in 1934, June divorced Miller by proxy in Mexico City.\nIn 1931, Miller was employed by the \"Chicago Tribune\" Paris edition as a proofreader, thanks to his friend Alfred Perl\u00e8s, who worked there. Miller took this opportunity to submit some of his own articles under Perl\u00e8s's name, since at that time only the editorial staff were permitted to publish in the paper. This period in Paris was highly creative for Miller, and during this time he also established a significant and influential network of authors circulating around the Villa Seurat. At that time a young British author, Lawrence Durrell, became a lifelong friend. Miller's correspondence with Durrell was later published in two books. During his Paris period he was also influenced by the French Surrealists.\nHis works contain detailed accounts of sexual experiences. His first published book, \"Tropic of Cancer\" (1934), was published by Obelisk Press in Paris and banned in the United States on the grounds of obscenity. The dust jacket came wrapped with a warning: \"Not to be imported into the United States or Great Britain.\" He continued to write novels that were banned; along with \"Tropic of Cancer\", his \"Black Spring\" (1936) and \"Tropic of Capricorn\" (1939) were smuggled into his native country, building Miller an underground reputation. While the aforementioned novels remained banned in the US for over two decades, in 1939, New Directions published \"The Cosmological Eye\", Miller's first book to be published in the US. The collection contained short prose pieces, most of which originally appeared in 1938 in \"Black Spring\" and \"Max and the White Phagocytes\".\nMiller became fluent in French during his ten-year stay in Paris and lived in France until June 1939. During the late 1930s he also learned about German-born sailor George Dibbern, helped to promote his memoir, \"Quest,\" and organized charity to help him.\nGreece, 1939\u20131940.\nIn 1939, Durrell, who was living in Corfu, Greece, invited Miller to Greece. Miller described the visit in \"The Colossus of Maroussi\" (1941), which he considered his best book. One of the first acknowledgments of Miller as a major modern writer was by George Orwell in his 1940 essay \"Inside the Whale\". Orwell wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here in my opinion is the only imaginative prose-writer of the slightest value who has appeared among the English-speaking races for some years past. Even if that is objected to as an overstatement, it will probably be admitted that Miller is a writer out of the ordinary, worth more than a single glance; and after all, he is a completely negative, unconstructive, amoral writer, a mere Jonah, a passive acceptor of evil, a sort of Whitman among the corpses.\nCalifornia, 1942\u20131980.\nIn 1940, Miller returned to New York. After a year-long trip around the United States, a journey that became material for \"The Air-Conditioned Nightmare\", he moved to California in June 1942, initially residing just outside Hollywood in Beverly Glen before settling in Big Sur in 1944. While Miller was establishing his base in Big Sur, the \"Tropic\" books, still banned in the US, were being published in France by Obelisk Press and later Olympia Press. There they were slowly and steadily gaining notoriety among both Europeans and various enclaves of American cultural exiles. As a result, they were frequently smuggled into the US, where they were a major influence on the new Beat Generation of American writers, most notably Jack Kerouac, the only Beat writer Miller liked. By the time his banned books were published in the 1960s and he was becoming better known, Miller was no longer interested in his image as an outlaw writer of smut-filled books, but he eventually gave up fighting the image.\nIn 1942, shortly before moving to California, Miller began writing \"Sexus\", the first novel in \"The Rosy Crucifixion\" trilogy, a fictionalized account of the six-year period of his life in Brooklyn falling in love with June and struggling to become a writer. Like several of his other works, the trilogy, completed in 1959, was initially banned in the US, published only in France and Japan. Miller lived in a small house on Partington Ridge from 1944 to 1947, along with other bohemian writers like Harry Partch, Emil White, and Jean Varda. There he wrote \"Into the Nightlife\", about the artists who lived at Anderson Creek as the Anderson Creek Gang in \"Big Sur and the Oranges of Hieronymus Bosch\". Miller paid $5 per month rent for his shack on the property.\nIn other works written during his time in California, Miller was widely critical of consumerism in America, as reflected in \"Sunday After the War\" (1944) and \"The Air-Conditioned Nightmare\" (1945). \"Big Sur and the Oranges of Hieronymus Bosch\", published in 1957, is a collection of stories about his life and friends in Big Sur.\nIn 1944, Miller met and married his third wife, Janina Martha Lepska, a philosophy student who was 30 years his junior. They had two children: a son, Tony, and a daughter, Valentine. They divorced in 1952. The next year, he married artist Eve McClure, who was 37 years his junior. They divorced in 1960, and she died in 1966, likely as a result of alcoholism. In 1961, Miller arranged a reunion in New York with his ex-wife June, the main subject of \"The Rosy Crucifixion\" trilogy. They had not seen each other in nearly three decades. In a letter to Eve, he described his shock at June's \"terrible\" appearance, as she had degenerated both physically and mentally.\nIn 1948, Miller wrote a novella he called his \"most singular story\", \"The Smile at the Foot of the Ladder\".\nIn February 1963, Miller moved to 444 Ocampo Drive, Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles, California, where he spent the last 17 years of his life. In 1967, Miller married his fifth wife, Japanese-born singer Hoki Tokuda (). In 1968, Miller signed the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War. After moving to Ocampo Drive, he held dinner parties for the artistic and literary figures of the time. His cook and caretaker was a young artist's model, Twinka Thiebaud, who later wrote a book about his evening chats. Thiebaud's memories of Miller's table talk were published in a rewritten and retitled book in 2011.\nOnly 200 copies of Miller's 1972 chapbook \"On Turning Eighty\" were published. Published by Capra Press in collaboration with Yes! Press, it was the first volume of the \"Yes! Capra\" chapbook series and is 34 pages long. The book contains three essays on topics such as aging and living a meaningful life. Of reaching age 80 years, Miller writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If at eighty you're not a cripple or an invalid, if you have your health, if you still enjoy a good walk, a good meal (with all the trimmings), if you can sleep without first taking a pill, if birds and flowers, mountains and sea still inspire you, you are a most fortunate individual and you should get down on your knees morning and night and thank the good Lord for his savin' and keepin' power.\nIn 1973, Miller was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature by University of Copenhagen professor Allan Philip.\nMiller and Tokuda divorced in 1977. Then in his late 80s, Miller filmed with Warren Beatty for the 1981 film \"Reds\", which Beatty also directed. He spoke of his remembrances of John Reed and Louise Bryant as part of a series of \"witnesses\". The film was released 18 months after Miller's death. During the last four years of his life, Miller held an ongoing correspondence of over 1,500 letters with Brenda Venus, a young \"Playboy\" model and columnist, actress, and dancer. A book about their correspondence was published by William Morrow, NY, in 1986.\nDeath.\nMiller died of circulatory complications at his home in Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles, on June 7, 1980, aged 88. His body was cremated and his ashes shared between his son Tony and daughter Val. Tony has said he intends to have his own ashes mixed with his father's and scattered in Big Sur.\nUS publication of previously banned works.\nThe publication of Miller's \"Tropic of Cancer\" in the United States in 1961 by Grove Press led to a series of obscenity trials that tested American laws on pornography. The U.S. Supreme Court, in \"Grove Press, Inc., v. Gerstein\", citing \"Jacobellis v. Ohio\" (which was decided the same day in 1964), overruled the state court findings of obscenity and declared the book a work of literature. This was one of the signature events of the sexual revolution. Elmer Gertz, the lawyer who successfully argued the initial case for the novel's publication in Illinois, became Miller's lifelong friend; a volume of their correspondence has been published. After the trial, in 1964\u201365, Miller's other books, which had also been banned in the US, were published by Grove Press: \"Black Spring\", \"Tropic of Capricorn\", \"Quiet Days in Clichy\", \"Sexus\", \"Plexus\", and \"Nexus\". Excerpts from some of them, including \"Tropic of Cancer\", \"Black Spring\", and \"Sexus\", were first published in the US by New Directions in \"The Henry Miller Reader\" in 1959.\nWatercolors.\nIn addition to his literary accomplishments, Miller produced numerous watercolor paintings and wrote books on this field. He was a close friend of the French painter Gr\u00e9goire Michonze. It is estimated that Miller painted 2,000 watercolors during his life, and that 50 or more major collections of his paintings exist. The Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin holds a selection of his watercolors, as did the Henry Miller Museum of Art in \u014cmachi City in Nagano, Japan, before closing in 2001. Miller's daughter Valentine placed some of her father's art for sale in 2005. He was also an amateur pianist.\nLiterary archives.\nMiller's papers can be found in the following library special collections:\nMiller's friend Emil White founded the nonprofit Henry Miller Memorial Library in Big Sur in 1981. It houses a collection of his work and celebrates his literary, artistic, and cultural legacy by providing a public gallery as well as performance and workshop spaces for artists, musicians, students, and writers.\nLiterary references.\nMiller is considered a \"literary innovator\" in whose works \"actual and imagined experiences became indistinguishable from each other.\" His books did much to free the discussion of sexual subjects in American writing from both legal and social restrictions. He influenced many writers, including Lojze Kova\u010di\u010d, Richard Brautigan, Jack Kerouac, Norman Mailer, Vitomil Zupan, Philip Roth, Cormac McCarthy, Paul Theroux, and Erica Jong.\nThroughout his novels he makes references to other works of literature; he cites Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Joris-Karl Huysmans, Knut Hamsun, Oswald Spengler, Balzac, and Nietzsche as having a formative impact on him.\n\"Tropic of Cancer\" is referenced in Junot D\u00edaz's 2007 book \"The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao\". Miller's legal difficulties, \"Tropic of Cancer\", and \"Tropic of Capricorn\" are mentioned in Denis Johnson's 2007 novel \"Tree of Smoke\". Miller's relationship with June Mansfield is the subject of Ida Ther\u00e9n's 2020 novel \"Att omfamna ett vattenfall\".\nFilms.\nMiller as himself.\nMiller appeared as himself in several films:\nActors portraying Miller.\nSeveral actors played Miller on film:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMultimedia"}
{"id": "63084", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63084", "title": "Bear market", "text": ""}
{"id": "63085", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63085", "title": "Equity investment", "text": ""}
{"id": "63086", "revid": "313197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63086", "title": "History of Victoria", "text": "History of the Australian state of Victoria\nThe history of Victoria refers to the history of the Australian state of Victoria and the area's preceding Indigenous and British colonial societies.\nBefore British colonisation of Australia, many Aboriginal peoples lived in the area now known as Victoria. After the first Europeans settled there in October 1803, in September 1836 the area became part of the colony of New South Wales, known as the District of Port Phillip. In July 1851, the District of Port Phillip was established as its own colony, becoming the Colony of Victoria, with its own government within the British Empire. During the 1850s, gold was discovered in Clunes and Buninyong in Ballarat in 1851, which was the start of the Victorian Gold Rush. In 1901 it became a state of the Commonwealth of Australia.\nAboriginal history.\nThe state of Victoria was originally home to many Aboriginal nations that had occupied the land for tens of thousands of years. According to Gary Presland, Aboriginal people have lived in Victoria for about 40,000 years, living a semi-nomadic existence of fishing, hunting and gathering, and farming eels, as is evident in the Budj Bim heritage areas.\nAt the Keilor Archaeological Site a human hearth excavated in 1971 was radiocarbon-dated to about 31,000 years BP, making Keilor one of the earliest sites of human habitation in Australia. A cranium found at the site has been dated at between 12,000 and 14,700 years BP.\nArchaeological sites in Tasmania and on the Bass Strait Islands have been dated to between 20,000 \u2013 35,000 years ago, when sea levels were 130 metres below present level allowing Aboriginal people to move across the region of southern Victoria and on to the land bridge of the Bassian plain to Tasmania by at least 35,000 years ago.\nDuring the Ice Age about 20,000 years BP, the area now the bay of Port Phillip was dry land, and the Yarra and Werribee rivers joined to flow through the heads then south and south west through the Bassian plain before meeting the ocean to the west. Tasmania and the Bass Strait islands became separated from mainland Australia around 12,000 BP, when the sea level was approximately below present levels. Port Phillip was flooded by post-glacial rising sea levels between 8000 and 6000 years ago.\nOral history and creation stories from the Wathaurong, Woiwurrung and Boonwurrung languages describe the flooding of the bay, which they call Narm-Narm; it was previously covered in scrubby tea-tree and was a kangaroo hunting ground. Aboriginal creation stories describe how Bunjil was responsible for the formation of the bay, or the bay was flooded when the Yarra River was created. Another story says that Balayang the bat created the oceans, rivers, and creeks.\nEarly European exploration.\nComing from New Zealand in 1770, Lieutenant James Cook in HM Bark \"Endeavour\" sighted land at Point Hicks, about 70\u00a0km west of Gabo Island, before turning east and north to follow the coast of Australia.\nShips sailing from Great Britain to Sydney crossed the Indian Ocean and Southern Ocean, sailing around Van Diemen's Land before turning north to their destination. Several captains viewed the expanse of water between Van Diemen's Land and the east coast of New South Wales and wondered whether it was a large bay or a strait. Survivors of \"Sydney Cove\", wrecked in the Furneaux Group of islands, also thought it might be a strait.\nTo clear up the question, Governor John Hunter sent George Bass to explore thoroughly the coast in a whaleboat. After reaching Wilsons Promontory and Western Port in January 1798 bad weather and lack of provisions forced him to return to Sydney. Bass returned with Matthew Flinders in December 1798 in \"Norfolk\" and sailed through the strait, proving its existence.\nIn December 1800, Lieutenant James Grant in , on way from Cape Town to Sydney, sailed through Bass Strait from west to east. Governor King, disappointed at the vagueness of Grant's chart, sent him back to survey the strait more thoroughly. Bad weather prevented him from proceeding beyond Western Port, where he stayed for five weeks, planting wheat, Indian corn, peas, rice, coffee and potatoes on Churchill Island off Phillip Island.\nIn 1801 \"Harbinger\", under John Black, was the second vessel to sail through Bass Strait en route to Port Jackson. She reached the coast near Cape Otway on 1 January 1801, then veered sharply south-west to the north-western tip of Governor King's Island (now King Island), which Black named after the Governor of New South Wales, Philip Gidley King. She then sailed easterly towards Wilsons Promontory. Proceeding around the tip of the promontory, Black discovered the Hogan Group, which he named after the ship's owner Michael Hogan. \"Harbinger\" arrived in Port Jackson on 12 January 1801.\nIn January 1802 Lieutenant John Murray in \"Lady Nelson\" visited Western Port and entered Port Phillip on 14 February. He named Arthur's Seat, explored Corio Bay and formally took possession of the bay (which he named Port King) for Britain. The bay was then known as Narm-Narm by the people of the Kulin Nation, and Murray called the bay Port King after the Governor of New South Wales, Philip Gidley King. On 4 September 1805, King formally renamed it Port Phillip, in honour of his predecessor Arthur Phillip. Murray chose to base the \"Lady Nelson\" off what is now known as Sorrento Beach.\nDuring this voyage, Murray records in his journal his first encounter with local Aboriginal peoples in the eastern Melbourne region. This initially friendly encounter started with trading, eating, and gifting, and was suddenly interrupted by a violent ambush by another group of Aboriginal people. The crew in response shot at the Aboriginal people, and continued to shoot at them as they fled, inflicting likely mortal wounds on two of them. Murray then ordered the ship carronades to be fired at the fleeing Aboriginal people.\n\"They were all clothed in opossum skins and in each basket a certain quantity of gum was found. ... if we may judge from the number of their fires and other marks this part of the country is not thin of inhabitants. Their spears are of various kinds and all of them more dangerous than any I have yet seen.\"Three weeks later the French explorer Nicolas Baudin sailed through the strait from east to west and was the first to properly survey the coast to the west. In April 1802, a French expedition ship \"Le Naturaliste\" under Jacques Hamelin explored the area around French Island, as part of the Baudin expedition to Australia. It named the island \"Ile des Fran\u00e7ais\", since Anglicised as French Island.\nOn 26 April 1802, Flinders, unaware of Murray's visit, entered Port Phillip in , climbed Arthur's Seat, rowed to Mornington and across to the Bellarine Peninsula and climbed the You Yangs.\nIn January 1803 Acting-Lieutenant Charles Robbins in the schooner sailed right around Port Phillip. With him were acting surveyor-general Charles Grimes, Mr James Meehan and gardener James Fleming. At the head of the bay they found a river and followed it upstream where it soon divided. They followed the western branch and named it the Saltwater River (the present Maribyrnong) to what is now Braybrook, and then the eastern fresh-water branch (the Yarra) to Dights Falls. They had a friendly meeting with local Aboriginal people and returned to their ship via Corio Bay. They concluded that the best site for a settlement would be on the freshwater at the northern head of the bay, but were unenthusiastic about the soil and its agricultural potential.\n1803 British settlement.\nWith Britain involved in the French revolutionary wars, Governor King was concerned that Bass Strait could harbour enemy raiders, and that in peace time it could provide an important trade route and trading base. The appearance of Baudin's ships served to reinforce the concern that France was interested in the area. King was also looking for an alternative settlement for the increasing number of convicts in Sydney and to reduce the pressure on food resources. Port Phillip, with a favourable climate and rich fishing and sealing resources, seemed an ideal location for another settlement.\nA full description of Murray's and Flinders' discoveries, together with King's thoughts on settlement, but not Grimes' report, reached England just as was being prepared to send a shipload of convicts to Sydney. In February 1803, Lord Hobart the Secretary of State changed the destination to Port Phillip. On 24 April 1803 HMS \"Calcutta\", commanded by Captain Daniel Woodriff, with Lieutenant-Colonel David Collins as commander of the expedition, left England accompanied by the store-ship \"Ocean\". The expedition consisted of 402 people: 5 Government officials, 9 officers of marines, 2 drummers, and 39 privates, 5 soldiers' wives, and a child, 307 convicts, 17 convicts' wives, and 7 children. One of the children was the eleven-year-old John Pascoe Fawkner, later a founder of Melbourne, who accompanied his convicted father and mother.\nThe party entered Port Phillip on 9 October 1803 and chose a site at Sullivan Bay near present-day Sorrento.\nCollins was soon disappointed with the area. Reports from exploring parties led by Lieutenant James Tuckey and surveyor George Harris described strong currents, sandy soil, poor timber, swampy land and scarce fresh water. They also clashed with the Wathaurung people near Corio Bay, killing their leader \u2013 the first Aborigines known to have been killed by settlers in Victoria.\nCollins reported his criticisms to Governor King, who supported him and recommended moving the settlement. On 18 December \"Calcutta\" departed for Port Jackson, and the party was prepared for evacuation. This was achieved in two voyages of \"Ocean\" in January and May 1804, assisted by which had been surveying Port Dalrymple on the north coast of Van Diemens Land. The party was transferred to the fledgling settlement of Hobart, founded by Lieutenant John Bowen as a penal colony at Risdon Cove in September 1803.\nThe brief settlement at Sorrento achieved little and left only a few relics for modern tourists to observe. Collins has been criticised for not investigating the bay thoroughly, in particular, the northern head with its fresh-water river, and for being too hasty in his condemnation of the bay. The site of the settlement is now a reserve incorporating four graves from the period.\nWhen Collins departed, several convicts \u2013 who had escaped when they heard the colony was leaving for Van Diemen's Land \u2013 were left behind. They were presumed killed by Aboriginal people. However, William Buckley survived, meeting Wathaurong people on the Bellarine Peninsula and living with them for the next 32 years. (In 1835 he became aware of John Batman's Port Phillip Association camp and reintroduced himself to Europeans.)\nFor the next thirty years a few sealers and whalers rested on the southern coast of New South Wales.\nInterest grows in the north coast of Bass Strait.\nFollowing a number of exploratory expeditions south from the settled areas of New South Wales, the pastoralist Hamilton Hume and former sea-captain William Hovell set off to explore the country to the south in October 1824. They crossed the Murray River (which they named the Hume River) near the site of Albury and continued south. They crossed the Goulburn River (which they called the Hovell) above the site of Yea, and were forced to detour around mountains. They arrived on the shores of Corio Bay, mistakenly believing it to be Western Port, and returned to Sydney in January 1825, lavishly praising the quality of the country they had passed through.\nIn April 1826 the French explorer d'Urville visited one of the sealers' camps on Phillip Island. Worried by this renewed French interest in the area and encouraged by Hume and Hovell's reports, Governor Darling ordered a settlement to be established at Western Port. A small convict party arrived in November 1826 at Corinella under the command of Samuel Wright, to protect the approaches to the bay. Hovell, accompanying the party, soon realised that this was not where he had arrived two years before, and reported unfavourably on the swampy land around Western Port, although he referred to better land to the north. In spite of clearing the land for crops, and the construction of a fort and houses, the settlement was abandoned in April 1828.\nThe shortage of good pasture in Van Diemen's Land led to settlers there showing interest in the country across Bass Strait, following Hume and Hovell's reports and stories of visiting sealers. Pastoralist John Batman and surveyor John Wedge planned an expedition from Launceston in 1825 but permission was not granted. A number of settlers sought land over the next few years, but Governor Darling turned down all requests.\nA sealer and whaler William Dutton built a hut on the shore of Portland Bay in 1829 where he resided for a time prior to the arrival of the Hentys.\nThe expedition down the Murray River by Charles Sturt in 1830 again aroused interest in settlement in the south. In April 1833 Edward Henty, returning to Van Diemen's Land from Spencer Gulf called in to Portland for a cargo of oil, and was much impressed. In November 1834 John Hart, another sailor, reported favourably in Launceston on Western Port. It was now inevitable that settlement would occur.\nIn June 1834 banker Charles Swanston advised his client George Mercer that land was scarce in Van Diemen's Land and he should invest across Bass Strait. Pastoralists John Aitken and George Russell suggested forming a partnership, and in August 1834 a group of eight Launceston capitalists formed what became the Port Phillip Association. On 19 November 1834 Edward Henty landed in Portland Bay and began the first permanent European settlement on the north coast of Bass Strait.\nPermanent European settlement.\nVictoria's first successful British settlement was at Portland, on the west coast of what is now Victoria. Portland was settled on 19 November 1834 by the Henty family, who were originally farmers from Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania). When Major Thomas Mitchell led an expedition to the region from Sydney in 1835, arriving at Portland in August 1836, he was surprised to find a small but prosperous community living off the fertile farmland.\nIn 1835, John Pascoe Fawkner and the Port Phillip Association (led by John Batman) started the Port Phillip settlement that later become known as Melbourne.\nBorders.\nThe District of Port Phillip was formally established as an administrative division within the Colony of New South Wales in September 1836, though with ill-defined borders. In 1839, the District was defined as consisting of all the lands within New South Wales south of 36\u00b0S latitude, and between 141\u00b0E (that is, the border with the future Colony of South Australia) and 146\u00b0E longitude. Coinciding with the introduction of a fixed-price land sale scheme in January 1840, the District was expanded north to follow the course of the Murrumbidgee River from its source to the Pacific coast at Moruya. However, the border was retracted south to the Murray River after extensive opposition in Sydney, including from the Legislative Council, all of whom were appointed by the Sovereign or the Governor of the Colony. When the Legislative Council was expanded and restructured to include 12 appointed members and 24 members elected by eligible landowners, taking effect from the 1843 colonial elections, the newly created electoral districts included Port Phillip (to be represented by 5 members) and the Town of Melbourne. On 1 July 1843, a proclamation formalised the border as running from Cape Howe, to the nearest source of the Murray River, and then along the course of the Murray to the border with South Australia.\nElected representatives for Port Phillip and Melbourne needed to be in Sydney to serve in the Legislative Council, placing them at a great distance from the areas they represented, and they were consequently considered ineffective and out-of-touch by locals. In protest and in support of a campaign for independence, the 1848 election scheduled for 27 July was disrupted by not nominating candidates for Port Phillip and putting forward for the Town of Melbourne the incumbent Secretary of State for War and the Colonies in the British Cabinet, Earl Grey. Grey received nearly 75% of the vote despite Grey having never visited the Colony and being ineligible as a current member of the British Parliament. A second writ was issued to elect five representatives for Port Phillip in October 1848. Following the strategy involving Earl Grey, the nominees included the Duke of Wellington, Lord Palmerston, Lord Brougham, Lord John Russell, and Sir Robert Peel but local representatives were elected. Grey never attempted to take up his seat and it was declared vacant in 1850 and a replacement elected. The independence campaign continued and led Grey to introduce the \"Australian Colonies Government Act 1850\" into the British Parliament, separating the District of Port Phillip from New South Wales to become the Colony of Victoria from 2 July 1851. The separation occurred along the 1843 borders and still apply to the modern State of Victoria. The same Act created bicameral legislatures and instituted self-government for each colony.\nConflict over resources.\nWith the dispossession of Aboriginal peoples from their lands with the establishment of sheep runs by squatters, conflict over resources and land use inevitably occurred. One highly notable incident called the Convincing Ground massacre occurred in Portland Bay in 1833 or 1834 in a possible dispute about a beached whale between whalers and the \"Kilcarer gundidj\" clan of the Gunditjmara people.\nMelbourne was founded in 1835 by John Batman, also from Van Diemen's Land and quickly grew into a thriving community, although at great human cost to the original inhabitants. Its foundation was the result of an invasion of wealthy squatters, land speculators and their indentured servants (including ex-convicts) who arrived from 1835, in a race with one another to seize an 'empty' country. The British Crown and colonial governments did not recognise prior Aboriginal ownership of their lands, waters and property, in spite of claiming that Aborigines fell within the protection of the law as British subjects.\nEarly in 1836, Mr Franks, one of the first immigrants to the region, and his shepherd were found dead as a result of steel hatchet wounds to the head. His station was near Cotterill's Mount, called the Sugarloaf, near the river Exe, now Werribee. Upon discovering the scene, and a nearby food store which appeared to have been ransacked, George Smith travelled to Point Gellibrand and formed an exploratory band. The party was sent out led by tour of the Melbourne tribe, and encountered a camp from the Indigenous Wathaurong tribe, whereupon an unclear incident occurred. Port Philip Police Magistrate Captain William Lonsdale advised the Colonel Secretary that no harm was inflicted on the Aboriginal people, however Wathaurong histories report that 35 of their people were murdered in retaliatory violence. The \"Traralgon Record\" newspaper reported in 1915 that the party \"took vengeance on the murderers\" (referring to the untried Wathaurong people), while \"The Cornwall Chronicle\" of Tasmania reported with approval in 1836 that the band had scouted the Wathaurong camp overnight, and in the morning launched an attack with the intent of \"annihilating them\". The incident is today remembered as \"The Mount Cottrell massacre\".\nBetween 1836 and 1842, Victorian Aboriginal groups were largely dispossessed of territory bigger than England. Although the British Colonial Office appointed 5 \"Aboriginal Protectors\" for the entire Aboriginal population of Victoria, arriving in Melbourne in 1839, they worked \"...within a land policy that nullified their work, and there was no political will to change this.\" \"It was government policy to encourage squatters to take possession of whatever [Aboriginal] land they chose...that largely explains why almost all the original inhabitants of Port Phillip's vast grasslands were dead so soon after 1835\". By 1845, fewer than 240 wealthy Europeans held all the pastoral licences then issued in Victoria and became the patriarchs \"...that were to wield so much political and economic power in Victoria for generations to come.\"\nRegarding the infamous Trial of \"R vs Tunnerminnerwait and Maulboyheener\", \"Tragically two of these (Aboriginal) men, Tunnerminnerwait (known as Jack) and Maulboyheenner (known as Bob, or sometimes called Timmy or Jimmy), became the first people executed in the Port Phillip District. This took place in 1842, a mere seven years after John Batman's treaties with the Kuhn people, when the two Tasmanian Aboriginal men were publicly hanged for murder.\" The Tunnerminnerwait and Maulboyheenner public marker exists at the place of execution near the site of the Old Melbourne Gaol, with artwork by Brook Andrew and Trent Walter.\nA severe financial crisis took place in 1842\u20133, mainly due to the Government demanding from the banks the large rate of 7% for all moneys deposited with them, the result of land sales. The banks had to charge their customers from 10 to 12% for loans, very often on questionable securities. It was then accelerated by Lord John Russell's instructions that all lands out of town boundaries to be sold at only \u00a31 per acre. Sheep that had been bought at from 30s to 40s per head are now sold at less than 2s. The Insolvent Court was rushed by all classes of the community.\nSeparation from New South Wales.\nThe first petition for the separation of the Port Phillip District (or 'Australia Felix') from New South Wales was drafted in 1840 by Henry Fyshe Gisborne and presented by him to Governor Gipps. Gipps, who had previously been in favour of separation, rejected the petition.\nAgitation of the Port Phillip settlers continued and led to the establishment of Port Phillip District as a separate colony on 1 July 1851. The British Act of Parliament separating Port Phillip District from New South Wales, and naming the new colony \"Victoria\" (after Queen Victoria) and providing it with a Constitution, was signed by Queen Victoria on 5 August 1850. Enabling legislation was passed by the New South Wales Legislative Council to take effect on 1 July 1851. This was formally the founding moment of the Colony of Victoria, with separation from New South Wales established by section 1 of the 1851 Act. La Trobe became the new colony's first Lieutenant-Governor.\nIn 1851, the white population of the new colony was still only 77,000, and only 23,000 people lived in Melbourne. Melbourne had already become a centre of Australia's wool export trade.\n1850s gold rush.\nIn 1851 gold was first discovered in Clunes and Buninyong near Ballarat, and subsequently at Bendigo. Later discoveries occurred at many sites across Victoria. This triggered one of the largest gold rushes the world has ever seen. The colony grew rapidly in both population and economic power. In ten years the population of Victoria increased sevenfold from 76,000 to 540,000. All sorts of gold records were produced including the \"richest shallow alluvial goldfield in the world\" and the largest gold nugget. Victoria produced in the decade 1851\u20131860, twenty million ounces of gold, one third of the world's output.\nImmigrants arrived from all over the world to search for gold, principally from the British Isles and particularly from Ireland. Many Chinese miners worked in Victoria, and their legacy is particularly strong in Bendigo and its environs. Although there was some racism directed at them, there was not the level of anti-Chinese violence that was seen at the Lambing Flat riots in New South Wales. However, there was a riot at Buckland Valley near Bright in 1857. Conditions on the gold fields were cramped and unsanitary \u2013 an outbreak of typhoid at Buckland Valley in 1854 killed over 1,000 miners.\nIn 1854 there was an armed rebellion against the government of Victoria by miners protesting against mining taxes (the \"Eureka Stockade\"). This was crushed by British troops, but some of the leaders of the rebellion subsequently became members of the Victoria Parliament, and the rebellion is regarded as a pivotal moment in the development of Australian democracy.\nColonial politics.\nIn 1857, reflecting the growing presence of Irish immigrants, in Victoria the British Empire had its first Catholic government leaders: John O'Shanassy as Premier, and the former Young Irelander, Charles Gavan Duffy his deputy. Melbourne's Protestant establishment was ill-prepared \"to countenance so startling a novelty\". In 1858\u201359, \"Melbourne Punch\" cartoons linked Duffy and O'Shanassy with images of the French Revolution to undermine their Ministry. One famous \"Punch\" image, \"Citizens John and Charles\", depicted the pair as French revolutionaries holding the skull and cross bone flag of the so-called \"Victorian Republic\".\nIn 1862 Duffy's Land Act attempted, but failed, through a system of extended pastoral licences, to break the land-holding monopoly of the so-called \"squatter\" class. In 1871 Duffy led the opposition to Premier Sir James McCulloch's plan to introduce a land tax, on the grounds that it unfairly penalised small farmers, and himself was briefly Premier (June 1871 to June 1872).\nIn 1866, the Victorian parliament passed the \"McCulloch Tariff\", which was the first recognisably and substantially protectionist piece of legislation in Australian tariff history, applying 10% duties to a range of manufactured commodities; there is no evidence, however, that it had an effect on the colony's manufacturing. Although, further increases in protectionism in the late nineteenth century were consequential for Victoria manufacturing.\nThe first foreign military action by the colony of Victoria was to send troops and a warship to New Zealand as part of the New Zealand Wars. Troops from New South Wales had previously participated in the Crimean War.\nKelly Gang.\nFrom 1878 to 1880 Victoria was the location of the celebrated bushranger Ned Kelly and his gang. Historian Geoffrey Serle has called Kelly and his gang \"the last expression of the lawless frontier in what was becoming a highly organised and educated society, the last protest of the mighty bush now tethered with iron rails to Melbourne and the world\". In the century after his execution in Melbourne in 1880, Kelly became a cultural icon, inspiring numerous works in the arts and popular culture, and is the subject of more biographies than any other Australian.\nDepression of 1893.\nA period of prosperity in the 1880s led to a wild speculation in land and buildings, and money poured in from England. Land companies, mortgage societies, municipal bodies, building societies, and a host of other organisations all clamoured for a share in the good things that were on offer, and probably \u00a340,000,000 flowed into Victoria during a period of six years. With so much money in circulation, a fictitious prosperity of a feverish sort resulted. The banks issued notes to the value of millions of pounds, and trade and industry flourished as never before. The reaction came quickly. Public confidence subsided like a pricked balloon. A run commenced on the banks, and the bursting of the boom brought with it widespread disaster.\nIn 1893, 14 banks failed, twelve of those with 905 branches throughout Australia, had liabilities assessed at \u00a3166,000,000, and thousands of people lost the whole of their possessions. Bank notes in many cases became worthless, and Victoria reached the farthest depth of a financial depression. Unemployment became widespread, wages and prices dropped and bankruptcies followed one another in disturbing sequence. The most drastic retrenchments were made by the Government and public bodies.\n1901 federation.\nAt the beginning of 1901, following a proclamation by Queen Victoria, Victoria ceased to be an independent colony and became a state in the Commonwealth of Australia. Victorian and Tasmanian politicians were particularly active in the Federation process.\nAs a result of the gold rush, Melbourne became the financial centre of Australia and New Zealand. Between 1901 and 1927, Australia's Parliament sat in Melbourne while Canberra was under construction. It was also the largest city in Australia at the time, and the second largest city in the Empire (after London).\nWorld War II.\n\"Main articles: Australian home front during World War II, and Military history of Australia during World War II\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63087", "revid": "50963885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63087", "title": "Siamese cat", "text": "Breed of cat\nThe Siamese cat (, \"Maeo Thai\"; , \"Maeo Sayam\"; , \"Maeo Wichien Maat\") is one of the first distinctly recognised breeds of Asian cat. It derives from the Wichianmat landrace. The Siamese cat is one of several varieties of cats native to Thailand (known as Siam before 1939). The original Siamese became one of the most popular breeds in Europe and North America in the 19th century. Siamese cats have a distinctive colourpoint coat, resulting from a temperature-sensitive type of albinism. \nDistinct features like blue almond-shaped eyes, a triangular head shape, large ears, an elongated, slender, and muscular body, and various forms of point colouration characterise the modern-style Siamese. The modern-style Siamese's point-colouration resembles the \"old-style\" foundation stock. The \"old-style\" Siamese have a round head and body. They have been re-established by multiple registries as the Thai cat. Siamese and Thai cats are selectively bred and pedigreed in multiple cat fancier and breeder organisations. The terms \"Siamese\" or \"Thai\" are used for cats from this specific breed, which are by definition all purebred cats with a known and formally registered ancestry. The ancestry registration is the cat's pedigree or \"paperwork\".\nThe Siamese is a part of the foundation stock for crossbreeding with other cats. The crossbreeding resulted in many different types of cats, like the Oriental Shorthair and Colourpoint Shorthair. The Oriental Shorthair and Colourpoint Shorthair were developed to expand the range of coat patterns. The crossbreeding with Persians resulted in a long-haired colourpoint variant called the Himalayan. The long-haired Siamese is recognised internationally as a Balinese cat. The breeding also created the hair-mutation breeds, including the Cornish Rex, Sphynx, Peterbald, and blue-point Siamese cat.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThailand.\nA description and depiction of the Wichianmat (Siamese cat) first appears in a collection of ancient manuscripts called the \"Tamra Maew\" (The Cat-Book Poems), thought to originate from the Ayutthaya Kingdom (1351 to 1767 AD). Over a dozen are now kept in the National Library of Thailand. The manuscripts have resurfaced outside of Thailand and are now in the British Library and National Library of Australia. \nAt the end of the Burmese\u2013Siamese war, the capitol was sacked on 7 April 1767. The Burmese army burned everything in sight and returned to Burma, taking Siamese noblemen and royal family members with them as captives. A Thai legend states that the King of Burma Hsinbyushin found and read the poem for the Thai cats in the Tamra Maew. The poem describes Thai cats as being as rare as gold, and anyone who owns this cat will become wealthy. He told his army to round up all the Suphalak cats and bring them back to Burma along with the other treasures.\nSiamese.\nThe pointed cat known in the West as \"Siamese\", recognised for its distinctive markings, is one of several breeds of cats from Siam described and illustrated in manuscripts called \"Tamra Maew\" (Cat Poems). The \"Tamra Maew\" is estimated to have been written from the 14th to the 18th century. In 1878, U.S. President Rutherford B. Hayes received the first documented Siamese to reach the United States. The cat, named \"Siam,\" was sent from Bangkok to the American Consul. In 1884, the British Consul-General in Bangkok, Edward Blencowe Gould (1847\u20131916), brought a breeding pair of the cats, Pho and Mia (\u0e1e\u0e48\u0e2d\u0e41\u0e25\u0e30\u0e41\u0e21\u0e48), back to Britain as a gift for his sister, Lilian Jane Gould (who, married in 1895 as Lilian Jane Veley, went on to co-found the Siamese Cat Club in 1901). In 1885, Gould's UK cats Pho and Mia produced three Siamese kittens\u2014Duen Ngai (\u0e40\u0e14\u0e37\u0e2d\u0e19\u0e2b\u0e07\u0e32\u0e22), Kalohom (\u0e01\u0e25\u0e32\u0e42\u0e2b\u0e21), and Khromata (\u0e01\u0e23\u0e21\u0e17\u0e48\u0e32)\u2014who were shown with their parents that same year at London's Crystal Palace Show. Their appearance and behaviour attracted attention, but all three of the kittens died soon after the show, their cause of death not documented.\nBy 1886, four Siamese cats were imported to the UK by Eva Forestier Walker (surnamed Vyvyan after 1887 marriage) and her sister, Ada. These Siamese imports were long, had rounded heads with wedge-shaped muzzles, and large ears. The cats ranged from substantial to slender but were not either extreme. The difference in the pointed coat pattern had not been seen before in cats by Westerners. Over the next several years, fanciers imported a small number of cats, forming the base breeding pool for the entire breed in Britain. It is believed that most Siamese in Britain today are descended from about eleven of these original imports. In Britain, they were called the \"Royal Cat of Siam.\" Some reports say that they had previously been kept only by Siamese royalty. Research does not show evidence of any organised royal breeding programme in Siam. \nTraditional Siamese versus modern development.\nIn the 1950s\u20131960s, as the Siamese was increasing in popularity, many breeders and cat show judges began to favour the more slender look. Breeders created increasingly long, fine-boned, narrow-headed cats through generations of selective breeding. Eventually, the modern show Siamese was bred to be extremely elongated, with a lean, tubular body, long, slender legs, a very long, very thin tail that tapers gradually into a point, and a long, wedge-shaped head topped by extremely large, wide-set ears.\nBy the mid-1980s, cats of the original style had largely disappeared from cat shows. Still, a few breeders, particularly in the UK, continued to breed and register them, resulting in today's two types of Siamese: the modern, \"show-style\", standardised Siamese, and the \"Traditional Siamese\", both descended from the same distant ancestors, but with few or no recent ancestors in common, and effectively forming distinct sub-breeds, with some pressure to separate them.\nIn addition to the modern Siamese breed category, The International Cat Association (TICA) and the World Cat Federation (WCF) now accept Siamese cats of the less extreme type, and any \"wichianmat\" cat imported directly from Thailand, under the new breed name Thai. Other, mostly unofficial, names for the traditional variety are \"Old-style Siamese\" and \"Classic Siamese\", with an American variation nicknamed \"Applehead\".\nAppearance.\nThe breed standard of the modern Siamese calls for an elongated, tubular, and muscular body and a triangular head, forming a triangle from the tip of the nose to each tip of the ear. The eyes are almond-shaped and light blue, while the ears are large, wide-based, and positioned more towards the side of the head. The breed has a long neck, a slender tail, and fur that is short, glossy, fine and adheres to the body with no undercoat. Its pointed colour scheme and blue eyes distinguish it from the closely related Oriental Shorthair. The modern Siamese shares the pointed colour pattern with the Thai, or traditional Siamese, but they differ in head and body type.\nThe pointed pattern is a form of partial albinism, resulting from a mutation in tyrosinase, an enzyme involved in melanin production. The mutated tyrosinase enzyme is heat-sensitive; it fails to work at normal body temperatures but becomes active in cooler (&lt; 33\u00a0\u00b0C) areas of the skin. The heat-sensitive enzyme results in a dark colouration in the coolest parts of the cat's body, like the extremities and the face, which are cooled by the airflow through their sinuses. Siamese kittens are cream or white at birth and develop visible points in the first few months of life in colder parts of their body. By the time a kitten is four weeks old, the points should be sufficiently distinguishable to recognise which colour they are.\nSiamese cats tend to darken with age, and generally, adult Siamese living in warm climates have lighter coats than those in cool climates. Originally the vast majority of Siamese had seal (extremely dark brown, almost black) points, but occasionally Siamese was born with \"blue\" (a cool grey) points, genetically a dilution of seal point; chocolate (lighter brown) points, a genetic variation of seal point; or lilac (pale warm grey) points, genetically a diluted chocolate. These colours were considered \"inferior\" seal points and were not qualified for showing or breeding. These shades were eventually accepted by the breed associations and became more common through breeding programmes specifically aimed at producing these colours. Later, outcrosses with other breeds developed Siamese-mix cats with points in other cat colours and patterns, including red and cream points, lynx (tabby) points, and tortoise-shell (\"tortie\") points. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the United Kingdom, all pointed Siamese-style cats are considered part of the Siamese breed. The Cat Fanciers' Association, considers only the four original fur colours as Siamese:\nOriental Shorthair cats with colour points in colours or patterns aside from these four are considered Colourpoint Shorthair in that registry. The World Cat Federation has also adopted this classification, treating the Colourpoint Shorthair as a distinct breed.\nMany Siamese cats from Thailand had a kink in their tails, but over the years, this trait has been considered a flaw. Breeders have largely eradicated it, but the kinked tail persists among street cats in Thailand.\nTemperament.\nSiamese are usually very affectionate and intelligent cats, renowned for their social nature. Many enjoy being with people and are sometimes described as \"extroverts\". Often they bond strongly with a single person. Myrna Milani describes the Siamese as being more diurnal, more likely to stay close to their owner, and less likely to hunt than other cats.\nHealth.\nBased on Swedish insurance data, which tracked cats only up to 12.5 years, Siamese and Siamese-derived breeds have a higher mortality rate than other breeds. 68% lived to 10 years or more and 42% to 12.5 years or more. The majority of deaths were caused by neoplasms, mainly mammary tumours. The Siamese also has a higher rate of morbidity. They are at higher risk of neoplastic and gastrointestinal problems but have a lower risk of feline lower urinary tract disease. A UK study of veterinary records found a life expectancy of 11.69 years for the Siamese compared with 11.74 years overall.\nThe Siamese has been found to have a predisposition to progressive retinal atrophy.\nThe same albino allele that produces coloured points also results in abnormal neurological connections between the eye and the brain. The optic chiasm has abnormal uncrossed wiring; many early Siamese were cross-eyed to compensate, but like the kinked tails, the crossed eyes have been seen as a fault, and due to selective breeding the trait is far less common today. Unlike many other blue-eyed white cats, Siamese cats do not have reduced hearing ability.\nThe Siamese suffers from abnormal visual projections due to the lateral geniculate body of the eye differing from normal felines. Fibres located in the temporal retina cross over in the chiasm instead of remaining uncrossed.\nThe Siamese is predisposed to periocular leukotrichia, pinnal alopecia, and psychogenic alopecia.\nYoung Siamese cats are predisposed to histiocytic cutaneous mast cell tumours.\nThe Siamese is one of the more commonly affected breeds for gangliosidosis 1. An autosomal recessive mutation in the GBL1 gene is responsible for the condition in the breed.\nIn media, literature and film.\nSiamese cats have been protagonists in literature and film for adults and children since the 1930s. Clare Turlay Newberry's \"Babette\" features a Siamese kitten escaping from a New York apartment in 1937. British publisher Michael Joseph recorded his relationship with his Siamese cat in \"Charles: The Story of a Friendship\" (1943). The \"Siamese Cat Song\" sequence (\"We are Siamese if you please\") in Walt Disney's \"Lady and the Tramp\" (1955), features the cats \"Si\" and \"Am\", both titled after the former name of Thailand, where the breed originated. The 1958 film adaptation of \"Bell, Book and Candle\" features Kim Novak's Siamese cat \"Pyewacket\", a witch's familiar. \n\"The Incredible Journey\" (1961) by Sheila Burnford tells the story of three pets, including the Siamese cat \"Tao\", as they travel through the Canadian wilderness searching for their beloved masters. The book was a modest success when first published but became widely known after 1963 when it was loosely adapted into a film of the same name by Walt Disney. Disney also employed the same Siamese in the role of \"DC\" for its 1965 crime caper \"That Darn Cat!\", with \"The New York Times\" commenting \"The feline that plays the informant, as the F.B.I. puts it, is superb. [...] This elegant, blue-eyed creature is a paragon of suavity and grace\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63088", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63088", "title": "Speculation", "text": "Engaging in risky financial transactions\nIn finance, speculation is the purchase of an asset (a commodity, goods, or real estate) with the hope that that asset will become more valuable in a brief amount of time.\nThe term can also refer to short sales, in which the speculator hopes for a decline in value.\nMany speculators pay little attention to the fundamental value of a security and instead focus purely on price movements. In principle, speculation can involve any tradable good or financial instrument. Speculators are particularly common in the markets for stocks, bonds, commodity futures, currencies, cryptocurrency, fine art, collectibles, real estate, and financial derivatives.\nSpeculators play one of the four primary roles in financial markets, along with:\nHistory.\nThe development of commodity markets in the 17th-century Netherlands soon created speculative bubbles such as the tulip mania of 1634 to 1637.\nThe bursting of the South Sea Bubble in England in 1720 and the near-simultaneous collapse of John Law's Mississippi Company in France\nbrought speculation into disrepute in early-18th century Europe.\nAfter 1867 the appearance of the stock ticker machine in New York removed the need for traders to physically visit the stock-exchange floor, and stock speculation underwent a dramatic expansion through the end of the 1920s. The number of shareholders increased, perhaps, from 4.4 million in 1900 to 26 million in 1932.\nSpeculation vs. investment.\nThe view of what distinguishes investment from speculation and speculation from excessive speculation varies widely among pundits, legislators and academics. Some sources note that speculation is simply a higher-risk form of investment. Others define speculation more narrowly as positions not characterized as hedging. The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission defines a speculator as \"a trader who does not hedge, but who trades with the objective of achieving profits through the successful anticipation of price movements\". The agency emphasizes that speculators serve important market functions, but defines excessive speculation as harmful to the proper functioning of futures markets.\nAccording to Benjamin Graham in \"The Intelligent Investor\", the prototypical defensive investor is \"one interested chiefly in safety plus freedom from bother\". He adds that \"some speculation is necessary and unavoidable, for, in many common-stock situations, there are substantial possibilities of both profit and loss, and the risks therein must be assumed by someone.\" Thus, many long-term investors, even those who buy and hold for decades, may be classified as speculators, excepting only the rare few who are primarily motivated by income or safety of principal and not eventually selling at a profit.\nEconomic benefits.\nSustainable consumption level.\nNicholas Kaldor has long argued for the price-stabilizing role of speculators, who tend to even out \"price-fluctuations due to changes in the conditions of demand or supply\", by possessing \"better than average foresight\". This view was later echoed by the speculator Victor Niederhoffer, in \"The Speculator as Hero\", who describes the benefits of speculation:\nLet's consider some of the principles that explain the causes of shortages and surpluses and the role of speculators. When a harvest is too small to satisfy consumption at its normal rate, speculators come in, hoping to profit from the scarcity by buying. Their purchases raise the price, thereby checking consumption so that the smaller supply will last longer. Producers encouraged by the high price further lessen the shortage by growing or importing to reduce the shortage. On the other side, when the price is higher than the speculators think the facts warrant, they sell. This reduces prices, encouraging consumption and exports and helping to reduce the surplus.\nAnother service provided by speculators to a market is that by risking their own capital in the hope of profit, they add liquidity to the market and make it easier or even possible for others to offset risk, including those who may be classified as hedgers and arbitrageurs.\nMarket liquidity and efficiency.\nIf any market, such as pork bellies, had no speculators, only producers (hog farmers) and consumers (butchers, etc.) would participate. With fewer players in the market, there would be a larger spread between the current bid and the asking price of pork bellies. Any new entrant in the market who wanted to trade pork bellies would be forced to accept this illiquid market and might trade at market prices with large bid\u2013ask spreads or even face difficulty finding a co-party to buy or sell to.\nBy contrast, a commodity speculator may profit from the difference in the spread and, in competition with other speculators, reduce the spread. Some schools of thought argue that speculators increase the liquidity in a market, and therefore promote an efficient market. This efficiency is difficult to achieve without speculators. Speculators take information and speculate on how it affects prices, producers and consumers, who may want to hedge their risks, needing counterparties if they could find each other without markets it certainly would happen as it would be cheaper. A very beneficial by-product of speculation for the economy is price discovery.\nOn the other hand, as more speculators participate in a market, underlying real demand and supply can diminish compared to trading volume, and prices may become distorted.\nBearing risks.\nSpeculators perform a risk-bearing role that can be beneficial to society. For example, a farmer might consider planting corn on unused farmland. However, he might not want to do so because he is concerned that the price might fall too far by harvest time. By selling his crop in advance at a fixed price to a speculator, he can now hedge the price risk and plant the corn. Thus, speculators can increase production through their willingness to take on risk (not at the loss of profit).\nFinding environmental and other risks.\nSpeculative hedge funds that do fundamental analysis \"are far more likely than other investors to try to identify a firm's off-balance-sheet exposures\" including \"environmental or social liabilities present in a market or company but not explicitly accounted for in traditional numeric valuation or mainstream investor analysis\". Hence, they make the prices better reflect the true quality of operation of the firms.\nShorting.\nShorting may act as a \"canary in a coal mine\" to stop unsustainable practices earlier and thus reduce damages and form market bubbles.\nEconomic disadvantages.\nWinner's curse.\nAuctions are a method of squeezing out speculators from a transaction, but they may have their own perverse effects by the winner's curse. The winner's curse is, however, not very significant to markets with high liquidity for both buyers and sellers, as the auction for selling the product and the auction for buying the product occur simultaneously, and the two prices are separated only by a relatively small spread. That mechanism prevents the winner's curse phenomenon from causing mispricing to any degree greater than the spread.\nEconomic bubbles.\nSpeculation is often associated with economic bubbles. A bubble occurs when the price for an asset exceeds its intrinsic value by a significant margin, although not all bubbles occur due to speculation. Speculative bubbles are characterized by rapid market expansion driven by word-of-mouth feedback loops, as initial rises in asset price attract new buyers and generate further inflation. The growth of the bubble is followed by a precipitous collapse fueled by the same phenomenon. Speculative bubbles are essentially social epidemics whose contagion is mediated by the structure of the market. Some economists link asset price movements within a bubble to fundamental economic factors such as cash flows and discount rates.\nIn 1936, John Maynard Keynes wrote: \"Speculators may do no harm as bubbles on a steady stream of enterprise. But the situation is serious when enterprise becomes the bubble on a whirlpool of speculation. (1936:159)\" Keynes himself enjoyed speculation to the fullest, running an early precursor of a hedge fund. As the Bursar of King's College, Cambridge, he managed two investment funds, one of which, called Chest Fund, invested not only in the then \"emerging\" market US stocks, but to a smaller extent periodically included commodity futures and foreign currencies (see Chua and Woodward, 1983). His fund was profitable almost every year, averaging 13% per year, even during the Great Depression, thanks to very modern investment strategies, which included inter-market diversification (it invested in stocks, commodities and currencies) as well as shorting (selling borrowed stocks or futures to profit from falling prices), which Keynes advocated among the principles of successful investment in his 1933 report: \"a balanced investment position... and if possible, opposed risks\".\nIt is controversial whether the presence of speculators increases or decreases short-term volatility in a market. Their provision of capital and information may help stabilize prices closer to their true values. On the other hand, crowd behavior and positive feedback loops in market participants may also increase volatility.\nGovernment responses and regulation.\nThe economic disadvantages of speculation have resulted in a number of attempts over the years to introduce regulations and restrictions to try to limit or reduce the impact of speculators. States often enact such financial regulation in response to a crisis. Note for example the Bubble Act 1720, which the British government passed at the height of the South Sea Bubble to try to stop speculation in such schemes. It remained in place for over a hundred years until repealed in 1825. The Glass\u2013Steagall Act passed in 1933 during the Great Depression in the United States provides another example; most of the Glass-Steagall provisions were repealed during the 1980s and 1990s. The Onion Futures Act bans the trading of futures contracts on onions in the United States, after speculators successfully cornered the market in the mid-1950s; it remains in effect .\nThe Soviet Union regarded any form of private trade with the intent of gaining profit as speculation () and a criminal offense and punished speculators accordingly with fines, imprisonment, confiscation and/or corrective labor. Speculation was specifically defined in article 154 of the Penal Code of the USSR.\nRegulations.\nIn the United States, following passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has proposed regulations aimed at limiting speculation in futures markets by instituting position limits. The CFTC offers three basic elements for their regulatory framework: \"the size (or levels) of the limits themselves; the exemptions from the limits (for example, hedged positions) and; the policy on aggregating accounts for purposes of applying the limits\". The proposed position limits would apply to 28 physical commodities traded in various exchanges across the US.\nAnother part of the Dodd-Frank Act established the Volcker Rule, which deals with speculative investments of banks that do not benefit their customers. Passed on 21 January 2010, it states that those investments played a key role in the 2008 financial crisis.\nProposals.\nProposals made in the past to try to limit speculation \u2013 but never enacted \u2013 included:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63090", "revid": "48385198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63090", "title": "Piet Pieterszoon Hein", "text": "Dutch admiral (1577\u20131629)\nPiet Pieterszoon Hein (25 November 1577\u00a0\u2013 18 June 1629) was a Dutch admiral and privateer for the Dutch Republic during the Eighty Years' War. Hein was the first and the last to capture a large part of a Spanish treasure fleet which transported huge amounts of gold and silver from Spanish America to Spain. The amount of silver taken was so large that it resulted in the rise of the price of silver worldwide and the near bankruptcy of Spain.\nEarly life.\nHein was born in Delfshaven (now part of Rotterdam), the son of a sea captain, and he became a sailor while he was still a teenager. During his first journeys he suffered from extreme motion sickness. In his twenties, he was captured by the Spanish, and served as a galley slave In 1598 he \u2013 together with his father \u2013 was taken captive by the Spanish. Hein was deployed as a\u00a0galley slave\u00a0in the fleet of\u00a0Ambrosio Spinola\u00a0, moored near\u00a0Sluis. for about four years, probably between 1598 and 1602, when he was traded for Spanish prisoners. \nIn 1603, Hein became a captain of\u00a0Kleine Neptunus,\u00a0was captured again and imprisoned in the fort of\u00a0Havana. Because his fate was unknown in his homeland, merchant Jan Gerritszoon Meerman goes on trading voyage to Cuba in 1605, with the intention to gather information About Hein.\nNaval career.\nDutch East India Company.\nIn 1607, he joined the Dutch East India Company and left for Asia, returning with the rank of captain (of the \"Hollandia\") five years later. He married Anneke Claesdochter de Reus and settled in Rotterdam.\nIn April 1609, Verhoeff arrived on\u00a0Banda Neira and tried to force the establishment of a fort. However, Bandanese preferred free trade, as they dont want to limit their custom vers to only the Dutch. The VOC aimed for a monopsony on the spice trade, so that the Bandanese could only sell their products to the Dutch. Negotiations were difficult, and at one point the village chiefs lured Verhoeff and two other commanders, who had left their ships to negotiate on the beach, into a trap in the forest and murdered them there (end of May 1609). As retaliation, several Bandanese villages were plundered and ships destroyed;\u00a0Hein was probably not involved in this action, because he did not yet have a military position at the time.In August, peace was concluded in favor of the VOC: the Bandanese recognized Dutch authority and monopoly on the spice trade.\nIn 1618, when he was captain of the \"Neptunus\", both he and his ship were pressed into service by the Republic of Venice. In 1621, he left his vessel behind and traveled overland to the Netherlands.\nFor a year in 1622, he was a member of the local government of Rotterdam, although he did not have citizenship of this city: the cousin of his wife, one of the three burgomasters, made this possible.\nDutch West India Company.\nAfter capital had been raised for the Dutch West India Company, the company's directors, the Heeren XIX, devised the Groot Desseyn in October 1623. The plan was to first seize the capital of Brazil, S\u00e3o Salvador da Bahia (Salvador), and then the main Portuguese fort on the coast of Angola, S\u00e3o Paulo de Loanda (Luanda). In this way, the company would control both the lucrative sugar plantations in Brazil and the Atlantic slave trade. Control of the trade itself was necessary because of the high mortality rate from the plantations' harsh conditions and tropical diseases such as malaria.\nIn the same year Piet Hein became vice-admiral of the new Dutch West India Company, and sailed to the West Indies the following year with a fleet of 26 ships and 3.300 men. In Colonial Brazil, he briefly captured the settlement of Salvador, personally leading the assault on the sea fortress of that town. In August with a small and undermanned fleet he sailed for the African west coast and attacked a Portuguese fleet in the strongly defended bay of Luanda, but failed to capture any ships.\nPrivateering activity.\nHe then crossed the Atlantic Ocean again to try and capture merchant ships at the city of Vit\u00f3ria, but was defeated by resistance organized by the local citizenry with the assistance of the Portuguese garrison. After finding that Salvador had been recaptured by a large Spanish\u2013Portuguese fleet, Hein returned home. The Dutch West India Company, pleased with Hein's leadership, placed him in command of a new squadron in 1626. In subsequent raids during 1627 at Salvador, he attacked and captured over 30 richly laden Portuguese merchant ships before returning to the Dutch Republic.\nSpanish treasure fleet.\nIn 1628, during the eighty years-long Dutch war of liberation from Spain, Admiral Hein, with Witte de With as his flag captain, sailed out to capture a Spanish treasure fleet loaded with silver from the Spanish American colonies and the Philippines. With him was Admiral Hendrick Lonck. He was later joined by a squadron under Vice-Admiral Joost Banckert, as well as the pirate Moses Cohen Henriques. Part of the Spanish fleet in Venezuela had been warned because a Dutch cabin boy had lost his way on Blanquilla island and was captured and betrayed the plan, but the other half from Mexico continued on its voyage, unaware of the threat. Sixteen Spanish ships were intercepted and captured: one galleon was taken after a surprise encounter during the night, nine smaller merchants were talked into surrendering, two fleeing small ships were taken at sea, and four fleeing galleons were trapped on the Cuban coast in the Bay of Matanzas.\nAfter some musket volleys from Dutch sloops, the crews of the galleons also surrendered and Hein captured 11,509,524 guilders of booty in gold, silver, and other expensive trade goods, such as indigo and cochineal, without any bloodshed. The Dutch did not take prisoners: they gave the Spanish crews ample supplies for a march to Havana. The released were surprised to hear the admiral personally giving them directions in fluent Spanish; Hein after all was well acquainted with the region as he had been confined to it during his internment after 1603.\nThe capture of the treasure fleet was the Dutch West India Company's greatest victory in the Caribbean. It enabled the Dutch, at war with Spain, to fund their army for eight months (and as a direct consequence, allowing it to capture the fortress 's-Hertogenbosch), and the shareholders enjoyed a cash dividend of 50% for that year. The financial loss strategically weakened their Spanish enemy. Hein returned to the Netherlands in 1629, where he was hailed as a hero. Watching the crowds cheering him as he stood on the balcony of the town hall of Leyden, he remarked to the burgomaster: \"Now they praise me because I gained riches without the least danger; but earlier when I risked my life in full combat they didn't even know I existed...\". Hein was the first and the last to capture such a large part of a Spanish \"silver fleet\".\nLieutenant-Admiral.\nHe became, after a conflict with the Dutch West India Company about policy and payment, Lieutenant-Admiral of Holland and West Frisia on 26 March 1629, and thus factual supreme commander of the confederate Dutch fleet, taking as flag captain Maarten Tromp.\nHe died the same year, in a campaign against the Dunkirkers, the highly effective fleet of Habsburg commerce raiders and privateers operating from Dunkirk. His flotilla intercepted three privateers from Ostend. He sailed his flagship between two enemy ships to give them simultaneous broadsides. After half an hour, he was hit in the left shoulder by a cannonball and was killed instantly. He is buried in the Oude Kerk in Delft.\nCommemoration.\nThe Piet Hein Tunnel in Amsterdam is named in his honor, as is the former Dutch , HNLMS \"Piet Heyn\". A direct descendant of Hein was Piet Hein, a famous 20th century Danish mathematician, physicist and poet. A song praising Admiral Hein's capture of the Spanish \"silver fleet\" written in 1844 is still sung by choirs and children at primary school in the Netherlands, as well as during traditional drinks by student unions in Belgian universities. A statue of him stands in his native Delfshaven, now a district in Rotterdam, and one in the Cuban city of Matanzas near where the silver fleet battle occurred.\nViews on slavery.\nPiet Hein rejected the slavery in the Spanish New World colonies, as the inhumane treatment of fellow human beings. Dutch historian Siebe Thissen suggests that he rejected slavery after his 10 years capture by the Spanish empire. During this capture, Hein served as a galley slave. It is unclear how this rejection of slavery fits in his activities for the Dutch West India Company, and his contributions to their Groot Desseyn.\nThere is an ongoing debate on the meaning of slavery within Dutch history, in which Piet Hein is an anachronistic figure head. On the one hand, some modern critiques attribute the evils of the Dutch Atlantic slave trade to him. On the other hand, he is still used as a hero figure, within a 19th-century expression of romantic idealism. In June 2020 his statue in Delfshaven was defaced.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63091", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63091", "title": "Piet Hein (scientist)", "text": "Danish polymath (1905\u20131996)\nPiet Hein (16 December 1905 \u2013 17 April 1996) was a Danish polymath (mathematician, inventor, designer, writer and poet), often writing under the Old Norse pseudonym Kumbel, meaning \"tombstone\". His short poems, known as \"gruks\" or grooks (), first started to appear in the daily newspaper \"Politiken\" shortly after the German occupation of Denmark in April 1940 under the pseudonym \"Kumbel Kumbell\". He also invented the Soma cube and the board game Hex.\nBiography.\nHein, a direct descendant of Piet Pieterszoon Hein, the 17th century Dutch naval figure, was born in Copenhagen, Denmark. He studied at the Institute for Theoretical Physics (later to become the Niels Bohr Institute) of the University of Copenhagen, and Technical University of Denmark. Yale awarded him an honorary doctorate in 1972. He died in his home on Funen, Denmark in 1996.\nResistance.\nPiet Hein, who, in his own words, \"played mental ping-pong\" with Niels Bohr in the inter-War period, found himself confronted with a dilemma when the Germans occupied Denmark. He felt that he had three choices: Do nothing, flee to neutral Sweden or join the Danish resistance movement. As he explained in 1968, \"Sweden was out because I am not Swedish, but Danish. I could not remain at home because, if I had, every knock at the door would have sent shivers up my spine. So, I joined the Resistance.\"\nTaking as his first weapon the instrument with which he was most familiar, the pen, he wrote and had published his first \"grook\" (). It passed the censors who did not grasp its real meaning. The \"Consolation Grook\" reads:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nCONSOLATION GROOK\nLosing one glove\nis certainly painful,\nbut nothing \n compared to the pain,\nof losing one,\nthrowing away the other,\nand finding \n the first one again.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe Danes, however, understood its importance and soon it was found as graffiti all around the country. The deeper meaning of the grook was that even if you lose your freedom (\"losing one glove\"), do not lose your patriotism and self-respect by collaborating with the Nazis (\"throwing away the other\"), because that sense of having betrayed your country will be more painful when freedom has been found again someday.\nOne of Hein's best-known grooks is \"A Maxim for Vikings\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nA MAXIM FOR VIKINGS\nHere is a fact\n that should help you fight\n a bit longer:\nThings that don't act-\n ually kill you outright\n make you stronger.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nRecreational mathematics.\nIn 1959, city planners in Stockholm, Sweden announced a design challenge for a roundabout in their city square Sergels Torg. Piet Hein's winning proposal was based on a superellipse. He went on to use the superellipse in the design of furniture and other artifacts. He also invented a perpetual calendar called the Astro Calendar and marketed housewares based on the superellipse and its three-dimensional analog, the superegg.\nHe invented the Soma cube and devised the games of Hex, Tangloids, Tower, Polytaire, TacTix, Nimbi, Qrazy Qube, and Pyramystery.\nHein was a close associate of Martin Gardner and his work was frequently featured in Gardner's Mathematical Games column in Scientific American. At the age of 95, Gardner wrote his autobiography and titled it \"Undiluted Hocus-Pocus\". Both the title and the dedication of this book come from one of Hein's grooks.\nPersonal.\nPiet Hein was married four times and had five sons from his last three marriages.\nBibliography.\nThe following books of grooks are available on this subpage of the website \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63092", "revid": "53396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63092", "title": "Joseph Stiglitz", "text": "American economist and Nobel Laureate (born 1943)\nJoseph Eugene Stiglitz (; born February 9, 1943) is an American New Keynesian economist, a public policy analyst, political activist, and a professor at Columbia University. He is a recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (2001) and the John Bates Clark Medal (1979). He is a former senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank. He is also a former member and chairman of the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers. He is known for his support for the Georgist public finance theory and for his critical view of the management of globalization, of \"laissez-faire\" economists (whom he calls \"free-market fundamentalists\"), and of international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.\nIn 2000, Stiglitz founded the Initiative for Policy Dialogue (IPD), a think tank on international development based at Columbia University. He has been a member of the Columbia faculty since 2001 and received the university's highest academic rank (university professor) in 2003. He was the founding chair of the university's Committee on Global Thought. He also chairs the University of Manchester's Brooks World Poverty Institute. He was a member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences. In 2009, the President of the United Nations General Assembly Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann, appointed Stiglitz as the chairman of the U.N. Commission on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System, where he oversaw suggested proposals and commissioned a report on reforming the international monetary and financial system. He served as the chair of the international Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, appointed by the French President Sarkozy, which issued its report in 2010, \"Mismeasuring our Lives: Why GDP doesn't add up,\" and currently serves as co-chair of its successor, the High Level Expert Group on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. From 2011 to 2014, Stiglitz was the president of the International Economic Association (IEA). He presided over the organization of the IEA triennial world congress held near the Dead Sea in Jordan in June 2014.\nIn 2011, Stiglitz was named as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by \"Time\" magazine. Stiglitz's work focuses on income distribution from a Georgist perspective, asset risk management, corporate governance, and international trade. He is the author of several books, the latest being \"The Road to Freedom (2024); People, Power, and Profits\" (2019); \"The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe\" (2016); \"The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them\" (2015); \"Rewriting the Rules of the American Economy: An Agenda for Growth and Shared Prosperity\" (2015); and \"Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth Development and Social Progress\" (2014). He is also one of the 25 leading figures on the Information and Democracy Commission launched by Reporters Without Borders. According to the Open Syllabus Project, Stiglitz is the fifth most frequently cited author on college syllabi for economics courses.\nLife and career.\nStiglitz was born in Gary, Indiana into a Jewish family. His mother was Charlotte (n\u00e9e Fishman), a schoolteacher, and his father was Nathaniel David Stiglitz, an insurance salesman. Stiglitz attended Amherst College, where he was a National Merit Scholar, active on the debate team, and president of the student government. During his senior year at Amherst College, he studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he later pursued graduate work. In Summer 1965, he moved to the University of Chicago to do research under Hirofumi Uzawa who had received an NSF grant. He studied for his PhD from MIT from 1966 to 1967, during which time he also held an MIT assistant professorship. Stiglitz stated that the particular style of MIT economics suited him well, describing it as \"simple and concrete models, directed at answering important and relevant questions.\"\nFrom 1966 to 1970 he was a research fellow at the University of Cambridge. Stiglitz initially arrived at Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge as a Fulbright Scholar in 1965, and he later won a Tapp Junior Research Fellowship at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge which was instrumental in shaping his understanding of Keynes and macroeconomic theory. In subsequent years, he held academic positions at Yale, Stanford, Oxford\u2014where he was Drummond Professor of Political Economy\u2014and Princeton. Since 2001, Stiglitz has been a professor at Columbia University, with appointments at the Business School, the Department of Economics and the School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA), and is an editor of \"The Economists' Voice\" journal with J. Bradford DeLong and Aaron Edlin.\nHe teaches classes for a double-degree program between Sciences Po Paris and \u00c9cole Polytechnique in Economics and Public Policy. He has chaired the Brooks World Poverty Institute at the University of Manchester since 2005. Stiglitz is widely considered a New-Keynesian economist, although at least one economics journalist says his work cannot be so clearly categorized.\nStiglitz has played a number of policy roles throughout his career. He served in the Clinton administration as the chair of the President's Council of Economic Advisers (1995\u20131997). At the World Bank, he served as a senior vice-president and the chief economist from 1997 to 2000. He was fired by the World Bank for expressing dissent with its policies. Stiglitz has advised American president Barack Obama, but has criticized the Obama Administration's financial-industry rescue plan. He said whoever designed the Obama administration's bank rescue plan is \"either in the pocket of the banks or they're incompetent.\"\nIn October 2008, he was asked by the President of the United Nations General Assembly to chair a commission drafting a report on the reasons for and solutions to the 2008 financial crisis. In response, the commission produced the Stiglitz Report.\nOn July 25, 2011, Stiglitz participated in the \"I Forro Social del 15M\" organized in Madrid, expressing his support to the 15M Movement protestors.\nStiglitz was the president of the International Economic Association from 2011 to 2014.\nOn September 27, 2015, the United Kingdom Labour Party announced that Stiglitz was to sit on its Economic Advisory Committee along with five other world-leading economists.\nStiglitz serves on the Executive Advisory Board of the World.Minds Foundation, contributing to global ethical discussions on science, society, and responsibility.\nContributions to economics.\n After the 2018 mid-term elections in the United States, he wrote a statement about the importance of economic justice to the survival of democracy worldwide.\nRisk aversion.\nAfter getting his Ph.D. from M.I.T. in 1967, Stiglitz co-authored one of his first papers with Michael Rothschild for the Journal of Economic Theory in 1970. Stiglitz and Rothschild built upon works by economists such as Robert Solow on the concept of risk aversion. Stiglitz and Rothschild showed three plausible definitions of a variable X being 'more variable' than a variable Y were all equivalent \u2013 Y being equal to X plus noise, every risk-averse agent preferring Y to X, and Y having more weight in its tails, and that none of these were always consistent with X having a higher statistical variance than Y \u2013 a commonly used definition at the time. In a second paper, they analyzed the theoretical consequences of risk aversion in various circumstances, such as an individual's savings decisions and a firm's production decisions.\nHenry George theorem.\nStiglitz made early contributions to a theory of public finance stating that an optimal supply of local public goods can be funded entirely through capture of the land rents generated by those goods (when population distributions are optimal). Stiglitz dubbed this the 'Henry George theorem' in reference to the radical classical economist Henry George who famously advocated for land value taxation. The explanation behind Stiglitz's finding is that rivalry for public goods takes place geographically, so competition for access to any beneficial public good will increase land values by at least as much as its outlay cost. Furthermore, Stiglitz shows that a single tax on land rents is necessary to provide the optimal supply of local public investment. Stiglitz also shows how the theorem could be used to find the optimal size of a city or firm.\nInformation asymmetry.\nStiglitz's most famous research was on screening, a technique used by one economic agent to extract otherwise private information from another. It was for this contribution to the theory of information asymmetry that he shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with George A. Akerlof and A. Michael Spence in 2001 \"for laying the foundations for the theory of markets with asymmetric information\".\nMuch of Stiglitz's work on information economics demonstrates situations in which incomplete information prevents markets from achieving social efficiency. His paper with Andrew Weiss showed that if banks use interest rates to infer information about borrowers' types (adverse selection effect), or to encourage their actions following borrowing (incentive effect), then credit will be rationed below the optimal level, even in a competitive market. Stiglitz and Rothschild showed that in an insurance market, firms have an incentive to undermine a 'pooling equilibrium', where all agents are offered the same full-insurance policy, by offering cheaper partial insurance that would only be attractive to the low-risk types, meaning that a competitive market can only achieve partial coverage of agents. Stiglitz and Grossman showed that trivially small information acquisition costs prevent financial markets from achieving complete informational efficiency, since agents will have an incentive to free-ride on others' information acquisition, and acquire this information indirectly by observing market prices.\nMonopolistic competition.\nStiglitz, together with Avinash Dixit, created a tractable model of monopolistic competition that was an alternative to traditional perfect-competition models of general equilibrium. They showed that in the presence of increasing returns to scale, the entry of firms is socially too small. The model was extended to show that when consumers have a preference for diversity, entry can be socially too large. The modeling approach was used by Paul Krugman in his analysis of the non-comparative advantage trading patterns.\nShapiro\u2013Stiglitz efficiency wage model.\nStiglitz also did research on efficiency wages, and helped create what became known as the \"Shapiro\u2013Stiglitz model\" to explain why there is unemployment even in equilibrium, why wages are not bid down sufficiently by job seekers (in the absence of minimum wages) so that everyone who wants a job finds one, and to question whether the neoclassical paradigm could explain involuntary unemployment. An answer to these puzzles was proposed by Shapiro and Stiglitz in 1984: \"Unemployment is driven by the information structure of employment\". Two basic observations undergird their analysis:\nSome key implications of this model are:\nThe outcome is never Pareto efficient.\nPractical implications of Stiglitz's theories.\nThe practical implications of Stiglitz's work in political economy and their economic policy implications have been subject to debate. Stiglitz himself has evolved his political-economic discourse over time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Once incomplete and imperfect information is introduced, Chicago-school defenders of the market system cannot sustain descriptive claims of the Pareto efficiency of the real world. Thus, Stiglitz's use of rational-expectations equilibrium assumptions to achieve a more realistic understanding of capitalism than is usual among rational-expectations theorists leads, paradoxically, to the conclusion that capitalism deviates from the model in a way that justifies state action\u00a0\u2013 socialism\u00a0\u2013 as a remedy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The effect of Stiglitz's influence is to make economics even more presumptively interventionist than Samuelson preferred. Samuelson treated market failure as an exception to the general rule of efficient markets. But the Greenwald-Stiglitz theorem posits market failure as the norm, establishing \"that government could potentially almost always improve upon the market's resource allocation.\" And the Sappington-Stiglitz theorem \"establishes that an ideal government could do better running an enterprise itself than it could through privatization\"\nAs David L. Prychitko discusses in his critique to \"Whither Socialism?\", he thought that Stiglitz seems generally correct, though it still leaves how the coercive institutions of the government should be constrained and what the relation is between the government and civil society.\nGovernment.\nClinton administration.\nStiglitz joined the Clinton Administration in 1993, serving first as a member during 1993\u20131995, and was then appointed Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers on June 28, 1995.\nStiglitz always had a poor relationship with Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers. In 2000, Summers successfully petitioned for Stiglitz's removal, supposedly in exchange for World Bank President James Wolfensohn's re-appointment\u00a0\u2013 an exchange that Wolfensohn denies took place. Whether Summers ever made such a blunt demand is questionable\u00a0\u2013 Wolfensohn claims he would \"have told him to *** himself\".\nStiglitz resigned from the World Bank in January 2000, a month before his term expired. The Bank's president, James Wolfensohn, announced Stiglitz's resignation in November 1999 and also announced that Stiglitz would stay on as Special Advisor to the President, and would chair the search committee for a successor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Joseph E. Stiglitz said today [Nov. 24, 1999] that he would resign as the World Bank's chief economist after using the position for nearly three years to raise pointed questions about the effectiveness of conventional approaches to helping poor countries.\nIn this role, he continued criticism of the IMF, and, by implication, the U.S. Treasury Department. In April 2000, in an article for \"The New Republic\", he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They'll say the IMF is arrogant. They'll say the IMF doesn't really listen to the developing countries it is supposed to help. They'll say the IMF is secretive and insulated from democratic accountability. They'll say the IMF's economic 'remedies' often make things worse\u00a0\u2013 turning slowdowns into recessions and recessions into depressions. And they'll have a point. I was chief economist at the World Bank from 1996 until last November, during the gravest global economic crisis in a half-century. I saw how the IMF, in tandem with the U.S. Treasury Department, responded. And I was appalled.\nStiglitz's protector-of-sorts at the World Bank, Wolfensohn, had privately empathized with Stiglitz's views, but was worried for his second term, which Summers had threatened to veto. Stanley Fischer, deputy managing director of the IMF, called a special staff meeting and informed the gathering that Wolfensohn had agreed to fire Stiglitz. Meanwhile, the bank's External Affairs department told the press that Stiglitz had not been fired; his post had merely been abolished.\nIn a September 19, 2008 radio interview, with Aimee Allison and Philip Maldari on Pacifica Radio's KPFA 94.1\u00a0FM in Berkeley, United States, Stiglitz implied that President Clinton and his economic advisors would not have backed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) had they been aware of stealth provisions, inserted by lobbyists, that they overlooked.\nInitiative for Policy Dialogue.\nIn July 2000, Stiglitz founded the Initiative for Policy Dialogue.\nCommission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.\nAt the beginning of 2008, Stiglitz chaired the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, also known as the Stiglitz-Sen-Fitoussi Commission, initiated by President Sarkozy of France. The Commission held its first plenary meeting on April 22\u201323, 2008, in Paris. Its final report was made public on September 14, 2009.\nCommission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System.\nIn 2009, Stiglitz chaired the Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System which was convened by the President of the United Nations General Assembly \"to review the workings of the global financial system, including major bodies such as the World Bank and the IMF, and to suggest steps to be taken by Member States to secure a more sustainable and just global economic order\". Its final report was released on September 21, 2009.\nGreek debt crisis.\nIn 2010, Stiglitz acted as an advisor to the Greek government during the Greek debt crisis. He appeared on Bloomberg TV for an interview on the risks of Greece defaulting, in which he stated that he was very confident that Greece would not default. He went on to say that Greece was under \"speculative attack\" and though it had \"short-term liquidity problems ... and would benefit from Solidarity Bonds\", the country was \"on track to meet its obligations\".\nThe next day, during a BBC interview, Stiglitz stated that \"there's no problem of Greece or Spain meeting their interest payments\". He argued nonetheless, that it would be desirable and needed for all of Europe to make a clear statement of belief in social solidarity and that they \"stand behind Greece\". Confronted with the statement: \"Greece's difficulty is that the magnitude of debt is far greater than the capacity of the economy to service\", Stiglitz replied, \"That's rather absurd\".\nIn 2012, Stiglitz described the European austerity plans as a \"suicide-pact\". In 2015, he said that the programmer of austerity in Greece had been \"an enormous mistake\", that the International Monetary Fund, European Central Bank and the European Commission had \"criminal responsibility for causing a major recession\". He argued that Greek debt should be written off.\nScotland.\nSince March 2012, Stiglitz has been a member of the Scottish Government's Fiscal Commission Working Group, which oversees the work to establish a fiscal and macroeconomic framework for an independent Scotland on behalf of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers. Together with Professors Andrew Hughes Hallett, Sir James Mirrlees and Frances Ruane, Stiglitz will \"advise on the establishment of a credible Fiscal Commission which entrenches financial responsibility and ensures market confidence\".\nLabour Party.\nIn July 2015, Stiglitz endorsed Jeremy Corbyn's campaign in the Labour Party leadership election. He said: \"I am not surprised at all that there is a demand for a strong anti-austerity movement around increased concern about inequality. The promises of New Labour in the UK and of the Clintonites in the US have been a disappointment.\"\nOn September 27, 2015, it was announced that he had been appointed to the British Labour Party's Economic Advisory Committee, convened by Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell and reporting to Labour Party Leader Jeremy Corbyn, although he reportedly failed to attend the first meeting.\nEconomic views.\nMarket efficiency.\nFor Stiglitz, there is no such thing as an invisible hand, in the sense that free markets lead to efficiency as if guided by unseen forces. According to Stiglitz:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whenever there are \"externalities\"\u00a0\u2013 where the actions of an individual have impacts on others for which they do not pay or for which they are not compensated\u00a0\u2013 markets will not work well. But recent research has shown that these externalities are pervasive, whenever there is imperfect information or imperfect risk markets\u00a0\u2013 that is always.\nThe real debate today is about finding the right balance between the market and government. Both are needed. They can each complement each other. This balance will differ from time to time and place to place.\nIn an interview in 2007, Stiglitz explained further:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The theories that I (and others) helped develop explained why unfettered markets often not only do not lead to social justice, but do not even produce efficient outcomes. Interestingly, there has been no intellectual challenge to the refutation of Adam Smith's invisible hand: individuals and firms, in the pursuit of their self-interest, are not necessarily, or in general, led as if by an invisible hand, to economic efficiency.\nThe preceding claim is based on Stiglitz's 1986 paper, \"Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets\", which describes a general methodology to deal with externalities and for calculating optimal corrective taxes in a general equilibrium context. In the opening remarks for his prize acceptance at Aula Magna, Stiglitz said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I hope to show that Information Economics represents a fundamental change in the prevailing paradigm within economics. Problems of information are central to understanding not only market economics but also political economy, and in the last section of this lecture, I explore some of the implications of information imperfections for political processes.\nSupport for anti-austerity movement in Spain.\nOn July 25, 2011, Stiglitz participated in the \"I Foro Social del 15M\" organized in Madrid (Spain) expressing his support for the anti-austerity movement in Spain. During an informal speech, he made a brief review of some of the problems in Europe and in the United States, the serious unemployment rate and the situation in Greece. \"This is an opportunity for economic contribution social measures\", argued Stiglitz, who made a speech about the way authorities are handling the political exit to the crisis. He encouraged those present to respond to the ideas with good ideas. \"This does not work, you have to change it\", he said.\nCriticism of rating agencies.\nStiglitz has been critical of rating agencies, describing them as the \"key culprit\" in the 2008 financial crisis, noting \"they were the party that performed the alchemy that converted the securities from F-rated to A-rated. The banks could not have done what they did without the complicity of the rating agencies.\"\nStiglitz co-authored a paper with Peter Orszag in 2002 titled \"Implications of the New Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Risk-Based Capital Standard\" where they stated \"on the basis of historical experience, the risk to the government from a potential default on GSE debt is effectively zero.\" However, \"the risk-based capital standard ... may fail to reflect the probability of another Great Depression-like scenario.\"\nViews on risks associated with government-sponsored enterprises.\nIn a 2002 paper coauthored with Jonathan Orszag, and Peter R. Orszag, Stiglitz asserted \"the probability of default by the GSEs [Government-Sponsored Enterprises] is extremely small\".\nCriticism of Trans-Pacific Partnership and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.\nStiglitz warned that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) presented \"grave risks\" and it \"serves the interests of the wealthiest.\"\nStiglitz also opposed the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) trade deal between the European Union (EU) and the United States, and has argued that the United Kingdom should consider its withdrawal from the EU in the 2016 referendum on the matter if TTIP passes, saying that \"the strictures imposed by TTIP would be sufficiently averse to the functioning of government that it would make me think over again about whether membership of the EU was a good idea\".\nRegulation.\nStiglitz argues that relying solely on business self-interest as the means of achieving the well-being of society and economic efficiency is misleading, and that instead \"What is needed is stronger norms, clearer understandings of what is acceptable\u00a0\u2013 and what is not\u00a0\u2013 and stronger laws and regulations to ensure that those that do not behave in ways that are consistent with these norms are held accountable\".\nLand value tax (Georgism).\nStiglitz argues that land value tax would improve the efficiency and equity of agricultural economies. Stiglitz believes that societies should rely on a generalized Henry George principle to finance public goods, protect natural resources, improve land use, and reduce the burden of rents and taxes on the poor while increasing productive capital formation. Stiglitz advocates taxing \"natural resource rents at as close to 100 percent as possible\" and that a corollary of this principle is that polluters should be taxed for \"activities that generate negative externalities.\" Stiglitz therefore asserts that land value taxation is even better than its famous advocate Henry George thought.\nViews on the eurozone.\nIn a September 2016 interview Stiglitz stated that \"the cost of keeping the Eurozone together probably exceeds the cost of breaking it up.\"\nViews on free trade.\nAdvice for the eurozone countries.\nIn the 1990s, he wrote that \"countries in North America and Europe should eliminate all tariffs and quotas (protectionist measures)\". He now advises the eurozone countries to control their trade balance with Germany by means of export/import certificates or \"trade chits\" (a protectionist measure).\nCiting Keynesian theory, he explains that trade surpluses are harmful: \"John Maynard Keynes pointed out that surpluses lead to weak global aggregate demand \u2013 countries running surpluses exert a \"negative externality\" on trading partners. Indeed, Keynes believed it was surplus countries, far more than those in deficit, that posed a threat to global prosperity; he went so far as to advocate a tax on surplus countries\". From the beginning of 1930, Keynes stopped believing in free trade, denounced the theory of comparative advantage (the basis of free trade) and adhered to protectionism.\nStiglitz writes: \"Germany's surplus means that the rest of Europe is in deficit. And the fact that these countries import more than they export contributes to the weakness of their economies\". He thinks that surplus countries are getting richer at the expense of deficit countries. He notes that the euro is the cause of this deficit and that as the trade deficit declines GDP would rise and unemployment would fall: \"The euro system means that Germany's exchange rate cannot increase compared to other euro area members. If the exchange rate were to rise, Germany would have more difficulty exporting and its economic model, based on strong exports, would cease. At the same time, the rest of Europe would export more, GDP would rise, and unemployment would fall\".\nHe also thinks that the rest of the world should impose a carbon-adjustment tax (a protectionist measure) on American exports that do not comply with global standard.\nAdvice for the United States.\nContrary to Keynesian theory and these analyses on the eurozone, he argues that the United States should not rebalance the trade account, and that the country can no longer apply protectionist measures to protect or recreate the well-paying manufacturing jobs, saying: \"The very Americans who have been among the losers of globalization stand to be among the losers of a reversal of globalization. History cannot be put into reverse\".\nOn the other hand, he admits that as trade deficit declines, \"GDP would rise and unemployment would fall\", further stating: \"...the fact that these countries are importing more than they are exporting contributes to their weak economies.\" He also notes that trade deficit is correlated with loss of manufacturing jobs: the increase in the \"value of the dollar will lead to larger trade deficits and fewer manufacturing jobs\".\nContrary to most economics historians who argue that tariffs played only a minor if any role in the Great Depression, Stiglitz, to convince the United States not to use protectionist policies, says that tariffs would be harmful to the United States economy today because it contributed to the Great Depression: \"Following that, U.S. exports fell by some 50 percent\u2014contributing to our Great Depression\".\nHe denounces the \"trickle-down\" policies of liberalism and neoliberalism (\"laissez-faire\") However, he calls for lowering trade barriers and promoting free trade (policy of deregulation of foreign trade which is part of the \"laissez-faire\" economic model).\nAccording to him, it is not China (which has a large trade surplus) that makes \"trade war\", but the United States (which has a large trade deficit). He advises China to take sanctions against the United States 'where it hurts economically and politically' if the US tries to raise tariffs to protect its industry, saying: \"For example, cutbacks in purchases by China will lead to more unemployment in congressional districts that are vulnerable, influential, or both. ... China can retaliate anywhere it chooses, such as by using trade restrictions to target jobs in the congressional districts of those who support US tariffs. ... China may be more effective in targeting its retaliation to cause acute political pain. ... It's anybody's guess who can stand the pain better. Will it be the US, where ordinary citizens have already suffered for so long, or China, which, despite troubled times, has managed to generate growth in excess of 6%?\"\nStiglitz does not want the United States to stop free trade. According to him, if China limits globalization, it will not hurt them, but if the United States stops with the process of free trade, it will be harmful. About China, according to him, if China depends less on economic globalization, it will not be negative for the country. He writes that the decline in exports from China to the U.S. may not \"hurt them more than it hurt us\" because \"China's government has far more control over the country's economy than our government has over ours; and it is moving from export dependence to a model of growth driven by domestic demand.\" Regarding the United States, he writes the opposite and advice to apply the opposite of the Keynesian theory of trade deficits seen earlier: \"Walking away from globalization may reduce our imports, but it will also reduce exports in tandem. And, almost surely, jobs will be destroyed faster than they will be created: there may even be fewer net manufacturing jobs\". \"[The] erection of barriers to trade and the movement of people and ideas more likely than not will be one in which the U.S. almost surely will lose.\"\nIn early 2017, he wrote that \"the American middle class is indeed the loser of globalization\" (the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes) and \"China, with its large emerging middle class, is among the big beneficiaries of globalization\". \"Thanks to globalization, in terms of purchasing-power parity, China actually has already become the largest economy in the world in September 2015\". However, contrary to what he wrote earlier, he later argued in February 2017 that the fall in wages and the disappearance of well-paid jobs in the United States, are not due to free trade or globalization, but rather are inevitable collateral damage to the march of economic progress and technological innovation: \"The United States can only push for advanced manufacturing, which requires higher skill sets and employs fewer people. Rising inequality, meanwhile, will continue ...\". In addition, on December 5, 2017, contrary to what he wrote earlier, he wrote that the drop in wages in the United States is due to the actions of multinational companies rather than the globalization and the trade account imbalances between countries caused by free trade: \"It was an agenda written by and for large multinational companies, at the expense of workers\".\nIn 2016, he said he believes that the economic situation of the United States is critical: \"As the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton showed in their study published in December 2015, life expectancy among middle-age white Americans is declining, as rates of suicides, drug use, and alcoholism increase. A year later, the National Center for Health Statistics reported that life expectancy for the country as a whole has declined for the first time in more than 20 years.\" ... With the incomes of the bottom 90% having stagnated for close to a third of a century (and declining for a significant proportion), the health data simply confirmed that things were not going well for swaths of the country\".\nIn June 2024, 16 Nobel Prize in Economics laureates, including Stiglitz, signed an open letter (which Stiglitz spearheaded) arguing that Donald Trump\u2019s fiscal and trade policies coupled with efforts to limit the Federal Reserve's independence would reignite inflation in the United States.\nGreen economy.\nStiglitz has called for a transition to a green economy. He supported the Green New Deal. In 2019, he wrote that \"The Green New Deal would stimulate demand, ensuring that all available resources were used; and the transition to the green economy would likely usher in a new boom. Trump's focus on the industries of the past, like coal, is strangling the much more sensible move to wind and solar power. More jobs by far will be created in renewable energy than will be lost in coal.\" Stiglitz described the climate crisis as humanity's World War III.\nViews on taxation.\nStiglitz maintained the super-rich should pay taxes up to 70% to help deal with increasing inequality. Stiglitz stated a worldwide income tax rate of 70% on biggest earners \"would clearly make sense\". Stiglitz maintained society would become more egalitarian and cohesive. Stiglitz said a wealth taxes on fortunes acquired during many generations would have a larger influence. Stiglitz maintains most billionaires acquired much of their wealth through luck. He maintains Elizabeth Warren proposing a 2% tax on assets for people with assets of over $50 million and 3% on those with over $1 billion was \"very reasonable\" and would raise significant revenues that could improve some United States problems.\nViews on artificial intelligence.\nStiglitz was a signatory to a letter sent to the attorneys general of California and Delaware, opposing OpenAI's proposed transition from a not-for-profit entity to a public benefit corporation. The letter argued that the restructuring would undermine OpenAI's stated charitable purpose of developing artificial general intelligence to benefit \"all of humanity.\" It further asserted that, if reorganized as a corporation, OpenAI would be legally obligated to prioritize the interests of its shareholders over broader goals of serving humanity as a whole.\nBooks.\nAlong with his technical economic publications (over 300 technical articles), Stiglitz is the author of books on issues from patent law to abuses in international trade.\n\"Whither Socialism?\" (1994).\n\"Whither Socialism?\" is based on Stiglitz's Wicksell Lectures, presented at the Stockholm School of Economics in 1990 and presents a summary of information economics and the theory of markets with imperfect information and imperfect competition, as well as being a critique of both free market and market socialist approaches (see Roemer critique, op. cit.). Stiglitz explains how the neoclassical, or Walrasian model (\"Walrasian economics\" refers to the result of the process which has given birth to a formal representation of Adam Smith's notion of the \"invisible hand\", along the lines put forward by L\u00e9on Walras and encapsulated in the general equilibrium model of Arrow\u2013Debreu), may have wrongly encouraged the belief that market socialism could work. Stiglitz proposes an alternative model, based on the information economics established by the Greenwald\u2013Stiglitz theorems.\nOne of the reasons Stiglitz sees for the critical failing in the standard neoclassical model, on which market socialism was built, is its failure to consider the problems that arise from lack of perfect information and from the costs of acquiring information. He also identifies problems arising from its assumptions concerning completeness.\n\"Globalization and Its Discontents\" (2002).\nIn \"Globalization and Its Discontents\", Stiglitz argues that what are often called \"developing economies\" are, in fact, not developing at all, and puts much of the blame on the IMF.\nStiglitz stresses: \"Recent advances in economic theory\" (in part referring to his own work) \"have shown that whenever information is imperfect and markets are incomplete, which is to say always, and especially in developing countries, then the invisible hand works most imperfectly.\" As a result, Stiglitz continues, governments can improve the outcome by well-chosen interventions. Stiglitz argues that when families and firms seek to buy too little compared to what the economy can produce, governments can fight recessions and depressions by using expansionary monetary and fiscal policies to spur the demand for goods and services. At the microeconomic level, governments can regulate banks and other financial institutions to keep them sound. They can also use tax policy to steer investment into more productive industries and trade policies to allow new industries to mature to the point at which they can survive foreign competition. And governments can use a variety of devices, ranging from job creation to manpower training to welfare assistance, to put unemployed labor back to work and cushion human hardship.\nStiglitz argues that the IMF has done great damage through the economic policies it has prescribed that countries must follow in order to qualify for IMF loans, or for loans from banks and other private-sector lenders that look to the IMF to indicate whether a borrower is creditworthy. The organization and its officials, he argues, have ignored the implications of incomplete information, inadequate markets, and unworkable institutions\u00a0\u2013 all of which are especially characteristic of newly developing countries. As a result, Stiglitz argues, the IMF has often called for policies that conform to textbook economics but do not make sense for the countries to which the IMF is recommending them. Stiglitz seeks to show that these policies have been disastrous for the countries that have followed them.\n\"The Roaring Nineties\" (2003).\n\"The Roaring Nineties\" is Stiglitz's analysis of the boom and bust of the 1990s. Presented from an insider's point of view, firstly as chair of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisors, and later as chief economist of the World Bank, it continues his argument on how misplaced faith in free-market ideology led to the global economic issues of today, with a perceptive focus on US policies.\n\"Fair Trade for All\" (2005).\nIn \"Fair Trade for All\", authors Stiglitz and Andrew Charlton argue that it is important to make the trading world more development friendly. The idea is put forth that the present regime of tariffs and agricultural subsidies is dominated by the interests of former colonial powers and needs to change. The removal of the bias toward the developed world will be beneficial to both developing and developed nations. The developing world is in need of assistance, and this can only be achieved when developed nations abandon mercantilist-based priorities and work towards a more liberal world trade regime.\n\"Making Globalization Work\" (2006).\n\"Making Globalization Work\" surveys the inequities of the global economy, and the mechanisms by which developed countries exert an excessive influence over developing nations. Dr. Stiglitz argues that through tariffs, subsidies, an over-complex patent system and pollution, the world is being both economically and politically destabilized. Stiglitz argues that strong, transparent institutions are needed to address these problems. He shows how an examination of incomplete markets can make corrective government policies desirable.\nStiglitz is an exception to the general pro-globalization view of professional economists, according to economist Martin Wolf. Stiglitz argues that economic opportunities are not widely enough available, that financial crises are too costly and too frequent, and that the rich countries have done too little to address these problems. \"Making Globalization Work\" has sold more than two million copies.\n\"Stability with Growth\" (2006).\nIn \"Stability with Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization and Development\", Stiglitz, Jos\u00e9 Antonio Ocampo (United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, until 2007), Shari Spiegel (managing director, Initiative for Policy Dialogue\u00a0\u2013 IPD), Ricardo Ffrench-Davis (Main Adviser, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean\u00a0\u2013 ECLAC) and Deepak Nayyar (Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi) discuss the current debates on macroeconomics, capital market liberalization and development, and develop a new framework within which one can assess alternative policies. They explain their belief that the Washington Consensus has advocated narrow goals for development (with a focus on price stability) and prescribed too few policy instruments (emphasizing monetary and fiscal policies), and places unwarranted faith in the role of markets.\nThe new framework focuses on real stability and long-term sustainable and equitable growth, offers a variety of non-standard ways to stabilize the economy and promote growth, and accepts that market imperfections necessitate government interventions. Policy-makers have pursued stabilization goals with little concern for growth consequences, while trying to increase growth through structural reforms focused on improving economic efficiency. Moreover, structural policies, such as capital market liberalization, have had major consequences for economic stability. This book challenges these policies by arguing that stabilization policy has important consequences for long-term growth and has often been implemented with adverse consequences. The first part of the book introduces the key questions and looks at the objectives of economic policy from different perspectives. The third part presents a similar analysis for capital market liberalization.\n\"The Three Trillion Dollar War\" (2008).\n\"The Three Trillion Dollar War\" (co-authored with Linda Bilmes) examines the full cost of the Iraq War, including many hidden costs. The book also discusses the extent to which these costs will be imposed for many years to come, paying special attention to the enormous expenditures that will be required to care for very large numbers of wounded veterans. Stiglitz was openly critical of George W. Bush at the time the book was released.\n\"Freefall\" (2010).\nIn \"Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy\", Stiglitz discusses the causes of the 2008 recession/depression and goes on to propose reforms needed to avoid a repetition of a similar crisis, advocating government intervention and regulation in a number of areas. Among the policymakers he criticizes are George W. Bush, Larry Summers, and Barack Obama.\n\"The Price of Inequality\" (2012).\nFrom the jacket: As those at the top continue to enjoy the best health care, education, and benefits of wealth, they often fail to realize that, as Joseph E. Stiglitz highlights, \"their fate is bound up with how the other 99 percent live ... It does not have to be this way. In \"The Price of Inequality\" Stiglitz lays out a comprehensive agenda to create a more dynamic economy and fairer and more equal society\"\nThe book received the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights 2013 Book Award, given annually to the book that \"most faithfully and forcefully reflects Robert Kennedy's purposes\u00a0\u2013 his concern for the poor and the powerless, his struggle for honest and even-handed justice, his conviction that a decent society must assure all young people a fair chance, and his faith that a free democracy can act to remedy disparities of power and opportunity.\"\n\"Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development, and Social Progress\" (2014).\n\"Creating a Learning Society\" (co-authored with Bruce C. Greenwald) casts light on the significance of this insight for economic theory and policy. Taking as a starting point Kenneth J. Arrow's 1962 paper \"Learning by Doing\", they explain why the production of knowledge differs from that of other goods and why market economies alone typically do not produce and transmit knowledge efficiently. Closing knowledge gaps and helping laggards learn are central to growth and development. But creating a learning society is equally crucial if we are to sustain improved living standards in advanced countries.\n\"The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them\" (2015).\nFrom the jacket: In \"The Great Divide\", Joseph E. Stiglitz expands on the diagnosis he offered in his best-selling book \"The Price of Inequality\" and suggests ways to counter America's growing problem. Stiglitz argues that inequality is a choice\u00a0\u2013 the cumulative result of unjust policies and misguided priorities.\n\"The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe\" (2016).\nFrom the description: \"Stiglitz dismantles the prevailing consensus around what ails Europe, demolishing the champions of austerity while offering a series of plans that can rescue the continent \u2013 and the world \u2013 from further devastation.\"\n\"People, Power and Profits: Progressive Capitalism for an Age of Discontent\" (2019).\nFrom the jacket: Stiglitz shows how a middle-class life can once again be attainable by all. An authorities account of the predictable dangers of free market fundamentalism and the foundations of progressive capitalism, \"People, Power, and Profits\" shows us an America in crisis, but also lights a path through this challenging time. Daniel W. Drezner gave the book a mixed review in \"The New York Times\".\n\"Measuring What Counts: The Global Movement for Well-Being\" (2019).\nStiglitz and his co-authors point out that the interrelated crises of environmental degradation and human suffering of our current age demonstrate that \"something is fundamentally wrong with the way we assess economic performance and social progress.\" They argue that using GDP as the chief measure of our economic health does not provide an accurate assessment of the economy or the state of the world and the people living in it.\n\"The Road to Freedom: Economics and the Good Society\" (2024).\nIn \"The Road to Freedom\", Stiglitz challenges the claim by its adherents that neoliberalism is morally superior to its alternatives. The title is a pointed reference to Friedrich Hayek's famous treatise, \"The Road to Serfdom\", and the book is a rejoinder to the economic theories of Hayek and Milton Friedman. Stiglitz proposes that his essay is based on experimental empirical research. He is concerned that free information will reduce the production of information quality and value in our economy as artificial intelligence gathers and reproduces it.\nPapers and conferences.\nStiglitz wrote a series of papers and held a series of conferences explaining how such information uncertainties may have influence on everything from unemployment to lending shortages. As the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers during the first term of the Clinton Administration and former chief economist at the World Bank, Stiglitz was able to put some of his views into action. For example, he was an outspoken critic of quickly opening up financial markets in developing countries. These markets rely on access to good financial data and sound bankruptcy laws, but he argued that many of these countries did not have the regulatory institutions needed to ensure that the markets would operate soundly.\nIn July 2020, Stiglitz alongside Hamid Rashid, the chief of Global Economic Monitoring at the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, published a report, pointing out that the quantitative easing policy implemented by the US after the 2008 financial crisis, had \"basically exported a debt bubble to developing countries\".\nThe economic analysis of Stiglitz and Ira Regmi on the pandemic-induced inflation of 2021\u20132023 concluded the causes were sector supply-side disruptions and the Ukraine war effects in food and energy sectors and not from the excessive pandemic spending in the United States.\nAwards and honors.\nIn addition to being awarded the Nobel Memorial prize, Stiglitz has over 40 honorary doctorates and at least eight honorary professorships as well as an honorary deanship.\nStiglitz was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1983, the National Academy of Sciences in 1988, and the American Philosophical Society in 1997.\nIn 2009, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Archbishop Desmond Tutu at an awards ceremony at St. George's Cathedral in Cape Town, South Africa.\nHe received the 2010 Gerald Loeb Awards for Commentary for \"Capitalist Fools and Wall Street's Toxic Message\".\nIn 2011, he was named by \"Foreign Policy\" magazine on its list of top global thinkers. In February 2012, he was awarded the Legion of Honor, in the rank of Officer, by the French ambassador in the United States Fran\u00e7ois Delattre. Stiglitz was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2009. Stiglitz was awarded the 2018 Sydney Peace Prize.\nPersonal life.\nStiglitz married Jane Hannaway in 1978 but the couple later divorced. He married for the third time on October 28, 2004, to Anya Schiffrin, who works at the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University. He has four children and three grandchildren.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63093", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63093", "title": "Joan Mir\u00f3", "text": "Catalan painter, sculptor, and ceramicist (1893\u20131983)\nJoan Mir\u00f3 i Ferr\u00e0 ( , ; ; 20 April 1893\u00a0\u2013 25 December 1983) was a Catalan painter, sculptor and ceramist from Spain. A museum dedicated to his work, the Fundaci\u00f3 Joan Mir\u00f3, was established in his native city of Barcelona in 1975, and another, the Fundaci\u00f3 Pilar i Joan Mir\u00f3, was established in his adoptive city of Palma, Mallorca in 1981.\nEarning international acclaim, his work has been interpreted as Surrealism but with a personal style, sometimes also veering into Fauvism and Expressionism. He was notable for his interest in the unconscious or the subconscious mind, reflected in his re-creation of the childlike. His difficult-to-classify works also had a manifestation of Catalan pride. In numerous interviews dating from the 1930s onwards, Mir\u00f3 expressed contempt for conventional painting methods as a way of supporting bourgeois society, and declared an \"assassination of painting\" in favour of upsetting the visual elements of established painting.\nBiography.\nBorn into a family of a goldsmith and watchmaker, Miquel Mir\u00f3 Adzerias, and mother Dolores Ferr\u00e0., Mir\u00f3 grew up in the Barri G\u00f2tic neighborhood of Barcelona. The \"Mir\u00f3\" surname indicates some possible Jewish roots (in terms of \"marrano\" or \"converso\" Iberian Jews who converted to Christianity). He began drawing classes at the age of seven at a private school at Carrer del Regomir 13, a medieval mansion. To the dismay of his father, he enrolled at the fine art academy at La Llotja in 1907. He studied at the Cercle Art\u00edstic de Sant Lluc and he had his first solo show in 1918 at the Galeries Dalmau, where his work was ridiculed and defaced. Inspired by Fauve and Cubist exhibitions in Barcelona and abroad, Mir\u00f3 was drawn towards the arts community that was gathering in Montparnasse and in 1920 moved to Paris, but continued to spend his summers in Catalonia.\nCareer.\nMir\u00f3 initially went to business school as well as art school. He began his working career as a clerk when he was a teenager, although he abandoned the business world completely for art after suffering a nervous breakdown. His early art, like that of the similarly influenced Fauves and Cubists, was inspired by Vincent van Gogh and Paul C\u00e9zanne. The resemblance of Mir\u00f3's work to that of the intermediate generation of the avant-garde has led scholars to dub this period his Catalan Fauvist period.\nA few years after Mir\u00f3's 1918 Barcelona solo exhibition, he settled in Paris where he finished a number of paintings that he had begun on his parents' summer home and farm in Mont-roig del Camp. One such painting, \"The Farm\", showed a transition to a more individual style of painting and certain nationalistic qualities. Ernest Hemingway, who later purchased the piece, described it by saying, \"It has in it all that you feel about Spain when you are there and all that you feel when you are away and cannot go there. No one else has been able to paint these two very opposing things.\" Mir\u00f3 annually returned to Mont-roig and developed a symbolism and nationalism that would stick with him throughout his career. Two of Mir\u00f3's first works classified as Surrealist, \"Catalan Landscape (The Hunter)\" and \"The Tilled Field\", employ the symbolic language that was to dominate the art of the next decade.\nJosep Dalmau arranged Mir\u00f3's first Parisian solo exhibition, at Galerie la Licorne in 1921.\nIn 1924, Mir\u00f3 joined the Surrealist group. The already symbolic and poetic nature of Mir\u00f3's work, as well as the dualities and contradictions inherent to it, fit well within the context of dream-like automatism espoused by the group. Much of Mir\u00f3's work lost the cluttered chaotic lack of focus that had defined his work thus far, and he experimented with collage and the process of painting within his work so as to reject the framing that traditional painting provided. This antagonistic attitude towards painting manifested itself when Mir\u00f3 referred to his work in 1924 ambiguously as \"x\" in a letter to poet friend Michel Leiris. The paintings that came out of this period were eventually dubbed Mir\u00f3's dream paintings.\nMir\u00f3 did not completely abandon subject matter, though. Despite the Surrealist automatic techniques that he employed extensively in the 1920s, sketches show that his work was often the result of a methodical process. Mir\u00f3's work rarely dipped into non-objectivity, maintaining a symbolic, schematic language. This was perhaps most prominent in the repeated \"Head of a Catalan Peasant\" series of 1924 to 1925. In 1926, he collaborated with Max Ernst on designs for ballet impresario Sergei Diaghilev.\nMir\u00f3 returned to a more representational form of painting with \"The Dutch Interiors\" of 1928. Crafted after works by Hendrik Martenszoon Sorgh and Jan Steen seen as postcard reproductions, the paintings reveal the influence of a trip to Holland taken by the artist. These paintings share more in common with \"Tilled Field\" or \"Harlequin's Carnival\" than with the minimalistic dream paintings produced a few years earlier.\nMir\u00f3 married Pilar Juncosa in Palma, Mallorca on 12 October 1929. Their daughter, Mar\u00eda Dolores Mir\u00f3, was born on 17 July 1930. In 1931, Pierre Matisse opened an art gallery in New York City. The Pierre Matisse Gallery (which existed until Matisse's death in 1989) became an influential part of the Modern art movement in America. From the outset Matisse represented Joan Mir\u00f3 and introduced his work to the United States market by frequently exhibiting Mir\u00f3's work in New York.\nIn 1932 he created a scenic design for Massine's ballet \"Jeux d'enfants\" at Ballet Russe de Monte-Carlo.\nUntil the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, Mir\u00f3 habitually returned to Spain in the summers. Once the war began, he was unable to return home. Unlike many of his surrealist contemporaries, Mir\u00f3 had previously preferred to stay away from explicitly political commentary in his work. Though a sense of (Catalan) nationalism pervaded his earliest surreal landscapes and \"Head of a Catalan Peasant\", it was not until Spain's Republican government commissioned him to paint the mural \"The Reaper\", for the Spanish Republican Pavilion at the 1937 Paris Exhibition, that Mir\u00f3's work took on a politically charged meaning.\nIn 1939, with Germany's invasion of France looming, Mir\u00f3 relocated to Varengeville in Normandy, and on 20 May of the following year, as Germans invaded Paris, he narrowly fled to Spain (now controlled by Francisco Franco) for the duration of the Vichy Regime's rule. In Varengeville, Palma, and Mont-roig, between 1940 and 1941, Mir\u00f3 created the twenty-three gouache series \"Constellations\". Revolving around celestial symbolism, \"Constellations\" earned the artist praise from Andr\u00e9 Breton, who seventeen years later wrote a series of poems, named after and inspired by Mir\u00f3's series. Features of this work revealed a shifting focus to the subjects of women, birds, and the moon, which would dominate his iconography for much of the rest of his career.\nShuzo Takiguchi published the first monograph on Mir\u00f3 in 1940. In 1948\u201349 Mir\u00f3 lived in Barcelona and made frequent visits to Paris to work on printing techniques at the Mourlot Studios and the Atelier Lacouri\u00e8re. He developed a close relationship with Fernand Mourlot and that resulted in the production of over one thousand different lithographic editions.\nIn 1959, Andr\u00e9 Breton asked Mir\u00f3 to represent Spain in \"The Homage to Surrealism\" exhibition alongside Enrique T\u00e1bara, Salvador Dal\u00ed, and Eugenio Granell. Mir\u00f3 created a series of sculptures and ceramics for the garden of the Maeght Foundation in Saint-Paul-de-Vence, France, which was completed in 1964.\nIn 1974, Mir\u00f3 created a tapestry for the World Trade Center in New York City together with the Catalan artist Josep Royo. He had initially refused to do a tapestry, then he learned the craft from Royo and the two artists produced several works together. His \"World Trade Center Tapestry\" was displayed at the building and was one of the most expensive works of art lost during the September 11 attacks.\nIn 1977, Mir\u00f3 and Royo finished a tapestry to be exhibited in the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC.\nIn 1981, Mir\u00f3's \"The Sun, the Moon and One Star\"\u2014later renamed \"Mir\u00f3's Chicago\"\u2014was unveiled. This large, mixed media sculpture is situated outdoors in the downtown Loop area of Chicago, across the street from another large public sculpture, the Chicago Picasso. Mir\u00f3 had created a bronze model of \"The Sun, the Moon and One Star\" in 1967. The maquette now resides in the Milwaukee Art Museum.\nLate life and death.\nIn 1979 Mir\u00f3 received a doctorate \"honoris causa\" from the University of Barcelona. The artist, who suffered from heart failure, died in his home in Palma, Mallorca on 25 December 1983 at age 90. He was later interred in the Montju\u00efc Cemetery in Barcelona.\nMental health.\nMir\u00f3 had many episodes of depression throughout his life. He experienced his first depression when he was 18 in 1911. Mir\u00f3 said, \"I was demoralized and suffered from a serious depression. I fell really ill, and stayed three months in bed\". He used painting as a way of dealing with depression, and it supposedly made him calmer and his thoughts less dark. Mir\u00f3 said that without painting he became \"very depressed, gloomy and I get 'black ideas', and I do not know what to do with myself\".\nHis mental state is visible in his painting \"Carnival of the Harlequin.\" He tried to paint the chaos he experienced in his mind, the desperation of wanting to leave that chaos behind and the pain created because of that. Mir\u00f3 painted the symbol of the ladder here which is also visible in multiple other paintings after this painting. It is supposed to symbolize escaping.\nThe relation between creativity and mental illness is very well studied. It has been argued that creative people have a higher chance of suffering from a manic depressive illness or schizophrenia, as well as higher chance of transmitting this genetically. Even though we know Mir\u00f3 suffered from episodic depression, it is uncertain whether he also experienced manic episodes, which is often referred to as bipolar disorder.\nWorks.\nEarly fauvist.\nHis early modernist works include \"Portrait of Vincent Nubiola\" (1917), \"Siurana (the path)\", \"Nord-Sud\" (1917) and \"Painting of Toledo\". These works show the influence of C\u00e9zanne, and fill the canvas with a colorful surface and a more painterly treatment than the hard-edge style of most of his later works. In \"Nord-Sud\", the literary newspaper of that name appears in the still life, a compositional device common in cubist compositions, but also a reference to the literary and avant-garde interests of the painter.\nMagical realism.\nStarting in 1920, Mir\u00f3 developed a very precise style, picking out every element in isolation and detail and arranging them in deliberate composition. These works, including \"House with Palm Tree\" (1918), \"Nude with a Mirror\" (1919), \"Horse, Pipe and Red Flower\" (1920), and \"The Table \u2013 Still Life with Rabbit\" (1920), show the clear influence of Cubism, although in a restrained way, being applied to only a portion of the subject. For example, \"The Farmer's Wife\" (1922\u201323), is realistic, but some sections are stylized or deformed, such as the treatment of the woman's feet, which are enlarged and flattened.\nThe culmination of this style was \"The Farm\" (1921\u201322). The rural Catalan scene it depicts is augmented by an avant-garde French newspaper in the center, showing Mir\u00f3 sees this work transformed by the Modernist theories he had been exposed to in Paris. The concentration on each element as equally important was a key step towards generating a pictorial sign for each element. The background is rendered in flat or patterned in simple areas, highlighting the separation of figure and ground, which would become important in his mature style.\nMir\u00f3 made many attempts to promote this work, but his surrealist colleagues found it too realistic and apparently conventional, and so he soon turned to a more explicitly surrealist approach.\nEarly surrealism.\nIn 1922, Mir\u00f3 explored abstracted, strongly coloured surrealism in at least one painting. From the summer of 1923 in Mont-roig, Mir\u00f3 began a key set of paintings where abstracted pictorial signs, rather than the realistic representations used in The Farm, are predominant. In \"The Tilled Field\", \"Catalan Landscape (The Hunter)\" and \"Pastoral\" (1923\u201324), these flat shapes and lines (mostly black or strongly coloured) suggest the subjects, sometimes quite cryptically. For \"Catalan Landscape (The Hunter)\", Mir\u00f3 represents the hunter with a combination of signs: a triangle for the head, curved lines for the moustache, angular lines for the body. So encoded is this work that at a later time Mir\u00f3 provided a precise explanation of the signs used.\nSurrealist pictorial language.\nThrough the mid-1920s Mir\u00f3 developed the pictorial sign language which would be central throughout the rest of his career. In \"Harlequin's Carnival\" (1924\u20131925), there is a clear continuation of the line begun with \"The Tilled Field\". But in subsequent works, such as \"The Happiness of Loving My Brunette\" (1925) and \"Painting (Fratellini)\" (1927), there are far fewer foreground figures, and those that remain are simplified.\nSoon after, Mir\u00f3 also began his \"Spanish Dancer\" series of works. These simple collages, were like a conceptual counterpoint to his paintings. In \"Spanish Dancer\" (1928) he combines a cork, a feather and a hatpin onto a blank sheet of paper.\nLivres d'Artiste.\nMir\u00f3 created over 250 illustrated books. These were known as \"Livres d'Artiste\". One such work was published in 1974, at the urging of the widow of the French poet Robert Desnos, titled \"Les p\u00e9nalit\u00e9s de l'enfer ou les Nouvelles H\u00e9brides\" (\"The Penalties of Hell or The New Hebrides\"). It was a set of 25 lithographs, five in black, and the others in colors.\nIn 2006, the book with these collected lithos was displayed in \"Joan Mir\u00f3, Illustrated Books\" at the Vero Beach Museum of Art. One critic described it as \"an especially powerful set, not only for the rich imagery but also for the story behind the book's creation. The lithographs are long, narrow verticals, and while they feature Mir\u00f3's familiar shapes, there's an unusual emphasis on texture.\" The critic continued, \"I was instantly attracted to these four prints, to an emotional lushness, that's in contrast with the cool surfaces of so much of Mir\u00f3's work. Their poignancy is even greater, I think, when you read how they came to be. The artist met and became friends with Desnos, perhaps the most beloved and influential surrealist writer, in 1925, and before long, they made plans to collaborate on a \"livre d'artist[e]\". Those plans were put on hold because of the Spanish Civil War and World War II. Desnos' bold criticism of the latter led to his imprisonment in concentration camps [ Auschwitz ], and he died at age 45 shortly after his release in 1945.\n\"Nearly three decades later, at the suggestion of Desnos' widow, Mir\u00f3 set out to illustrate the poet's manuscript. It was his first work in prose, which was written in Morocco in 1922 but remained unpublished until this posthumous collaboration.\"\nStyles and development.\nIn Paris, under the influence of poets and writers, he developed his unique style: organic forms and flattened picture planes drawn with a sharp line. Generally thought of as a Surrealist because of his interest in automatism and the use of sexual symbols (for example, ovoids with wavy lines emanating from them), Mir\u00f3's style was influenced in varying degrees by Surrealism and Dada, yet he rejected membership in any artistic movement in the interwar European years. Andr\u00e9 Breton described him as \"the most Surrealist of us all.\" Mir\u00f3 confessed to creating one of his most famous works, \"Harlequin's Carnival\", under similar circumstances:\nHow did I think up my drawings and my ideas for painting? Well I'd come home to my Paris studio in Rue Blomet at night, I'd go to bed, and sometimes I hadn't any supper. I saw things, and I jotted them down in a notebook. I saw shapes on the ceiling...\nMir\u00f3's surrealist origins evolved out of \"repression\" much like all Spanish surrealist and magic realist work, especially because of his Catalan ethnicity, which was subject to special persecution by the Franco regime. He drew on Catalan folk art such as siurells, which he claimed to \"observe constantly.\" Also, Joan Mir\u00f3 was influenced by Haitian Vodou art and Cuban Santer\u00eda religion, which he encountered while he was in exile in the Caribbean. These movements shaped his own style of painting.\nExperimental style.\nJoan Mir\u00f3 was among the first artists to develop automatic drawing as a way to undo previous established techniques in painting, and thus, with Andr\u00e9 Masson, represented the beginning of Surrealism as an art movement. However, Mir\u00f3 chose not to become an official member of the Surrealists to be free to experiment with other artistic styles without compromising his position within the group. He pursued his own interests in the art world, ranging from automatic drawing and surrealism, to expressionism, Lyrical Abstraction, and Color Field painting. Four-dimensional painting was a theoretical type of painting Mir\u00f3 proposed in which painting would transcend its two-dimensionality and even the three-dimensionality of sculpture.\nMir\u00f3's oft-quoted interest in the \"assassination of painting\" is derived from a dislike of bourgeois art, which he believed was used as a way to promote propaganda and cultural identity among the wealthy. Specifically, Mir\u00f3 responded to Cubism in this way, which by the time of his quote had become an established art form in France. He is quoted as saying \"I will break their guitar,\" referring to Picasso's paintings, with the intent to attack the popularity and appropriation of Picasso's art by politics.\nThe spectacle of the sky overwhelms me. I'm overwhelmed when I see, in an immense sky, the crescent of the moon, or the sun. There, in my pictures, tiny forms in huge empty spaces. Empty spaces, empty horizons, empty plains \u2013 everything which is bare has always greatly impressed me. \u2014Joan Mir\u00f3, 1958, quoted in \"Twentieth-Century Artists on Art\"\nIn an interview with biographer Walter Erben, Mir\u00f3 expressed his dislike for art critics, saying, they \"are more concerned with being philosophers than anything else. They form a preconceived opinion, then they look at the work of art. Painting merely serves as a cloak in which to wrap their emaciated philosophical systems.\"\nIn the final decades of his life Mir\u00f3 accelerated his work in different media, producing hundreds of ceramics, including the \"Wall of the Moon\" and \"Wall of the Sun\" at the UNESCO building in Paris. He also made temporary window paintings (on glass) for an exhibit. In the last years of his life Mir\u00f3 wrote his most radical and least known ideas, exploring the possibilities of gas sculpture and four-dimensional painting.\nExhibitions.\nThroughout the 1960s, Mir\u00f3 was a featured artist in many salon shows assembled by the Maeght Foundation that also included works by Marc Chagall, Giacometti, Brach, Cesar, Ubac, and Tal-Coat.\nThe large retrospectives devoted to Mir\u00f3 in his old age in places like New York (1972), London (1972), Saint-Paul-de-Vence (1973) and Paris (1974) were a good indication of the international acclaim that had grown steadily over the previous half-century; further major retrospectives took place posthumously. Political changes in his native country led in 1978 to the first full exhibition of his painting and graphic work, at the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sof\u00eda in Madrid.\nIn 1993, the year of the hundredth anniversary of his birth, several exhibitions were held, among which the most prominent were those held in the Fundaci\u00f3 Joan Mir\u00f3, Barcelona, the Museum of Modern Art, New York, the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sof\u00eda, Madrid, and the Galerie Lelong, Paris.\nIn 2010, the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited \"Mir\u00f3: The Dutch Interiors\" that showed 3 Mir\u00f3 paintings with Dutch Golden Age works that inspired them.\nIn 2011, another retrospective \"Joan Mir\u00f3: The Ladder of Escape\" was mounted by the Tate Modern and travelled to Fundaci\u00f3 Joan Mir\u00f3 and the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. The catalog was edited by Marko Daniel and Matthew Gale \n\"Joan Mir\u00f3, Printmaking\" was exhibited at Fundaci\u00f3n Joan Mir\u00f3 (2013). In 2014 there were two exhibitions \"Mir\u00f3: From Earth to Sky\" at Albertina Museum, and \"Masterpieces from the Kunsthaus Z\u00fcrich\", National Art Center, Tokyo.\nExhibitions entitled \"Joan Mir\u00f3: Instinct &amp; Imagination\" and \"Mir\u00f3: The Experience of Seeing\" were held at the Denver Art Museum from 22 March \u2013 28 June 2015 and at the McNay Art Museum from 30 September 2015 \u2013 10 January 2016 (respectively), showing works made by Mir\u00f3 between 1963 and 1981, on loan from the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sof\u00eda in Madrid. In 2018, he was exhibited alongside, among others, Henri Matisse, Le Corbusier, Raymond Hains and \u00c9ric Sandillon at the Museum of Decorative Arts and Design in Riga, Latvia. This exhibition, titled \"Colour of Gobelins: Contemporary Gobelins from the 'Mobilier national' collection in France\", took place during the sixth edition of the Riga Textile Art.\nIn Spring 2019, the Museum of Modern Art, New York, launched \"Joan Mir\u00f3: Birth of the World.\" Running until July 2019, the exhibit showcased 60 pieces of work from the inception of Mir\u00f3's career, and including the influence of the World Wars. The exhibit featured 60-foot canvasses as well as smaller 8-foot paintings, and the influences ranged from cubism to abstraction.\nIn 2018\u201319, the Philadelphia Museum of Art exhibited his work in \"Joan Mir\u00f3\" which showcased his paintings and \u201canti-paintings.\u201d\nLegacy and influence.\nMir\u00f3 has been a significant influence on late 20th-century art, in particular the American abstract expressionist artists that include: Motherwell, Calder, Gorky, Pollock, Matta, and Rothko, while his lyrical abstractions and color field paintings were precursors of that style by artists such as Helen Frankenthaler, Olitski and Louis and others.\nHis work has also influenced modern designers, including Paul Rand and Lucienne Day, and influenced recent painters such as Julian Hatton.\nOne of Man Ray's 1930s photographs, \"Mir\u00f3 with Rope\", depicts the painter with an arranged rope pinned to a wall, and was published in the single-issue surrealist work \"Minotaure\".\nIn 2002, American percussionist/composer Bobby Previte released the album \"The 23 Constellations of Joan Mir\u00f3\" on Tzadik Records. Inspired by Mir\u00f3's \"Constellations\" series, Previte composed a series of short pieces (none longer than about 3 minutes) to parallel the small size of Mir\u00f3's paintings. Previte's compositions for an ensemble of up to ten musicians was described by critics as \"unconventionally light, ethereal, and dreamlike\".\nRecognition.\nIn 1954 he was given the Venice Biennale print making prize, in 1958 the Guggenheim International Award.\nIn 1981, the Palma City Council (Mallorca) established the \"Fundaci\u00f3 Pilar i Joan Mir\u00f3 a Mallorca\", housed in the four studios that Mir\u00f3 had donated for the purpose.\nIn October 2018, the Grand Palais in Paris opened the largest retrospective devoted to the artist until this date. The exhibition included nearly 150 works and was curated by Jean Louis Prat.\nArt market.\nToday, Mir\u00f3's paintings sell for between US$250,000 and US$26\u00a0million; US$17\u00a0million at a U.S. auction for the \"La Caresse des \u00e9toiles\" (1938) on 6 May 2008, at the time the highest amount paid for one of his works. In 2012, \"Painting-Poem (\"le corps de ma brune puisque je l'aime comme ma chatte habill\u00e9e en vert salade comme de la gr\u00eale c'est pareil\")\" (1925) was sold at Christie's London for $26.6\u00a0million. Later that year at Sotheby's in London, \"Peinture (Etoile Bleue)\" (1927) brought nearly 23.6\u00a0million pounds with fees, more than twice what it had sold for at a Paris auction in 2007 and a record price for the artist at auction. On 21 June 2017, the work \"Femme et Oiseaux\" (1940), one of his \"Constellations\", sold at Sotheby's London for 24,571,250 GBP.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63097", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63097", "title": "National Book Award", "text": "American literary awards\nThe National Book Awards (NBA) are a set of annual U.S. literary awards. At the final National Book Awards Ceremony every November, the National Book Foundation presents the National Book Awards and two lifetime achievement awards to authors. The National Book Awards were established in 1936 by the American Booksellers Association, abandoned during World War II, and re-established by three book industry organizations in 1950. Non-U.S. authors and publishers were eligible for the pre-war awards. Since then they are presented to U.S. authors for books published in the United States roughly during the award year.\nThe nonprofit National Book Foundation was established in 1988 to administer and enhance the National Book Awards and \"move beyond [them] into the fields of education and literacy\", primarily by sponsoring public appearances by writers.\nIts mission is \"to celebrate the best literature in America, expand its audience, and ensure that books have a prominent place in American culture.\"\nIn 2018, there were 1,637 books nominated for the five award categories, led by the Nonfiction category with 546 nominations. The 2018 ceremony was held on November 14 in New York City.\nProcess.\nNational Book Awards are given to one book (author) annually in each of five categories: fiction, nonfiction, poetry, translation, and young people's literature. There have previously been many other categories but they have been retired or subsumed in the existing five. The National Book Foundation also presents two lifetime achievement awards each year: the \"Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters\" and the \"Literarian Award for Outstanding Service to the American Literary Community\".\nOnly publishers nominate books for the National Book Awards, but panelists may request particular nominations from publishers. Each panel comprises five judges, including writers, librarians, booksellers, and literary critics. In 2013, the judging panels were expanded to include experts in the literary field in addition to established writers.\nEach panel considers hundreds of books each year in each of the five categories. In 2013, the Foundation announced the addition of a National Book Awards longlist\u2014announced in September and consisting of ten titles per category\u2014to precede the finalists list, announced in October and comprising five titles per category. The fifth category, the National Book Award for Translated Literature, was added in 2018, recognizing works in translation for the first time since 1983. At the National Book Awards Ceremony and Dinner held in New York City each November, the chair of each judging panel announces the winners of the year's National Book Awards. Each finalist receives $1,000, a medal, and a citation written by the judging panel; winners get $10,000 and a bronze sculpture.\nHistory.\nPre-war awards by booksellers.\nThe first National Book Awards were presented in May 1936 at the annual convention of the American Booksellers Association, one month after \"The New York Times\" reported institution of the \"new annual award\". The winners were authors of four 1935 books selected by a vote of ABA members. Virginia Kirkus chaired the central committee of seven including the ABA president, three bookshops, \"Publishers Weekly\", and American News Company. Three were called \"the most distinguished of 1935\" (novel, biography, and general nonfiction) and one \"the most original\" (novel).\nTwo of the books were advertised by their publishers as \"The most distinguished autobiography of 1935\" and \"The most distinguished general non-fiction book of 1935\" in \"NYTimes\" on May 12, the same day that the newspaper reported yesterday's awards.\nFor the next six years, 1937 to 1942, the awards were announced from mid-February to early March.\nThe \"Most Distinguished\" Nonfiction, Biography, and Novel (for 1935 and 1936) were reduced to two and termed \"Favorite\" Nonfiction and Fiction beginning 1937. Master of ceremonies Clifton Fadiman declined to consider the Pulitzer Prizes (not yet announced in February 1938) as potential ratifications. \"Unlike the Pulitzer Prize committee, the booksellers merely vote for their favorite books. They do not say it is the best book or the one that will elevate the standard of manhood or womanhood. Twenty years from now we can decide which are the masterpieces. This year we can only decide which books we enjoyed reading the most.\"\nThe Bookseller Discovery officially recognized \"outstanding merit which failed to receive adequate sales and recognition\" (quoted by NYT)\nFinally that award stood alone for 1941 and the \"New York Times\" frankly called it \"a sort of consolation prize that the booksellers hope will draw attention to his work.\"\nThe winning authors and books were selected by a nationwide poll of booksellers (ABA members); during the 1937/38 cycle, ballots were received from 319 stores, triple the number who voted in the first rendition early in 1936.\nIn a 1941 advertisement, the Booksellers described the \"significance of the awards\" thus:\nIn effect, his ballot says, \"Of all the books of the year these are the three I enjoyed most \u2013 \"in two ways\"! I enjoyed reading them; and I enjoyed selling them.\" And that to a bookseller means people who, on his recommendation, read and enjoyed \u2013 and sent in other people who also read and enjoyed.\nThe National Book Awards give you perhaps a greater guarantee of reading pleasure than any other literary prizes.\nReestablished by the book industry.\nIn January 1950 three book industry organizations announced that \"works by Americans published here\" would be recognized by three awards in March (at the annual convention?). There would be three distinct panels of five judges. The fifteen judges were \"Elmer Davis, John Kieran, Henry Steele Commager, Fairfield Osborn and Norman Cousins for non-fiction; Mary Colum, Glenway Wescott, Max Gissin, W. G. Rogers and Malcolm Cowley for fiction; and W. H. Auden, Louise Bogan, Babett Duetsch, Horace Gregory and Louise Untermeyer for poetry.\"\nThe awards were administered by the National Book Committee from 1950 to 1974, when the Committee disbanded after publishers withdrew support.\nIn 1950 and 1967, at least, the prize sponsors were three book-industry organizations American Booksellers Association, the American Book Publishers Council and the Book Manufacturers Institute.\nIn 1973 NYTimes still called the National Book Committee a nonprofit funded \"by publishers and by organizations involved in the book trade\" A temporary Committee on Awards Policy handled 1975.\nNew categories and split awards.\nIn 1964 Nonfiction was divided in three. The National Book Award for Translation was introduced in 1967 and split between two books, the first split.\nChildren's literature was first recognized as one of seven categories in 1969. Two awards were split in 1973 for the first time.\nPublishers dropped their support after 1974 and the National Book Committee was disbanded.\nIn 1975 the temporary administrator\"begged\" judges not to split awards.\nThree of 27 awards were split in 1983\nbefore the drastic cutback that also required selection of a single winner in all three categories for 1984.\nThe currently active Poetry category was added in 1991, followed by Young People's Literature in 1996, and Translated Literature in 2018.\n\"American Book Awards\".\nIn 1980 the \"National Book Awards\" were canceled and replaced by \"American Book Awards\" on the film industry model (Oscars). \"It will be run almost exactly the way the Academy Awards are run,\" a spokesman told reporters.\" There would be nearly 30 awards presented in an extravagant TV-friendly ceremony, to winners selected by a standing \"academy\" of more than 2,000 people in the book industry.\nImplementation was poor, the episode a disaster.\nMost new categories survived only one to four cycles, 1980 to 1983. There were seven awards categories in 1979, twenty-eight in 1980, nineteen in 1983 (plus graphics awards, see below), three in 1984.\nIn 1983 there were 30 award winners in 27 categories including 14 categories of literary achievement in writing for adults; in turn, five for hardcover editions, six for paperback editions, and three general.\n1983 awards categories (27)\nLate that year, the AAP Board voted to fund a new version of the Awards, which had been \"close to expiring from lack of support\". At the time, AAP and Harper &amp; Row president Brooks Thomas anticipated \"probably fewer than ten\" categories, including some \"only for original paperbacks, not reprints\". Edwin McDowell reported that \"many book-industry officials hope\u00a0... [to] rank in importance with the $15,000 Booker McConnell Prize for Fiction\" (British).\nFor 1983 publications (January to October) there would be no awards. A committee comprising American Book Awards executive director Barbara Prete and four publishers designed the new and improved program, implemented fall 1984 for a publication year beginning November 1983. They cut the roster to merely three (Nonfiction, Fiction, and First Work of Fiction), moved the ceremony from early spring to late fall, and redefined eligibility to require publication during the calendar year of the awards (roughly, see Annual eligibility). There were only fiction and nonfiction awards in 1986.\n1987-present day.\nIn 1987 the \"National\" award returned in name. Covering the November ceremony, Edwin McDowell of \"The New York Times\" remarked upon the recurring changes in format and contrasted 1983 in particular, when there were 96 finalists in 27 awards categories (listed above).\nThe surviving awards for general Fiction and Nonfiction, now with precisely five finalists each, were administered by National Book Awards, Inc., whose Chairman of the Board was the president of Hearst Trade Book Group. He declaimed that \"Book people are really not actors, and there's a realization now that we should not try to reward things like who did the best book blurb.\" The fixed number five finalists was retained through 2012, while the number of book categories has doubled with the addition of Poetry in 1991 and Young People's Literature in 1996. Beginning with 2013, the Foundation announced there would be a \"longlist\" of 10 titles in each of the four categories in September (40 titles), followed by a \"finalist\" list of 5 titles in October (20 titles), and then the winners in November (4 titles). In 2018 a fifth award category was announced, the National Book Award for Translated Literature. It is for living translators and authors and for fiction and non-fiction. The foundation previously gave a translation award from 1967-1983, but did not require the author to be living and was for fiction only.\nIn 2024, the National Book Foundation announced the awards would no longer require U.S. citizenship for eligibility, following a similar decision the Pulitzer Prizes had made in 2023.\nAnnual eligibility.\nA book must be published \"between December 1 of the previous year and November 30 of the current year\" to be eligible. Its publisher must complete a nomination in the spring and mail copies to the panelists. The panelists read all the valid nominees during this time, and the panels compile shortlists in September.\nThe pre-war awards were announced in the winter, usually February, and described with reference to the year of publication, if any; for example, \"National Book Awards for 1939\" announced February 1940. The 1950 to 1983 awards, as the National Book Foundation labeled them, were presented in the spring to works published during the preceding calendar year. Since 1984 the NBA have been presented in the fall, usually November, to books published roughly during the calendar year (December of the previous year through November).\nMedal for Distinguished Contribution (lifetime).\nThe Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters is a lifetime achievement award presented by the Foundation at the final ceremony for the Book Awards. The medal comes with a cash prize of $10,000. It recognizes someone who \"has enriched [American] literary heritage over a life of service, or a corpus of work.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFive of the seventeen medalists through 2004 were previous National Book Award winners (Bellow, Welty, McCullough, Updike, and Roth, all but McCullough for fiction). Between 2005 and 2018, all of the medalists except Leonard and Allende have been previous National Book Award winners.\nLiterarian Award for Outstanding Service (lifetime).\nThe Literarian Award for Outstanding Service to the American Literary Community is a lifetime achievement award presented by the Foundation annually from 2005. It recognizes \"an individual for outstanding service to the American literary community, whose life and work exemplify the goals of the National Book Foundation to expand the audience for literature and to enhance the cultural value of literature in America.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63098", "revid": "26798189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63098", "title": "Optic chiasm", "text": "Part of the brain where the optic nerves cross\nIn neuroanatomy, the optic chiasm (), or optic chiasma (from el \" ' (kh\u00edasma)\"\u00a0'crossing', from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'to mark with an X'), is the part of the brain where the optic nerves cross. It is located at the bottom of the brain immediately inferior to the hypothalamus. The optic chiasm is found in all vertebrates, although in cyclostomes (lampreys and hagfishes), it is located within the brain.\nThis article is about the optic chiasm of vertebrates, which is the best known nerve chiasm, but not every chiasm denotes a crossing of the body midline (e.g., in some invertebrates, see Chiasm (anatomy)). A midline crossing of nerves inside the brain is called a decussation (see Definition of types of crossings).\nStructure.\nIn all vertebrates, the optic nerves of the left and the right eye meet in the body midline, ventral to the brain. In many vertebrates the left optic nerve crosses over the right one without fusing with it.\nIn vertebrates with a large overlap of the visual fields of the two eyes, i.e., most mammals and birds, but also amphibians, reptiles such as chameleons, the two optic nerves merge in the optic chiasm. In such a merged optic chiasm, part of the nerve fibres do not cross the midline, but continue towards the optic tract of the ipsilateral side. By this partial decussation, the part of the visual field that is covered by both eyes is fused so that the processing of binocular depth perception by stereopsis is enabled (see Figure 2).\nIn the case of such partial decussation, the optic nerve fibres on the medial sides of each retina (which correspond to the lateral side of each visual hemifield, because the image is inverted) cross over to the opposite side of the body midline. The inferonasal retina are related to the anterior portion of the optic chiasm whereas superonasal retinal fibers are related to the posterior portion of the optic chiasm.\nThe partial crossing over of optic nerve fibres at the optic chiasm allows the visual cortex to receive the same hemispheric visual field from both eyes. Superimposing and processing these monocular visual signals allow the visual cortex to generate binocular and stereoscopic vision. The net result is that the right cerebral hemisphere processes left visual hemifield, and the left cerebral hemisphere processes the right visual hemifield.\nBeyond the optic chiasm, with crossed and uncrossed fibers, the optic nerves are called optic tracts. The optic tract inserts on the optic tectum (in mammals known as superior colliculus) of the midbrain. In mammals they also branch off to the lateral geniculate body of the thalamus, in turn giving them to the occipital cortex of the cerebrum.\nArterial supply.\nThe optic chiasma receives its arterial supply from the anterior cerebral arteries, and from branches of the internal carotid artery which ascend along the pituitary stalk (the latter supplying the midline portion of the chiasma).\nDevelopment in mammals.\nDuring development, the crossing of the optic nerves is guided primarily by cues such as netrin, slit, semaphorin and ephrin; and by morphogens such as sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt. This navigation is mediated by the neuronal growth cone, a structure that responds to the cues by ligand-receptor signalling systems that activate downstream pathways inducing changes in the cytoskeleton. Retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons leaving the eye through the optic nerve are blocked from exiting the developing pathway by Slit2 and Sema5A inhibition, expressed bordering the optic nerve pathway. Ssh expressed at the central nervous system midline inhibits crossing prior to the chiasm, where it is downregulated. The organization of RGC axons changes from retinotopic to a flat sheet-like orientation as they approach the chiasm site.\nMost RGC axons cross the midline at the ventral diencephalon and continue to the contralateral superior colliculus. The number of axons that do not cross the midline and project ipsilaterally depends on the degree of binocular vision of the animal (3% in mice and 45% in humans do not cross). Ephrin-B2 is expressed at the chiasm midline by radial glia and acts as a repulsive signal to axons originating from the ventrotemporal retina expressing EphB1 receptor protein, giving rise to the ipsilateral, or uncrossed, projection. RGC axons that do cross at the optic chiasm are guided by the vascular endothelial growth factor, VEGF-A, expressed at the midline, which signals through the receptor Neuropilin-1 (NRP1) expressed on RGC axons. Chiasm crossing is also promoted by Nr-CAM (Ng-CAM-related cell adhesion molecule) and Semaphorin6D (Sema6D) expressed at the midline, which form a complex that signals to Nr-CAM/Plexin-A1 receptors on crossing RGC axons.\nOther animals.\nMammals.\nSince all vertebrates, even the earliest fossils and modern jawless ones, possess an optic chiasm, it is not known how it evolved. A number of theories have been proposed for the function of the optic chiasm in vertebrates (see theories). According to the axial twist theory the optic chiasm develops as a consequence of a twist in the early embryo.\nIn Siamese cats with certain genotypes of the albino gene, the wiring is disrupted, with more of the nerve-crossing than normal. Since Siamese cats, like albino tigers, also tend to cross their eyes (strabismus), it has been proposed that this behavior might compensate the abnormal amount of decussation.\nCephalopods and insects.\nIn cephalopods and insects the optic tracts do not cross the body midline, so each side of the brain processes the ipsilateral eye.\nHistory.\nThe crossing of nerve fibres, and the impact on vision that this had, was probably first identified by Persian physician \"Esmail Jorjani\", who appears to be Zayn al-Din Gorgani (1042\u20131137).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63099", "revid": "35791198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63099", "title": "Ishmael (Quinn novel)", "text": "1992 philosophical novel by Daniel Quinn\nIshmael is a 1992 philosophical novel by Daniel Quinn. The novel examines the hidden cultural biases driving modern civilization and explores themes of ethics, sustainability, and global catastrophe. Largely framed as a Socratic conversation between two characters, \"Ishmael\" aims to expose that several widely accepted assumptions of modern society, such as human supremacy, are actually cultural myths that produce catastrophic consequences for humankind and the environment. The novel was awarded the $500,000 Turner Tomorrow Fellowship Award in 1991, a year before its formal publication.\n\"Ishmael\" is part of a loose trilogy that includes a 1996 spiritual sequel, \"The Story of B\", and a 1997 \"sidequel,\" \"My Ishmael\". Quinn also details how he arrived at the ideas behind \"Ishmael\" in his 1994 autobiography, \"\". Yet another related book is Quinn's 1999 short treatise, \"Beyond Civilization\".\nPlot summary.\nImplicitly set in the early 1990s, \"Ishmael\" begins with a newspaper advertisement: \"Teacher seeks pupil. Must have an earnest desire to save the world. Apply in person\". The nameless narrator and protagonist thus begins his story, telling how he first reacted to this ad with scorn because of the absurdity of \"wanting to save the world\", a notion he feels that he once na\u00efvely embraced himself as an adolescent during the counterculture movement of the 1960s. Feeling he must discover the ad's publisher, he follows its address, surprisingly finding himself in a room with a live gorilla. On the wall is a sign with a double meaning: \"With man gone, will there be hope for gorilla?\" Suddenly, the gorilla, calling himself Ishmael, begins communicating to the man telepathically. At first baffled by this, the man learns the story of how the gorilla came to be here and soon accepts Ishmael as his teacher, regularly returning to Ishmael's office. The novel continues from this point mainly as a dialogue between Ishmael and his new student.\nIshmael's life began in the African wilderness, though he was captured at a young age and has lived mostly in a zoo and a menagerie (before living permanently in a private residence), which caused Ishmael to start thinking about ideas that he never would have thought about in the wild, including self-awareness, human language and culture, and what he refers to as the subject he specifically teaches: \"captivity\". The narrator admits to Ishmael that he has a vague notion of living in some sort of cultural captivity and being lied to in some way by society, but he cannot articulate these feelings fully.\nThe man frequently visits Ishmael over the next several weeks, and Ishmael proceeds to use the Socratic method to deduce with the man what \"origin story\" and other \"myths\" modern civilization subscribes to. Before proceeding, Ishmael lays down some basic definitions for his student:\nAt first, the narrator is certain that civilized people no longer believe in any \"myths\", but Ishmael proceeds to gradually tease from him several hidden but widely accepted premises of \"mythical\" thinking being enacted by the Takers:\nIshmael points out to his student that when the Takers decided all of this, especially the idea that there is something fundamentally wrong with humans, they took as evidence only their own particular culture's history: \"They were looking at a half of one percent of the evidence taken from a single culture. Not a reasonable sample on which to base such a sweeping conclusion\". \nOn the contrary, Ishmael asserts that there is nothing inherently wrong with humans and that a story that places humans in harmony with the world will cause humans to enact this harmony, while a destructive story such as this will cause humans to destroy the world, as humans are doing now. Ishmael goes on to help his student discover that, contrary to this Taker world-view, there is indeed knowledge of how humans should live: biological \"laws\" that life is subject to, discernible by studying the ecological patterns of other living things. Together, Ishmael and his student identify one set of survival strategies that appear to be true for all species (later dubbed the \"law of limited competition\"): in short, as a species, \"you may compete to the full extent of your capabilities, but you may not hunt down competitors or destroy their food or deny them access to food. In other words, you may compete but you may not wage war\". All species inevitably follow this law, or as a consequence go extinct; the Takers, however, believe themselves to be exempt from this law and flout it at every point, which is therefore rapidly leading humanity towards extinction.\nTo illustrate his philosophy, Ishmael proposes a revision to the Christian myth of the Fall of Man. Ishmael's version of why the fruit was forbidden to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden is: eating the fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil provides gods with the knowledge of who shall live and who shall die\u2014knowledge which they need to rule the world. The fruit nourishes only the gods, though. If Adam (\"humanity\") were to eat from this tree, he might \"think\" that he gained the gods' wisdom (without this actually happening) and consequently destroy the world and himself through his arrogance. Ishmael makes the point that the myth of the Fall, which the Takers have adopted as their own, was in fact developed by Leavers to explain the origin of the Takers. If it were of Taker origin, the story would be of liberating progress instead of a sinful fall.\nIshmael and his student go on to discuss how, for the ancient herders among whom the tale originated, the Biblical story of Cain killing Abel symbolizes the Leaver being killed off and their lands taken so that it could be put under cultivation. These ancient herders realized that the Takers were acting as if they were gods themselves, with all the wisdom of what is good and evil and how to rule the world: agriculture is, in fact, an attempt to more greatly create and control life, a power that only gods can hold, not humans. To begin discerning the Leavers' story, Ishmael proposes to his student a hypothesis: the Takers' Agricultural Revolution was a revolution in trying to strenuously and destructively live \"above\" the laws of nature, against the Leavers' more ecologically peaceful story of living \"by\" the laws of nature.\nThe Takers, by practicing their uniquely envisioned form of agriculture (dubbed by Quinn \"totalitarian agriculture\" in a later book) produce enormous food surpluses, which consequently yields an ever-increasing population, which itself is leading to ecological imbalances and catastrophes around the world. Ishmael finishes his education with the student by saying that, in order for humanity to survive, Takers must relinquish their arrogant vision in favor of the Leaver humility in knowing that they do not possess any god-like knowledge of some \"one right way to live\". They can adopt an alternative story that has humans as the first, not the final, fully-conscious creature. We can support evolution and diversity. Ishmael tells his student to teach a hundred people what he has learned, who can each pass this learning on to another hundred.\nThe student becomes busy at work, later discovering that Ishmael has fallen ill and died of pneumonia. Returning to Ishmael's room one day, he collects Ishmael's belongings. Among them he discovers that the sign he saw before (\"With man gone, will there be hope for gorilla?\") has a backside with another message: \"With gorilla gone, will there be hope for man?\"\nReinterpretation of biblical stories.\nIshmael proposes that the story of Genesis was written by the Semites and later adapted to work within Hebrew, Christian and Muslim belief structures. He proposes that Abel's extinction metaphorically represents the nomadic Semites' losing in their conflict with agriculturalists. As they were driven further into the Arabian peninsula, the Semites became isolated from other herding cultures and, according to Ishmael, illustrated their plight through oral history, which was later adopted into the Hebrew book of Genesis.\nIshmael denies that the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was forbidden to humans simply to test humans' self-control. Instead, he proposes that eating of the Tree would not actually give humans divine knowledge but would only make humans \"believe\" they had been given it, and that the Tree represents the choice to bear the responsibility of deciding which species live and which die. This is a decision agricultural peoples (i.e. Takers) make when deciding which organisms to cultivate, which to displace, and which to kill in protection of the first.\nIshmael explains that the Fall of Adam represents the belief that, once mankind usurps this responsibility\u2014historically decided through natural ecology (i.e. food chains)\u2014that humankind will perish. He cites as fulfillment of this prophecy contemporary environmental crises such as endangered or extinct species, global warming, and modern mental illnesses.\nReferences in popular culture.\nThe opening credits for the 1999 film \"Instinct\", starring Anthony Hopkins and Cuba Gooding Jr., indicate that it is inspired by \"Ishmael\". Daniel Quinn did not approve of the script or movie before transferring the rights, which were transferred as part of the Turner Award, though he may have had some minor input on the script, though to a degree he personally considered trivial. The movie and book share no common story elements, and the philosophical connection to the book is reduced to some pictorial format and a few seconds of on-screen dialogue.\nEddie Vedder of Pearl Jam has cited the book as an influence on their album, \"Yield\". Quinn responds to the album's significance in relation to the book on his website.\nIn Rise Against's album \"The Sufferer and The Witness\", \"Ishmael\" is on the album notes' recommended reading list.\nThe song \"The Taker Story\" on Chicano Batman's 2017 album \"Freedom is Free\" describes the global colonization of the \"Taker\" societies based on the use of the term in \"Ishmael\".\nThe name of progressive metal band Animals as Leaders was inspired by the book.\nChronology of events in the \"Ishmael\" trilogy.\nThe following is a list of the (fictional) events in the interrelated time frame of \"Ishmael\" (published in 1992), \"The Story of B\" (1996), and \"My Ishmael\" (1997). Much of the chronology remains ambiguous in the former two, though is specified in much more detail in \"My Ishmael\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63101", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63101", "title": "James Hilton (novelist)", "text": "British novelist and screenwriter (1900\u20131954)\nJames Hilton (9 September 1900 \u2013 20 December 1954) was a British-American novelist and screenwriter. He is best remembered for his novels \"Lost Horizon\", \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\" and \"Random Harvest\", as well as co-writing screenplays for the films \"Camille\" (1936) and \"Mrs. Miniver\" (1942), the latter earning him an Academy Award.\nEarly life and education.\nHilton was born in Leigh, Lancashire, the son of John Hilton, the headmaster of Chapel End School in Walthamstow. He was educated at the Monoux School Walthamstow until 1914, then The Leys School, Cambridge, and then at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he wrote his first novel and was awarded an honours degree in English literature. He started work as a journalist, first for the \"Manchester Guardian\", then reviewing fiction for \"The Daily Telegraph\".\nCareer.\nHilton's first novel, \"Catherine Herself,\" was published in 1920 when he was still an undergraduate. The next 11 years were difficult for him, and it was not until 1931 that he had success with the novel \"And Now Goodbye\". Following this, several of his books were international bestsellers and inspired successful film adaptations, notably \"Lost Horizon\" (1933), which won a Hawthornden Prize; \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\" (1934); and \"Random Harvest\" (1941). After this, he continued to write, but the works were not regarded as of the same quality as his better-known novels. However, there is a contrary view, that the 'better known' novels \u2013 certainly Lost Horizon and Goodbye Mr Chips \u2013 were, in fact, his weakest works and have led to a misvaluing of his work as a whole.\nHilton's books are sometimes characterised as sentimental and idealistic celebrations of English virtues. This is true of \"Mr. Chips\", but some of his novels had a darker side. Flaws in the English society of his time\u2014particularly narrow-mindedness and class-consciousness\u2014were frequently his targets. His novel \"We Are Not Alone\", despite its inspirational-sounding title, is a grim story of legally approved lynching brought on by wartime hysteria in Britain.\nSigmund Freud, an early admirer despite his tepid reaction to \"The Meadows of the Moon\", came to conclude that Hilton had wasted his talent by being too prolific.\nFrom 1948 to 1952, Hilton was also host of one of radio's prestige drama anthologies, \"Hallmark Playhouse\". He also presented six episodes of \"Ceiling Unlimited\" (1943) and hosted \"The Hallmark Playhouse\" (1948\u20131953) for CBS Radio.\n\"Lost Horizon\".\nFirst published in 1933, this novel won Hilton the Hawthornden Prize in 1934. Later, Pocket Books, which pioneered the publication of small, soft-cover, inexpensive books, picked \"Lost Horizon\" as its first title in 1939. For that reason, the novel is frequently called the book that began the \"paperback revolution.\"\nHilton is said to have been inspired to write \"Lost Horizon\", and to invent \"Shangri-La\", by reading the \"National Geographic\" articles of Joseph Rock, an Austrian-American botanist and ethnologist exploring the southwestern Chinese provinces and Tibetan borderlands. Still living in Britain at the time, Hilton was perhaps influenced by the Tibetan travel articles of early travelers in Tibet whose writings were found in the British Library. Christian Zeeman, the Danish father of the mathematician Christopher Zeeman, has also been claimed to be the model for the hero of the story. He disappeared while living in Japan (where his son was born in 1925), and was reputed to be living incognito in a Zen Buddhist monastery.\nSome say that the isolated valley town of Weaverville, California, in far-northern Trinity County, was a source, but this is the result of a misinterpretation of a comment by Hilton in a 1941 interview, in which he said that Weaverville reminded him of Shangri-La. Coincidentally, Junction City (about 8 miles from Weaverville) now has a Tibetan Buddhist centre with the occasional Tibetan monks in saffron robes.\nThe name \"Shangri-La\" has become a byword for a mythical utopia, a permanently happy land, isolated from the world. After the Doolittle Raid on Tokyo, when the fact that the bombers had flown from an aircraft carrier remained highly classified, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt told the press facetiously that they had taken off from Shangri-La. The Navy subsequently gave that name to an aircraft carrier, and Roosevelt named his presidential retreat in Maryland Shangri-La. (Later, President Dwight D. Eisenhower renamed the retreat Camp David after his grandson, and that name has been used for it ever since.) Zhongdian, a mountain region in the northwest of Yunnan province China, has been renamed Shangri-La (Xianggelila), based on its claim to have inspired Hilton's book.\n\"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\".\nW.H. Balgarnie, a master at The Leys School, Cambridge and Hilton's father, headmaster of Chapel End School in Walthamstow, were the inspirations for the character of Mr. Chipping in \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\", a best-seller. Hilton first sent the material to \"The Atlantic\", and the magazine printed it as a short story in April 1934. On 8 June, it was published as a book. Four months later it appeared as a book in Britain.\nPersonal life.\nHilton wrote his two best remembered books, \"Lost Horizon\" and \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\", while living in a house at 42 Oak Hill Gardens, in Woodford Green in east London. The house still stands, with a blue plaque marking Hilton's residence. By 1938, he had moved to California, and his work became more connected with the Hollywood film industry.\nHe married Alice Brown, a secretary at the BBC, just before they left for the United States in 1935, but they divorced in 1937. The same year, he married actress Galina Kopernak, but they divorced eight years later. He became an American citizen in 1948.\nDeath.\nA heavy smoker, Hilton had various health problems when he made a farewell visit to England in 1954, and in December he died at his home in Long Beach, California, from liver cancer, with his reconciled former wife Alice at his side. His obituary in \"The Times\" describes him as \"a modest and retiring man for all his success; he was a keen mountaineer and enjoyed music and travel.\" He was buried at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Long Beach). After his wife Alice Brown Hilton died in 1962, his remains were reinterred at Knollkreg Memorial Park (Abingdon, Virginia).\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdaptations and sequels of his works.\nSome of Hilton's novels were filmed:\nHilton co-wrote the book and lyrics for \"Shangri-La\", a disastrous 1956 Broadway musical adaptation of \"Lost Horizon\".\nThere is one sequel to \"Lost Horizon\" titled \"Shangri-La\" and written by Eleanor Cooney and Daniel Altieri. It was licensed by the publisher William Morrow (an imprint of HarperCollins) and approved by the heirs to the Hilton Estate, Elizabeth Hill and Mary Porterfield. \"Shangri-La\" continues James Hilton's tale, moving it forward in time to the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and from there travelling back to the 1930s. In addition to its U.S. publication, the novel was further published in Germany, France, Spain and Portugal and Poland and (Eastern Europe) was a \"New York Times\" Notable Book.\nMemorials.\nA furore was caused in the late 1990s, when Wigan Council (the Metropolitan Borough responsible for Leigh) announced that a blue plaque in honour of Hilton would be placed not on his house in Wilkinson Street, but on the town hall. This caused great debate amongst the populace of Leigh, which considered it more appropriate to have it on the house itself, which is only a few hundred yards from the town hall. Subsequently, in 2013, a blue plaque was affixed to his birthplace at 26 Wilkinson Street.\nIn 1997, a blue plaque was erected on the wall of 42 Oakhill Gardens, Woodford Green, the modest semi-detached house in which Hilton was living with his parents from 1921.\nJames Hilton should not be confused with the Leigh businessman of the same name who became chairman of Leigh Rugby League Football Club after the war and after whom the club's former ground, Hilton Park (1947\u20132009), was named.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63102", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63102", "title": "Wholesalers", "text": ""}
{"id": "63103", "revid": "10344016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63103", "title": "Wholesaling", "text": "Sale of goods or merchandise to retailers rather than end consumers\nWholesaling or distributing is the sale of goods or merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional or other professional business users; or to other wholesalers (wholesale businesses) and related subordinated services. In general, it is the sale of goods in bulk to anyone, either a person or an organization, other than the end consumer of that merchandise. Wholesaling involves purchasing goods in bulk, usually directly from the manufacturer or source, at a discounted rate. Retailers then sell these goods to end consumers at a higher price, generating a profit.\nTraditionally, wholesalers were closer to the markets they supplied than the source from which they got the products. However, with the advent of the internet and e-procurement there is an increasing number of wholesalers located nearer to the manufacturers in China, Taiwan, and Southeast Asia. The profit margins of wholesalers depend largely on their ability to achieve market competitive transaction costs.\nIn the banking industry \"wholesale\" usually refers to wholesale banking, providing tailored services to large customers, in contrast with retail banking, providing standardized services to large numbers of smaller customers.\nIn real estate, wholesaling is the act of contracting to purchase real property, and assigning that contract to an investor.\nDefinition.\nAccording to the United Nations Statistics Division, \"wholesale\" is the resale of new and used goods to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional users, or to other wholesalers, or involves acting as an agent or broker in buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such persons or companies. Wholesalers frequently physically assemble, sort, and grade goods in large lots, break-bulk, repack, and redistribute in smaller lots. While wholesalers of most products usually operate from independent premises, wholesale marketing for foodstuffs can take place at specific wholesale markets where all traders are congregated.\nTaxes.\nOften, in the United States, wholesalers are not required to charge their buyers sales tax, if the buyer has a resale license in the state the wholesaler is located. Out-of-state buyers are not charged sale tax by wholesalers.\nIn China, wholesalers are subject to a Value-Added Tax (VAT) of either 9% or 13% on imported goods, depending on the type of product. Additionally, consumption tax is levied on products such as tobacco, alcohol, and luxury goods. These taxes are part of China's broader strategy to promote domestic consumption and regulate imports. On the other hand, Vietnam imposes a standard VAT rate of 10% on most goods and services, with exemptions for certain agricultural products and essential services. In Europe, Value-Added Tax (VAT) rates vary among member states, with a standard rate that cannot be less than 15%. Countries like Hungary, Croatia, Denmark, and Sweden have higher standard VAT rates, while Luxembourg, Malta, Cyprus, Greece, Germany, and Romania have lower rates.\nDirect selling.\nThe alternative to selling wholesale to distributors or retailers is to sell retail either through company-owned stores or online. Advantages include receiving a larger slice of the price paid by the consumer; disadvantages include difficulty in reaching consumers. Direct selling is a business model wherein sellers sell the goods directly to the end customer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63104", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63104", "title": "Manufacturer", "text": ""}
{"id": "63105", "revid": "27560029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63105", "title": "Deborah Kerr", "text": "British film, stage, and television actress (1921\u20132007)\nDeborah Jane Trimmer (30 September 1921\u00a0\u2013 16 October 2007), known professionally as Deborah Kerr (), was a British film star. Kerr rose to fame for her portrayals of proper, ladylike women, who often navigated societal expectations and stereotypes. Kerr attracted wide praise for her work, earning six Academy Award nominations for Best Actress. She was regarded as one of the best actresses of her generation. From the 1940s to the late 1960s, she was one of the most popular actresses in the world. \nFollowing a brief career as a ballerina, Kerr moved to the stage and acted in various Shakespeare productions and small plays before making her film debut in \"Major Barbara\" (1941). This led to additional leading roles which raised her profile, such as \"Love on the Dole\" (1941), \"Hatter's Castle\" (1942), and \"The Day Will Dawn\" (1942). In 1943, Kerr played three women in Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's romantic-war drama \"The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp\", which consistently ranks among the greatest British films of all time. Following major successes in the spy comedy \"I See a Dark Stranger\" (1946) and psychological drama \"Black Narcissus\" (1947), Kerr transitioned to Hollywood under the helm of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios (MGM). \nFollowing the lukewarm success of her debut Hollywood features, \"The Hucksters\" and \"If Winter Comes\", both in 1947, Kerr found critical praise in \"Edward, My Son\" (1949), for which she received her first Academy Award nomination for Best Actress, becoming the first Scottish person to be nominated for an acting Oscar. Though she found major commercial success in \"King Solomon's Mines\" (1950) and \"Quo Vadis\" (1951), the latter the highest grossing film of 1951, reviews were often lackluster for her performances, highlighting her typecasting. In 1953, Kerr had a critical resurgence in the major hit \"From Here to Eternity\", which reestablished her as a serious actress and earned her a second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. \nThroughout the 1950s, Kerr starred in a string of major commercial and critical successes. She earned three consecutive Academy Award nominations for \"The King and I\" (1956), \"Heaven Knows, Mr. Allison\" (1957), and \"Separate Tables\" (1958). She also appeared in the progressive drama \"Tea and Sympathy\" (1956), in which she had starred on Broadway in 1953. Later, the romantic classic \"An Affair to Remember\" (1957). By the 1960s, her career had slowed, though she remained somewhat prominent in film due to successful roles in \"The Sundowners\" (1960 - her 6th Oscar nomination), \"The Grass Is Greener\" (1960), \"The Innocents\" (1961), \"The Chalk Garden\" (1964) and \"The Night of the Iguana\" (1964). She made sporadic appearances in films and television (earning an Emmy nomination for \"A Woman of Substance\" in 1984) until \"The Assam Garden\" in 1985, which was her final film role. \u00a0\nKerr received numerous accolades throughout her career, including two Golden Globe Awards and nominations for six Academy Awards, four British Academy Film Awards, and an Emmy Award. In 1994, having already received honorary awards from the Cannes Film Festival and BAFTA, Kerr received an Academy Honorary Award with a citation recognizing her as \"an artist of impeccable grace and beauty, a dedicated actress whose motion picture career has always stood for perfection, discipline and elegance.\"\nEarly life.\nDeborah Jane Trimmer was born on 30 September 1921 in Hillhead, Glasgow, the only daughter of Kathleen Rose (n\u00e9e Smale) and Capt. Arthur Charles Kerr Trimmer, a World War I veteran and pilot who lost a leg at the Battle of the Somme and later became a naval architect and civil engineer. Trimmer and Smale married, both aged 28, on 21 August 1919 in Smale's hometown of Lydney, Gloucestershire.\nYoung Deborah spent the first three years of her life in the Scottish west coast town of Helensburgh, where her parents lived with Deborah's grandparents in a house on West King Street. Kerr had a younger brother, Edmund Charles (born 31 May 1926), who became a journalist. He died, aged 78, in a road rage incident in 2004.\nKerr was educated at the independent Northumberland House School, Henleaze in Bristol, England, and at Rossholme School, Weston-super-Mare. Kerr originally trained as a ballet dancer, first appearing on stage at Sadler's Wells in 1938. After changing careers, she soon found success as an actress. Her first acting teacher was her aunt, Phyllis Smale, who worked at a drama school in Bristol run by Lally Cuthbert Hicks. She adopted the name Deborah Kerr on becoming a film actress (\"Kerr\" was a family name going back to the maternal grandmother of her grandfather Arthur Kerr Trimmer).\nEarly career.\nEarly theatre and film.\nKerr's first stage appearance was at Weston-super-Mare in 1937, as \"Harlequin\" in the mime play \"Harlequin and Columbine\". She then went to the Sadler's Wells ballet school and in 1938 made her d\u00e9but in the corps de ballet in \"Prometheus\". After various walk-on parts in Shakespeare productions at the Open Air Theatre in Regent's Park, London, she joined the Oxford Playhouse repertory company in 1940, playing, \"inter alia\", \"Margaret\" in \"Dear Brutus\" and \"Patty Moss\" in \"The Two Bouquets\".\nKerr's first film role was in the British production \"Contraband\" (US: \"Blackout\", 1940), aged 18 or 19, but her scenes were cut. She had a strong supporting role in \"Major Barbara\" (1941) directed by Gabriel Pascal.\nFilm stardom.\nKerr became known playing the lead role in the film of \"Love on the Dole\" (1941). Critic James Agate wrote that \"Love on the Dole\" \"is not within a mile of Wendy Hiller's in the theatre, but it is a charming piece of work by a very pretty and promising beginner, so pretty and so promising that there is the usual yapping about a new star\".\nShe was the female lead in \"Penn of Pennsylvania\" (1941) which was little seen; however \"Hatter's Castle\" (1942), in which she starred with Robert Newton and James Mason, was very successful. She played a Norwegian resistance fighter in \"The Day Will Dawn\" (1942). She was an immediate hit with the public: an American film trade paper reported in 1942 that she was the most popular British actress with Americans.\nKerr played three women in Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's \"The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp\" (1943). During the filming, according to Powell's autobiography, Powell and she became lovers: \"I realised that Deborah was both the ideal and the flesh-and-blood woman whom I had been searching for\". Kerr made clear that her surname should be pronounced the same as \"car\". To avoid confusion over pronunciation, Louis B. Mayer, head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer billed her as \"Kerr rhymes with Star!\" Although the British Army refused to co-operate with the producers\u2014and Winston Churchill thought the film would ruin wartime morale\u2014\"Colonel Blimp\" confounded critics when it proved to be an artistic and commercial success.\nPowell hoped to reunite Kerr and lead actor Roger Livesey in his next film, \"A Canterbury Tale\" (1944), but her agent had sold her contract to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. According to Powell, his affair with Kerr ended when she made it clear to him that she would accept an offer to go to Hollywood if one were made.\nIn 1943, aged 21, Kerr made her West End d\u00e9but as Ellie Dunn in a revival of \"Heartbreak House\" at the Cambridge Theatre, stealing attention from stalwarts such as Edith Evans and Isabel Jeans. \"She has the rare gift\", wrote critic Beverley Baxter, \"of thinking her lines, not merely remembering them. The process of development from a romantic, silly girl to a hard, disillusioned woman in three hours was moving and convincing\".\nNear the end of the Second World War, she also toured Holland, France, and Belgium for ENSA as Mrs Manningham in \"Gaslight\" (retitled \"Angel Street\"), and Britain (with Stewart Granger).\nAlexander Korda cast her opposite Robert Donat in \"Perfect Strangers\" (1945). The film was a big hit in Britain. So too was the spy comedy drama \"I See a Dark Stranger\" (1946), in which she gave a breezy, amusing performance that dominated the action and overshadowed her co-star Trevor Howard. This film was a production of the team of Frank Launder and Sidney Gilliat.\nHer role as a troubled nun in the Powell and Pressburger production of \"Black Narcissus\" (1947) brought her to the attention of Hollywood producers. The film was a hit in the US, as well as the UK, and Kerr won the New York Film Critics Award as Actress of the Year. British exhibitors voted her the eighth-most popular local star at the box-office in 1947. She relocated to Hollywood and was under contract to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.\nHollywood.\nMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer.\nKerr's first film for MGM in Hollywood was a mature satire of the burgeoning advertising industry, \"The Hucksters\" (1947) with Clark Gable and Ava Gardner. She and Walter Pidgeon were cast in \"If Winter Comes\" (1947). She received the first of her Oscar nominations for \"Edward, My Son\" (1949), a drama set and filmed in England co-starring Spencer Tracy.\nIn Hollywood, Kerr's British accent and manner led to a succession of roles portraying refined, reserved, and \"proper\" English ladies. Kerr, nevertheless, used any opportunity to discard her cool exterior. She had the lead in a comedy \"Please Believe Me\" (1950).\nKerr appeared in two huge hits for MGM in a row. \"King Solomon's Mines\" (1950) was shot on location in Africa with Stewart Granger and Richard Carlson. This was immediately followed by her appearance in the religious epic \"Quo Vadis\" (1951), shot at Cinecitt\u00e0 in Rome, in which she played the indomitable Lygia, a first-century Christian.\nShe then played Princess Flavia in a remake of \"The Prisoner of Zenda\" (1952) with Granger and Mason. In between Paramount borrowed her to appear in \"Thunder in the East\" (1951) with Alan Ladd.\nIn 1953, Kerr \"showed her theatrical mettle\" as Portia in Joseph Mankiewicz's \"Julius Caesar\". She made \"Young Bess\" (1953) with Granger and Jean Simmons, then appeared alongside Cary Grant in \"Dream Wife\" (1953), a flop comedy.\n\"From Here to Eternity\" and Broadway.\nKerr departed from typecasting with a performance that brought out her sensuality, as Karen Holmes, the embittered American military wife in Fred Zinnemann's \"From Here to Eternity\" (1953), for which she received an Oscar nomination for Best Actress. The American Film Institute acknowledged the iconic status of the scene from that film in which she and Burt Lancaster romped illicitly and passionately amidst crashing waves on a Hawaiian beach. The organisation ranked it 20th in its list of the 100 most romantic films of all time.\nHaving established herself as a film actress in the meantime, she made her Broadway debut in 1953, appearing in Robert Anderson's \"Tea and Sympathy\", for which she received a Tony Award nomination. Kerr performed the same role in Vincente Minnelli's film adaptation released in 1956; her stage partner John Kerr (no relation) also appeared. In 1955, Kerr won the Sarah Siddons Award for her performance in Chicago during a national tour of the play. After her Broadway d\u00e9but in 1953, she toured the United States with \"Tea and Sympathy\".\nPeak years of stardom.\nThereafter, Kerr's career choices would make her known in Hollywood for her versatility as an actress. She played the repressed wife in \"The End of the Affair\" (1955), shot in England with Van Johnson. She was a widow in love with William Holden in \"The Proud and Profane\" (1956), directed by George Seaton. Neither film was much of a hit. However Kerr then played Anna Leonowens in the film version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical \"The King and I\" (1956), with Yul Brynner in the lead; it was a huge hit. Marni Nixon dubbed Kerr's singing voice.\nShe played a nun in \"Heaven Knows, Mr. Allison\" (1957) opposite her long-time friend Robert Mitchum, directed by John Huston. It was very popular as was \"An Affair to Remember\" (1957) opposite Cary Grant.\nKerr starred in three films with David Niven: \"Bonjour Tristesse\" (1958), directed by Otto Preminger, \"Separate Tables\" (1958), directed by Delbert Mann, which was particularly well received, and \"Eye of the Devil\" (1966), directed by J. Lee Thompson.\nShe made two films at MGM: \"The Journey\" (1959) reunited her with Brynner; \"Count Your Blessings\" (1959), was a comedy. Both flopped, as did \"Beloved Infidel\" (1959) with Gregory Peck.\nLater films.\nKerr was reunited with Mitchum in \"The Sundowners\" (1960) shot in Australia, then \"The Grass Is Greener\" (1960), co-starring Cary Grant. She appeared in Gary Cooper's last film \"The Naked Edge\" (1961) and starred in \"The Innocents\" (1961) where she plays a governess tormented by apparitions.\nKerr made her British TV debut in \"Three Roads to Rome\" (1963). She was another governess in \"The Chalk Garden\" (1964) and worked with John Huston again in \"The Night of the Iguana\" (1964).\nShe joined Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra in a love triangle for a romantic comedy, \"Marriage on the Rocks\" (1965).\nIn 1965, the producers of \"Carry On Screaming!\" offered her a fee comparable to that paid to the rest of the cast combined, but she turned it down in favour of appearing in an aborted stage version of \"Flowers for Algernon\". She replaced Kim Novak in \"Eye of the Devil\" (1966) with Niven, and was reteamed with Niven in the comedy \"Casino Royale\" (1967), achieving the distinction of being, at 45, the oldest \"Bond girl\" in any James Bond film, until Monica Bellucci, at the age of 50, in \"Spectre\" (2015). \"Casino Royale\" was a hit as was another movie she made with Niven, \"Prudence and the Pill\" (1968). She made \"The Arrangement\" (1969) with Elia Kazan, her director from the stage production of \"Tea and Sympathy\".\nShe appeared in one more film, \"The Assam Garden\" (1985).\nTheatre.\nConcern about parts offered her made her abandon film at the end of the 1960s, with one exception in 1985, in favour of television and theatre work.\nKerr returned to the London stage in many productions, including the old-fashioned, \"The Day After the Fair\" (Lyric, 1972), a Peter Ustinov comedy, \"Overheard\" (Haymarket, 1981) and a revival of Emlyn Williams's \"The Corn is Green\". After her first London success in 1943, she toured England and Scotland in \"Heartbreak House\".\nIn 1975, she returned to Broadway, creating the role of Nancy in Edward Albee's Pulitzer Prize-winning play \"Seascape\".\nIn 1977, she came back to the West End, playing the title role in a production of George Bernard Shaw's \"Candida\".\nThe theatre, despite her success in films, was always to remain Kerr's first love, even though going on stage filled her with trepidation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do it because it's exactly like dressing up for the grown ups. I don't mean to belittle acting but I'm like a child when I'm out there performing\u2014shocking the grownups, enchanting them, making them laugh or cry. It's an unbelievable terror, a kind of masochistic madness. The older you get, the easier it should be but it isn't.\nTelevision.\nKerr experienced a career resurgence on television in the early 1980s when she played the role of the nurse (played by Elsa Lanchester in the 1957 film of the same name) in \"Witness for the Prosecution\", with Sir Ralph Richardson. She also did \"A Song at Twilight\" (1982).\nShe took on the role of the older Emma Harte, a tycoon, in the adaptation of Barbara Taylor Bradford's \"A Woman of Substance\" (1985). For this performance, Kerr was nominated for an Emmy Award.\nKerr rejoined old screen partner Mitchum in \"Reunion at Fairborough\" (1985). Other TV roles included \"Ann and Debbie\" (1986) and \"Hold the Dream\" (1986), the latter a sequel to \"A Woman of Substance\".\nPersonal life.\nKerr's first marriage was to Squadron Leader Anthony Bartley RAF on 29 November 1945. They had two daughters, Melanie Jane (born 27 December 1947) and Francesca Ann (born 18 December 1951, who married the actor John Shrapnel). Through Francesca they had three grandsons, actors Lex Shrapnel and Tom Shrapnel as well as the writer Joe Shrapnel. Melanie is a medical sociologist and retired academic. The marriage was troubled, owing to Bartley's envy of his wife's fame and financial success, and because her career often took her away from home. They divorced in 1959.\nHer second marriage was to author Peter Viertel on 23 July 1960. In marrying Viertel, she became stepmother to Viertel's daughter, Christine Viertel. Although she long resided in Klosters, Switzerland, and Marbella, Spain, Kerr moved back to Britain to be closer to her own children as her health began to deteriorate. Her husband, however, continued to live in Marbella.\nStewart Granger said in his autobiography that in 1945 she had approached him romantically in the back of his chauffeur-driven car at the time he was making \"Caesar and Cleopatra\". Although he was married to Elspeth March, he states that he and Kerr went on to have an affair. When asked about this revelation, Kerr's response was, \"What a gallant man he is!\"\nDeath.\nKerr died aged 86 on 16 October 2007 at Botesdale, a village in the county of Suffolk, England, from the effects of Parkinson's disease.\nWithin three weeks of her death, her husband Peter Viertel died of cancer on 4 November. At the time of Viertel's death, director Michael Scheingraber was filming the documentary \"Peter Viertel: Between the Lines\", which includes reminiscences concerning Kerr and the Academy Awards.\nAwards and nominations.\nAcademy Awards.\nShe is tied with Thelma Ritter and Amy Adams as the actresses with the second most nominations without winning, surpassed only by Glenn Close, who has been nominated eight times without winning.\nHonours.\nKerr was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1998, but was unable to accept the honour in person because of ill health. She was also honoured in Hollywood, where she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1709 Vine Street for her contributions to the motion picture industry.\nAlthough nominated six times as Best Actress, Kerr never won a competitive Oscar. In 1994, Glenn Close presented Kerr with the Honorary Oscar for lifetime achievement with a citation recognising her as \"an artist of impeccable grace and beauty, a dedicated actress whose motion picture career has always stood for perfection, discipline and elegance\".\nKerr won a Golden Globe Award for \"Best Actress\u00a0\u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy\" for \"The King and I\" in 1957 and a Henrietta Award for \"World Film Favorite\u00a0\u2013 Female\". She was the first performer to win the New York Film Critics Circle Award for \"Best Actress\" three times (1947, 1957 and 1960).\nAlthough she never won a BAFTA or Cannes Film Festival award in a competitive category, both organisations gave Kerr honorary awards: a Cannes Film Festival Tribute in 1984 and a BAFTA Special Award in 1991.\nIn September and October 2010, Josephine Botting of the British Film Institute curated the \"Deborah Kerr Season\", which included around twenty of her feature films and an exhibition of posters, memorabilia and personal items loaned by her family.\nIn September 2021, Kerr's grandsons, Joe and Lex Shrapnel, unveiled a memorial plaque at the former family home in Weston-super-Mare.\nOn 30 September 2021, on what would have been Kerr's one hundredth birthday, the Lord Provost of Glasgow, Philip Braat, unveiled a memorial plaque in Ruskin Terrace, on the site of the nursing home where Kerr was born.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63106", "revid": "50371435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63106", "title": "Modal jazz", "text": "Sub-genre of jazz\nModal jazz is jazz that makes use of musical modes, often modulating among them to accompany the chords instead of relying on one tonal center used across the piece.\nThough exerting influence to the present, modal jazz was most popular in the 1950s and 1960s, as evidenced by the success of Miles Davis's 1958 composition \"Milestones\" and 1959 album \"Kind of Blue\", and John Coltrane's quartet from 1960 to 1965. Other performers of modal jazz include Chick Corea, Bill Evans, Herbie Hancock, Joe Henderson, Bobby Hutcherson, Pharoah Sanders, Woody Shaw, Wayne Shorter, McCoy Tyner, and Larry Young.\nHistory.\nIn bebop as well as in hard bop, musicians use chords to provide the background for solos. A piece starts out with a theme that introduces a series of chords for the solos. These chords repeat throughout the whole piece, while the soloists play new, improvised themes over the repeated chord progression. By the 1950s, improvising over chords had become such a dominant part of jazz that sidemen at recording dates were sometimes given nothing more than a list of chords to play from.\nMercer Ellington has stated that Juan Tizol conceived the melody to \"Caravan\" in 1936 as a result of his days studying music in Puerto Rico, where they could not afford much sheet music so the teacher would turn the music upside down after they had learned to play it right-side up. This \"inversion\" technique led to a modal sound throughout Tizol's work.\nSun Ra reportedly rehearsed a small group consisting of Harold Ousley, Vernel Fournier, and Wilbur Ware in 1950 that played original songs that were modal in which the melody was based on a single chord or vamp \u2013 ten years before this approach became popular in jazz. \nSaxophonist Wayne Shorter has noted that the 1953 composition \"Glass Enclosure\" by pianist Bud Powell was one of the earliest jazz compositions to make use of Lydian chords, based on the Lydian mode that was not widely used in jazz until about a decade later. Powell's 1951 Un Poco Loco uses the Lydian chords and even uses Lydian chords stacked on top of each implying a polytonality (D major 7 over C major 7: CEGBDF#AC#) with the improvisation based on alternating Lydian-ish polytonality and an altered dominant chord.\nTowards the end of the 1950s, spurred by the experiments of composer and bandleader George Russell, musicians began using a modal approach. They chose not to write their pieces using conventional chord changes, but instead using modes. Musicians employing this technique include Miles Davis, Freddie Hubbard, Bill Evans, Herbie Hancock, and Wayne Shorter.\nAmong the significant compositions of modal jazz were \"So What\" by Miles Davis and \"Impressions\" by John Coltrane. \"So What\" and \"Impressions\" follow the same AABA structure and were in D Dorian for the A sections and modulated a half step up to E-flat Dorian for the B section. The Dorian mode is the natural minor scale with a raised sixth. Other compositions include Davis's \"Flamenco Sketches\", Bill Evans's \"Peace Piece\", and Shorter's \"Footprints\".\nDavis recorded one of the best selling jazz albums of all time in this modal framework. \"Kind of Blue\" is an exploration of the possibilities of modal jazz. Davis acknowledged the crucial role played by Bill Evans, a former member of George Russell's ensembles, in his transition from hard bop to modal playing. Although his explorations of modal jazz were sporadic throughout the 1960s, he included several of the tunes from \"Kind of Blue\" in the repertoire of his second quintet.\nColtrane took the lead in extensively exploring the limits of modal improvisation and composition with his quartet, featuring Elvin Jones (drums), McCoy Tyner (piano), and Reggie Workman and Jimmy Garrison (bass). Several of Coltrane's albums from the period are recognized as examples of modal jazz: \"Africa/Brass\" (1961), \"Live! at the Village Vanguard\" (1962), \"Crescent\" (1964), \"A Love Supreme\" (1964), and \"Meditations\" (1965). Coltrane's compositions from this period such as \"India\", \"Chasin' the Trane\", \"Crescent\", and \"Impressions\" have entered the jazz repertoire, along with his interpretations of standards like Richard Rodgers's \"My Favorite Things\", and the traditional \"Greensleeves\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63107", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63107", "title": "Columbiformes", "text": ""}
{"id": "63109", "revid": "29346105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63109", "title": "Post-rock", "text": "Rock music genre\nPost-rock is a subgenre of experimental rock that emphasizes texture, atmosphere, and non-traditional song structures over conventional rock techniques. Post-rock artists often combine rock instrumentation and rock stylings with electronics and digital production as a means of enabling the exploration of textures, timbres and different styles. Vocals, when present, are often used as an instrumental layer, with many bands opting for entirely instrumental compositions. The genre began in indie and underground music scenes, but deviated.\nThe term \"post-rock\" was coined by music journalist Simon Reynolds and popularized in his review of Bark Psychosis' 1994 album \"Hex\". He later expanded the concept as music \"using rock instrumentation for non-rock purposes\". The term has since developed to refer to bands oriented around dramatic and suspense-driven instrumental rock, making the term controversial among listeners and artists alike.\nGroups such as Talk Talk and Slint are credited with producing foundational works in the style in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The release of Tortoise's 1996 album \"Millions Now Living Will Never Die\" led to post-rock becoming an established term for the genre in music criticism and journalism. In its second wave, post-rock diversified into subgenres, influencing indie rock, electronica, and certain forms of metal. \nCharacteristics.\nPost-rock emphasizes the use of textures, timbres, and non-rock influences, often featuring little or no vocals. Rather than relying on traditional song structures or riffs, it\u2014as a musical aesthetic\u2014focuses on atmosphere and mood to create a musically evocative experience. Post-rock incorporates stylings and traits from a variety of musical genres and scenes, including indie rock and its forms like slowcore and math rock, as well as krautrock, ambient music, psychedelia, progressive rock, space rock, tape music, minimalist classical, British IDM, jazz (including avant-garde jazz and cool jazz), dub, post-punk, free jazz, contemporary classical and avant-garde electronica. \nFirst wave post-rock groups often exhibited strong influence from the krautrock of the 1970s, particularly the motorik, the characteristic krautrock rhythm, and its one- or two-chord melodicism, with these influences also being pivotal for the substyle of ambient pop, where the framework of post-rock is applied to indie pop. Post-rock acts frequently blend traditional rock instrumentation and stylistic elements with electronic and digital production, using this combination to explore a wider range of textures, timbres, and musical styles. The genre originated in the indie and underground music scenes of the 1980s and 1990s, but as it moved away from traditional rock elements, it became increasingly distinct from the conventions of indie rock of that era. \nInstrumentation.\nThough typically performed using standard rock instrumentation\u2014guitars, bass, drums, and keyboards\u2014post-rock compositions often subvert the expected uses of these instruments, for example by employing guitars as noise generators or focusing on sonic texture rather than melody. However, instruments were often used in non-traditional ways, acting as a \"palette of textures\" rather than for their conventional rock roles. It can be lengthy and instrumental, containing repetitive build-ups of timbres, dynamics and textures, often making use of repetition of musical motifs and subtle changes with an extremely wide range of dynamics. In some respects, this is similar to the music of Steve Reich, Philip Glass and Brian Eno, pioneers of minimalism who were acknowledged influences on bands in the first wave of post-rock.\nGuitars, rather than serving melodic or riff-driven purposes, are often employed as tools for texture and atmosphere. Artists manipulate timbre through alternate tunings, effects like delay and distortion, EBows, and looping, sometimes processing guitars to the point of becoming unrecognizable. Drums and percussion in post-rock frequently defy traditional roles, drawing inspiration from krautrock's hypnotic \"motorik\" beats and dub's spacious, bass-heavy rhythms. It can feature, as is prominently the case in the first wave, multiple drum kits, irregular tempos, and/or minimalist patterns that prioritize mood over groove. The bass guitar often assumes a central role in shaping post-rock's atmospheric depth, diverging from standard rock's rhythmic lock with the bass drum, extending from post-punk. Influenced by dub and ambient music in addition, basslines may consist of sustained drones, pulsating loops, or sparse, resonant notes that anchor the composition's harmonic framework, differing from the walking bass trope of conventional rock.\nWith the increasing accessibility of samplers in the late 1980s, bands drew inspiration from contemporary electronica and experimental electronic music to restructure their compositions with sampling. Samplers, along with sequencers and MIDI setups, allowed for both ordered and chaotic elements to coexist within a single piece. The recording studio is regarded as an essential component of the creative process in post-rock. English acts such as Disco Inferno, Insides, Seefeel and Third Eye Foundation made the recording studio an active component of composition, employing hardware for live processing and sampling, and software like Cubase to sequence tracks, fragmenting and reassemble guitar sounds and vocals as abstract sonic material over drum patterns and beats.\nVocals and structure.\nVocals play a much lesser role in most post-rock and are sometimes entirely absent. When post-rock bands have vocalists, their performances are often non-traditional, with them employing vocals as purely instrumental efforts and incidental to the sound. Vocals are often presented as spoken word, found audio samples, or stylized delivery such as murmured or shouted passages. Bands often treat the voice as an additional instrument. Lyrics, if included, are often non-narrative, poetic, or opaque, reflecting themes of alienation, ambiguity, or abstraction.\nWhile the verse-chorus form is not exempt from the ethos of post-rock, in lieu of typical rock structures, groups make greater use of soundscapes and abstraction. Reynolds states in his essay \"Post-Rock\" from \"Audio Culture\" that \"a band's journey through rock to post-rock usually involves a trajectory from narrative lyrics to stream-of-consciousness to voice-as-texture to purely instrumental music\". Songs in the genre can include climactic endings alongside buildups of textures and timbres, used to provide closure in otherwise linear compositions. This structural trope became a hallmark of second wave post-rock, where bands focused on dramatic, suspenseful instrumental rock; this usage of the term became controversial among both listeners and musicians.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"post-rock\" was first coined by the English music journalist Simon Reynolds in a \"Melody Maker\" article in late 1993, which is the earliest instance of him using the term. He later employed it in a review of Bark Psychosis' 1994 album \"Hex\", published in the March 1994 issue of \"Mojo\". Reynolds further developed the concept in a May 1994 issue of \"The Wire\", defining post-rock as \"using rock instrumentation for non-rock purposes, using guitars as facilitators of timbre and textures rather than riffs and power chords\". He further expounded on the term that: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Perhaps the really provocative area for future development lies [...] in cyborg rock; not the wholehearted embrace of Techno's methodology, but some kind of interface between real time, hands-on playing and the use of digital effects and enhancement.\nReynolds, in a July 2005 entry in his blog, said he later found the term not to be of his own coinage, writing in his blog \"I discovered many years later it had been floating around for over a decade\". In 2021, Reynolds reflected on the evolution of the style, saying that the term had developed in meaning during the 21st century, no longer referring to \"left-field UK guitar groups engaged in a gradual process of abandoning songs [and exploring] texture, effects processing, and space\", but instead coming to signify \"epic and dramatic instrumental rock, not nearly as post- as it likes to think it is\".\nThe earliest use of the term cited by Reynolds dates back as far as September 1967. In a \"Time\" cover story feature on the Beatles, writer Christopher Porterfield hails the band and producer George Martin's creative use of the recording studio, declaring that this is \"leading an evolution in which the best of current post-rock sounds are becoming something that pop music has never been before an art form\". Other uses of the term include its employment in a 1975 article by American journalist James Wolcott about musician Todd Rundgren, although with a different meaning. It was also used in the \"Rolling Stone Album Guide\" to name a style roughly corresponding to \"avant-rock\" or \"out-rock\", the latter of which became synonymous with post-rock during the first wave. Alternately, an April 1992 review of the single \"Stacey's Cupboard\" by 1990s noise pop band the Earthmen by Steven Walker in Melbourne music publication \"Juke\" describes the song as a \"post-rock noisefest\".\nHistory.\n1960s\u20131980s: influences and precursors.\nIn music journalism and criticism, various retroactive examples have been given of precursors to post-rock. For instance, with regards to the 1960s and early 1970s in music, the \"dronology\" of The Velvet Underground, most apparent on their 1967 album \"The Velvet Underground &amp; Nico\", was referred to by Reynolds in 1994 as having significantly influenced much \"of today's post rock activity\" in the first wave, especially with regards to the 1990s space rock revival. The experimental electronic rock band Silver Apples have also been described as an influence, and Germany's krautrock scene which included Can, Neu!, Faust and Cluster later influenced post-rock acts like Stereolab and Mogwai. \nThe post-punk and no wave movements\u2014via acts like Sonic Youth, Glenn Branca, and Ut\u2014experimented with dissonance, non-linear structures, and noise, challenging rock's expressive norms. Similarly, This Heat, which formed in 1976, are regarded as having predated the genre with their significantly unconventional musical stylings and repetitive structures, and were an influence on bands in the first wave of post-rock.\n\"Stylus Magazine\" observed that David Bowie's 1977 album \"Low\", produced by Brian Eno, would have been considered post-rock if released twenty years later. \"Louder\" also described the English post-punk band Wire as \"the genre's godfathers\", highlighting their 1979 studio album \"154\" as an early precursor that signposted the beginning of post-rock.\nBritish post-punk band Public Image Ltd have been seen as pivotal for post-rock, with the \"NME\" describing them as \"arguably the first post-rock group\" when referring to their first few albums. Their 1979 album \"Metal Box\" almost completely abandoned traditional rock structures in favor of dense, repetitive dub- and krautrock-inspired soundscapes and John Lydon's cryptic, stream-of-consciousness lyrics. The year before \"Metal Box\" was released, PiL bassist Jah Wobble declared that \"rock is obsolete\".\n1990s: first wave.\nCritics have retroactively regarded the Louisville, Kentucky-based rock band Slint's 1991 album \"Spiderland\" as a foundational work that anticipated and inspired the indie rock-derived area of the genre; the album is characterized by its dramatic shifts in dynamics both instrumentally and vocally, as well as its deliberate, bass-driven grooves. The English art rock band Talk Talk's album \"Laughing Stock\", released in the same year, has been identified as influential on post-rock by critics for its drawn out song structures, relying on influences from jazz, contemporary classical music and space rock.\nPost-rock was initially applied to a wave of primarily English bands in the early 1990s who drew from genres such as psychedelia, electronica, hip-hop, free improvisation, and the avant-garde. Examples include Stereolab, Moonshake, Laika, Disco Inferno, Seefeel, Bark Psychosis, Pram and Insides, many of which began in post-punk and shoegaze roots; these were largely deemed post-rock as such in Reynolds' music journalism, and they were also pivotal for the substyle of ambient pop.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, Bristol, England, emerged as a notable hub for post-rock, characterized by a loosely connected group of musicians working with home-recording setups and a distinctly lo-fi aesthetic. Trip hop, which began as a scene in the same city, influenced Bristol post-rock in the turn of the millennium. Bands such as Movietone, Crescent, Flying Saucer Attack and Third Eye Foundation were central to this movement, initially releasing music on the local Planet label and gathering around Recreational Records before later partnering with Domino Records. North American post-rock tended to maintain the traditional rock band format, drawing on earlier experimental and avant-rock traditions while retaining the indie rock band form. Influences included space rock, krautrock, minimalism, the Canterbury scene, and no wave, as well as the work of composers such as John Cage and Alvin Lucier. Bands from the Kranky label like Labradford, Bowery Electric, and Stars of the Lid, are often cited as foundational to both the American first wave of post-rock and the space rock revival of the 1990s. Reynolds remarked in a November 1995 issue of \"The Wire\" that these American bands were \"rewiring rock according to the legacies of European space rock, avant jazz and Ambient sound design [\"sic\"]\", counterculturally in contrast to \"the spent forces of Grunge and lo-fi [\"sic\"]\".\nIn 2000, Radiohead released the studio album \"Kid A\", marking a significant turning point in their musical style. Reynolds described it and the 2001 follow-up album \"Amnesiac\" as major examples of post-rock in the style that had been established by the first wave, incorporating influences from electronica, krautrock, jazz and space rock into the band's indie rock music; he noted that the success of the albums showed that the style had made a mainstream breakthrough.\nThe Chicago school.\nThe second Tortoise album \"Millions Now Living Will Never Die\" made the band a post-rock icon according to music critics, with bands outside the city such as Do Make Say Think recording music inspired by the Chicago school (also referred to as the \"Windy City school\"). John McEntire of Tortoise and Jim O'Rourke of Gastr del Sol were prominent figures in the scene, with McEntire being a member of The Sea and Cake, and both musicians also contributing as producers on multiple albums by Stereolab throughout the 1990s and 2000s.\n2000s\u2013present: second wave.\nIn the early 2000s, the term became divisive with both music critics and musicians, with it being seen at the time as falling out of favor. It became increasingly controversial as more critics outwardly condemned its use. Some of the bands for whom the term was most frequently assigned, including Cul de Sac, Tortoise, Mogwai, and Godspeed You! Black Emperor rejected the label. The wide range of styles covered by the term, they and others have claimed, robbed it of its individuality. Kenny Bringelson, writing for \"Consequence\", commented that the bands' music is \"rife with creative recontextualization and categorically fresh sounds, but rarely does it transcend what's defined as, and cool about, rock music.\"\nAn eminent post-rock locale was Montreal, Canada, where Godspeed You! Black Emperor and related groups, including Silver Mt. Zion and Fly Pan Am, released music on Constellation Records; these groups are generally characterized by a melancholy and crescendo-driven style rooted in, among other genres, chamber music, musique concr\u00e8te techniques and free jazz influences. Notable albums from Montrealer bands include \"F\u266f A\u266f \u221e\" (1997) and \"Lift Your Skinny Fists like Antennas to Heaven\" (2000), both by Godspeed You! Black Emperor, and Set Fire to Flames's \"Sings Reign Rebuilder\" (2001).\nAs part of the second wave of post-rock, the bands Godspeed You! Black Emperor, Sigur R\u00f3s, Mogwai, Explosions in the Sky, 65daysofstatic, This Will Destroy You, Do Make Say Think, and Mono became some of the more popular post-rock acts of the new millennium. Sigur R\u00f3s, a band known for their distinctive vocals, fabricated a language they called \"Hopelandic\" (), which they described as \"a form of gibberish vocals that fits to the music and acts as another instrument\". With the release of their album \"\u00c1g\u00e6tis byrjun\" in 1999, they became among the most well known post-rock bands of the 2000s due to the use of many of their tracks, particularly their 2005 single \"Hopp\u00edpolla\", in TV soundtracks and film trailers. These bands' popularity was attributed to a move towards a more conventional rock-oriented sound with simpler song structures and increasing utilization of pop hooks, also being regarded as a new atmospheric style of indie rock. Following a 13-year hiatus, experimental rock band Swans, who had been regarded as influencing post-rock, began releasing a number of albums that were described as post-rock, most notably \"To Be Kind\", which was acclaimed by AllMusic at the end of 2014.\nWider experimentation and blending of other genres took hold in post-rock. For instance, bands such as Cult of Luna, Isis, Russian Circles, Palms, Deftones, and Pelican fused metal with second wave post-rock, with the resulting sound being termed post-metal. Sludge metal grew and evolved to include (and in some cases fuse completely with) some elements of post-rock, with this second wave of sludge metal being pioneered by bands such as Giant Squid and Battle of Mice. The label Neurot Recordings has released music by bands in this genre. Similarly, bands such as Altar of Plagues, Lantl\u00f4s and Agalloch blend second wave post-rock and black metal, incorporating elements of the former while primarily using the latter. In some cases, post-rock experimentation has extended beyond blending with a single genre\u2014such as in post-metal\u2014to embrace a wider range of influences. A notable example is blackgaze, a fusion of black metal and shoegaze, post-rock and post-hardcore, exemplified by bands like Deafheaven that combine intense metal elements with the atmospheric textures of post-rock.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63110", "revid": "46274489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63110", "title": "David Copperfield", "text": "1849\u20131850 novel by Charles Dickens\nDavid Copperfield is a novel by English author Charles Dickens, narrated by the eponymous David Copperfield, detailing his adventures in his journey from infancy to maturity. As such, it is typically categorized in the bildungsroman genre. It was published as a serial in 1849 and 1850 and then as a book in 1850.\n\"David Copperfield\" is also a partially autobiographical novel: \"a very complicated weaving of truth and invention\", with events following Dickens's own life. Of the books he wrote, it was his favourite. Called \"the triumph of the art of Dickens\", it marks a turning point in his work, separating the novels of youth and those of maturity.\nAt first glance, the work is modelled on 18th-century \"personal histories\" that were very popular, like Henry Fielding's \"Joseph Andrews\" or \"Tom Jones\", but \"David Copperfield\" is a more carefully structured work. It begins, like other novels by Dickens, with a bleak picture of childhood in Victorian England, followed by young Copperfield's slow social ascent, as he painfully provides for his aunt, while continuing his studies.\nDickens wrote without an outline, unlike his previous novel, \"Dombey and Son\". Some aspects of the story were fixed in his mind from the start, but others were undecided until the serial publications were underway. The novel has a primary theme of growth and change, but Dickens also satirises many aspects of Victorian life. These include the plight of prostitutes, the status of women in marriage, class structure, the criminal justice system, the quality of schools, and the employment of children in factories.\nPlot summary.\nThe story follows the life of David Copperfield from childhood to maturity. David was born in Blunderstone, Suffolk, England, six months after the death of his father. David spends his early years residing in a small house called the Rookery. His loving and childish mother, Clara Copperfield, and their kindly housekeeper, Clara Peggotty, bring him up here; they call him Davy. When he is seven years old, his mother surprises David by marrying Edward Murdstone while the boy is visiting Peggotty's family in Yarmouth. Her brother, a fisherman named Mr Peggotty, lives in a beached barge, with his adopted niece and nephew Emily and Ham, and an elderly widow, Mrs Gummidge. \"Little Em'ly\" is somewhat spoiled by her fond foster father, and David is in love with her. Here he is known as \u201cMaster Copperfield.\u201d\nOn his return, David discovers his mother has married and is immediately given good reason to dislike his stepfather, Murdstone, who believes exclusively in stern, harsh methods of parenting, calling it \"firmness\". David has similar feelings for Murdstone's sister Jane, who moves into the house soon afterwards. Between them, they tyrannise David and his poor mother, making their lives miserable. When David falls behind in his studies, Murdstone thrashes him, and David bites his hand; in consequence, he is sent away to Salem House, a boarding school, under a ruthless headmaster named Mr Creakle. There he is befriended by two quite different older boys, James Steerforth and Tommy Traddles. He develops an impassioned admiration for Steerforth, perceiving him as someone noble, who could do great things if he would, and one who pays attention to him.\nDavid goes home for the holidays to learn that his mother has given birth to a baby boy. Shortly after David returns to Salem House, his mother and her baby die, and David returns home immediately. Peggotty marries the local carrier, Mr Barkis. Murdstone sends David to work for a wine merchant in London \u2013 a business of which Murdstone is a joint owner. After some months, David's friendly but spendthrift landlord, Wilkins Micawber, is arrested for debt and sent to the King's Bench Prison, and the rest of Mr. Micawber's family soon moves to the Prison too. David visits the Micawbers regularly at the Prison, and boards nearby. When Micawber's release is imminent, the Micawbers decide they will soon move to Plymouth. David realises that will leave him alone in London, where no one cares about him. He makes up his mind to run away to Dover to find his only known remaining relative, his eccentric and kind-hearted great-aunt Betsey Trotwood. She had come to Blunderstone at his birth, only to depart in ire upon learning that he was not a girl. However, she takes it upon herself to raise David, despite Murdstone's attempt to regain custody of him. She encourages him to 'be as like his sister, 'Betsey Trotwood' as he can be \u2013 that is, to meet the expectations she had for the girl who was never born. David's great-aunt renames him \"Trotwood Copperfield\" and addresses him as \"Trot\", one of several names others call David in the novel.\nDavid's aunt sends him to a better school than the last he attended. It is run by kind Dr. Strong, whose methods inculcate honour and self-reliance in his pupils. During term, David lodges with the lawyer Mr Wickfield and his daughter Agnes, who becomes David's friend and confidante. Wickfield's clerk, Uriah Heep, also lives at the house.\nBy devious means, Uriah Heep gradually gains a complete ascendancy over the aging and alcoholic Wickfield, to Agnes's great sorrow. Heep, as he maliciously confides to David, aspires to marry Agnes. Ultimately with the aid of Micawber, who has been employed by Heep as a secretary, his fraudulent behaviour is revealed. (At the end of the book, David encounters him in prison, convicted of attempting to defraud the Bank of England.)\nAfter completing school, David apprentices to be a proctor. During this time, due to Heep's fraudulent activities, his aunt's fortune has diminished. David toils to make a living. He works mornings and evenings for his former teacher Dr Strong as a secretary, and also starts to learn shorthand, with the help of his old school-friend Traddles, upon completion reporting parliamentary debate for a newspaper. With considerable moral support from Agnes and his own great diligence and hard work, David ultimately finds fame and fortune as an author, writing fiction.\nDavid's romantic but self-serving school friend, Steerforth, also re-acquainted with David, goes on to seduce and dishonour Emily, offering to marry her off to his manservant Littimer before deserting her in Europe. Her uncle Mr Peggotty manages to find her with the help of Martha, who had grown up in their part of England and then settled in London. Ham, who had been engaged to marry Emily before the tragedy, dies in a fierce storm off the coast while rescuing shipwreck victims. Steerforth was aboard the ship and also dies. Mr Peggotty takes Emily to a new life in Australia, accompanied by Mrs Gummidge and the Micawbers, where all eventually find security and happiness.\nMeanwhile, David has fallen in love with Dora Spenlow, and marries her. Their marriage proves troublesome for David in the sense of everyday practical affairs, but he never stops loving her. Dora dies early in their marriage after a miscarriage. After Dora's death, Agnes encourages David to return to normal life and his profession of writing. While living in Switzerland to dispel his grief over so many losses, David realises that he loves Agnes. Upon returning to Britain, after a failed attempt to conceal his feelings, David finds that Agnes loves him too. They quickly marry, and in this marriage he finds true happiness. David and Agnes then have at least five children, including a daughter named after his great-aunt, Betsey Trotwood.\nAutobiographical novel.\nFragments of autobiography.\nBetween 1845 and 1848, Dickens wrote fragments of autobiography, excerpts of which he showed to his wife and John Forster. Then in 1855 he made an attempt at revising it. This was a failure because, as he tells his first love Maria Beadnell (now Mrs Winter), when he began dealing with his youthful love for her, \"I lost courage and burned the rest\". Paul Schlicke points out that in fact not all the pages have gone through the flames and that, as Dickens began writing \"David Copperfield\" some pages were unearthed. Proof of this is found in the eleventh chapter of the novel: \"I begin Life on my own Account and don't like it\", where the story of Dickens's experience at the Warren Shoe Factory is told almost verbatim, with the only change, \"Mr Micawber\" instead of \"my father\". John Forster also published substantial extracts relating to this period in Dickens's biography, including a paragraph devoted to Wellington House College, which corresponds with the second stage of childhood recounted in the novel. Thus Dickens looks back on his painful past, already evoked by the martyrdom of Little Paul in \"Dombey and Son\", though voiced by an omniscient narrator in that earlier novel. Until Forster published his biography of Dickens in 1872\u20131874, no one knew that Dickens had worked in a factory as a child, not even his wife, until Dickens wrote it down and gave the papers to Forster in 1847. The first generations of readers did not know this part of David Copperfield's story began like an incident in the author's life.\nThe autobiographical dimension.\nIf \"David Copperfield\" has come to be Dickens's \"darling\", it is because it is the most autobiographical of all his novels. Some of the most painful episodes of his life are barely disguised; others appear indirectly, termed \"oblique revelations\" by Paul Davis. However, Dickens himself wrote to Forster that the book is not a pure autobiography, but \"a very complicated weaving of truth and invention\".\nThe autobiographical material.\nThe most important autobiographical material concerns the months that Dickens, still a child, spent at the Warren factory, his diligence with his first love, Maria Beadnell (see Catherine Dickens and Ellen Ternan), and finally his career as a journalist and writer. As pointed out by his biographer and friend John Forster, these episodes are essentially factual: the description of forced labour to which David is subjected at Murdstone and Grinby reproduces verbatim the autobiographical fragments entrusted to his friend; David's fascination with Dora Spenlow is similar to that inspired by the capricious Maria; the major stages of his career, from his apprenticeship at Doctors' Commons to writing his first novel, via the shorthand reporting of parliamentary procedures, also follow those of its creator.\nHowever, this material, like the other autobiographical aspects of the novel, is not systematically reproduced as such. The cruel Mr Murdstone is very different from the real James Lamert, cousin to Dickens, being the stepson of Mrs Dickens's mother's sister, who lived with the family in Chatham and Camden Town, and who had found for the young Charles the place of tagger in the shoe factory he managed for his brother-in-law George. The end of this episode looks nothing like what happens in the novel; in reality, contrary to the desire of his mother that he continue to work, it is his father who took him out of the warehouse to send him to school. Contrary to Charles's frustrated love for Maria Beadnell, who pushed him back in front of his parents' opposition, David, in the novel, marries Dora Spenlow and, with satisfaction \"ex post facto\", writes Paul Davis, virtually \"kills\" the recalcitrant stepfather. Finally, David's literary career seems less agitated than that of Dickens, and his results are much less spectacular. David's natural modesty alone does not explain all these changes; Paul Davis expresses the opinion that Dickens recounts his life as he would have liked it, and along with \"conscious artistry\", Dickens knows how to borrow data, integrate them to his original purpose and transform them according to the novelistic necessities, so that \"In the end, Copperfield is David's autobiography, not Dickens's\".\nSources and context.\nDickens's past.\n\"David Copperfield\" is the contemporary of two major memory-based works, William Wordsworth's \"The Prelude\" (1850), an autobiographical poem about the formative experiences of his youth and Tennyson's \"In Memoriam\" (1850) which eulogises the memory of his friend, Arthur Hallam. There is Wordsworth's romantic questioning on the personal development of the individual and there is Tennyson's Victorian confrontation with change and doubt. According to Andrew Sanders, \"David Copperfield\" reflects both types of response, which give this novel the privileged position of representing the hinge of the century.\nThe memories of Dickens are, according to Paul Schlicke, remarkably transmuted into fiction. The experience Dickens lived, as the son of a brazen impenitent, is celebrated through the comic figure of Wilkins Micawber. Dickens's youthful passion for Maria Beadnell resurfaces with tenderness, in the form of David's impractical marriage with Dora Spenlow. Dickens's decision to make David a novelist emphasises how he used this book to re-invent himself as a man and artist, \"The world would not take another Pickwick from me, but we can be cheerful and merry, and with a little more purpose in us\". If the preoccupation with the adventures of a hero, associated with a parade of comic or grotesque characters, looks back to Dickens's earlier novels, the interest in personal development, the pessimistic atmosphere and the complex structure of \"Copperfield\" foreshadow other novels.\nDespite never living there, Dickens knew the City of Canterbury well and includes numerous references to it. David Copperfield regularly visits the cathedral services at Canterbury Cathedral, and Mr Micawber wants his son to become a chorister. The Guildhall is mentioned when David Copperfield is asked by the barrister to visit. Dr Strong and Annie Markleham get married at St Alphege church, which is also situated prominently in Canterbury.\nContemporaneous novels.\nIn 1847, \"Jane Eyre\", Charlotte Bront\u00eb's first-person narrative, was acclaimed as soon as it was published. Unlike Thackeray, who adored it, Dickens claims years later never to have read it. True or false, he had encountered Elizabeth Gaskell's \"Mary Barton\", a novel that called for understanding and sympathy in a class-eaten society. Thackeray's \"Pendennis\" was serialised at the same time as \"David Copperfield\" and it depicts its hero's personal and social journey from the countryside to the city. A rivalry existed between the two writers, though it preoccupied Thackeray more than Dickens. The most direct literary influence is \"obviously Carlyle\" who, in a lecture given in 1840, the year of his meeting with Dickens, on \"On Heroes, Hero-Worship\" and \"the Heroic in History\", claims that the most important modern character is \"the hero as a man of letters\". This is David's destiny, through experience, perseverance and seriousness.\nDevelopment of the novel.\nFirst inspirations.\nOn 7 January 1849, Dickens visited Norwich and Yarmouth in Norfolk, with two close friends, John Leech (1817\u20131864) and Mark Lemon (1809\u20131870). Leech was an illustrator at \"Punch\", a satirical magazine, and the first illustrator for \"A Christmas Carol\" by Dickens in 1843. Lemon was a founding editor of \"Punch\", and soon a contributor to \"Household Words\", the weekly magazine Dickens was starting up; he co-authored \"Mr Nightingale's Diary\", a farce, with Dickens in 1851. The two towns, especially the second, became important in the novel, and Dickens informed Forster that Yarmouth seemed to him to be \"the strangest place in the world\" and that he would \"certainly try my hand at it\". During a walk in the vicinity of Yarmouth, Dickens noticed a sign indicating the small locality of Blundeston, which became in his novel the village of \"Blunderstone\" where David is born and spends his childhood.\nA week after his arrival in Yarmouth, his sixth son, Henry Fielding Dickens, was named after Henry Fielding, his favourite past author. Per Forster, Dickens refers to Fielding \"as a kind of homage to the novel he was about to write\".\nAs always with Dickens, when a writing project began, he was agitated, melancholic, \"even deeper than the customary birth pangs of other novels\"; as always, he hesitated about the title, and his working notes contain seventeen variants, \"Charles Copperfield\" included. After several attempts, he stopped on \"The Copperfield Survey of the World as it Rolled\", a title that he retained until 19 April. When Forster pointed out that his hero, now called David, has his own initials transposed, Dickens was intrigued and declared that this was a manifestation of his fate. He was not yet sure of his pen: \"Though I know what I want to do, I am lumbering like a train wagon\", he told Forster.\nNo general plan, but an inspired novel.\nContrary to the method previously used for \"Dombey and Son\", Dickens did not elaborate an overall plan and often wrote the summary of a chapter after completing it. Four character names were found at the last moment: Traddles, Barkis, Creakle and Steerforth; the profession of David remains uncertain until the eighth issue (printed in December 1849, containing Chapters 22\u201324, in which David chooses to be trained as a proctor); and Paul Schlicke notes that the future of Dora was still not determined on 17 May 1850 (when 37 chapters had been published in the first 12 monthly instalments). Other major aspects of the novel, however, were immediately fixed, such as David's meeting with Aunt Betsey, Emily's fall or Agnes's role as the \"real\" heroine of the story.\nOnce launched, Dickens becomes \"quite confident\". The most difficult thing was to insert \"what I know so well\", his experience at the Warren factory; once the threads were woven, however, the truth mixed with fiction, he exulted and congratulated himself in a letter to Forster. From now on, he wrote in this letter, the story \"bore him irresistibly along\". Never, it seems, was he in the grip of failures of inspiration, so \"ardent [is his] sympathy with the creatures of the fancy which always made real to him their sufferings or sorrows.\"\nChanges in detail occur during the composition: on 22 August 1849, while staying on the Isle of Wight for a family vacation, he changed on the advice of Forster, the theme of the obsession of Mr Dick, a secondary character in the novel. This theme was originally \"a bull in a china shop\" and became \"King Charles's head\" in a nod to the bicentenary of the execution of Charles I of England.\nLast incidents in the writing.\nAlthough plunged into the writing of his novel, Dickens set out to create a new journal, \"Household Words\", the first issue of which appeared on 31 March 1850. This daunting task, however, did not seem to slow down the writing of \"David Copperfield\": I am \"busy as a bee\", he writes happily to the actor William Macready.\nA serious incident occurred in December: Mrs Jane Seymour Hill, chiropractor to Mrs Dickens, raised the threat of prosecution, because she recognised herself in the portrait of Miss Mowcher; Dickens did not do badly, gradually modifying the psychology of the character by making her less of a caricature and, at the very end of the novel, by making her a friend of the protagonist, whereas at the beginning she served rather contrary purposes. This was, writes Harry Stone, \"the only major departure from his original plans\".\nHis third daughter was born on 16 August 1850, called Dora Annie Dickens, the same name as his character's first wife. The baby died nine months later after the last serial was issued and the book was published.\nDickens marked the end of his manuscript on 21 October 1850 and felt both torn and happy like every time he finished a novel: \"Oh, my dear Forster, if I were to say half of what \"Copperfield\" makes me feel to-night, how strangely, even to you, I should be turned inside out! I seem to be sending some part of myself into the Shadowy World.\"\nAt first glance, the work is modelled in the loose and somewhat disjointed way of \"personal histories\" that was very popular in the United Kingdom of the 18th century; but in reality, \"David Copperfield\" is a carefully structured and unified novel. It begins, like other novels by Dickens, with a rather bleak painting of the conditions of childhood in Victorian England, notoriously when the troublesome children are parked in infamous boarding schools, then he strives to trace the slow social and intimate ascent of a young man who, painfully providing for the needs of his good aunt while continuing his studies, ends up becoming a writer: the story, writes Paul Davis, of \"a Victorian everyman seeking self-understanding\".\nPublication in monthly instalments.\n\"The Personal History, Adventures, Experience, and Observation of David Copperfield the Younger, of Blunderstone Rookery\" was published from 1 May 1849 to 1 November 1850 in 19 monthly one-shilling instalments, containing 32 pages of text and two illustrations by Hablot Knight Browne (\"Phiz\"), with a title cover simplified to \"The Personal History of David Copperfield\". The last instalment was a double-number.\nOn the other side of the Atlantic, John Wiley &amp; Sons and G. P. Putnam published a monthly edition, then a two-volume book version.\nPoint of view.\nWhatever the borrowings from Dickens's own life, the reader knows as an essential precondition, that \"David Copperfield\" is a novel and not an autobiography; a work with fictional events and characters \u2013 including the hero-narrator \u2013 who are creations of Dickens's imagination.\nFirst person narrator.\nThe use of the first person determines the point of view: the narrator Copperfield, is a recognised writer, married to Agnes for more than ten years, who has decided to speak in public about his past life. This recreation, in itself an important act, can only be partial and also biased, since, \"a priori\", Copperfield is the only viewpoint and the only voice; not enjoying the prerogatives of the third person, omnipotence, ubiquity, clairvoyance, he relates only what he witnessed or participated in: all the characters appear in his presence or, failing that, he learns through hearsay, before being subjected to his pen through the prism of his conscience, deformed by the natural deficit of his perception and accentuated by the selective filter of memory. Story teller and teacher, Copperfield does not let the facts speak for themselves, but constantly asserts himself as master of the narrative game, and he intervenes, explains, interprets and comments. His point of view is that of the adult he has become, as he expresses himself just as he is writing. At the end of his book, he feels a writer's pride to evoke \"the thread[s] in the web I have spun\".\nGareth Cordery writes that \"if \"David Copperfield\" is the paradigmatic Bildungsroman, it is also the quintessential novel of memory\" and as such, according to Angus Wilson, the equal of Marcel Proust's \"In Search of Lost Time\" (\"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\"). The memory of the hero engages so intensely with his memories that the past seems present:\nHow well I recollect the kind of day it was! I smell the fog that hung about the place; I see the hoar-frost, ghostly, through it; I feel my rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek; I look along the dim perspective of the schoolroom, with a sputtering candle here and there to light up the foggy morning, and the breath of the boys wreathing and smoking in the raw cold as they blow upon their fingers, and rap their feet upon the floor.\nIn such passages, which punctuate the retrospective chapters, the relived moment replaces the lived, the historical present seals the collapse of the original experience and the recreation of a here and now that seizes the entire field of consciousness. Sometimes this resurrected experience is more vivid than reality; so, in Chapter 41, about Traddles's face, he says: \"His honest face, he looked at me with a serio-comic shake of his head impresses me more in the remembrance than it did in the reality.\" These are \"sacred moments\", writes Gareth Cordery, which Copperfield has carefully guarded in \"the treasure chambers\" of his memory, where sings \"the music of time\": \"secret prose, that sense of a mind speaking to itself with no one there to listen\".\nCommentary via the illustrations.\nWithout being Dickens, this narrator, Copperfield, is very like him and often becomes his spokesperson. It adds to his point of view, directly or indirectly, that of the author, without there necessarily being total match between the two. As such, Copperfield serves as \"medium\", mirror and also screen, Dickens sometimes subverting his speech to get to the forefront or, on the contrary, hide behind this elegant delegate to the nimble pen. Dickens's voice, however, is in general well concealed and, according to Gareth Cordery, the most difficult to detect because mostly present by implication. To help hear his voice, he adds, it is advisable to turn to Phiz, whose illustrations bring a point of view which is not always in agreement with that of Copperfield. For example, in chapter 21, the two friends arrive by surprise at the Peggotty home, and Copperfield presents Steerforth to Emily at the very moment when her betrothal with Ham has just been announced. This sudden intrusion stops the girl as she has just jumped from Ham's arms to nestle in those of Mr Peggotty, a sign, says Cordery in passing, that the promise of marriage is as much for the uncle as for the nephew. The text remains brief but Phiz interprets, anticipates the events, denounces even the future guilt of Copperfield: all eyes are on the girl, her bonnet, emblem of her social aspirations and her next wanderings with Steerforth, is ready to be seized. Copperfield, dressed as a gentleman, stands in the doorway, one finger pointing at Steerforth who is taller by one head, the other measuring the gap between Ham and Dan Peggotty, as if offering Emily to his friend. Emily, meanwhile, still has her head turned to Ham but the body is withdrawn and the look has become both challenging and provocative. Phiz brings together in a single image a whole bunch of unwritten information, which Dickens approved and probably even suggested.\nReader's insight.\nA third perspective is the point of view of the discerning reader who, although generally carried away by sympathy for the narrator's self-interested pleading, does not remain blissfully ignorant and ends up recognizing the faults of the man and of the writer, just as the reader also learns to identify and gauge the covert interventions of the author.\nThe discerning reader listens to the adult Copperfield and hears what this adult wants or does not want them to hear. \"Even though this manuscript is intended for no eyes but mine\", (chapter 42) the book exists, and the reader becomes \"ipso facto\" a \"father-confessor\", knowing how to judge and even, at times, to doubt the sincerity of the emotion expressed. So, when Dora dies, the reader sees that the topic of grief is dropped in a hurry, as if Copperfield had more important things to do than to indulge in sorrow: \"this is not the time at which I am to enter a state of mind beneath its load of sorrow\", which creates a question and an embarrassment: is Copperfield protecting himself from his confusion, or does he shed some crocodile tears for form?\nCopperfield also examines some of his most culpable weaknesses, such as unconscious connivance (his \"own unconscious part\") in the defilement of the Peggotty home by Steerforth, which he remains forever incapable of opposing: \"I believe that if I had been brought face to face with him, I could not have uttered one reproach.\"(chapter 32) The same treatment is given to his childhood love, his so much idealised Emily, who, once \"fallen\", is expelled from his consciousness to the point where his last comment, when he stealthily sees her aboard the ship leaving for Australia, is \"a masterpiece of narrative duplicity\": far from seeing in her what she has become, a real woman, he takes refuge behind the image of a pathetic religious icon elegantly allowing him to remove his own guilt for betraying her.\nThese underground currents are thus revealed in David's psychological struggle, Gareth Cordery concludes, currents that his narrative unconsciously attempts to disguise.\nRecapitulation of plot structure.\nThe plot line.\nThe story is a road from which different paths leave. The road is that of David's life, the main plot; the branches are born of meetings with him and lead to several secondary intrigues taken more or less far along. Each is represented by an important figure: Mr Micawber, Steerforth, little Emily, Uriah Heep; there are side stories, that of Martha Endell, Rosa Dartle, and, along the main road, stretch some parallel paths on which the reader is from time to time invited: the Traddles, Betsey Trotwood, the Peggotty family, Dan and Ham in particular, Peggotty herself remaining from start to finish intimately related to David. The different tracks do not move away from the main avenue, and when they do, a narrative \"forceps\" brings them together again. Hence the retrospective chapters and the ultimate recapitulation were written.\nThe necessary summaries.\nThe narrative is linear in appearance, as is usual in traditional first-person form. It covers the narrator's life until the day he decides to put an end to his literary endeavor. However, whole sections of his life are summarised in a few paragraphs, or sometimes just a sentence or two, indicating that three or ten years have passed, or that Dora is dead, necessary to keep the story moving along. Thus, the long stay of reflection in Switzerland which leads to the recognition of love for Agnes, or the lapse of time before the final chapter, are all blanks in the story. Besides the hero, this story concerns important secondary characters such as Mr Micawber or Uriah Heep, or Betsey Trotwood and Traddles, the few facts necessary for a believable story are parsimoniously distilled in the final chapters: an impromptu visit to a prison, the unexpected return of Dan Peggotty from the Antipodes; so many false surprises for the narrator who needs them to complete each person's personal story. As such, the epilogue that represents the last chapter (Ch 64) is a model of the genre, a systematic review, presumably inspired by his memory, without true connection. There is the desire to finish with each one, with forced exclamations and ecstatic observations, scrolling through the lives of those who are frozen in time: Dick with his \"Memorial\" and his kite, Dr Strong and his dictionary, and as a bonus, the news of David's \"least child\", which implies that there have been other children between him and eldest child Agnes of whom the reader has never heard by name. So also goes the story of Dan Peggotty relating the sad tale of his niece. The four chapters called \"Retrospect\" (Chapter 18: \"A Retrospect\", Chapter 43: \"Another Retrospect\", Chapter 53: \"Another Retrospect\" and Chapter 64: \"A Last Retrospect\") are placed at strategic moments of the general discourse, which play a catch-up role more than one of meditation by the narrator, without venturing into event details. Here, the narration has disappeared, it has given way to a list, an enumeration of events.\nRestructuring \"a posteriori\".\nDickens's approach, as shown in \"David Copperfield\", does not escape what Georges Gusdorf calls \"the original sin of autobiography\", that is to say a restructuring \"a posteriori\" and in this, paradoxically, it demonstrates its authenticity. It consists of splitting one's life into parts, choosing decisive phases, identifying an evolution and endowing them with a direction and then a meaning, whereas, from day to day, existence has been lived as a cluster of shapeless perceptions requiring an immediate adaptation, that captures at best in the novel the use of the historical present generally adopted by Dickens. It is a succession of autonomous moments which do not end up amalgamating in a coherent whole and that connect the tenuous thread of the \"I\" recognizing each other. In this reconstruction, one part of truth and the other of poetry, the famous \"Dichtung und Wahrheit\" (\"From my Life: Poetry and Truth; 1811\u20131833\"), autobiography of Goethe, there is the obligatory absence of objectivity, the promotion of oblivion as an integral part of memory, the ruling power of the subjectivity of time found.\nThus, to use George Gusdorf's words again, \"David Copperfield\" appears as a \"second reading of a man's experience\", in this case, Charles Dickens, when he reached the fullness of his career, tried to give \"a meaning to his legend\".\nThemes.\nThis novel's main theme arises from the fact that it is a bildungsroman, a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from youth to adulthood, which is common in Dickens's novels, and in which character change is extremely important. The changes involve David leaving past selves behind on the way to maturity. Other important themes relate especially to Dickens's social concerns, and his desire for reform. This includes the plight of so-called \"fallen women\", and prostitutes, as well as the attitude of middle-class society to these women; the status of women in marriage; the rigid class structure; the prison system; educational standards, and emigration to the colonies of what was becoming the British Empire. The latter was a way for individuals to escape some of the rigidity of British society and start anew. Some of these subjects are directly satirized, while others are worked into the novel in more complex ways by Dickens.\nBildungsroman.\nDifferent names.\nCopperfield's path to maturity is marked by the different names assigned to him: his mother calls him \"Davy\"; Murdstone calls him as \"Brooks of Sheffield\"; for Peggotty's family, he is \"Mas'r Davy\"; en route to boarding school from Yarmouth, he appears as \"Master Murdstone\"; at Murdstone and Grinby, he is known as \"Master Copperfield\"; Mr Micawber is content with \"Copperfield\"; for Steerforth he is \"Daisy\"; he becomes \"Mister Copperfield\" with Uriah Heep; and \"Trotwood\", soon shortened to \"Trot\" for Aunt Betsey; Mrs Crupp deforms his name into \"Mr Copperfull\"; and for Dora he is \"Doady\". While striving to earn his real name once and for all, this plethora of names reflects the fluidity of Copperfield's personal and social relationships, and obscure his real identity. It is by writing his own story, and giving him his name in the title, that Copperfield can finally assert who he is.\nA series of lives.\nDavid's life can be seen as a series of lives, each one in radical disjunction from what follows, writes Paul Davis. The young boy in the warehouse differs from Blunderstone Rookery's child, or Salem House student, and overall David strives to keep these parts of himself disconnected from each other. For example, in Chapter 17, while attending Canterbury School, he met Mr Micawber at Uriah Heep's, and a sudden terror gripped him that Heep could connect him, such as he is today, and the abandoned child who lodged with the Micawber family in London.\nSo many mutations indicate the name changes, which are sometimes received with relief: \"Trotwood Copperfield\", when he finds refuge in Dover at his Aunt Betsey's house, so the narrator writes, \"Thus I began my new life, in a new name, and with everything new about me.\" Then, he realised \"that a remoteness had come upon the old Blunderstone life\" and \"that a curtain had for ever fallen on my life at Murdstone and Grinby's\".\nThere is a process of forgetfulness, a survival strategy developed by memory, which poses a major challenge to the narrator; his art, in fact, depends on the ultimate reconciliation of differences in order to free and preserve the unified identity of his being a man.\n\"Will I be the hero of my own life?\".\nDavid opens his story with a question: Will I be the hero of my own life? This means that he does not know where his approach will lead him, that writing itself will be the test. As Paul Davis puts it, \"In this Victorian quest narrative, the pen might be lighter than the sword, and the reader will be left to judge those qualities of the man and the writer that constitute heroism.\nHowever, question implies an affirmation: it is Copperfield, and no one else, who will determine his life, the future is delusory, since the games are already played, the life has been lived, with the novel being only the story. Copperfield is not always the hero of his life, and not always the hero of his story, as some characters have a stronger role than him, Besides Steerforth, Heep, Micawber, for example, he often appears passive and lightweight. Hence, concludes Paul Davis, the need to read his life differently; it is more by refraction through other characters that the reader has a true idea of the \"hero\" of the story. What do these three men reveal to him, and also to Dora, whom he marries? Another possible yardstick is a comparison with the other two \"writers\" of the novel, Dr Strong and Mr Dick. The dictionary of Strong will never be completed and, as a story of a life, will end with the death of its author. As for Mr Dick, his autobiographical project constantly raises the question of whether he can transcend the incoherence and indecision of his subject-narrator. Will he be able to take the reins, provide a beginning, a middle, an end? Will he succeed in unifying the whole, in overcoming the trauma of the past, his obsession with the decapitated royal head, so as to make sense of the present and find a direction for the future? According to Paul Davis, only Copperfield succeeds in constructing a whole of his life, including suffering and failure, as well as successes, and that is \"one measure of his heroism as a writer\".\nThe weight of the past.\nThe past \"speaks\" especially to David, \"a child of close observation\" (chapter 2); the title of this chapter is: \"I observe\", and as an adult he is endowed with a remarkable memory. So much so that the story of his childhood is realised so concretely that the narrator, like the reader, sometimes forgets that it is a lived past and not a present that is given to see. The past tense verb is often the \"preterite\" for the narrative, and the sentences are often short independent propositions, each one stating a fact. Admittedly, the adult narrator intervenes to qualify or provide an explanation, without, however, taking precedence over the child's vision. And sometimes, the story is prolonged by a reflection on the functioning of the memory. So, again in chapter 2, the second and third paragraphs comment on the first memory of the two beings surrounding David, his mother, and Peggotty:\nI believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart, dwarfed to my sight by stooping or kneeling on the floor, and I going unsteadily from the one to the other. I have an impression on my mind, which I cannot distinguish from actual remembrance, of the touch of Peggotty's forefinger as she used to hold it out to me, and of its being roughened by needlework, like a pocket nutmeg-grater.\nThis may be fancy, though I think the memory of most of us can go further back into such times than many of us suppose; just as I believe the power of observation in numbers of very young children to be quite wonderful for its closeness and accuracy. Indeed, I think that most grown men who are remarkable in this respect may with greater propriety be said not to have lost the faculty than to have acquired it; the rather, as I generally observe such men to retain a certain freshness, and gentleness, and capacity of being pleased, which are also an inheritance they have preserved from their childhood.\nDavid thus succeeds, as George Orwell puts it, in standing \"both inside and outside a child's mind\", a particularly important double vision effect in the first chapters. The perspective of the child is combined with that of the adult narrator who knows that innocence will be violated and the feeling of security broken. Thus, even before the intrusion of Mr Murdstone as step-father or Clara's death, the boy feels \"intimations of mortality\". In the second chapter for example, when David spends a day with Mr Murdstone, during the first episode of \"Brooks of Sheffield\" in which, first blow to his confidence, he realises little by little that Mr Murdstone and his comrade Quinion are mocking him badly:\n'That's Davy,' returned Mr Murdstone.\n'Davy who?' said the gentleman. 'Jones?'\n'Copperfield' said Mr Murdstone.\n'What! Bewitching Mrs Copperfield's incumbrance?' cried the gentleman. 'The pretty little widow?'\n'Quinion,' said Mr Murdstone, 'take care, if you please. Somebody's sharp.'\n'Who is?' asked the gentleman laughing.\nI looked up quickly, being curious to know.\n'Only Brooks of Sheffield', said Mr Murdstone.\nI was quite relieved to find that it was only Brooks of Sheffield, for, at first, I really thought it was I.\nThere seemed to be something very comical in the reputation of Mr Brooks of Sheffield, for both the gentlemen laughed heartily when he was mentioned, and Mr Murdstone was a good deal amused also.\nThe final blow, brutal and irremediable this time, is the vision, in chapter 9, of his own reflection in his little dead brother lying on the breast of his mother: \"The mother who lay in the grave was the mother of my infancy; the little creature in her arms was myself, as I had once been, hushed forever on her bosom\".\nA series of male models for David.\nDavid Copperfield is a posthumous child, that is, he was born after his father died. From birth, his aunt is the authority who stands in for the deceased father, and she decides Copperfield's identity by abandoning him because he is not female. His first years are spent with women, two Claras, his mother and Peggotty, which, according to Paul Davis, \"undermines his sense of masculinity\". Hence a sensitivity that the same critic calls \"feminine\", made-up of a lack of confidence, naive innocence and anxiety, like that of his mother, who was herself an orphan. Steerforth is not mistaken, when from the outset he calls Copperfield \"Daisy\"\u2013a flower of spring, symbol of innocent youth. To forge an identity as a man and learn how to survive in a world governed by masculine values, instinctively, he looks for a father figure who can replace that of the father he did not have.\nSeveral male models will successively offer themselves to him: the adults Mr Murdstone, Mr Micawber and Uriah Heep, his comrades Steerforth and Traddles.\nMr Murdstone.\nMr Murdstone darkens Copperfield's life instead of enlightening him, because the principle of firmness which he champions, absolute novelty for the initial family unit, if he instills order and discipline, kills spontaneity and love. The resistance that Copperfield offers him is symbolic: opposing a usurper without effective legitimacy, he fails to protect his mother but escapes the straitjacket and achieves his independence. Mr Murdstone thus represents the anti-father, double negative of the one of which David was deprived, model \"a contrario\" of what it is not necessary to be.\nMr Micawber.\nThe second surrogate father is just as ineffective, although of a diametrically opposed personality: it is Mr Micawber who, for his part, lacks firmness to the point of sinking into irresponsibility. Overflowing with imagination and love, in every way faithful and devoted, inveterate optimist, he eventually becomes, in a way, the child of David who helps him to alleviate his financial difficulties. The roles are reversed and, by the absurdity, David is forced to act as a man and to exercise adult responsibilities towards him. However, the Micawbers are not lacking in charm, the round Wilkins, of course, but also his dry wife, whose music helps her to live. Mrs Micawber has, since childhood, two songs in her repertoire, the Scottish \"The dashing white sergeant\" and the American lament \"The little Tafflin with the Silken Sash\", whose attraction has decided her husband to \"win that woman or perish in the attempt\" In addition to the melodies that soothe and embellish, the words of the second, with her dream \"Should e'er the fortune be my lot to be made a wealthy bride!\" and her aphorism \"Like attracts like\" have become emblematic of the couple, one is the opposite of reality and the other the very definition of its harmony.\nUriah Heep.\nNew avatar of this quest, Uriah Heep is \"a kind of negative mirror to David\". Heep is clever at enlarging the pathos of his humble origins, for example, which ability he exploits shamelessly to attract sympathy and mask an unscrupulous ambition; while David, on the other hand, tends to suppress his modest past and camouflage his social ambitions under a veneer of worldly mistrust, prompting Paul Davis to conclude that, just as Mr Murdstone is adept at firmness, Heep, in addition to being a rascal, lacks the so-called feminine qualities of sensitivity which David does not lose.\nSteerforth.\nFor David, Steerforth represents all that Heep is not: born a gentleman, with no stated ambition or defined life plan, he has a natural presence and charisma that immediately give him scope and power. However, his failure as a model is announced well before the episode at Yarmouth where he seizes, like a thief, Little Emily before causing her loss in Italy. He already shows himself as he is, brutal, condescending, selfish and sufficient, towards Rosa Dartle, bruised by him for life, and Mr Mell who undergoes the assaults of his cruelty. The paradox is that even as he gauges his infamy, David remains from start to finish dazzled by Steerforth's aristocratic ascendancy, even as he contemplates him drowning on Yarmouth Beach, \"lying with his head upon his arm, as I had often seen him at school\".\nTraddles.\nNow consider Traddles, the anti-Steerforth, the same age as the hero, not very brilliant at school, but wise enough to avoid the manipulations to which David succumbs. His attraction for moderation and reserve assures him the strength of character that David struggles to forge. Neither rich nor poor, he must also make a place for himself in the world, at which he succeeds by putting love and patience at the center of his priorities, the love that tempers the ambition and the patience that moderates the passion. His ideal is to achieve justice in his actions, which he ends up implementing in his profession practically. In the end, Traddles, in his supreme modesty, represents the best male model available to David.\nThere are others, Daniel Peggotty for example, all love and dedication, who goes in search of his lost niece and persists in mountains and valleys, beyond the seas and continents, to find her trace. Mr Peggotty is the anti-Murdstone par excellence, but his influence is rather marginal on David, as his absolute excellence, like the maternal perfection embodied by his sister Peggotty, makes him a character type more than an individual to refer to. There is also the carter Barkis, original, laconic and not without defects, but a man of heart. He too plays a role in the personal history of the hero, but in a fashion too episodic to be significant, especially since he dies well before the end of the story.\nThe hard path to the right balance.\nIt is true that David's personal story makes it more difficult for him to access the kind of equilibrium that Traddles presents, because it seems destined, according to Paul Davis, to reproduce the errors committed by his parents. So, without knowing it, he looks a lot like his late father, also named David, who, according to Aunt Betsey, had eyes only for the flower-women, and, as such, he finds himself as irresistibly attracted to Dora whose delicate and charming femininity, the sweet frivolity too, recall those of his diaphanous mother. The chapters describing their loves are among the best in the novel because Dickens manages to capture the painful ambivalence of David, both passionately infatuated with the irresistible young woman, to whom we can only pass and forgive everything, and frustrated by his weak character and his absolute ignorance of any discipline. For love, the supreme illusion of youth, he tries to change it, to \"form her mind\", which leads him to recognize that \"firmness\" can to be a virtue which, ultimately, he needs. However, finding himself in a community of thought, even distantly, with his hateful and cruel stepfather whom he holds responsible for the death of his mother and a good deal of his own misfortunes, it was a troubling discovery.\nIt is his aunt Betsey who, by her character, represents the struggle to find the right balance between firmness and gentleness, rationality and empathy. Life forced Betsey Trotwood to assume the role she did not want, that of a father, and as such she became, but in her own way, adept at steadfastness and discipline. From an initially culpable intransigence, which led her to abandon the newborn by denouncing the incompetence of the parents not even capable of producing a girl, she finds herself gradually tempered by circumstances and powerfully helped by the \"madness\" of her protege, Mr Dick. He, between two flights of kites that carry away the fragments of his personal history, and without his knowing it, plays a moderating role, inflecting the rationality of his protector by his own irrationality, and his cookie-cutter judgments by considerations of seeming absurdity, but which, taken literally, prove to be innate wisdom. In truth, Aunt Betsey, despite her stiffness and bravado, does not dominate her destiny; she may say she can do it, yet she cannot get David to be a girl, or escape the machinations of Uriah Heep any more than the money demands of her mysterious husband. She also fails, in spite of her lucidity, her clear understanding, of the love blindness of her nephew, to prevent him from marrying Dora and in a parallel way, to reconcile the Strongs. In fact, in supreme irony, it is once again Mr Dick who compensates for his inadequacies, succeeding with intuition and instinctive understanding of things, to direct Mr Micawber to save Betsey from the clutches of Heep and also to dispel the misunderstandings of Dr Strong and his wife Annie.\nAs often in Dickens where a satellite of the main character reproduces the course in parallel, the story of the Strong couple develops in counterpoint that of David and Dora. While Dora is in agony, David, himself obsessed with his role as a husband, observes the Strongs who are busy unraveling their marital distress. Two statements made by Annie Strong impressed him: in the first, she told him why she rejected Jack Maldon and thanked her husband for saving her \"from the first impulse of an undisciplined heart\". The second was like a flash of revelation: \"There can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose\". At the end of chapter 45, almost entirely devoted to the epilogue of this affair, David meditates on these words which he repeats several times and whose relevance, applied to his own case, is imposed on him. He concludes that in all things, discipline tempered by kindness and kindness is necessary for the equilibrium of a successful life. Mr Murdstone preached firmness; in that, he was not wrong. Where he cruelly failed was that he matched it with selfish brutality instead of making it effective by the love of others.\nThe happiness of maturity with Agnes.\nIt is because David has taken stock of his values and accepted the painful memories of Dora's death, that he is finally ready to go beyond his emotional blindness and recognize his love for Agnes Wickfield, the one he already has called the \"true heroine\" of the novel to which he gives his name. Paul Davis writes that Agnes is surrounded by an aura of sanctity worthy of a stained glass window, that she is more a consciousness or an ideal than a person, that, certainly, she brings the loving discipline and responsibility of which the hero needs, but lacks the charm and human qualities that made Dora so attractive. Adrienne E Gavin, nuancing the point, writes that she is neither more nor less caricature than other young women in the hero's life: if Emily is a stereotype of the \"lost woman\" and Dora of \"woman-child\", Agnes is that of \"ideal Victorian woman\", which necessarily limits, for her as for the others, the possibilities of evolution, the only change available from a loving and devoted daughter to a loving and devoted wife.\nThat said, the writer David, now David Copperfield, realised the vow expressed to Agnes (when he was newly in love with Dora, in Chapter 35. Depression): \"If I had a conjurer's cap, there is no one I should have wished but for you\". At the end of his story, he realises that the conjurer's cap is on his head, that he can draw his attention to the people he loves and trusts. Thus, \"David Copperfield\" is the story of a journey through life and through oneself, but also, by the grace of the writer, the recreation of the tenuous thread uniting the child and the adult, the past and the present, in what Georges Gusdorf calls \"fidelity to the person\". or, as Robert Ferrieux said, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nSocial questions.\nAdmittedly, it is not the primary interest of \"David Copperfield\" that remains above all the story of a life told by the very one who lived it, but the novel is imbued with a dominant ideology, that of the middle class, advocating moral constancy, hard work, separate spheres for men and women, and, in general, the art of knowing one's place, indeed staying in that place. Further, some social problems and repeated abuses being topical, Dickens took the opportunity to expose them in his own way in his fiction, and Trevor Blount, in his introduction to the 1966 edition Penguin Classics, reissued in 1985, devotes several pages to this topic.\nHowever, Gareth Cordery shows that behind the display of Victorian values, often hides a watermarked discourse that tends to question, test, and even subvert them. There are therefore two possible readings, the one that remains on the surface and another that questions below this surface, the implicit questions.\nAmong the social issues that \"David Copperfield\" is concerned with, are prostitution, the prison system, education, as well as society's treatment of the insane.\nDickens's views on education are reflected in the contrast he makes between the harsh treatment that David receives at the hands of Creakle at Salem House and Dr Strong's school where the methods used inculcate honour and self\u2013reliance in its pupils.\nThrough the character of \"the amiable, innocent, and wise fool\" Mr Dick, Dickens's \"advocacy in the humane treatment of the insane\" can be seen. Mr Dick's brother\ndidn't like to have him visible about his house, and sent him away to some private asylum-place: though he had been left to his particular care by their deceased father, who thought him almost a natural. And a wise man he must have been to think so! Mad himself, no doubt.\nSo Betsy Trotwood, continuing Mr Dick's story in Chapter 14, stepped in to suggest that Mr Dick should be given \"his little income, and come and live with\" her: \"I am ready to take care of him, and shall not ill-treat him as some people (besides the asylum-folks) have done.\"\nVictorian child exploitation.\nThe employment of young children in factories and mines under harsh conditions in the early Victorian era disturbed many. There was a series of Parliamentary enquiries into the working conditions of children, and these \"reports shocked writers Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Charles Dickens.\" Dickens describes children working in factories or other workplaces in several novels, notably in \"Oliver Twist\", and in \"David Copperfield\". Young David works in a factory for a while after his mother dies and his stepfather showed no interest in him. Such depictions contributed to the call for legislative reform.\nPrison discipline.\nDickens satirises contemporary ideas about how prisoners should be treated in Chapter 61, 'I am Shown Two Interesting Penitents'. In this chapter, published in November 1850, David along with Traddles is shown around a large well-built new prison, modelled on Pentonville prison (built in 1842), where a new, supposedly more humane, system of incarceration is in operation, under the management of David's former headmaster Creakle. A believer in firmness, Dickens denounced comically the system of isolating prisoners in separate cells, the \"separate system\", and giving them healthy and pleasant food. His satire appeals directly to the public, already warned by the long controversy over the prison discipline in the press. Mr Creakle is very proud of this new system, but his enthusiasm is immediately undermined by the reminder of his former ferocity as a school principal. In the prison David and Traddles encounter 'model prisoners' 27 and 28, who they discover are Uriah Heep and Mr Littimer. Heep is seen reading a hymn book and Littimer also \"walked forth, reading a good book\": both have managed to convince the na\u00efve Creakle, and his fellow magistrates, that they have seen the error of their ways. Both are questioned about the quality of the food and Creakle promises improvements.\nDickens's ideas in this chapter were in line with Carlyle, whose pamphlet, \"Model Prisons\", also denounced Pentonville Prison, was published in the spring of 1850. Indeed, Dickens had published anonymously, a month after Carlyle's pamphlet on the same subject, \"Pet Prisonners\".\nEmigration to Australia.\nDickens's exploration of the subject of emigration in the novel has been criticised, initially by John Forster and later by G. K. Chesterton. Chesterton accused Dickens of presenting emigration in an excessively optimistic light, arguing that Dickens believed that by sending a boatload of people overseas their 'souls' can be changed, while ignoring the fact that poor people like Peggotty have seen their home stained or, like Emily, their honour tarnished. Micawber has been broken by the English social system, his journey to the antipodes is paid for by a paragon of the Victorian bourgeoisie, Betsey Trotwood and he is supposed to regain control of his destiny once he has arrived in Australia. Trevor Blount points out that the word 'soul' has a different meaning for Dickens than Chesterton. Dickens cares about material and psychological happiness, and is convinced that physical well-being is a comfort for life's wounds.\nDickens sent his characters to America in \"Nicholas Nickleby\" and \"Martin Chuzzlewit\", but he has the Peggotty and Micawber families emigrate to Australia. This approach was part of the official policy of the 1840s, focusing on Australia as a land of welcome. It was at this time necessary to stimulate interest in the new colony and propagandists arrived in England in particular John Dunmore Lang and Caroline Chisholm from Australia. Dickens was only following this movement and, in any case, had faith in family colonisation. Moreover, the idea that redemption could be achieved by such a new start in a person's life was a preoccupation of the author, and he saw here subject matter to charm his readers.\nFrom the point of view of the novel's inner logic, in order for Copperfield to complete his psychological maturation and exist independently, Dickens must expel his surrogate fathers, including Peggotty and Micawber, and emigration is an easy way to remove them.\nVisions for society.\nThe episode in the prison, according to novelist Angus Wilson, is more than a piece of journalism; it represents Dickens's vision of the society in which he lives. The same can be said of the episodes concerning prostitution and emigration, which illuminate the limits of Copperfield's moral universe and Dickens's own uncertainties. That everything is put in order in Australia, that Martha marries a man from the bush, that Emily, in the strong arms of Dan Peggotty, becomes a lady of good works, that Micawber, who had been congenitally insolvent, suddenly acquires the management skills and becomes prosperous in dispensing justice. All these conversions are somewhat 'ironic', and tend to undermine the hypothesis of 'a Dickens believing in the miracle of the antipodes', which Jane Rogers considers in her analysis of the 'fallen woman' as a plot device to gain the sympathy of Dickens's readers for Emily.\nThe middle-class ideology.\nJohn Forster, Dickens's early biographer, praises the bourgeois or middle-class values and ideology found in \"David Copperfield\". Like him the Victorian reading public shared Copperfield's complacent views, expressed with the assurance of success that is his, at the end, as a recognized writer who is happy in marriage and safe from need.\nGateth Cordery takes a close look at class consciousness. According to him, Copperfield's relationship with aristocrat Steerforth and the humble Uriah Heep is \"crucial\". From the beginning, Copperfield ranks as and is considered by his friends among the good people. The Peggotty family, in Chapter 3, treat him with respect, \"as a visitor of distinction\"; even at Murdstone and Grinby, his behaviour and clothes earned him the title of \"the little gentleman\". When he reached adulthood, he naturally enjoyed Steerforth's disdain for Ham as a simple \"joke about the poor\". So he is predisposed to succumb, by what he calls in chapter 7 an \"inborn power of attraction\", to the charm instinctively lent to beautiful people, about which David said \"a kind of enchantment\u00a0... to which it was a natural weakness to yield.\" From start to finish, David remains fascinated by Steerforth, so he aspires inwardly to his social status.\nIn parallel there is a contempt of the upstart, Heep, hatred of the same nature as Copperfield's senseless adoration for Steerforth, but inverted. That \"'umble\" Heep goes from a lowly clerk to an associate at Wickfield's, to claiming to win the hand of Agnes, daughter of his boss, is intolerable to David, though it is very similar to his own efforts to go from shorthand clerk to literary fame, with Dora Spenlow, the daughter of his employer. Heep's innuendo that Copperfield is no better than him feeds on the disdain in which he holds Heep as of right: \"Copperfield, you've always been an upstart\", an honesty of speech, comments Cordery, of which Copperfield himself is incapable.\nMarriage.\nAnother concern of Dickens is the institution of marriage and in particular, the unenviable place occupied by women. Whether at the home of Wickfield, Strong, or under the Peggotty boat, women are vulnerable to predators or intruders like Uriah Heep, Jack Maldon, James Steerforth; Murdstone's firmness prevails up to the death of two wives; with David and Dora complete incompetence reigns; and at the Micawber household, love and chaos go hand in hand; while Aunt Betsey is subjected to blackmail by her mysterious husband. Dickens, according to Gareth Cordery, clearly attacks the official status of marriage, which perpetuated an inequality between the sexes, an injustice that does not end with the separation of couples.\nThe mid-Victorian era saw a change in gender roles for men and women, in part forced by the factories and separation of work and home, which made stereotypes of the woman at home and the man working away from home. Values, like the imperative need for women to marry and to be that ideal described as The Angel in the House (manages the home without aid and is always calm) are \"interrogated, tested and even subverted\", for example by having one mother-figure be the character Betsey Trotwood, who is not a mother. When seeming to describe a stereotypical image in particularly the female characters, the story \"does so in a way that reflects the fault-lines of the image.\"\nAnne Bront\u00eb in \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" (1848) explores this iniquity in the status of the character Helen Graham, separated from her alcoholic husband. Dickens's understanding of the burden on women in marriage in this novel contrasts with his treatment of his own wife Catherine, whom he expected to be an Angel in the House.\nThe fallen woman.\nMartha Endell and Emily Peggotty, the two friends in Yarmouth who work at the undertaker's house, reflect Dickens's commitment to \"save\" so-called fallen women. Dickens was co-founder with Angela Burdett-Coutts of Urania Cottage, a home for young women who had \"turned to a life of immorality\", including theft and prostitution. On the eve of her wedding to her cousin and fianc\u00e9, Ham, Emily abandons him for Steerforth. After Steerforth deserts her, she doesn't go back home, because she has disgraced herself and her family. Her uncle, Mr Peggotty, finds her in London on the brink of being forced into prostitution. So that she may have a fresh start away from her now degraded reputation, she and her uncle emigrate to Australia. Martha has been a prostitute and contemplated suicide but towards the end of the novel, she redeems herself by helping Daniel Peggotty find his niece after she returns to London. She goes with Emily to start a new life in Australia. There, she marries and lives happily.\nTheir emigration to Australia, in the wake of that of Micawber, Daniel Peggotty, and Mr Mell, emphasizes Dickens's belief that social and moral redemption can be achieved in a distant place, where someone may create a new and healthy life. However, despite their families' forgiveness, they remain \"tainted\" and their expulsion from England is symbolic of their status: it is only at the other end of the world that these \"social outcasts\" can be reinstated. Morally, Dickens here conforms to the dominant middle-class opinion.\nThe exception of Rosa Dartle.\nJohn O. Jordan devotes two pages to this woman, also \"lost\", though never having sinned. The sanctification of the Victorian home, he says, depends on the opposition between two stereotypes, the \"angel\" and the \"whore\". Dickens denounced this restrictive dichotomy by portraying women \"in between\". Such is Rosa Dartle, passionate being, with the inextinguishable resentment of having been betrayed by Steerforth, a wound that is symbolised by the vibrant scar on her lip. Never does she allow herself to be assimilated by the dominant morality, refusing tooth and nail to put on the habit of the ideal woman. Avenger to the end, she wants the death of Little Emily, both the new conquest and victim of the same predator, and has only contempt for the efforts of David to minimize the scope of his words. As virtuous as anyone else, she claims, especially that Emily, she does not recognize any ideal family, each being moulded in the manner of its social class, nor any affiliation as a woman: she is Rosa Dartle, in herself.\nDavid's vision, on the other hand, is marked by class consciousness: for him, Rosa, emaciated and ardent at the same time, as if there were incompatibility (chapter 20), is a being apart, half human, half animal, like the lynx, with its inquisitive forehead, always on the look out (chapter 29), which consumes an inner fire reflected in the gaunt eyes of the dead of which only this flame remains (chapter 20). In reality, says Jordan, it is impossible for David to understand or even imagine any sexual tension, especially that which governs the relationship between Rosa and Steerforth, which, in a way, reassures his own innocence and protects what he calls his \"candour\" \u2013 frankness or angelism? \u2013 his story. Also, Rosa Dartle's irreducible and angry marginality represents a mysterious threat to his comfortable and reassuring domestic ideology.\nDickens's way of writing.\nDickens's approach to the novel is influenced by various literary genres, including the picaresque novel tradition, melodrama, and the novel of sensibility. Satire and irony are central to the picaresque novel. Comedy is also an aspect of the British picaresque novel tradition of Laurence Sterne, Henry Fielding, and Tobias Smollett. Fielding's \"Tom Jones\" was a major influence on the nineteenth century novel including Dickens, who read it in his youth, and named a son Henry Fielding Dickens in his honour. Melodrama is typically sensational and designed to appeal strongly to the emotions.\nTrevor Blount comments on the fascination that Dickens has always exercised on the public. He mentions the lavishness, energy, vividness, brilliance, and tenderness of Dickens's writing, along with the range of his imagination. Blount also refers to Dickens's humour, and his use of the macabre and of pathos. Finally, Blount celebrates the artistic mastery of an overflowing spontaneity, which is conveyed with both delicacy and subtlety. What Blount admires, in the first place, is the vigour with which the characters \"rise\" from the page and create a \"phantasmagorical\" universe, which is seen by the reader with the intensity of an hallucination. This is best illustrated in many of Dickens's works, by the powerful figure of a weak individual. In \"David Copperfield\" Mr Wilkins Micawber is such a figure, someone who is formidably incompetent, grandiose in his irreducible optimism, sumptuous in his verbal virtuosity, and whose grandiloquent tenderness is irresistibly comical. Micawber has been described as \"With the one exception of Falstaff, ... the greatest comic figure in English literature\".\nIn this novel, one characteristic noted by Edgar Johnson is that Dickens, in the first part, \"makes the reader see with the eyes of a child\", an innovative technique for the time, first tried in \"Dombey and Son\" with an omniscient narrator, and carried here to perfection through the use of the 'I'.\nModernist novelist Virginia Woolf writes, that when we read Dickens \"we remodel our psychological geography ... [as he produces] characters who exist not in detail, not accurately or exactly, but abundantly in a cluster of wild yet extraordinarily revealing remarks\".\nSatire and pathos.\nThe very principle of satire is to question, and to tear off the masks, so as to reveal the raw reality under the varnish. Dickens uses the whole arsenal of literary tools that are available to the satirist, or rather supplied by his narrator, David, who even directs satire upon himself. These tools include irony, humour, and caricature. How it is employed relates to the characters' differing personalities. Satire is thus gentler towards some characters than others; toward David the hero-narrator, it is at once indulgent and transparent.\nTypes of character.\nThere are several different types of character: On the one hand, there are the good ones, Peggotty, Dr Strong, Traddles, Agnes etc., on the other hand, there are the bad ones, Murdstone, Steerforth, Uriah Heep, etc. A third category are characters who change over time, including Betsey Trotwood, who at first is more obstinate than nasty, it is true, and Martha Endell, and Creakle, etc. There is also a contrast drawn between ever-frozen personalities such as Micawber, Dora, Rosa Dartle, and those who evolve. The latter includes David, Mr Mell, Miss Mowcher. There is also a contrast drawn between the idiosyncrasies of Mr Dick, Barkis, Mrs Gummidge, and the subtle metamorphosis from innocence to maturity of characters like David, Traddles, Agnes.\nDickens worked intensively on developing arresting names for his characters that would reverberate with associations for his readers, and assist the development of motifs in the storyline, giving what one critic calls an \"allegorical impetus\" to a novel's meanings. The name Mr Murdstone in \"David Copperfield\" conjures up twin allusions to \"murder\" and stony coldness; Strong is definitely not \"strong\"; Creakle \"squeaks and grinds\". There can also be a visual dimension to Dickens's humour. This includes Micawber's rotundity, his wife's dried-up body, which forever offers a sterile breast, Betsey's steadfast stiffness, Mr Sharp's bowed head, Daniel Peggotty's stubborn rudeness, Clara Copperfield's delicate silhouette, and Dora's mischievous air. Then there are exaggerated attitudes that are constantly repeated. Dickens creates humour out of character traits, such as Mr Dick's kite flying, James Steerforth's insistent charm, Uriah Heep's obsequiousness, Betsey pounding David's room. There are in addition the employment of repetitive verbal phrases: \"umble\" of the same Heep, the \"willin\" of Barkis, the \"lone lorn creetur\" of Mrs Gummidge. Dickens also uses objects for a humorous purpose, like Traddles's skeletons, the secret box of Barkis, the image of Heep as a snake, and the metallic rigidity of Murdstone.\nPathos and indulgent humour.\nIn \"David Copperfield\" idealised characters and highly sentimental scenes are contrasted with caricatures and ugly social truths. While good characters are also satirised, a considered sentimentality replaces satirical ferocity. This is a characteristic of all of Dickens's writing, but it is reinforced in \"David Copperfield\" by the fact that these people are the narrator's close family members and friends, who are devoted to David and sacrificing themselves for his happiness. Hence the indulgence applied from the outset, with humour prevailing along with loving complicity. David is the first to receive such treatment, especially in the section devoted to his early childhood, when he is lost in the depths of loneliness in London, following his punishment by Mr Murdstone. Michael Hollington analyses a scene in chapter 11 that seems emblematic of the situation and how humour and sentimentality are employed by Dickens. This is the episode where the very young David orders a pitcher of the best beer in a public house, \"To moisten what I had for dinner\". David's memory has retained the image of the scene, which is so vivid that he sees himself as from the outside. He has forgotten the exact date (his birthday). This episode release David's emotional pain, writes Michael Hollington, obliterating the infected part of the wound. Beyond the admiration aroused for the amazing self-confidence of the little child, in resolving this issue and taking control of his life with the assurance of someone much older, the passage \"testifies to the work of memory, transfiguring the moment into a true myth\". The tone is nostalgic because, ultimately, the epilogue is a true moment of grace. The wife of the keeper, returning David's money, deposits on his forehead a gift that has become extremely rare, a kiss, \"Half admired and half compassionate\", but above all full of kindness and femininity; at least, adds David, as a tender and precious reminder, \"I am sure\".\nTheatricality.\nDickens went to the theatre regularly from an early age and even considered becoming an actor in 1832. \"Many of the plays that he saw on the London stage in the 1820s and 1830s were melodramas\". There is a visual, theatrical\u2014even cinematic\u2014element in some scenes in \"David Copperfield\". The cry of Martha at the edge of the river belongs to the purest Victorian melodrama, as does the confrontation between Mr Peggotty and Mrs Steerforth, in chapter 32:\nI justify nothing, I make no counter-accusations. But I am sorry to repeat, it is impossible. Such a marriage would irretrievably blight my son's career, and ruin his prospects. Nothing is more certain than that, it never can take place, and never will. If there is any other compensation.\nSuch language, according to Trevor Blount, is meant to be said aloud. Many other scenes employ the same method: Micawber crossing the threshold, Heep harassing David in Chapter 17, the chilling apparition of Littimer in the middle of David's party in Chapter 27. The climax of this splendid series of scenes is the storm off Yarmouth, which is an epilogue to the menacing references to the sea previously, which shows Dicken's most intense virtuosity (chapter 55).\nDickens made the following comment in 1858: \"Every good actor plays direct to every good author, and every writer of fiction, though he may not adopt the dramatic form, writes in effect for the stage\".\nSetting.\nSetting is a major aspect of Dickens's \"narrative artistry and of his methods of characterization\", so that \"the most memorable quality of his novels may well be their atmospheric density [... of the] descriptive writing\".\nIn \"David Copperfield\" setting is less urban, more rustic than in other novels, and especially maritime. Besides Peggotty, who is a seaman whose home is an overturned hull, Mr Micawber goes to the naval port of Plymouth on the south coast after prison and appears finally on board a steamer. David himself is connected to Yarmouth, and Aunt Betsey settled in the Channel port of Dover. Young David notices the sea on his first day at her home; \"the air from the sea came blowing in again, mixed with the perfume of the flowers\". The city, London, is especially the place of misfortune, where the dark warehouse of Murdstone and Grinby are found. The philosopher Alain (pseudonym of \u00c9mile-Auguste Chartier) comments as follows about Dickens's portrayal of London (but it might also be applied to other locations), as cited by Lan\u00e7on:\nThe Dickensian atmosphere, unlike any other, comes from the way the distinctive nature of a dwelling is linked to the personality of its inhabitant [...] [There is there] a look that creates a sense of reality, with the remarkable connection between buildings and characters.\nSymbolism.\nImportant symbols include, imprisonment, the sea, flowers, animals, dreams, and Mr Dick's kite. According to Henri Suhamy, \"Dickens's symbolism consists in giving significance to physical details ... The constant repetition of these details ... contributes to deepen their emblematic significance\". This may include the characters, aspects of the story, and, more prominently amongst the motifs, places or objects.\nSeparating realism and symbolism can be tricky, especially, for example, when it relates, to the subject of imprisonment, which is both a very real place of confinement for the Micawber family, and, more generally throughout \"David Copperfield\", symbolic of the damage inflicted on a sick society, trapped in its inability to adapt or compromise, with many individuals walled within themselves.\nThe imponderable power of the sea is almost always associated with death: it took Emily's father; will take Ham and Steerforth, and in general is tied to David's \"unrest\" associated with his Yarmouth experiences. In the end nothing remains but Steerforth's body cast-up as \"flotsam and jetsam\", that symbolises the moral emptiness of David's adoration. The violent storm in Yarmouth coincides with the moment when the conflicts reached a critical threshold, when it is as if angry Nature called for a final resolution; as Kearney noted, \"The rest of the novel is something of an anti-climax after the storm chapter.\" Referring to the climactic storm scene in \"David Copperfield\", the last in any Dickens novel, Kearney remarked that \"The symbolism of sea, sky and storm is successfully integrated to achieve what amounts to a mystical dimension in the novel, and this mystical dimension is, on the whole, more acceptable than the ones found elsewhere in Dickens\".\nAccording to Daniel L Plung, four types of animal are a particularly important aspect of the way symbolism is used: song birds symbolise innocence; \"lions and raptors [are] associated with the fallen but not evil\"; dogs, other than Jip, are associated \"with the malicious and self-interested\"; while snakes and eel represent evil. A typical example of the way that animal symbolism is used is found in the following sentence: \" 'the influence of the Murdstones upon me [David] was like the fascination of two snakes on a wretched young bird\" '. When David describes Steerforth as \"brave as a lion\" this is a clue to Steerforth's moral weakness and foreshadows subsequent events.\nFlowers symbolise innocence, for example, David is called \"Daisy\" by Steerforth, because he is naive and pure, while Dora constantly paints bouquets, and when Heep was removed from Wickfield House, flowers return to the living room. Mr Dick's kite, represents how much he is both outside and above society, immune to its hierarchical social system. Furthermore, it flies among the innocent birds, and just as this toy soothes and gives joy to him, Mr Dick heals the wounds and restore peace where the others without exception have failed.\nDreams are also an important part of the novel's underlying symbolic structure, and are \"used as a transitional device to bind [its] parts together\" with twelve chapters ending \"with a dream or reverie\". In the early dark period of David's life his dreams \"are invariably ugly\", but in later chapters they are more mixed, with some reflecting \"fanciful hopes\" that are never realised, while others are nightmares which foreshadow \"actual problems\".\nIn addition physical beauty, in the form of Clara, is emblematic of moral good, while the ugliness of Uriah Heep, Mr Creakle and Mr Murdstone underlines their villainy. While David, the story's hero, has benefited from her love and suffered from the violence of the others.\nDialect.\nDickens, in preparation for this novel, went to Norwich, Lowestoft, and Yarmouth where the Peggotty family resides, but he stayed there for only five hours, on 9 January 1849. He assured his friends, that his descriptions were based on his own memories, brief as were his local experiences. However, looking to the work of K. J. Fielding reveals that the dialect of this town was taken from a book written by a local author, Major Edward Moor published in 1823. There, Dickens found \"a beein\" (a house), \"fisherate\" (officiate), \"dodman\" (snail), \"clickesen\" (gossip), and \"winnicking\" (tears) from \"winnick\" (to cry) and so on.\nLiterary significance and reception.\nMany view this novel as Dickens's masterpiece, beginning with his friend and first biographer John Forster, who writes: \"Dickens never stood so high in reputation as at the completion of Copperfield\", and the author himself calls it \"his favourite child\". It is true, he says, that \"underneath the fiction lay something of the author's life\", that is, an experience of self-writing. It is therefore not surprising that the book is often placed in the category of autobiographical works. From a strictly literary point of view, however, it goes beyond this framework in the richness of its themes and the originality of its writing.\nSituated in the middle of Dickens's career, it represents, according to Paul Davis, a turning point in his work, the point of separation between the novels of youth and those of maturity. In 1850, Dickens was 38 years old and had twenty more to live, which he filled with other masterpieces, often denser, sometimes darker, that addressed most of the political, social and personal issues he faced.\n\"The privileged child\" of Dickens.\nDickens welcomed the publication of his work with intense emotion, and he continued to experience this until the end of his life. When he went through a period of personal difficulty and frustration in the 1850s, he returned to \"David Copperfield\" as to a dear friend who resembled him: \"Why,\" he wrote to Forster, \"Why is it, as with poor David, a sense comes always crashing on me now, when I fall into low spirits, as of one happiness I have missed in life, and one friend and companion I have never made?\" When Dickens begins writing \"Great Expectations\", which was also written in the first person, he reread \"David Copperfield\" and confided his feelings to Forster: \"was affected by it to a degree you would hardly believe\". Criticism has not always been even-handed, though over time the high importance of this novel has been recognised.\nInitial reception.\nAlthough Dickens became a Victorian celebrity his readership was mainly the middle classes, including the so-called skilled workers, according to the French critic Fabrice Bensimon, because ordinary people could not afford it. Issues I to V of the serial version reached 25,000 copies in two years, modest sales compared to 32,000 \"Dombey and Son\" and 35,000 \"Bleak House\", but Dickens was nevertheless happy: \"Everyone is cheering David on\", he writes to Mrs Watson, and, according to Forster, his reputation was at the top.\nThe first reviews were mixed, but the great contemporaries of Dickens showed their approval: Thackeray found the novel \"freshly and simply simple\"; John Ruskin, in his \"Modern Painters\", was of the opinion that the scene of the storm surpasses Turner's evocations of the sea; more soberly, Matthew Arnold declared it \"rich in merits\"; and, in his autobiographical book \"A Small Boy and Others\", Henry James evokes the memory of \"treasure so hoarded in the dusty chamber of youth\".\nSubsequent reputation.\nAfter Dickens's death, \"David Copperfield\" rose to the forefront of the writer's works, both through sales, for example, in \"Household Words\" in 1872 where sales reached 83,000, and the praise of critics. In 1871, Scottish novelist and poet Margaret Oliphant described it as \"the culmination of Dickens's early comic fiction\"; However, in the late nineteenth-century Dickens's critical reputation suffered a decline, though he continued to have many readers. This began when Henry James in 1865 \"relegated Dickens to the second division of literature on the grounds that he could not 'see beneath the surface of things'\". Then in 1872, two years after Dickens's death, George Henry Lewes wondered how to \"reconcile [Dickens's] immense popularity with the 'critical contempt' which he attracted\". However, Dickens was defended by the novelist George Gissing in 1898 in \"Charles Dickens: A Critical Study\". G. K. Chesterton published an important defence of Dickens in his book \"Charles Dickens\" in 1906, where he describes him as this \"most English of our great writers\". Dickens's literary reputation grew in the 1940s and 1950s because of essays by George Orwell and Edmund Wilson (both published in 1940), and Humphrey House's \"The Dickens World\" (1941). However, in 1948, F. R. Leavis in \"The Great Tradition\", contentiously, excluded Dickens from his canon, characterising him as a \"popular entertainer\" without \"mature standards and interests\".\nDickens's reputation, however, continued to grow and K. J. Fielding (1965) and Geoffrey Thurley (1976) identify what they call \"David Copperfield\"'s \"centrality\", and Q. D. Leavis in 1970, looked at the images he draws of marriage, of women, and of moral simplicity. In their 1970 publication \"Dickens the Novelist\", F. R. and Q. D. Leavis called Dickens \"one of the greatest of creative writers\", and F. R. Leavis had changed his mind about Dickens since his 1948 work, no longer finding the popularity of the novels with readers as a barrier to their seriousness or profundity. In 1968 Sylv\u00e8re Monod, after having finely analyzed the structure and style of the novel, describe it as \"the triumph of the art of Dickens\", which analysis was shared by Paul B. Davis. The central themes are explored by Richard Dunne in 1981, including the autobiographical dimension, the narrator-hero characterization process, memory and forgetting, and finally the privileged status of the novel in the interconnection between similar works of Dickens. Q. D. Leavis compares \"Copperfield\" to Tolstoy's \"War and Peace\" and looks at adult-child relationships in both novels. According to writer Paul B. Davis, Q. D. Leavis excels at dissecting David's relationship with Dora. Gwendolyn Needham in an essay, published in 1954, analyzes the novel as a bildungsroman, as did Jerome H. Buckley twenty years later. In 1987 Alexander Welsh devoted several chapters to show that \"Copperfield\" is the culmination of Dickens's autobiographical attempts to explore himself as a novelist in the middle of his career. Finally, J. B. Priestley was particularly interested in Mr Micawber and concludes that \"With the one exception of Falstaff, he is the greatest comic figure in English literature\".\nIn 2015, the BBC Culture section polled book critics outside the UK about novels by British authors; they ranked \"David Copperfield\" eighth on the list of the 100 Greatest British Novels. The characters and their varied places in society in the novel evoked reviewer comments, for example, the novel is \"populated by some of the most vivid characters ever created,\" \"David himself, Steerforth, Peggotty, Mr Dick \u2013 and it climbs up and down and off the class ladder.\", remarked by critic Maureen Corrigan and echoed by Wendy Lesser.\nOpinions of other writers.\n\"David Copperfield\" has pleased many writers. Charlotte Bront\u00eb, for example, commented in 1849 in a letter to the reader of her publisher: \"I have read \"David Copperfield\"; it seems to me very good\u2014admirable in some parts. You said it had affinity to \"Jane Eyre\": it has\u2014now and then\u2014only what an advantage has Dickens in his varied knowledge of men and things!\" Tolstoy, for his part, considered it \"the best work of the best English novelist\" and, according to F. R. Leavis and Q. D. Leavis, was inspired by David and Dora's love story to have Prince Andrew marry Princess Lise in \"War and Peace\". Henry James remembered being moved to tears, while listening to the novel, hidden under a table, read aloud in the family circle. Dostoevsky enthusiastically cultivated the novel in a prison camp in Siberia. Franz Kafka wrote in his diary in 1917, that the first chapter of his novel \"Amerika\" was inspired by \"David Copperfield\". James Joyce parodied it in \"Ulysses\". Virginia Woolf, who was not very fond of Dickens, states that \"David Copperfield\", along with \"Robinson Crusoe\", Grimm's fairy tales, Scott's \"Waverley\" and \"Pickwick's Posthumous Papers\", \"are not books, but stories communicated by word of mouth in those tender years when fact and fiction merge, and thus belong to the memories and myths of life, and not to its aesthetic experience.\" Woolf also noted in a letter to Hugh Walpole in 1936, that she is re-reading it for the sixth time: \"I'd forgotten how magnificent it is.\" It also seems that the novel was Sigmund Freud's favourite; and Somerset Maugham sees it as a \"great\" work, although his hero seems to him rather weak, unworthy even of its author, while Mr Micawber never disappoints: \"The most remarkable of them is, of course, Mr Micawber. He never fails you.\"\nIllustrations.\nAs is the custom for a regular serialised publication for a wide audience, \"David Copperfield\", like Dickens's earlier novels, was from the beginning a \"story in pictures\" whose many engravings are part of the novel and how the story is related.\nHablot Knight Browne (Phiz).\nPhiz drew the original, the first two illustrations associated with \"David Copperfield\": on the wrapper for the serial publication, for which he engraved the silhouette of a baby staring at a globe, probably referring to the working title (\"The Copperfield Survey of the World as it Rolled\"), and the frontispiece (later used in the published books), and the title page. The green wrapper is shown at the top of this article. Phiz drew the images around the central baby-over-the-globe with no information on the characters who would appear in the novel. He knew only that it would be a bildungsroman. The images begin at the bottom, on the left side of the tree that has leaves on the left, and is dead on the right. A woman holds a baby on her lap. The images continue clockwise, marking events of a life, but with no reference to any specific event or specific character of the novel.\nWhen each issue was written, Phiz then worked with Dickens on the illustrations. \"In the monthly plates, Phiz would have to translate the memories of the protagonist-narrator into a third-person objective or dramatic point of view.\" Some of his illustrations contain details that are not in the text, but illuminate a character or situation, \"forming part of [...] of what the novel is\". Dickens accepted and even encouraged these additional, sometimes subtle indications, which, commenting on the event, say more than the narrator says in print. The latter intends to stay behind, just like the author who, thus, hides behind the illustrator.\nDickens was particularly scrupulous about illustrations; he scrutinised the smallest details and sometimes demanded modifications, for example to replace for a very particular episode the coat that David wears by \"a little jacket\". The illustration of the meeting between David and Aunt Betsey was particularly delicate, and Phiz had to do it several times, the ultimate choice being that of Dickens. Once the desired result was obtained, Dickens does not hide his satisfaction: the illustrations are \"capital\", he writes to Phiz, and especially that which depicts Mr Micawber in chapter 16, \"uncommonly characteristic\".\nOne puzzling mismatch between the text and accompanying illustrations is that of the Peggotty family's boat-house \"cottage\" on the Yarmouth sands (pictured). It is clear from the text that the author envisaged the house as an upright boat, whereas the illustrator depicted it as an upturned hull resting on the beach with holes cut for the doors and windows. Interior illustrations of the cottage also show it as a room with curved ceiling beams implying an upturned hull. Although Dickens seemed to have had the opportunity to correct this discrepancy he never did, suggesting that he was happy with the illustrator's depiction.\nOther illustrators.\n\"David Copperfield\" was later illustrated by many artists, after the serialization, including:\nSome of these works are fullsize paintings rather than illustrations included in editions of the novels. Kyd painted watercolours. Frank Reynolds provided the illustrations for a 1911 edition of David Copperfield.\nAlthough the reputation of Dickens with literary critics went through a decline and a much later rise after he died, his popularity with readers followed a different pattern after his death. Around 1900, his novels, including \"David Copperfield\", began an increase in popularity, and the 40-year copyrights expired for all but his latest novels, opening the door to other publishers in the UK; by 1910 all of them had expired. This created the opportunity for new illustrators in new editions of the novels, as both Fred Barnard (Household Edition) and Frank Reynolds (1911 edition of \"David Copperfield\") provided, for example; their styles were different from that of Phiz who provided the illustrations for the first publications of the novel in 1850 and during the author's life. As the books were read by so many (one publisher, Chapman &amp; Hall, sold 2 million copies of Dickens's works in the period 1900\u20131906), the characters became more popular for use outside the novels, in jigsaw puzzles and postcards. Uriah Heep and Mr Micawber were popular figures for illustrations. As World War I approached, the illustrations on postcards and the novels, abridged or full length, continued in popularity in the UK and among the soldiers and sailors abroad.\nMajor print editions of \"David Copperfield\".\nPublishing contract.\nLike \"Dombey and Son\", \"David Copperfield\" was not the subject of a specific contract; it followed the agreement of 1 June 1844, which was still valid. In that contract, the publishing house Bradbury and Evans received a quarter of the receipts from what Dickens wrote for the next eight years. This did not prevent the novelist from criticizing his publisher, or providing an incomplete number, just \"to see exactly where I am\" and for his illustrator Phiz to have \"some material to work on\".\nDedication and preface.\nThe 1850 book, published by Bradbury and Evans, was dedicated to the honourable Mr and Mrs Richard Watson, from Rockingham, Northamptonshire, aristocratic friends met on a trip to Switzerland five years ago. A brief preface was written in 1850 by the author, already entrusted to Forster after he finished his manuscript, with the promise that a new work will follow. This text was also used for the 1859 edition, the Cheap Edition. The ultimate version of 1867, also called the Charles Dickens edition, included another preface by the author with the statement that \"David Copperfield\" is the favourite work of the author.\nOther editions.\nThree volumes were published by Tauchnitz in 1849\u201350, in English, for distribution outside Great Britain in Europe. During Dickens's lifetime, many other editions were released, and many since he died. According to Paul Schlicke, the most reliable edition is the 1981 edition from Clarendon Press with an introduction and notes by Nina Burgis; it serves as a reference for later editions, including those of Collins, Penguin Books and Wordsworth Classics.\nAdaptations.\nEarliest adaptations.\nWhile it was being published, \"David Copperfield\" was the object, according to Philip Bolton's survey, of six initial dramatisations, followed by a further twenty when the public's interest was at its peak in the 1850s. The first adaptation, \"Born with a Caul\" by George Almar, was staged while the serial issues were not yet completed, with some changes from Dickens's plot, having Steerforth live and marry Emily, and inventing a character to kill Mr Murdstone. The most spectacular dramatisation, however, were those of Dickens himself. Although he waited more than ten years to prepare a version for his public readings, it soon became one of his favourite performances, especially the storm scene, which he kept for the finale, \"the most sublime moment in all the readings\".\nFilm and TV.\n\"David Copperfield\" has been filmed on several occasions:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks\nJournals\nLetters written by Charles Dickens\n\"Letters\", cited by recipient and date in the References, are found in the Pilgrim edition, published in 12 volumes, from 1965 to 2003.\nExternal links.\nOnline editions\nAdaptations"}
{"id": "63111", "revid": "4385147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63111", "title": "Stock option", "text": ""}
{"id": "63116", "revid": "32159694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63116", "title": "Kourou", "text": "Commune in French Guiana, France\n \nKourou ( ; ) is a commune in French Guiana, an overseas region and department of France in South America. Kourou is famous for being the location of the Guiana Space Centre, the main spaceport of France and the European Space Agency (ESA). It is an administrative district in French Guiana and the main town there.\nGeography.\nSome northwest of the French Guianese capital Cayenne the Kourou River empties into the Atlantic Ocean. At the mouth of this river sits the town of Kourou, which is ringed by four hills: Carapa, Pariacabo, Caf\u00e9 and Lombard, with the Singes and Condamine mountains not far behind. There are three lakes within the town's city limits: Lake Bois Diable (where one can take lessons in jetski and other aquatic sports), Lake Marie-Claire (the smallest and calmest), and Lake Bois Chaudat (the biggest of the three; also open to sport lovers, especially canoers and kayakers). Long white sand beaches and some rocky outcrops line the town's ocean coast, the riverbank and all points inland consisting mostly of mangrove and dense tropical rainforest.\nThe town had a population of 24,805 inhabitants at the 2020 census. Its inhabitants can be classified into three ethnic groups of roughly equal size:\nThe Saramaka mostly settled in the \"quartier Saramaka\", along the river. In 2006, a fire rendered 55 people homeless.\nGuiana in general has a high level of crime compared to the rest of France's \"d\u00e9partements\"; Kourou has an average of two armed robberies a day. A march protesting the high level of insecurity felt by most of the population was held in Kourou on 27 October 2006. Shopkeepers of Chinese descent in particular are often targeted by armed robbers, their cash registers emptied and some products stolen.\nKourou is the port of departure for those going to the Iles du Salut, of which the most famous is Devil's Island. It is also common for many to go up the river in canoes on weekends to camp in the forest.\nThe Guiana Space Centre, where the European Space Agency starts missions, is located a little behind and outside the town. Part of the town and the islands are closed during rocket launches.\nIn 2010, the Kourou solar power plant was built near Kourou on Auban\u00e8le Savannah. It is the largest solar power plant in Overseas France.\nHistory.\nEra of Kalini people.\nNot much is known of the pre-colonial era. The area was mostly populated by Kalina, or Galibi before the arrival of the French in the late 17th century.\nNot far from the town at Les Roches Grav\u00e9es (The Carved Rocks), indigenous art can be seen on the rock walls.\nEarly colonization.\nVicente Y\u00e1\u00f1ez Pinz\u00f3n sailed along most of the north coast of South America and passed by the current location of Kourou in 1500.\nThe Jesuits Lombard and Creuilly baptised a few Galibis at the church of Saint Nicholas in Cayenne in December 1710 and returned with them soon after to farm the land at Guat\u00e9mala, across the river from Kourou. The Society of Jesus was disbanded (in Guiana) in 1762, however, and Kourou was nothing more than a small village until the arrival of the Expedition.\nIn 1744, La Condamine, in charge of the expedition sent to Peru in 1735 to determine the length of a degree of the meridian arc in the neighbourhood of the equator, passed by and gave his name to one of the mountains behind Kourou.\nExpedition.\nThe mission at Kourou being abandoned by the Jesuits, the engineers Mentelle and Tugny designed the layout of the future town. This resulted in the neighbourhood called the Bourg, around the Church of Saint Catherine and next to the port on the river.\nThat same year, 1763, as agreed in the Treaty of Paris, Great Britain took control of New France. Having lost their largest and richest colony, the French decided to send a large expedition to Guiana, commanded by Choiseul. Around 10,000 to 12,000 people, mostly Frenchmen, tempted by stories of an El Dorado on the other side of the ocean, settled in Kourou.\nThe small town, surrounded by marshes and rainforest, was unprepared for such a massive influx of people, and around 6,000 of the pioneers died within the year due to fevers and other illnesses. Those remaining fled to the \u00eeles du Salut, free of mosquitoes due to constant winds, to recover before being repatriated to Metropolitan France. Hence the name, \"Salvation Islands.\" Previously they had been known as the \"\u00eeles du Diable\" (\"Devil's Islands\"), and one of the islands retains the name to this day.\nThe failure of the Expedition only served to discourage settling in Guiana. The colony earned the nickname \"Enfer Vert\" (\"Green Hell\"), which it is still trying to shake. No other project of mass colonisation was undertaken, and the population of Whites was always drastically lower than that of the slaves. The population of the colony, of all races, did not rise above 20,000 until the gold rush (starting in 1855), the second abolition of slavery in 1848 and the founding of the prisons.\nPrisons.\nKourou was formerly the home of the \"Kourou Prison\" which was one of the main prisons in French Guiana, and which was also a part of the notorious Devil's Island Prison System. The Kourou Prison was dedicated mostly to agriculture.\nIn 1852 the three main islands off of Kourou's coast, the Salut island group (which included Devil's Island) also became prisons. These island prisons held mostly political prisoners, as well as some of France's toughest criminals. The first prisoners arrived in 1862.\nIn 1938, a law was passed prohibiting the transport of any new prisoners from France to French Guiana. In 1946 eight years later, the Kourou Prison was finally shut down, while some prisoners were kept in other Guyanese prisons until as late as 1953.\nAfter the closing of the prison, most of the prison buildings were demolished to make room for the \"H\u00f4tel des Roches\", but some vestiges of that period remain. One notable remnant of the prison is the Dreyfus Tower, which stands where the river meets the ocean. This tower was used in pre-radio days to communicate with the islands via Semaphore. Other prison ruins that remain are the prison bakery\u00a0\u2014 now on private property, but still visible from a cul-de-sac\u00a0\u2014 and an old prison fountain near the moucaya palm trees.\nCSG and the French Foreign Legion.\nIn 1965, the Guiana Space Centre was founded a little behind the town by the CNES. With the launch facility being used by the European Space Agency since 1975, the urbanisation of Kourou began in earnest.\nThe 3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment of the French Foreign Legion, whose mission is to protect the CSG, has had a base in the \"Forget\" neighbourhood since 1973. They clashed with the Creoles in 1985 and 2006.\nDemographics.\nHistorical population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMigrations.\nThe places of birth of the 26,221 residents in the commune of Kourou at the 2015 census were the following:\nThese were the countries of birth of the immigrants living in the commune of Kourou at the 2009 census:\nClimate.\nLike most of French Guiana, Kourou has a tropical monsoon climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Am\") with a short dry season centered between the months of August and October when the Intertropical Convergence Zone is furthest north. During the remainder of the year rainfall is always heavy. Between November and July a total of can be expected in nine months, with rain on most days and very cloudy skies.\nEconomy.\nKourou's economy is largely dominated by the CSG, from which the European Ariane rockets are launched, as well as the Russian Soyuz and the Italian Vega rockets.\nTransportation.\nKourou is served by Kourou Airport, located at the west of the city.\nPolitics.\nKourou is the main town on an \"administrative district\" of French Guiana. Such a district is equivalent to a county in the United States. Kourou is represented in Paris as part of French Guiana's 2nd constituency, which has been held by former Kourou city councilor Davy Rimane since 2022.\nIn popular culture.\nThis commune is featured in the 2021 video game \"Battlefield 2042\" as the setting of multiplayer map Orbital.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63117", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63117", "title": "Paul Fort", "text": "French poet (1872\u20131960)\nJules-Jean-Paul Fort (1 February 1872 \u2013 20 April 1960) was a French poet associated with the Symbolist movement. At the age of 18, reacting against the Naturalistic theatre, Fort founded the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art (1890\u201393). He also founded and edited the literary reviews \"Livre d'Art\" with Alfred Jarry and \"Vers et Prose\" (1905\u201314) with poet Guillaume Apollinaire, which published the work of Paul Val\u00e9ry and other important Symbolist writers. Fort is notable for his enormous volume of poetry, having published more than thirty volumes of ballads and, according to Amy Lowell, for creating the polyphonic prose form in his 'Ballades francaises'.\nLife and career.\nPaul Fort was born in Reims, Marne \"d\u00e9partement\", France in 1872. His father, an insurance agent, moved the family to Paris in 1878. While attending secondary school at the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand, he became a noted part of the artistic community of Montparnasse. He sought out the company of avant-garde artists and befriended Andr\u00e9 Gide and Pierre Lou\u00ffs. His work in the independent theatre movement spanned 1890 through 1892. Fort then devoted himself to poetry, publication, and advancing new writers. By 1912, his accomplishments and influence were such that he was given the title \"Prince of the Poets\" (honorific title given in France to poets, such as Verlaine and Mallarm\u00e9, after the death of their predecessor).\nOne of his works, \"La Ronde\", has become famous worldwide as a plea for world friendship.\nFort died on 20 April 1960, in Montlh\u00e9ry, a suburb south of Paris where he had lived since 1921, and is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Montlh\u00e9ry.\nTheater experience.\nAt 17, Fort frequented the Left Bank hangout of the Symbolist poets, the Caf\u00e9 Voltaire (1, Place de l'Od\u00e9on), where the discussion included contemporary theatre. His activity there would soon cause his expulsion from high school. The group aimed to break with the reigning Naturalistic scene, including the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Libre created in 1887 by Andr\u00e9 Antoine, even though Fort admired Antoine and hoped to create a new theatre that would bring together the best of all theater forms, including naturalistic drama. Indeed, the theater Fort founded, The Mixed Theater (\"Le Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Mixte\"), which debuted on 23 June 1890, announced an eclectic program of varying styles in both new works and long forgotten plays. Combining forces with Louis Germain's Idealist Theatre (Le Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Id\u00e9aliste), they presented four more plays on 5 and 12 October. These inaugural works included not only efforts by Fort and Germain but also Marc Legrand, le Sr de Chanm\u00eal\u00e9, Charles Grandmougin, and Joseph Gayda. The critics, however, failed to find the plays in either program artistically revolutionary. Fort and Germain parted ways, leaving Fort to rename his company The Art Theatre (\"Le Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art\") and to set up an office at 155, rue Montmartre. \nFort's two theatre ventures never had a single theatre home; instead, their programs circulated among eight rental performance spaces, mostly on the Right Bank. He engaged the leading Symbolist painters of the era to design and paint the sets and backdrops, particularly the \"Prophets\" of the Nabis group (Paul S\u00e9rusier, Emile Bernard, Maurice Denis, Paul Bonnard, Paul Ranson, Eduard Vuillard, and Henry Gabriel Ibels). Fort had appeared as an actor in the June program; Germain, the October. But an important discovery also debuted in the second program: Georgette Cam\u00e9e (d. 1957), a Paris Conservatory student, who became a seminal actor in the nascent avant-garde theatre movement, and would appear in 22 plays with the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art. Among her r\u00f4les was Mephistopheles\u2014a dandy with a monocle and in a smoking jacket\u2014in their 1892 French adaptation of Christopher Marlowe's \"Doctor Faustus\". Although she won admiration as Genevi\u00e8ve in \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\", the 1893 opening event of the new Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u0152uvre, it would be her only performance for the venture. She earned further acclaim in 1894 as Sara in the long-awaited stage presentation of Auguste de Villiers de L'Isle-Adam's 1890 Symbolist drama \"Ax\u00ebl\". She eventually married writer Maurice Pottecher and joined him in his own regional theatre endeavor, the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Peuple, in Bussang, France.\nA former actor for Antoine's Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Libre, Aur\u00e9lien Lugn\u00e9-Poe, who had returned from an abbreviated military service, joined the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art in spring 1891, first appearing in Maurice Maeterlinck's \"L'Intruse\". For the next two years, he moved regularly between acting for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art and directing for the amateur company Le Cercle des Escholiers. Lugn\u00e9-Poe performed in ten plays altogether for Fort, interpreting, most notably, the Maeterlinck r\u00f4les of the Old Man in \"L'Intruse\" (1891) and the First Blind Man in \"Les Aveugles\" (1891), as well as Satan in Jules Bois' \"Les Noces de Sathan\" (1892). He, along with Georgette Cam\u00e9e, forged the signature Symbolist acting style that conveys a religious reverie, with its hieratic poses and gestures, matched with solemn, psalmodized line readings. \nUnder the two and a half years of Fort's leadership, the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art presented poetry recitations, older, little-seen dramatic work by Marlowe, Shelley, and Hugo, as well as new plays by Rachilde (\"La Voix du Sang\", 1890; \"Madame la Mort\", 1891), Th\u00e9odore de Banville (\"Phyllis\", 1891), Catulle Mend\u00e8s (\"Le Soleil de Minuit\", 1891), Paul Verlaine (\"Les Uns et les Autres\", 1891), Remy de Gourmont (\"Th\u00e9odat\", 1891), and especially Maurice Maeterlinck (\"L'Intruse\" and Les Aveugles, both 1891) and Charles van Lerberghe's \"Les Flaireurs\" (1892). As an artistic director, however, he proved himself ambitious but in over his head; he was often over budget, unable to deal with his creditors, and straining technically to produce difficult, opaque dramatic material. By 1892, with the Parisian critics begging him to make better choices, Fort sought in vain to produce Villiers de L'Isle-Adam's \"Ax\u00ebl\" as the way to reinstate the company's reputation. When it fell through, he tried to shepherd the Paris premiere of Maeterlinck's \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\" for March 1893, but Maeterlinck and co-producer Tola Dorian appear to have lost faith in him and the production was abruptly cancelled. This defeat prompted Fort to give up control of the enterprise altogether and turn his focus to poetry. Lugn\u00e9-Poe took over the \"Pell\u00e9as and M\u00e9lisande\" project for its premiere in May 1893, which became the first step in launching his own Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u0152uvre. In a relatively short time, the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art had made its mark in the burgeoning avant-garde European theatre. As theatre historian Jacques Robichez has concluded, \"In brief, the history of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Art is that of a failed but fertile experiment, and its principal\u2014and perhaps only\u2014merit is having engendered the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u0152uvre.\"\nPoet.\nPost-war creation.\nFollowing the theatrical adventure he had achieved, he dedicated his life to poetry. He gave his first poems to the Mercure de France in 1896. Those poems consisted the debut of the Ballades fran\u00e7aises (17 volumes written entering 1922 and 1958). He begins to publish into the Le Livre d'art magazine in 1892 where it was relaunched in 1896 with Maurice Dumont. With the latter, he edited L'\u00e9preuve, Journal-Album d'art in 1894.\nBy 1903 he organized and held Tuesday poetic lectures at the Closerie des Lilas. In 1905, he began publishing the magazine Vers et prose with Mor\u00e9as and Salmon, who notably edited the works Guillaume Apollinaire, Max Jacob, Pierre Lou\u00ffs. He edited it together with Paul Val\u00e9ry. Pierre Lou\u00ffs, who wrote the prelude to the first volume of the \"Ballades\", defines them as small poems in polymorphous form or in familiar alexandrins, but which bend towards the normal prose form, requiring the rules of rhythmic prose rather than those of verse diction.\nGiven the title \u201ccommandeur de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur\u201d, he helped to give the quartier du Montparnasse in Paris its artistic reputation. A poll of five literary magazines (Gil Blas, Comoedia, La Phalange, Les Loups and Les Nouvelles) gave him the title \"Prince of Poets\" in 1912. Then, 350 authors voted him as the true heir to Verlaine, Mallarm\u00e9 and L\u00e9on Dierx.\nIn August 1913, his sixteen-year-old daughter Jeanne married futurist painter Gino Severini. Fort lead the ceremonies, Severini had as witnesses Guillaume Apollinaire, and Filippo Marinetti, the author of the Futurist Manifesto. Apollinaire wrote to Madeleine Pag\u00e8s two years later: \u201cI received the idiotic lyrical report of Paul Fort, the highfalutin prince of poets, who sings to battles in far away lands in a truly foolish language.\u201d\nPoet Laureate of the Third Republic.\nPaul Fort was a leading jury member of the Prix Jeunesse that was created in 1934. Running in 1943 for the Acad\u00e9mie Goncourt seat left vacant by the death of Pierre Champion a year earlier, Fort lost to Andr\u00e9 Billy, though Billy was confirmed to the seat only after the Lib\u00e9ration.\nHis work was banned by the CNE (National Writers' Committee of the intellectual resistance) at the end of war, but the interdiction was rescinded in a second list published in the Les Lettres fran\u00e7aises of 21 October 1944.\nBut he officially recovered when introducing an exhibition dedicated to him in 1954 at the Reims Carnegie Library.\nIn 1956, Paul married Germaine Pouget. His nephew married the daughter of Alfred Vallette (1858\u20131935), director of Mercure de France, and Marguerite Eymery (1860\u20131953), who wrote under the \"nom de plume\" Rachilde.\nPaul Fort was buried at Montlhery on his own property, called Argenlieu.\nLegacy.\nFort is mentioned by Ernest Hemingway as a customer of La Closerie des Lilas, in \"A Moveable Feast\".\nDutch composer Marjo Tal set several of Fort's works to music, as did British composer Eva Ruth Spalding and French composers Beatrice Siegrist, Gabriel Piern\u00e9 and Andr\u00e9 Caplet.\nFort is mentioned in \"The Diary of Ana\u00efs Nin\", in the entry for October 1936 where Nin recounts the evening when they met at a party.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63118", "revid": "42018071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63118", "title": "Avesta", "text": "Zoroastrian compendium of sacred literature\nThe Avesta is the text corpus of religious literature of Zoroastrianism. All its texts are composed in the Avestan language and written in the Avestan alphabet. Modern editions of the Avesta are based on the various manuscripts that have survived in India and Iran.\nThe individual texts of the Avesta were originally oral compositions. They were composed over a long period of several centuries during the Avestan period (possibly ranging from 15th century BCE \u2013 4th century BCE). The written transmission began much later during the Sasanian era (224 to 651 CE), with the creation of the Avestan alphabet. The resulting texts were then compiled into the multi-volume edition of the Sasanian Avesta. This edition was lost sometime after the 10th century CE, and only a small portion of it has survived, scattered across a number of individual manuscript traditions. The oldest surviving fragment of such a manuscript dates to 1323 CE.\nUnlike the Sasanian Avesta, which was organized thematically, the surviving Avestan manuscripts correspond to the different ceremonies in which they are used. It is assumed that it was their regular use which ensured their survival to this day. The principal text is the \"Yasna\", which takes its name from the corresponding ceremony, in which it is recited. Extensions to the Yasna ceremony include the \"Vendidad\" and the \"Visperad\". In addition to these High Liturgies, the Avestan corpus comprises shorter litugical texts compiled in the Khordeh Avesta or \"Little Avesta\". Aside from the \"Yasht\"s, these other lesser texts include the \"Nyayeshs\", the \"G\u0101hs\", the \"Sih-rozag\" and the \"Afrinagans\".\nName.\nThe term \"Avesta\" originates from the 9th/10th-century works of Zoroastrian tradition in which the word appears as Middle Persian \"abest\u0101g\", Book Pahlavi \"\u02bep(y)st\u02bek\u02bc\". In that context, \"abest\u0101g\" texts are portrayed as received knowledge and are distinguished from the exegetical commentaries (the \"zand\") thereof. The literal meaning of the word \"abest\u0101g\" is uncertain; it is generally acknowledged to be a learned borrowing from Avestan, but none of the suggested etymologies have been universally accepted. The widely repeated derivation from *\"upa-stavaka\" is from Bartholomae, who interpreted \"abest\u0101g\" as a descendant of a hypothetical reconstructed Old Iranian word for \"praise-song\" (Bartholomae: \"Lobgesang\"); but this word is not actually attested in any text.\nHistory.\nZoroastrian tradition.\nThe Zoroastrian history of the Avesta lies in the realm of legends and myths. The oldest surviving versions of these tales are found in the ninth to 11th century texts of Zoroastrian tradition (i.e. in the so-called \"Pahlavi books\"). The legends run as follows: The twenty-one \"nask\"s (\"books\") of the Avesta were created by Ahura Mazda and brought by Zoroaster to his patron Vishtaspa (\"Denkard\" 4A, 3A). Supposedly, Vishtaspa (\"Dk\" 3A) or another Kayanian, Daray (\"Dk\" 4B), then had two copies made, one of which was stored in the treasury and the other in the royal archives (\"Dk\" 4B, 5). Following Alexander's conquest, the Avesta was then supposedly destroyed or dispersed by the Greeks, after they had translated any scientific passages of which they could make use (\"AVN\" 7\u20139, \"Dk\" 3B, 8). Several centuries later, one of the Parthian emperors named Valaksh (one of the Vologases) supposedly then had the fragments collected, not only of those that had previously been written down, but also of those that had only been orally transmitted (\"Dk\" 4C).\nThe \"Denkard\" also records another legend related to the transmission of the Avesta. In this story, credit for collation and recension is given to the early Sasanian-era priest Tansar (high priest under Ardashir I, \"r.\" 224\u2013242 CE, and Shapur I, 240/242\u2013272 CE), who had the scattered works collected \u2013 of which he approved only a part as authoritative (\"Dk\" 3C, 4D, 4E). Tansar's work was then supposedly completed by Adurbad Mahraspandan (high priest of Shapur II, \"r.\" 309\u2013379 CE) who made a general revision of the canon and continued to ensure its orthodoxy (\"Dk\" 4F, \"AVN\" 1.12\u20131.16). A final revision was supposedly undertaken in the 6th century CE under Khosrow I (\"Dk\" 4G).\nModern scholarship.\nModern scholarship generally rejects the pre-Sasanian era Zoroastrian history of the Avesta. Instead, there is now a wide consensus that for most of their long history, the Avesta's various texts were handed down orally and independently of one another. Based on linguistic aspects, scholars like Kellens, Skj\u00e6rv\u00f8 and Hoffman have also identified a number of distinct phases, during which different parts of the Avestan corpus were composed, transmitted in either fluid or fixed form, as well as edited and redacted by the Zoroastrian priests.\nTime and place of composition.\nThe Avestan texts are grouped into two distinct layers; Old Avestan and Young Avestan, which belong to two different chronological strata. Regarding the Old Avestan material, scholars consider a time frame for its creation between 1500 and 900 BCE to be possible, with a date close to 1000 BCE being considered likely by many. There are no geographical references in the Old Avestan texts, which makes it impossible to specify where they were composed.\nThe Young Avestan texts, which form the majority of the extant Avesta, originated in a later stage of the Avestan period separated from the Old Avestan time by several centuries. Scholars assume that this phase corresponds to a long time frame possibly lasting from 900 to 400 BCE. In contrast to the Old Avestan texts, the Young Avestan parts contain a number of geographical references. As a result, there is a consensus that at least these texts were composed in the eastern portion of Greater Iran. \nSome texts in the Avestan corpus, like the \"Vendidad\" or the \"Vishtasp Sast\", show pronounced grammatical deficiencies. They seem to consist of proper Avestan phrases, which appear to have been pieced together by people who no longer had an active command of Avestan. This indicates that these texts were redacted from earlier, now lost sources, after Avestan ceased to be a spoken language.\nOral transmission.\nThe Old Avestan texts must have crystallized early on, meaning their transmission became fixed. During their long history, the Gathic texts seem to have been transmitted with the highest accuracy. While the Old Avestan material was handed down as a fixed liturgical corpus, the Young Avestan texts appear to have been transmitted for some time in an oral tradition which was still fluid. This means they were composed partly afresh with each generation of poet-priests, sometimes with the addition of new material. \nAt some time, however, this fluid phase must have stopped completely and the process of transmission of the Young Avestan texts became fixed similar to the Old Avestan material. This second crystallization must still have taken place during the Old Iranian period, as Young Avestan does not show any characteristics of Middle Iranian. The subsequent transmission took largely place in Western Iran as evidenced by alterations introduced by native Persian speakers. Scholars like Skj\u00e6rv\u00f8 and Kreyenbroek correlate this second crystallization with the adoption of Zoroastrianism by the Achaemenids. As a result, Persian- and Median-speaking priests would have become the primary group to transmit these texts. Having no longer an active command of Avestan, they may have decided to preserve both Old and Young Avestan texts as faithfully as possible.\n\"Written transmission\".\nIt was not until around the 5th or 6th century CE that Avestan corpus was written down by virtue of the newly developed Avestan Alphabet. This facilitated to the creation of a comprehensive edition of the Avestan corpus, namely the Sasanian Avesta. This is seen as a turning point in the Avestan tradition since it separates the purely oral from the written transmission. \nThis edition was lost at some time after the fall of the Sasanian empire,and the oldest surviving manuscript (\"K1\") of an Avestan text is dated to 1323 CE. The history of the Avesta until these first manuscripts appear is unknown, but the post-Sasanian phase saw a pronounced deterioration of the Avestan corpus. Summaries in the texts of the Zoroastrian tradition from the 9th/10th century indicate that the Sasanian Avesta was much larger than the Avesta that exists today. Only about one-quarter of the Avestan sentences or verses referred to by the 9th/10th century commentators can be found in the surviving texts. This suggests that an indeterminable number of juridical, historical and legendary texts have been lost since then. On the other hand, it appears that the most valuable portions of the canon, including all of the oldest texts, have survived. The likely reason for this is that the surviving materials represent those portions of the Avesta that were in regular liturgical use and therefore known by heart by the priests and not dependent for their preservation on the survival of particular manuscripts.\nAvestan studies.\nAvestan manuscripts became available to European scholarship comparatively late, thus the study of Zoroastrianism in Western countries dates back to only the 18th century. Abraham Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron travelled to India in 1755, and discovered the texts among Indian Zoroastrian (Parsi) communities. He published a set of French translations in 1771, based on translations provided by a Parsi priest. Anquetil-Duperron's translations were at first dismissed as a forgery in poor Sanskrit, but he was vindicated in the 1820s following Rasmus Rask's examination of the Avestan language (\"A Dissertation on the Authenticity of the Zend Language\", Bombay, 1821). Rask also established that Anquetil-Duperron's manuscripts were a fragment of a much larger literature of sacred texts. Anquetil-Duperron's manuscripts are at the ('P'-series manuscripts), while Rask's collection now lies in the Royal Library, Denmark ('K'-series). Other large Avestan language manuscript collections are those of the British Museum ('L'-series), the K. R. Cama Oriental Library in Mumbai, the Meherji Rana library in Navsari, and at various university and national libraries in Europe.\nIn the early 20th century, the Zoroastrian legend of the Parthian-era collation engendered a search for a 'Parthian archetype' of the Avesta. According to the theory of Friedrich Carl Andreas (1902), the archaic nature of the Avestan texts was assumed to be due to preservation via written transmission, and unusual or unexpected spellings in the surviving texts were assumed to be reflections of errors introduced by Sasanian-era transcription from the Aramaic alphabet-derived Pahlavi scripts. The search for the 'Arsacid archetype' was increasingly criticized in the 1940s and was eventually abandoned in the 1950s after Karl Hoffmann demonstrated that the inconsistencies noted by Andreas were actually due to unconscious alterations introduced by oral transmission. Hoffmann identifies these changes to be due, in part, to modifications introduced through recitation; in part to influences from other Iranian languages picked up on the route of transmission from somewhere in eastern Iran (i.e. Central Asia) via Arachosia and Sistan through to Persia; and in part due to the influence of phonetic developments in the Avestan language itself.\nManuscripts.\nAfter the loss of the Sasanian Avesta, the Avestan corpus survived through a number of manuscript traditions. These manuscripts overwhelmingly correspond to specific liturgies in which they are used, and it is assumed that this liturgical use guaranteed their survival. The oldest surviving fragment of a manuscript dates to 1323 CE but most extant manuscripts date from after the 17th century. Today, more than 300 such manuscripts are catalogued. The most important analysis of Avestan manuscripts was provided by Geldner in his edition of the Avesta. In the Prolegomena to his edition, he provided a critical apparatus, detailing the stemmatics of the manuscripts he used.\nIn modern editions, specific manuscripts are typically classified according to several criteria. One criterion is the liturgy, like the Yasna, Vendidad or Visperad, in which they are used. Another criterion is whether they originated within the Iranian or Indian Zoroastrian communities. In addition, manuscripts are classified according to their use. Manuscripst for liturgical purposes contain the Avestan text plus liturgical instructions. They are called \"Sade\" or \"Sadah\", meanig \"pure\". On the other hand, manuscripts for exegetical purposes contain the Avestan text jointly with a translation. Most exegetical manuscripts have a translation into Middle Persian, called \"Pahlavi.\" But there are also some manuscripts with translations into Modern Persian, Sanskrit and Gujarati.\nEditions.\nThe corpus of Avestan literature was produced during the Old Iranian Avestan period and transmitted within an oral culture of priestly composition. It was not until the Sasanian period, that the Zoroastrian priesthood produced an authoritative edition of this corpus. This edition is described in the Zoroastrian literature of the 10th century, but was lost at some undetermined time afterwards. Since then, no new authoritative edition of the scattered Avestan corpus has been produced by the Zoroastrian community.\nAfter Avestan manuscripts became known in the Western world, several scholary attempts were made to create a critical edition of the diverse manuscripts through which the, now much reduced, Avestan corpus had survived. The first critical edition was published in 1852 by Westergaard. It was based mostly on the manuscripts collected by Rask. Around the same time, Spiegel published an edition of the Zoroastrian High Liturgies, i.e., the Yasna, the Visperad and the Vendidad. Despite being smaller in scope and based on fewer manuscripts than Westergaard's edition, it is still considered relevant since it includes the Middle Persian translations jointly with the Avestan text. Between 1886 and 1896, Geldner produced an edition of the Yasna, the Visperad, the Khordeh Avesta, and the Vendidad. Although it lacked a few minor texts, included by Westergaard, it was based on significantly more manuscripts. As a result, it has remained the standard edition of the surviving Avestan corpus to this day. Overall, these works share the same editorial principle, which was to reproduce the earliest common ancestor of the manuscripts, therefore going back as close as possible to the Sasanian Avesta.\nSince the publication of Geldner's edition, a number of developments have increased the need for a new edition. On the one hand many new manuscripts have been found, in particular in Iran. These new manuscripts have cast doubt on the, up to then, established opinion that all extant manuscripts derive from a single Sasanian archetype or, at least, some later hypearchetype. Furthermore, the surviving Avestan texts are nowadays recognized as a primarily liturgical corpus. This means the editorial principle of previous editions, i.e., the reconstruction of the Sasanian Urtext, does not apply. The surviving texts are instead increasingly seen as witnesses of a living liturgical tradition; a tradition which is much older and existed parallel to the exegetical tradition represented in the Sasanian Avesta. \nThese developments led to the creation of the Avestan Digital Archive (ADA) and the Corpus Avesticum Berolinense (CAB). ADA is a digital archive, which as of 2013 has digitized already 150 manuscripts and made 80 of them online available. Furthermore, CAB is a project which attempts to edit the manuscripts within their original ritual context.\nStructure and content.\nThe Sasanian Avesta.\nAccording to the \"Denkard\", the Avesta of the Sasanian period was organized into 21 \"nask\"s (volumes). This division was to mirror the structure of the 21-word-long \"Ahuna Vairya\" manthra: each of the three lines of the prayer consists of seven words. Correspondingly, the \"nask\"s are divided into three groups, of seven volumes per group. Originally, each volume had a word of the prayer as its name, which so marked a volume's position relative to the other volumes.\nThe first group of the nasks was the Gathic group. It contained the Gathas as well as long commentaries on them. It comprised the St\u014dd-yasn, the Sudgar, the Warshtmansr, the Bag, the Wa\u0161tag, the Hadoxt and the Spand nask. Of these nasks, the Stod-yasn is extant in the Staota Yesnya, which forms the central portion of the High Liturgies like the Yasna and Visperad (see below). Parts of the Hadoxt nask may be extant through the Hadoxt nask fragments, while most other nasks are considered to be lost.\nThe second group was the manthric group. Its content has been interpreted as connecting the first and third group. It comprised the D\u0101md\u0101d, the N\u0101xtar, the P\u0101zag the Ra\u03b8\u03b2i\u0161t\u0101iti, the Bari\u0161, the Ka\u0161kaysraw and the Wi\u0161t\u0101sp-s\u0101st nask. Only the Wi\u0161t\u0101sp-s\u0101st nask may be extant in the Wishtasp Sast manuscripts (see below). All the other nasks are considered lost.\nThe third group was the legal group, meaning its content primarily covered topics of Zoroastrian jurisprudence. It comprised the Nik\u0101tum, the Duzd-sar-nizad, the Husp\u0101ram, the Sak\u0101tum, the Judd\u0113wd\u0101d, the \u010cihrd\u0101d and the Bag\u0101n Ya\u0161t. The Bag\u0101n Ya\u0161t contained most of the Yashts of the extant Avesta (see below), whereas the Husp\u0101ram nask contained the Herbedestan and Nerangestan texts, which are extant in the fragments collections (see below). The Judd\u0113wd\u0101d nask ist the only nask of the Sasanian Avesta which has survived intact through the Vendidad manuscripts (see below), meaning that both its Avestan and Zand have remained the same. Of the other nasks, only fragments may have survived.\nThe extant Avesta.\nThe extant Avestan manuscripts no longer follow the division into nasks as described for the Sasanian Avesta. Instead, they are typically associated with the specific liturgy or ceremonies they are used in. The following structure is derived from Geldner's edition of the Avesta. Unlike the Sasanian Avesta, which was produced by the Zoroastrian priesthood, this is a scholary edition and it is consequently not canonical in a religious sense. It is, however, widely regarded to be the most important edition of the extant Avestan corpus and considered canonical for scholary purposes. In this edition, Geldner included the most important Zoroastrian High Liturgies, namely the Yasna, the Visperad and the Vendidad, as well as the Khordeh Avesta, a collection of minor liturgies, ceremonies and prayers aimed at lay people.\nYasna.\nThe \"Yasna\" (from \"yazi\u0161n\" \"worship, oblations\", cognate with Sanskrit \"yaj\u00f1a\") is an Avestan text recited during the primary Zoroastrian liturgy, namely the Yasna liturgy. It consists of 72 sections called the \"ha-iti\" or \"ha\". Its central part, Yasna 14\u201358, consists of the Staota Yesnya, which formed one of the volumes of the Sasanian Avesta. \nBeing the most important liturgy, the Yasna is attested through a large number of manuscripts, which are grouped into six different manuscript types: The (i) Indian and (ii) Iranian Pahlavi Yasna, the (iii) Indian and (iv) Iranian Sade Videvdad, i.e., manuscripts which describe the Videwdad liturgy in which the Yasna is embedded, the (v) Sanskrit Yasna as well as the (vi) Yasna Sade. In Geldner's edition, the Yasna is edited in the first volume of his series.\nVisperad.\nThe \"Visperad\" (from \"v\u00eespe ratavo\", \"(prayer to) all patrons\") is an Avestan text named after the Visperad liturgy in which it is used. The text is divided into 24 sections called \"karde,\" which are interleaved into the slightly rearranged 72 \"has\" of the Yasna during the Visperad liturgy. For his edition, Geldner used 26 manuscripts, which fall into three different manuscript types. The first type are \"Vendidad Sade\" manuscripts of the Vendidad liturgy, which is an extension of the Visperad liturgy. The second type are \"Visperad Sade\" manuscripts, i.e., they contain the Avestan text of the Visperad liturgy. The third type are the \"Visperad Pahlavi\" manuscripts, which do, however, only contain the text unique to the Visperad liturgy, i.e., they lack the portions drawn from the Yasna liturgy. In his edition, Geldner edited the text according to the Visperad Sade manuscripts. It was published in the second volume of his series.\nKhordeh Avesta.\nKhordeh Avesta manuscripts contain collections of Avestan texts, which are aimed at lay people. They, therefore, differ from the High Liturgies, like the Yasna, Visperad and Vendidad, which are only performed by priest, typically inside a fire temple. The content of different Khordeh Avesta manuscripts can differ widely, depending on the choices made by the editor(s). Most manuscripts contain the five \"Nyayesh\" , the five \"Gah\", a number of Yashts, the 30 Sih-rozag and the four \"Afrinagan\" prayers.\n\"Vendidad\".\nThe \"Vendidad\" (or \"Vid\u0113vd\u0101t\", a corruption of Avestan \"V\u012b-Da\u0113v\u014d-D\u0101ta\", \"Given Against the Demons\") is an Avestan text which is used during the Videvdad liturgy. This liturgy is an extension of the Visperad liturgy, itself an extension of the Yasna liturgy. The text consists of 22 sections, called \"fragard\"s. They are framed using the so called \"frashna\", i.e., a discussions between Ahura Mazda and Zoroaster. The Vendidad's different parts vary widely in character and in age. Some parts may have been composed during the Sasanian period although the greater part is very old.\nThe Vendidad originally was one of the legal nasks of the Sasanian Avesta, called \"Judd\u0113wd\u0101d\" therein. This naks belonged to \"d\u0101d\u012bg\", i.e., legal, nasks and therefore, unlike the Yasna and the Visparad, it is a text dealing with laws rather than the record of a liturgical ceremony. Since the Vendidad includes all of the Judd\u0113wd\u0101d nask, it is the only nask of the Sasanian Avesta that has survived in its original form.\nThe text is extant through two different manuscript traditions. The first are the so called Vendidad Pahlavi manuscripts. They contain the 22 \"fragards\" of the Vendidad jointly with the Zand. This manuscript type is, therefore, considered to go back directly to the Judd\u0113wd\u0101d nask from the Sasanian Avesta. The other type are the Vendidad Sade manuscripts. They described the Vendidad liturgy as it is performed. Consequently, they contain the Avestan text of the 72 \"has\" of the Yasna, the 24 \"kardes\" of the Visperad and 22 \"fragards\" of the Vendidad text. For his edition of the Avesta, Geldner edited only the Avestan text of the 22 fragards.\nFragments.\nIn his seminal edition of the Avesta, Geldner included only the most important liturgical manuscripts. Other authors, however, did compile a number of minor or incomplete Avestan texts. They are often referred to as fragments. There are altogether more than 20 fragment collections, many of which have no name (and are then named after their owner/collator) or only a Middle Persian name. The more important texts in this category are the \"Nerangestan\", the \"Herbedestan,\" the \"Wishtasp Sast\", the \"Hadoxt nask fragments\". (see Sasanian Avesta) and the \"Pursishniha\" \"questions,\" also known as \"Fragments Tahmuras\".\nTranslations.\nIt is generally assumed that the Sasanian Avesta not only consisted of a comprehensive edition of the Avestan corpus but also contained a full translation and commentary in Middle Persian, called Zand. This assumption is based on the observation that references to the Sasanian Avesta typically quote from the Middle Persian translation as well as the fact that those texts directly derived from it, namely the Vendidad, the Herbedestan and the Nerangestan, all include a Zand. The translations of these surviving texts is generally considered to be the oldest and most faithfull ones.\nAfter the Avestan corpus became known in the West, a number of scholary translation have been provided. The oldest translation of the Avesta into English was provided in the Sacred Books of the East series by Darmesteter and Mills between 1880 and 1887. In addition, Darmesteter also published a translation of the Avesta into his native French between 1892 and 1893. These translations, however, were mostly based on the Middle Persian translation of the manuscripts. In 1910, Fritz Wolff produced a translation of the Avesta into German. This work was based on Geldner's edition and translated the Avestan text directly using Bartholomae's \"Altiranisches W\u00f6rterbuch\". As a result, his translation is generally seen as superior.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63119", "revid": "149211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63119", "title": "Dot-com boom", "text": ""}
{"id": "63120", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63120", "title": "Mass-production", "text": ""}
{"id": "63121", "revid": "50102809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63121", "title": "Investment", "text": "Set of actions with the intent of earning profit\nInvestment is traditionally defined as the \"commitment of resources into something expected to gain value over time\". If an investment involves money, then it can be defined as a \"commitment of money to receive more money later\". From a broader viewpoint, an investment can be defined as \"to tailor the pattern of expenditure and receipt of resources to optimise the desirable patterns of these flows\". When expenditures and receipts are defined in terms of money, then the net monetary receipt in a time period is termed cash flow, while money received in a series of several time periods is termed cash flow stream.\nIn finance, the purpose of investing is to generate a return on the invested asset. The return may consist of a capital gain (profit) or loss, realised if the investment is sold, unrealised capital appreciation (or depreciation) if yet unsold. It may also consist of periodic income such as dividends, interest, or rental income. The return may also include currency gains or losses due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.\nInvestors generally expect higher returns from riskier investments. When a low-risk investment is made, the return is also generally low. Similarly, high risk comes with a chance of high losses. Investors, particularly novices, are often advised to diversify their portfolio. Diversification has the statistical effect of reducing overall risk.\nTypes of financial investments.\nIn modern economies, traditional investments include:\nAlternative investments include:\nInvestment and risk.\nAn investor may bear a risk of loss of some or all of their capital invested. Investment differs from arbitrage, in which profit is generated without investing capital or bearing risk.\nSavings bear the (normally remote) risk that the financial provider may default.\nForeign currency savings also bear foreign exchange risk: if the currency of a savings account differs from the account holder's home currency, then there is the risk that the exchange rate between the two currencies will move unfavourably so that the value of the savings account decreases, measured in the account holder's home currency.\nEven investing in tangible assets like property has its risk. And similar to most risks, property buyers can seek to mitigate any potential risk by taking out mortgage and by borrowing at a lower loan to security ratio.\nIn contrast with savings, investments tend to carry more risk, in the form of both a wider variety of risk factors and a greater level of uncertainty.\nIndustry to industry volatility is more or less of a risk depending. In biotechnology, for example, investors look for big profits on companies that have small market capitalizations but can be worth hundreds of millions quite quickly. The risk is high because approximately 90% of biotechnology products researched do not make it to market due to regulations and the complex demands within pharmacology as the average prescription drug takes 10 years and US$2.5 billion worth of capital.\nHistory.\nEarly forms of credit and trade-based lending appeared in ancient Mesopotamia, supporting commercial activity across the region. More formal regulation appears in the Code of Hammurabi, compiled around 1754 BCE, which contains several clauses regulating loans, collateral, and interest rates, indicating formalized investment-like practices in ancient Babylon. In ancient Rome, financial intermediaries known as argentarii provided credit, accepted deposits, and facilitated commercial payments, indicating the existence of organized investment-related activities in the early imperial economy. In medieval Europe, merchant banking families in Italian city-states such as Florence and Genoa developed early deposit, credit, and bill-of-exchange practices that supported expanding trade networks. These early financial practices laid the groundwork for more structured investment systems that emerged in Europe during the early modern period. During the early modern period, the 17th century is often viewed as the starting point of more recognizable forms of investing. The shipping industry started to become very popular, and British, Dutch and French boats would travel to Asia, transporting goods. Since these travels were dangerous by waters, ship owners looked for investors to fund their travels. In return, the investors would redeem some of the profits when the boats returned.\nThe start of a stock exchange can be contributed to Amsterdam in 1602 known as the Amsterdam Stock Exchange. The first company to go public was Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie, and that founded the Amsterdam Stock Exchange. It became so large, the government had to facilitate trade. Amsterdam had an Exchange bank, used for making stock market transactions easier, and they had a merchant bank, used to for a regulated place for merchants to trade both being reason for Amsterdam being a world center of trade and capital.\nThe start of the stock market in America can be traced back to May 17, 1792, when the Buttonwood Agreement was signed, setting rules for how stocks can be traded, and aimed to ensure that deals were done between trusted parties. A few years prior, the Compromise of 1790, allowed Alexander Hamilton to use a policy to pay off Revolutionary War debts, using federally issued Bonds, making the first market exchange in America. In 1817, the stock market created an official organization and a board, the New York Stock and Exchange Board. They would meet two times a day and trade 30 different stocks and bonds. The stock exchange rapidly grew, and by the end of the Civil War in 1865, more than 300 stocks and bonds were traded.\nInvestment strategies.\nValue investing.\nA value investor buys assets that they believe to be undervalued (and sells overvalued ones). To identify undervalued securities, a value investor uses analysis of the financial reports of the issuer to evaluate the security. Value investors employ accounting ratios, such as earnings per share and sales growth, to identify securities trading at prices below their worth.\nWarren Buffett and Benjamin Graham are notable examples of value investors. Graham and Dodd's seminal work, \"Security Analysis\", was written in the wake of the Wall Street Crash of 1929.\nThe price to earnings ratio (P/E), or earnings multiple, is a particularly significant and recognized fundamental ratio, with a function of dividing the share price of the stock, by its earnings per share. This will provide the value representing the sum investors are prepared to expend for each dollar of company earnings. This ratio is an important aspect, due to its capacity as measurement for the comparison of valuations of various companies. A stock with a lower P/E ratio will cost less per share than one with a higher P/E, taking into account the same level of financial performance; therefore, it essentially means a low P/E is the preferred option.\nAn instance in which the price to earnings ratio has a lesser significance is when companies in different industries are compared. For example, although it is reasonable for a telecommunications stock to show a P/E in the low teens, in the case of hi-tech stock, a P/E in the 40s range is not unusual. When making comparisons, the P/E ratio can give you a refined view of a particular stock valuation.\nFor investors paying for each dollar of a company's earnings, the P/E ratio is a significant indicator, but the price-to-book ratio (P/B) is also a reliable indication of how much investors are willing to spend on each dollar of company assets. In the process of the P/B ratio, the share price of a stock is divided by its net assets; any intangibles, such as goodwill, are not taken into account. It is a crucial factor of the price-to-book ratio, due to it indicating the actual payment for tangible assets and not the more difficult valuation of intangibles. Accordingly, the P/B could be considered a comparatively conservative metric.\nGrowth investing.\nGrowth investors seek investments they believe are likely to have higher earnings or greater value in the future. To identify such stocks, growth investors often evaluate measures of current stock value as well as predictions of future financial performance. Growth investors seek profits through capital appreciation \u2013 the gains earned when a stock is sold at a higher price than what it was purchased for. The price-to-earnings (P/E) multiple is also used for this type of investment; growth stock are likely to have a P/E higher than others in its industry. According to Investopedia author Troy Segal and U.S. Department of State Fulbright fintech research awardee Julius Mansa, growth investing is best suited for investors who prefer relatively shorter investment horizons, higher risks, and are not seeking immediate cash flow through dividends.\nSome investors attribute the introduction of the growth investing strategy to investment banker Thomas Rowe Price Jr., who tested and popularized the method in 1950 by introducing his mutual fund, the T. Rowe Price Growth Stock Fund. Price asserted that investors could reap high returns by \"investing in companies that are well-managed in fertile fields.\"\nA new form of investing that seems to have caught the attention of investors is Venture Capital. Venture Capital is independently managed dedicated pools of capital that focus on equity or equity-linked investments in privately held, high growth companies.\nMomentum investing.\nMomentum investors generally seek to buy stocks that are currently experiencing a short-term uptrend, and they usually sell them once this momentum starts to decrease. Stocks or securities purchased for momentum investing are often characterized by demonstrating consistently high returns for the past three to twelve months. However, in a bear market, momentum investing also involves short-selling securities of stocks that are experiencing a downward trend, because it is believed that these stocks will continue to decrease in value. Essentially, momentum investing generally relies on the principle that a consistently up-trending stock will continue to grow, while a consistently down-trending stock will continue to fall.\nEconomists and financial analysts have not reached a consensus on the effectiveness of using the momentum investing strategy. Rather than evaluating a company's operational performance, momentum investors instead utilize trend lines, moving averages, and the Average Directional Index (ADX) to determine the existence and strength of trends.\nDollar cost averaging.\nDollar cost averaging (DCA), also known in the UK as pound-cost averaging, is the process of consistently investing a certain amount of money across regular increments of time, and the method can be used in conjunction with value investing, growth investing, momentum investing, or other strategies. For example, an investor who practices dollar-cost averaging could choose to invest $200 a month for the next 3 years, regardless of the share price of their preferred stock(s), mutual funds, or exchange-traded funds.\nMany investors believe that dollar-cost averaging helps minimize short-term volatility by spreading risk out across time intervals and avoiding market timing. Research also shows that DCA can help reduce the total average cost per share in an investment because the method enables the purchase of more shares when their price is lower, and less shares when the price is higher. However, dollar-cost averaging is also generally characterized by more brokerage fees, which could decrease an investor's overall returns.\nThe term \"dollar-cost averaging\" is believed to have first been coined in 1949 by economist and author Benjamin Graham in his book, \"The Intelligent Investor.\" Graham asserted that investors that use DCA are \"likely to end up with a satisfactory overall price for all [their] holdings.\"\nMicro-investing.\nMicro-investing is a type of investment strategy that is designed to make investing regular, accessible and affordable, especially for those who may not have a lot of money to invest or who are new to investing.\nIntermediaries and collective investments.\nInvestments are often made indirectly through intermediary financial institutions. These intermediaries include pension funds, banks, and insurance companies. They may pool money received from a number of individual end investors into funds such as investment trusts, unit trusts, and SICAVs to make large-scale investments. Each individual investor holds an indirect or direct claim on the assets purchased, subject to charges levied by the intermediary, which may be large and varied.\nApproaches to investment sometimes referred to in marketing of collective investments include dollar cost averaging and market timing.\nInvestment valuation.\nFree cash flow measures the cash a company generates which is available to its debt and equity investors, after allowing for reinvestment in working capital and capital expenditure. It is often used by investors as a way of measuring profitability of the company. High and rising free cash flow, therefore, tend to make a company more attractive to investors. Free cash flow can be attractive to investors because having high free cash flow can be a good indicator for high dividend or interest payments.\nThe debt-to-equity ratio is an indicator of capital structure. Debt-to-equity ratio measures how much debt is used to finance a company, compared to equity. A high debt-to-equity ratio means that a company relies more on debt to finance operations, and is much riskier to investors. A high proportion of debt, reflected in a high debt-to-equity ratio, tends to make a company's earnings, free cash flow, and ultimately the returns to its investors, riskier or volatile. Investors compare a company's debt-to-equity ratio with those of other companies in the same industry, and examine trends in debt-to-equity ratios and free cashflow.\nEarnings per share (EPS) is another way to evaluate a stock and its profitability. Earnings per share is measured by dividing the net income of a company by the total number of outstanding shares. A higher earnings per share is attractive to investors because it typically means the company is more profitable. EPS shows how much money a company makes for each share of its stocks.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63122", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63122", "title": "Investing", "text": ""}
{"id": "63123", "revid": "782009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63123", "title": "Bon Jovi", "text": "American rock band\nBon Jovi is an American rock band formed in Sayreville, New Jersey in 1983. The band consists of singer Jon Bon Jovi, keyboardist David Bryan, drummer Tico Torres, guitarists John Shanks and Phil X, percussionist Everett Bradley, and bassist Hugh McDonald. Original bassist Alec John Such left the band in 1994, and longtime guitarist and co-songwriter Richie Sambora left in 2013.\nIn 1984, Bon Jovi released their self-titled debut album, and its single \"Runaway\" managed to reach the Top 40 of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In 1986, the band achieved widespread success and global recognition with their third album, \"Slippery When Wet\", which included three Top 10 singles on the Billboard Hot 100, two of which reached No. 1: \"You Give Love a Bad Name\" and \"Livin' on a Prayer\". Their fourth album, \"New Jersey\" (1988), was also commercially successful, featuring five Top 10 singles, including the number ones \"Bad Medicine\" and \"I'll Be There for You\". The band toured and recorded during the late 1980s, culminating in the 1988\u201390 New Jersey Syndicate Tour.\nIn 1992, the band returned with the double-platinum \"Keep the Faith\", which included the hit \"Bed of Roses\". This was followed by their biggest-selling and longest-charting single \"Always\" in 1994. The album \"These Days\" (1995), showcased a more mature sound. Following a second hiatus, their 2000 album \"Crush\", particularly the lead single, \"It's My Life\", successfully introduced the band to a younger audience. The platinum albums \"Have a Nice Day\" (2005) and \"Lost Highway\" (2007) saw the band incorporate elements of country music into some songs, including the 2006 single \"Who Says You Can't Go Home\", which won the band a Grammy Award and became the first single by a rock band to reach No. 1 on the country charts. \"The Circle\" (2009) marked a return to the band's rock sound. The band further success touring, with the 2005\u201306 Have a Nice Day Tour and 2007\u201308 Lost Highway Tour ranking among the Top 20 highest-grossing concert tours of the 2000s. After releasing \"Because We Can\" in 2013, lead guitarist Richie Sambora left the band, just before a concert during the supporting tour to spend more time with family. The band released their first studio album without Sambora, \"This House Is Not for Sale\" in 2016, touring it in 2017\u201319. Their album \"2020\" was reworked to include songs inspired by the COVID-19 pandemic and George Floyd protests.\nBon Jovi has been credited with bridging \"the gap between heavy metal and pop with style and ease\". The band has released 16 studio albums, five compilations and three live albums. They have sold more than 130 million records worldwide, making them one of the best-selling American rock bands, and performed 3000 concerts in 50 countries in front of a total audience of 34 million people. Bon Jovi was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2006, and the US Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2018. The band received the Award of Merit at the American Music Awards in 2004.\nHistory.\nFormation and \"Runaway\" (1980\u20131983).\nJon Bon Jovi began performing music live in 1975, at the age of 13, playing piano and guitar in New Jersey with his first band, Raze. At 16, Jon met David Bryan and formed a band called Atlantic City Expressway. Still in his teens, Bon Jovi played in the band John Bongiovi and the Wild Ones at clubs such as the Fast Lane and opening for local acts. By 1980, he had formed another band, the Rest, and opened up for New Jersey acts such as Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes. Also in 1980, Jon recorded his first single, \"Runaway\" in his cousin's studio, backed up by studio musicians. The song was played by a local radio station on a compilation tape.\nBy mid-1982, out of school and working part-time at a women's shoe store, Jon Bon Jovi took a job at the Power Station Studios, a Manhattan recording facility where his cousin Tony Bongiovi was co-owner. Jon made several demos\u00a0\u2013 including one produced by Billy Squier\u00a0\u2013 and sent them to record companies, though failing to make an impact. His first professional recording was as lead vocals in \"R2-D2 We Wish You a Merry Christmas,\" which was part of the \"Christmas in the Stars\" album which his cousin co-produced.\nIn 1983, Jon visited a local radio station WAPP 103.5FM \"The Apple\" in Lake Success, New York, to write and sing the jingles for the station. He spoke with DJ Chip Hobart and to the promotion director, John Lassman, who suggested Jon let WAPP include the song \"Runaway\" on the station's compilation album of local homegrown talent. Jon was reluctant, but eventually gave them the song, which he had re-recorded in 1982 (following a rough early recording in 1981) with local studio musicians whom he designated The All Star Review\u00a0\u2013 guitarist Tim Pierce, keyboardist Roy Bittan (from Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band), drummer Frankie LaRocka, and bassist Hugh McDonald.\nIn March 1983, Bon Jovi called David Bryan, who in turn called bassist Alec John Such and an experienced drummer named Tico Torres, both formerly of the band Phantom's Opera. Tapped to play lead guitar for a short tour supporting \"Runaway\" was Bon Jovi's friend and neighbor, Dave Sabo (\"The Snake\"), though he never officially joined the band. He and Jon promised each other that whoever made it first, would help out the other. Sabo later went on to form the group Skid Row. Jon saw and was impressed with hometown guitarist Richie Sambora who was recommended by fellow bassist Alec John Such and drummer Tico Torres. Sambora had toured with Joe Cocker, played with a group called Mercy and had been called up to audition for Kiss. He also played on the album \"Lessons\", originally intended for release in 1982 with the band Message for which Alec John Such was the bassist. Message was originally signed to Led Zeppelin's Swan Song Records label, although the album was never officially released at the time. Meanwhile, WAPP, the station that had first played \"Runaway\" worked with WOR-TV (now WWOR-TV) in nearby Secaucus, NJ on a music video show, Rock 9 Videos, for a short time in 1984.\nTico Torres was also an experienced musician, having recorded and played live with Phantom's Opera, The Marvelettes, and Chuck Berry. He appeared on 26 records and had recently recorded with Franke and the Knockouts, a Jersey band with hit singles during the early 1980s.\nDavid Bryan had quit the band that he and Bon Jovi had founded in order to study medicine. While in college, he realized that he wanted to pursue music full-time, and was accepted to Juilliard School, a New York music school. When Bon Jovi called his friend and said that he was putting together a band, and a record deal looked likely, Bryan followed Bon Jovi's lead and gave up his studies.\n\"Bon Jovi\", \"7800\u00b0 Fahrenheit\", \"Slippery When Wet\" and \"New Jersey\" (1984\u20131989).\nOnce the band began playing showcases and opening for local talent, they caught the attention of record executive Derek Shulman, who signed them to Mercury Records and who was part of the PolyGram company. Because Jon Bon Jovi wanted a group name, Pamela Maher, a friend of Richard Fischer and an employee of Doc McGhee, suggested they call themselves Bon Jovi, following the example of the other famous two-word bands such as Van Halen. This name was chosen instead of the original idea of Johnny Electric. Pamela's suggestion of the name was met with little enthusiasm, but two years later they hit the charts under that name.\nWith the help of their new manager Doc McGhee they recorded the band's debut album, \"Bon Jovi\", which was released on January 21, 1984. The album included the band's first hit single, \"Runaway\", reaching the top forty on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The album peaked at number forty-three on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart. The group soon found itself opening for Scorpions in U.S. and for Kiss in Europe.\nIn 1985, Bon Jovi's second album, \"7800\u00b0 Fahrenheit\", was released. The band released three singles: \"Only Lonely\", \"In and Out of Love\" and the ballad \"Silent Night\". The album peaked at number thirty-seven on the \"Billboard\" 200 and was certified Gold by RIAA. While the album did not sell as well as the band had hoped, it allowed Bon Jovi to get out on the road touring again. In May 1985, Bon Jovi headlined venues in Japan and Europe. At the end of the European tour, the band began a six-month run of U.S. tour dates supporting Ratt. In the midst of that tour, they appeared at the Texas Jam and Castle Donington's Monsters of Rock concerts in England. The band also performed at the first Farm Aid in 1985.\nAfter two moderately successful albums, the group changed its approach and hired professional songwriter Desmond Child as a collaborator. Bruce Fairbairn was chosen to produce and, in early 1986, Bon Jovi moved to Vancouver, Canada to spend six months recording a third album. They named it \"Slippery When Wet\" after visiting a strip club in Vancouver. On August 16, 1986, \"Slippery When Wet\" was released and it spent eight weeks atop the \"Billboard\" 200. The first two singles from the album, \"You Give Love a Bad Name\" and \"Livin' on a Prayer\", both hit number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"Slippery When Wet\" was named 1987's top-selling album by \"Billboard\", and \"Livin' On A Prayer\" won an MTV Video Music Award for Best Stage Performance. The band won an award for Favorite Pop/Rock Band at the American Music Awards and an award for Favorite Rock Group at the People's Choice Awards. When \"Slippery When Wet\" was released in August 1986, Bon Jovi was the support act for 38 Special. By the end of 1986, Bon Jovi were well into six months of headline dates in arenas across America. In August 1987, they headlined England's Monsters of Rock festival. During their set, Dee Snider, Bruce Dickinson and Paul Stanley guested to perform \"We're an American Band\". The band ended the year having headlined 130 shows in the \"Tour Without End\", grossing $28,400,000. \nDetermined to prove that the success of \"Slippery When Wet\" was not a fluke, Bon Jovi released their fourth effort, \"New Jersey\", in September 1988 which peaked at number one in the U.S., Canada, UK, Ireland, New Zealand and Australia. The album produced five Top 10 hits on the Billboard Hot 100, giving Bon Jovi the record for the most Top 10 singles spawned by a hard rock album. Two of the hits, \"Bad Medicine\" and \"I'll Be There for You\", reached number one. The album's three other singles, \"Born to Be My Baby\", \"Lay Your Hands on Me\", and \"Living in Sin\", reached the top ten. The video for \"Living In Sin\" was banned by MTV for sexual content; after the video was re-edited, MTV put it in heavy rotation. Bon Jovi mounted another worldwide tour that continued throughout 1989 and 1990. They visited more than 22 countries and performed more than 232 shows. On June 11, 1989, the band performed a homecoming concert at Giants Stadium in New Jersey. In August 1989, the band headed to the Soviet Union for the Moscow Music Peace Festival. Bon Jovi were officially sanctioned by the Soviet government to perform in the Soviet Union, and \"New Jersey\" was legally released in the USSR.\nIn the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards, Jon Bon Jovi and Richie Sambora performed acoustic versions of \"Livin' on a Prayer\" and \"Wanted Dead or Alive\". While MTV Unplugged was already in development by the time of this event, its showrunners have credited the pair's performance with influencing the show to go from initially being meant only for \"young, up-and-coming artists\" into being a simplified showcase for the \"big, stadium, electric-arena-type acts\".\nThe exhaustion of recording \"Slippery When Wet\" and \"New Jersey\" back to back and going on highly paced world tours took its toll. By the end of the \"New Jersey\" tour, the band had 16 months of concerts under its belt. The bandmates were exhausted physically, mentally and emotionally. Following the final tour date in Mexico, and without any clear plans for their future, the members of the band simply went home. The band has since stated that there were few if any goodbyes between them. During the time they took off from the scene, members of the band retreated to their own projects and showed no desire to make another album.\n\"Keep the Faith\", \" Cross Road\" and \"These Days\" (1992\u20131996).\nJon Bon Jovi fired manager Doc McGhee in 1991. Jon took on the management responsibilities himself by closing ranks and creating \"Bon Jovi Management\". In October 1991, the band went to a Caribbean island of St. Thomas to discuss plans for the future. They managed to resolve their differences by allowing each member to speak about his feelings without interruption from each other. Upon resolving their issues, they headed back into the Vancouver Little Mountain studios with Bob Rock to work on the band's fifth album in January 1992.\nBon Jovi's fifth studio album, \"Keep the Faith\", was released in November 1992, representing \"the beginning of a new chapter in the history of Bon Jovi\" and marking a change in the band's sound and image. The album turned away from heavy drums and wild guitar solos, but instead introduced a more mature sound of Bon Jovi and contained more serious lyrics. The media focused considerable attention on Jon Bon Jovi's hair. When Jon Bon Jovi cut his hair he made headlines on CNN. To promote \"Keep The Faith\" they returned to their roots playing a few dates at the small New Jersey clubs where they had started their career. The band appeared on \"MTV Unplugged\" but that was different from the other episodes of MTV Unplugged series. The performance captures Bon Jovi in an intimate, \"in the round\" experience, performing acoustic and electric renditions of classic hits (Bon Jovi and non-Bon Jovi tracks) and new material from \"Keep the Faith\". The concert was released commercially in 1993 as \"\". The album managed to reach Double Platinum status by the RIAA and produced the Top 10 hit \"Bed of Roses\" while the title track hit number one on the Mainstream Rock Tracks. Bon Jovi embarked on an extensive international world tour for the album, visiting countries the band had never seen before and headlining stadiums in South America, Europe, Asia and Australia. They visited 37 countries, performed 177 shows and seen them play to 2.5 million fans on the Keep the Faith Tour/I'll Sleep When I'm Dead Tour.\nIn October 1994, Bon Jovi released a greatest hits album titled \"Cross Road\", with two new tracks: \"Always\" and \"Someday I'll Be Saturday Night\". The first single from the album, \"Always\", became Bon Jovi's highest selling single and stayed on top ten of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 for six months. In the UK, \"Cross Road\" became the bestselling album of 1994. That year Bon Jovi won an award for \"Best Selling Rock Band\" at the World Music Awards.\nThat same year, bassist Alec John Such left the band, the first lineup change since Bon Jovi began. Hugh McDonald who was the bassist on \"Runaway\", unofficially replaced Such as bassist. Jon Bon Jovi said, regarding the departure of Such: \"Of course it hurts. But I learned to accept and respect it. The fact that I'm a workaholic, studio in, studio out, stage on, stage off, want to be dealing with music day and night, doesn't mean everyone else has to adjust to that pace. Alec wanted to quit for a while now, so it didn't come as a complete surprise.\"\nBon Jovi's sixth studio album, \"These Days\", was released in June 1995, during which time the band was on European tour. The album debuted at number one in UK and spent four consecutive weeks at the top position. The album also reached number one in Ireland, Germany, Australia, Japan and many other countries. The album's first single was the rhythm and blues influenced ballad \"This Ain't a Love Song\". With a video filmed in Thailand, \"This Ain't a Love Song\" reached top twenty on the Billboard Hot 100, and was the only significant U.S. hit from the album. However, the album produced four UK top ten hits (\"This Aint A Love Song\", \"Something for the Pain\", \"Lie to Me\" and \"These Days\"). That year the band earned a BRIT Award for best international band and also won a MTV Europe Music Award for Best Rock. It was followed by These Days Tour. In June 1995, Bon Jovi sold out three-nights at London's historical \"Wembley Stadium\". The concerts were documented for \"Bon Jovi: Live From London\". Bon Jovi visited 43 countries and performed 126 shows on \"These Days Tour\".\nFollowing the overwhelming success of the \"These Days Tour\", the members of Bon Jovi went their separate ways. But unlike the period following the New Jersey tour, tainted with uncertainty, this hiatus was a conscious group decision. The members of Bon Jovi agreed to a self-imposed two-year sabbatical from the band.\n\"Crush\", \"Bounce\" and \"This Left Feels Right\" (1999\u20132003).\nBon Jovi reunited in 1999 to record the song \"Real Life\" for the movie \"EdTV\". David Bryan was recovering from an accident in which he nearly severed his finger.\nAfter a nearly four-year hiatus, during which several band members worked on independent projects, Bon Jovi regrouped to begin work on their next studio album. In June 2000, \"Crush\" was released as the band's seventh studio album and constituted something of a comeback. The first single, \"It's My Life\", was noted as one of the group's most successful releases in a decade and most importantly, becoming a symbol of the band's longevity as they prevailed through many different changes in the mainstream rock scene with admirable success. \"It's My Life\" helped introduce them to a new, younger fan base. The band received two Grammy nominations for Best Rock Album (\"Crush\") and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal (\"It's My Life\"). The video for \"It's My Life\" won the My VH1 Music Awards for \"My Favorite Video\".\nBon Jovi played two sold-out concerts at London's historic Wembley Stadium on August 19\u201320, 2000, becoming the last concerts held at the legendary venue before its demolition. That year the band played to 1.1 million fans in 40 arena and stadium venues across North America, Europe and Japan. While on tour, Bon Jovi released a collection of live performances from throughout their career in an album titled \"One Wild Night Live 1985\u20132001\". This was Bon Jovi's first-ever live album. The songs were culled from archives of recorded material the band had been collecting from their earliest days on the road right through the current tour. The band sold out two homecoming concerts at New Jersey's Giants Stadium on July 27\u201328, 2001. The broadcast broke ratings records for the VH-1 network. At the end of the year Bon Jovi awarded for \"Hottest Live Show\" at the 2001 My VH1 Music Awards.\nThe members of the band had anticipated a brief vacation before work would begin on the band's 8th studio album but on September 11 the world changed. Within days of the terrorist attacks, Jon Bon Jovi and Richie Sambora had filmed Public Service Announcements for the Red Cross, recorded \"America The Beautiful\" for the NFL and performed as part of the historic \"\" live telethon. One month later, the band participated at two Monmouth County Alliance of Neighbors concerts in Red Bank, NJ to raise funds for the families close the band's hometowns, which were affected by the World Trade Center disaster. And on October 21, 2001, Bon Jovi performed at the monumental \"Concert For New York\" at Madison Square Garden, raising relief funds and honoring those who worked to save lives during the attack.\nIn spring 2002, the group entered the studio to begin recording their eighth studio album. \"Bounce\" was influenced by the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, released on October 8, 2002. The album debuted at number two in both the U.S. and UK, but was the first album to sell less than 6 million units since their 1985 record \"7800\u00b0 Fahrenheit\". The band went on the Bounce Tour for the album, during which they made history as the last band to play at Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia before it was torn down.\nFollowing the end of the Bounce Tour in August 2003, Bon Jovi embarked on a side project; originally intending to produce an album consisting of live acoustic performances, the band ended up rewriting, re-recording and reinventing 12 of their biggest hits in a new and much different light. Bon Jovi's compilation album \"This Left Feels Right\" was released in November 2003.\nThe following year, the band released a box set titled \"100,000,000 Bon Jovi Fans Can't Be Wrong\", with the title and cover being a homage to Elvis Presley's \"50,000,000 Elvis Fans Can't Be Wrong\". The set consisted of four CDs packed with 38 unreleased and 12 rare tracks, as well as a DVD. The box set marked the sales of 100 million Bon Jovi albums and also commemorated the 20th anniversary of the release of the band's first record in 1984. In November 2004, Bon Jovi was honored with the Award for Merit at the American Music Awards.\n\"Have a Nice Day\" and \"Lost Highway\" (2005\u20132008).\nThe band's ninth studio album, \"Have a Nice Day\", was released in September 2005. The album debuted at number two in both the U.S. and UK, reaching number one in fifteen countries. The title track was an international hit, reaching the top ten in the UK, Europe, Australia and Canada. The second single, \"Who Says You Can't Go Home\", was released in early 2006. The song reached top forty on the Billboard Hot 100 in the U.S. A duet version of \"Who Says You Can't Go Home\" with country singer Jennifer Nettles of the band Sugarland, peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Country Songs and Bon Jovi became the first rock band to have a number one single on Billboard's Country Chart. On February 11, 2007, Bon Jovi and Jennifer Nettles won the Grammy Award, for \"Best Country Collaboration with Vocals\" for \"Who Says You Can't Go Home\". The band also won an award for Favorite Rock Song at the People's Choice Awards with \"Who Says You Can't Go Home\".\nSoon after the release of \"Have A Nice Day\", the band started gearing up for the new 2005\u20132006 worldwide Have A Nice Day Tour. This tour, took the band to numerous stages and stadiums throughout the world. The tour was a significant commercial success, as the group played to 2,002,000 fans, and the tour grossed a total $191 million. The tour was the third-highest-grossing tour of 2006 taking in just over $131 million, just behind The Rolling Stones' A Bigger Bang World Tour and Madonna's Confessions Tour. On November 14, 2006, Bon Jovi were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame alongside James Brown and Led Zeppelin.\nIn June 2007, Bon Jovi released their tenth studio album, \"Lost Highway\". The album influences the band's rock sound with that of country music following the success of a country version of the band's 2006 single \"Who Says You Can't Go Home\". To promote the new album, Bon Jovi made several television appearances, including the 6th annual CMT Awards in Nashville, \"American Idol\", and MTV Unplugged, as well as playing at the Live Earth concert at Giants Stadium. They also performed ten promotional gigs in the U.S., Canada, the UK, and Japan. As part of the 'tour', Bon Jovi were the first group to perform at London's new O2 Arena (formerly the Millennium Dome) when it opened to the public on June 24, 2007. The 23,000-seater stadium sold out within 30 minutes of tickets being released.\nThe album, described by Jon Bon Jovi as a \"Bon Jovi album influenced by Nashville\", topped the charts in U.S., Canada, Europe, and Japan. The album's third single, \"Till We Ain't Strangers Anymore\", features LeAnn Rimes and won the CMT Music Award for the Collaborative Video of the Year in 2008. The song was also nominated for the Academy of Country Music Award for Vocal Event of the Year.\nThe Lost Highway Tour started with 10 shows to open the brand new, Newark, New Jersey Prudential Center, the band then toured Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, the U.S. and Europe, finishing in the summer of 2008. The tour was the highest-grossing tour of 2008 in Billboard's rankings, with ticket sales of $210.6 million, reported from November 14, 2007, through Nov.11, 2008. In all, 2,157,675 tickets were sold during 2008. Combined with $16.4 million in 2007 from the Newark shows, making a combined gross of $227 million in ticket sales. In Pollstar's calculus for North America, the Lost Highway Tour had the highest gross for 2008 at $70.4 million.\n\"The Circle\" and \"Greatest Hits\" (2009\u20132011).\nIn April 2009, Phil Griffin's documentary on the band, \"When We Were Beautiful\", debuted at the Tribeca Film Festival, chronicling Bon Jovi's ups and downs over 25 years and following the band on their latest Lost Highway tour.\nIn June 2009, Jon Bon Jovi and Richie Sambora were inducted into Songwriters Hall of Fame. That month they also recorded a cover of the song \"Stand By Me\" with Iranian singer Andy Madadian, to show solidarity for those affected by political unrest in Iran. Parts of the song were sung in Persian.\nOn November 10, 2009, the band released their eleventh studio album, titled \"The Circle\". The Circle is a return to rock n' roll after their Nashville-influenced album, \"Lost Highway\". The album debuted at number one in the U.S., Canada, Germany and Japan. Bon Jovi headed out on the road once again on February 19, 2010, embarking on The Circle Tour. Bon Jovi kicked off the stadium leg of the Circle Tour by making history. They played the first ever show at the brand new New Meadowlands Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey. The three sold-out shows on May 26, 27 and 29, 2010 were a huge success. Bon Jovi's 12 night run at London's O2 Arena grossed $18,178,036 and seen them play to 187,696 fans. The Circle Tour was the highest-grossing concert tour of 2010 according to Billboard's annual Top 25 concert tours. So far the tour has played to 1,909,234 fans and has grossed $201.1 million from more than 80 venues reported to Pollstar. For the second time in three years, Bon Jovi ranked as Billboard's &amp; Pollstar's Top Touring Act of the Year. Bon Jovi was also ranked second on \"Forbes\" magazine's list of the world's highest paid musicians, earning an approximate $125 million income that year.\nBon Jovi released a \"Greatest Hits\" with four new songs in October 2010. The album debuted at number one in Canada, Ireland, Europe, Australia and made the top five in twenty countries. At the 2010 MTV Europe Music Awards, Bon Jovi received the Global Icon Award. In October 2010, Bon Jovi released the concert film, \"The Circle Tour Live From Jersey\" in U.S. theaters. At the same time, the band announced their upcoming tour. At the conclusion of 2011, the tour placed second on Billboard's annual, \"Top 25 Tour\", earning more than \u00a3790 million dollars.\n\"Inside Out\", \"What About Now\" and Sambora's departure (2012\u20132014).\nIn January 2012, Jon Bon Jovi stated that they were working on a twelfth studio album, and in a live show in August 2012, Jon Bon Jovi played an acoustic version of a song that was announced to be on the upcoming album. The album, \"What About Now\", was released on March 12, 2013, and reached number one in the U.S., Canada, Austria, Sweden, and Australia. On February 13, Bon Jovi launched Because We Can, a new world tour for 2013 in support of \"What About Now\", and visited North America, Europe, Africa, the Far East, Australia and Latin America.\nOn November 27, 2012, Bon Jovi released a new live video album, called \"Inside Out\", made up of content from shows at the O2 Arena, MetLife Stadium, and Madison Square Garden. The album was first shown at movie theaters, with screenings preceded by a question-and-answer session with Jon Bon Jovi, Richie Sambora, David Bryan and Tico Torres streamed live from a theater in New York, and was subsequently made available for purchase on iTunes.\nOn March 14, 2013, Bon Jovi appeared on the results show of \"American Idol\" and played one song, \"Because We Can\", from \"What About Now\".\nOn April 2, 2013, Sambora departed the band's ongoing tour for unspecified \"personal reasons\"; Session guitarist Phil X filled in after previously replacing him for several 2011 dates. This time he stayed on for the remainder of the tour, amidst rumors that Sambora had been fired. Both Sambora and Jon Bon Jovi later denied the claim. Torres was also sidelined briefly due to emergency gallbladder surgery; he was replaced by Rich Scannella from Bon Jovi's solo band, the Kings of Suburbia, from September 20 to October 6.\nIn 2014, to celebrate the band's 30th anniversary, the band's album \"New Jersey\" was reissued with an additional CD with the \"Sons of Beaches\" demos on it.\nIn June 2014, Sambora told a reporter \"I love Jon and I certainly still foresee the possibility of a return. There is no bad blood with me now. I'm just taking the steps that I want, no, have to take.\" In November 2014, Jon Bon Jovi told a reporter that Sambora had officially left the band, saying \"He's quit. He's gone. No hard feelings.\" That November, he also revealed that he was finishing writing songs for the band's next studio album, their first without Sambora, who was unofficially replaced by touring guitarist Phil X.\n\"Burning Bridges\" and \"This House Is Not for Sale\" (2015\u20132018).\nOn July 31, 2015, Bon Jovi released twin lead singles \"We Don't Run\" and \"Saturday Night Gave Me Sunday Morning\" for the compilation album \"Burning Bridges\". \"Saturday Night Gave Me Sunday Morning\" had its premiere at the Austrian Radio \u00d63 Hitradio on July 17, 2015, and \"We Don't Run\" premiered at the Brazilian radio Radio Rock on July 20, 2015. \"Burning Bridges\" was released August 21, 2015. According to Bon Jovi, the album serves as a \"fan record\" to tie in with an accompanying international tour: \"It's songs that weren't finished, that were finished, a couple of new ones like the one we released as a single 'We Don't Run' \".\nThe first single from 2016's \"This House Is Not for Sale\" was the title track, \"This House Is Not for Sale\", which was promoted with a music video showing unofficial members Hugh McDonald and Phil X becoming full-time band members. On November 4, 2016, the band officially released their 13th studio album, \"This House Is Not for Sale\", which debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 with 129,000 album-equivalent units, of which 128,000 were pure album sales. The album was followed by their third live album, \"This House Is Not for Sale \u2013 Live from the London Palladium\", released on December 16, 2016.\nIn November 2016, Island Records and Universal Music Enterprises released Bon Jovi's studio albums in remastered versions on vinyl, spanning their 32-year career from \"Bon Jovi\" (1984) up until \"What About Now\" (2013). On February 10, 2017, a 25-LP box set titled \"Bon Jovi: The Albums\" was released. It consists of Bon Jovi's 13 studio albums, the compilation \"Burning Bridges\" (2015), the two Jon Bon Jovi solo albums (\"Blaze of Glory\" and \"Destination Anywhere\"), and an exclusive \"Extras\" album featuring \"international rarities\".\nOn December 13, 2017, it was announced that Bon Jovi would be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2018, after winning the 2017 fan ballot with over 1.1 million votes. Jon Bon Jovi invited Sambora and Such to appear with the band at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony. In later February 2018, it was confirmed that Such and Sambora would perform with the band at the 2018 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony.\nOn April 29, 2018, the band performed at the BMO Harris Bradley Center, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, as the last ticketed event at the venue before the start of demolition in the summer of 2018.\n\"2020\" and the death of Alec John Such (2019\u20132023).\nOn March 9, 2019, Jon Bon Jovi announced via social media that the band is back in the studio recording its fifteenth studio album, which was to be released in early 2020. In August 2019, he announced that the album would be called \"2020\". The release date was scheduled for May 15, 2020, but Jovi announced in an interview with Howard Stern that the album and its accompanying tour, Bon Jovi 2020 Tour, had been postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On April 20, 2020, Bon Jovi announced that the Bon Jovi 2020 Tour had been canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The album ended up being released in October. On January 7, 2022, the band announced a tour in April. Critics and social media users discussed the quality of Jon Bon Jovi's vocal performances during the tour, with many believing that it was poor.\nDuring the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, a viral video appeared where residents in Odesa, Ukraine, prepared for a Russian attack while a drummer played to the Bon Jovi hit \"It's My Life\". Bon Jovi supported this video and shared it with their followers, with the comment \"This is for the ones who stood their ground... Odessa, Ukraine. #SlavaUkraini\".\nThe death of founding member Alec John Such was announced by the band on June 5, 2022. It was later revealed that he had died of a heart attack.\nIn February 2023, former guitarist Richie Sambora noted that he was in talks about potentially rejoining the band: \"We're talking about it. I don't think there's any reason not to [return] at this point. I mean, [Jon and I] we did something... there's not a lot of bands that did what we did. [...] We have to get out there and do it for the fans really.\" However, in May 2024, Bon Jovi confirmed that there were no plans for Sambora to rejoin and that a reunion was unlikely.\n\"Thank You, Goodnight\" and \"Forever\" (2024\u2013present).\nIn October 2023, guitarist Phil X revealed in an interview that the band was heading to Nashville for a month to record a brand new album. On November 17, 2023, the band released a holiday themed single called \"Christmas Isn't Christmas\". This was the band's first release since the 2020 album and a preparation towards the new album coming out in 2024. On March 14, 2024, the band released the single, \"Legendary\", the lead single from their 16th album, \"Forever\", released on June 7, 2024. The album's second single, \"Living Proof\", was released May 17.\nIn April 2024, a four-part documentary series on the band, \"Thank You, Goodnight: The Bon Jovi Story\", premiered on Hulu and Disney+. Directed by Gotham Chopra, the series chronicles the band's entire history, with interviews with the members of the band along with those who worked with them, while following the current line-up of the band on its 2022 tour as they \"chart out their future\" following Jon Bon Jovi's health and vocal chord concerns.\nMusical style.\nBon Jovi's musical style has generally been characterized as hard rock, arena rock and pop rock. The band's first four albums were described as glam metal. Their first two albums used a heavier mixture of glam metal and hard rock while their follow ups, \"Slippery When Wet\" and \"New Jersey,\" featured a more commercialized mixture of glam metal and hard rock. They shed the glam metal sound by their fifth studio album, \"Keep the Faith\", and their sixth, \"These Days\", utilizing a more mature hard rock sound. \"Crush\" was characterized as \"far enough into pop/rock to actually stand a chance of getting airplay\", while \"Bounce\" was described as \"heavy, serious rock\". \"Have a Nice Day\" was also characterized as being heavier than \"Crush\". The band altered their sound dramatically in their next release, \"Lost Highway\", blending influences from country music and country rock, a sound Jon Bon Jovi described as \"a Bon Jovi album influenced by Nashville.\" Bon Jovi returned to a more typical rock sound on \"The Circle\", which was described by Allmusic as \"conjured by echoed, delayed guitars, shimmering keyboards, and spacious rhythms.\"\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTimeline\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nTours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63125", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63125", "title": "Veracruz", "text": "State of Mexico\nVeracruz, officially the Free and Sovereign State of Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave, is one of the 31 states which, along with Mexico City, comprise the 32 Federal Entities of Mexico. Located in eastern Mexico, Veracruz is bordered by seven states: Tamaulipas, San Luis Potos\u00ed, Hidalgo, Puebla, Oaxaca, Chiapas, and Tabasco. Veracruz is divided into 212 municipalities, and its capital city is Xalapa-Enr\u00edquez.\nVeracruz has a significant share of the coastline of the Gulf of Mexico on the east of the state. The state is noted for its mixed ethnic and indigenous populations, and its cuisine reflects the many cultural influences that have come through the state because of the importance of the port of Veracruz. In addition to the capital city, the state's largest cities include Veracruz, Coatzacoalcos, C\u00f3rdoba, Minatitl\u00e1n, Poza Rica, Boca Del R\u00edo and Orizaba.\nEtymology.\nThe official name of the state is Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave. It is named after its largest city and main port, Veracruz, which was originally founded as Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz (Rich Town of the True Cross) by Spanish conquistadors in 1519. The name \"Vera Cruz\" combines Latin and Spanish elements meaning \"True Cross\". The suffix is in honor of Ignacio de la Llave y Segura Zevallos (1818\u20131863), who was the governor of Veracruz from 1855 to 1857, and once again from 1861 to 1863. The state's official seal, adopted in 1954 by the state legislature through Law No. 92, is based on the colonial coat of arms granted by King Charles I of Spain to Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz in 1523, which recognized Veracruz as the first Spanish settlement in New Spain.\nHistory.\nPre-Columbian.\nDuring the pre-Columbian era, Veracruz was mainly populated by four indigenous groups: the Huastecs and Otomis in the north, the Totonacs in the north-center, and the Olmecs in the south. Archaeological remains of these civilizations are preserved at sites including P\u00e1nuco, Castillo de Teayo, El Zapotal, Las Higueras, Quiahuiztlan, El Taj\u00edn, Cempoala, Tres Zapotes, and San Lorenzo Tenochtitl\u00e1n.\nThe first major civilization in the territory of the current state was the Olmecs, centered in the Coatzacoalcos River region. Its principal ceremonial site was San Lorenzo Tenochtitl\u00e1n, with other important centers including Tres Zapotes in the city of Veracruz and La Venta in Tabasco. Olmec civilization reached its peak about 2,600 years ago, producing colossal stone heads that remain its most recognizable artistic achievement. These ceremonial sites were among the most complex of their era, leading many anthropologists to regard the Olmecs as the \"mother culture\" of Mesoamerican civilizations. Nevertheless, historian John Schmal notes that by 300 BCE, the Olmecs had been \"eclipsed by other emerging civilizations in Mesoamerica\".\nThe Totonacs, who continue to exist as a distinct group today, traditionally inhabited a region known as Totonacapan, located between the Cazones and Papaloapan Rivers in northern Veracruz. Pre-Columbian Totonacs subsisted on hunting, fishing, and agriculture, cultivating maize, beans, chili peppers, and squash; vanilla beans are also native to the region. Characteristic artifacts include clay sculptures depicting smiling faces. El Taj\u00edn, located near Papantla, is a major archaeological site of the Totonacs; however, the culture reached its peak at Cempoala, which is situated about inland from the modern port of Veracruz, before falling under Aztec control. At the time of the Spanish arrival in 1519, the Totonac population numbered approximately 250,000, distributed across fifty settlements and speaking four dialects, with about 25,000 inhabitants in Cempoala alone.\nThe Huastecs traditionally and currently inhabit the far north of Veracruz and extend into Tamaulipas, Hidalgo, San Luis Potos\u00ed, Quer\u00e9taro, and Puebla. Their language and agricultural practices are similar to those of the Maya, but only limited architectural and ceramic remains survive from the early Huastec culture. The civilization reached its height between 1200 and 1519, prior to Spanish conquest.\nDuring the 15th and early 16th centuries, the Aztecs established control over much of Veracruz, dividing the territory into the tributary provinces of Tochtepec, Cuetlaxtlan, Cempoallan, Quauhtochco, Jalapa, Misantla, and Tlatlauhquitepec. They valued the region for its vegetation and crops such as cedar, fruit, cotton, cacao, maize, beans, and vanilla. The Huastecs were incorporated into the provinces of Atlan and Tochpan. However, Totonac resistance to Aztec rule was frequent; as a result, rulers from Axayacatl in 1480 to Moctezuma II in the early 1500s were forced to dispatch troops to suppress uprisings.\nColonial period, 1519\u20131821.\nVeracruz played an important part in the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire by Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s and his expedition members. They founded Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz on May 18, 1519, as the first Spanish town in what is now Mexico. By doing so, Cort\u00e9s threw off the authority of the Governor of Cuba, Diego Vel\u00e1zquez, claiming authority directly from the Spanish Crown. A small contingent of the expedition remained at Veracruz, while the main body of conquerors moved inland.\nAmong the first groups encountered by the Spanish in the Americas were the Totonacs. Juan de Grijalva was the first Spaniard to make contact with the Totonacs near present-day Veracruz. Seeking to free his people from Aztec rule, Totonac ruler Tlacochcalcatl offered conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s 50,000 warriors to take Tenochtitlan. With Spanish assistance, the Totonacs expelled Aztec tax collectors and took over some Aztec outposts. The city of Veracruz was established as the first Spanish-controlled municipality on the coast. Cort\u00e9s then advanced towards Tenochtitlan, initiating the Spanish conquest. As Cort\u00e9s's campaign progressed, certain Totonac factions sided with the Spanish, while the Huastecs, also under Aztec rule, resisted Cort\u00e9s's forces. After the Aztecs were defeated at Tenochtitlan, Cort\u00e9s sent a unit to conquer the Huastecs as well.\nDuring the early conquest era, Cort\u00e9s established \"encomiendas\", which rewarded conquerors with the labor of conquered indigenous people. The indigenous ruler of a settlement was charged with mobilization of labor and tribute owed to the holder of the encomienda. Multiple encomiendas were established in Veracruz, which changed ownership over time, but early on came under the direct control of the Spanish Crown rather than individual \"encomenderos\".\nDuring the colonial era, Veracruz was the main port of entry for immigrants from Spain, enslaved Africans, and luxury goods for import and export. The first group of Franciscans arrived in Veracruz in 1524, walking barefoot to the capital of the Spanish colony of New Spain. The route between Veracruz and the Spanish capital of Mexico City, built on the site of the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan, was the key trade route during the colonial era. Much of the history of the state is involved with the port city that Cort\u00e9s founded in 1519. Veracruz became the principal and often only port to export and import goods between the colony of New Spain and Spain itself. To ensure the port's monopoly, Veracruz established control over almost all of New Spain's Gulf coastline. New Spain's silver and cochineal red dye were the two most important exports from the port, along with chocolate, vanilla, and chili peppers. Imports included livestock (sheep, cows, goats, horses), wheat and other cultivars. Slaves, pineapple, and sugar cane were introduced from the Caribbean. Such valuable trade made the port a highly prized target for pirates during the colonial period, resulting in frequent attacks and sackings. This led to the building of the fort of San Juan de Ul\u00faa, a site Juan de Grijalva visited in 1518, and the fortification of the city overall.\nMuch of Totonac and Huastec culture have survived the colonial period into the present day, largely due to northern Veracruz's rugged terrain and thick vegetation, and lack of resources that the Spanish sought. Veracruz is considered to be where the \"mestizo\" or mixed European/indigenous ethnicities began, which is a large part of Mexican cultural identity.\nArriving with the Spanish conquerors, new diseases made their first appearance in the continent. European diseases decimated the native population of the province, prompting the importation of enslaved Africans during the colonial period, starting in the 16th century. The Spanish imported between 500,000 and 1,000,000 West African slaves into Mexico between 1535 and 1767. As New Spain did not have any laws prohibiting interracial marriage, miscegenation between indigenous and African populations began almost immediately. People of this mixed heritage are called Afro-Mestizo, which includes all 3 ethnicities: Indigenous, African, and Spanish.\nRunaway slaves (\"cimarrones\") became problematic to public order since they frequently formed robber bands that attacked travelers on highways. The Spanish Crown took action against these groups beginning in the late sixteenth century, but a major rebellion broke out in 1606 in the Villa Rica, Nueva Veracruz, Ant\u00f3n Lizardo, and Rio Blanco areas. The most consequential rebellion occurred in the Orizaba area and involved about 500 fugitive slaves. In 1609, Gaspar Yanga, a fugitive slave, led an insurrection against the Spanish. Unrest continued until 1618, when the Spanish government eventually signed an amnesty pact which gave the Africans the right to form their own community in exchange for suppressing bandit activity. The town of San Lorenzo de Zerral established, and was later renamed the municipality of Yanga. Yanga's rebellion marked the first time slavery was abolished in the Americas.\nIn the first half of the seventeenth century, cities such as C\u00f3rdoba, Orizaba, and Xalapa were established or expanded to safeguard the trade route between Mexico City and the port of Veracruz. During this time, the Spanish and mixed-ethnicities population increased as the purely indigenous population continued to fall to a fraction of pre-Conquest levels (due now to mixing, rather than disease). Trade through Veracruz was restricted mainly to Spain, with only limited commerce permitted with England and other Spanish colonies, until the \"Decreto de Libre Comercio\" authorized free trade within Spanish-held realms in 1778, which opened up more of Europe. The reform increased the port's importance and the prosperity of its inhabitants.\nBeyond the port, in other areas of the province, the economy was based on agriculture, livestock, and commerce. In 1720, Xalapa hosted its first trade fair, establishing the city as a key point of exchange between inland Mexican goods and foreign imports; this role later contributed to its designation as the state capital.\nIn 1746, the state was divided into 14 civil jurisdictions: P\u00e1nuco, Tampico, Huayacocotla, Huauchinango, Papantla, Misantla, Xalapa, Jalacingo, Veracruz, C\u00f3rdoba, Orizaba, Cosamaloapan, Tuxtla, and Cotaxtla.\nIn 1824, soldiers loyal to the Spanish Crown made their last stand against the independence movement in 1824 at the port city of Veracruz and the fort of San Juan de Ul\u00faa, where Cort\u00e9s landed three hundred years earlier.\nIndependence.\nDuring the Mexican War of Independence, there was support for the insurgents in many parts of the state, with skirmishes erupting in various parts as early as 1811. A major conspiracy against the colonial government was discovered in the port in 1812, with rebels taking Ayahualulco and Ixhuac\u00e1n during the same year. This forced royalist troops to withdraw to Xalapa. Eventually, this city along with the port were cut off from Mexico City. Most of the state remained in rebel hands during the rest of the war although the commercial class of the port did not support the effort. In 1821, Juan de O'Donoj\u00fa, the last viceroy of New Spain, came to the port to leave for Spain. However, until 1823, Spanish troops continued to occupy San Juan de Ul\u00faa Fort. In 1826, the city would receive the first of its four titles of \"heroic city\" for confronting these remaining Spanish troops.\nWhile the last of the Spanish held on in San Juan de Ul\u00faa, Agust\u00edn de Iturbide had been declared the emperor of Mexico in 1822. However, his reign quickly encountered resistance from those favoring a republican form of government, including from Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna from his stronghold in Veracruz state. Months later, Iturbide would go into exile and Santa Anna would eventually hold nine terms as president.\nThe French intervened in Mexico through Veracruz for the first time in the 1838, in what became the Pastry War. The port was blockaded. Efforts to defend the country were coordinated from Xalapa. The port was bombarded, but eventually a settlement was reached.\nDuring the Mexican\u2013American War, the port was blockaded again, this time by the Americans. Initial American attempts in 1847 to land in Alvarado were checked, but the Americans then made a plan to land a few miles south of Veracruz, which surrendered after a 20-day siege, defeated General Santa Anna's forces at the Battle of Cerro Gordo, and marched inland through Xalapa towards Mexico City, led by General Winfield Scott. Mexico surrendered shortly after.\nThe municipalities of Tuxpan and belonged to Puebla until 1853, when they were annexed to Veracruz to give the state its final form. In 1855, the State Government Palace was constructed. During the Reform War, the major player was Ignacio de la Llave whose name is part of the state's official designation. In 1858, the port became the site for the liberal government under Benito Ju\u00e1rez after he was forced out of Mexico City during the Reform War. Their control of this port and its customs duties allowed liberal forces to gather resources. Conservative forces attacked the state but were repelled from both the port and Xalapa.\nThe Reform War devastated Mexico's economy, leaving it unable to repay its European debts. As a result, Ju\u00e1rez annulled the country's foreign debt, prompting Britain, Spain, and France to occupy the Mexican Gulf Coast in October 1861 to force repayment. Under normal conditions, this move would have been blocked by the United States under the Monroe Doctrine, however, that nation was occupied with a Civil War at the time, and the European powers believed that the Americans could not act. Spanish troops under General Manuel Gasset occupied the port of Veracruz without local resistance. Then, in November, the port was also occupied by British and French forces. The Spanish and the British withdrew after making deals with Ju\u00e1rez, but the French pushed on to establish the reign of Maximilian I of Mexico. However, this was short-lived and the French were expelled through Veracruz in 1866/67.\nIn 1863, the state was officially named Veracruz-Llave. After the French were expelled, the state government was in the port of Veracruz. In 1878, the capital was transferred to Orizaba. It was later moved to Xalapa in 1885.\nBy the end of the century, many infrastructure improvements, such as roads and railways (especially the Ferrocarril Interoce\u00e1nico) had been completed with the major cities being Veracruz, Orizaba, Xalapa, C\u00f3rdoba, Jalacingo, Chicontepec and Tantoyuca. The discovery of oil in the north of the state attracted foreign firms, which brought machinery needed for its extraction. These companies included Huasteca Company Petroleum and El Aguila along with American and English firms. During the same time period, uprisings against the government under Porfirio D\u00edaz in the agricultural south of the state were brutally repressed.\n20th century to the present.\nUnrest against the D\u00edaz regime continued until the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution ousted him from power. The major event leading up to this war in Veracruz was the cigar-makers strike of 1905, when more than 5,000 workers of the \"El Valle Nacional\" company walked off the job. The governor, Teodora A. Dehesa, unsuccessfully tried to negotiate a settlement. The strike went on for months until the strikers won. This victory encouraged more actions, until strikes at the factories in Rio Blanco, Nogales, Santa Rosa and Cont\u00f3n de Orizaba resulted in dramatic violence in January 1907.\nNo major battles of the Mexican Revolution were fought in the state, though there were skirmishes and attacks on the port. By 1914 rebel C\u00e1ndido Agular occupied a number of municipalities in the state and in 1917, Venustiano Carranza transferred the federal government here temporarily.\nIn April 1914, the Tampico Affair, which concerned U.S. sailors in the city of Tampico, caused President Woodrow Wilson to send American troops to Veracruz for six months, after which Mexico severed diplomatic relations with the United States.\nAfter the Revolution, agrarian reform, including the redistribution of land and the creation of ejidos took place here. The oil companies in the north of the state were nationalized and consolidated into PEMEX in the 1930s by L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas. In the 1950s, more road construction, such as the Mexico City- Poza Rica, Veracruz-Alvarado- Coatzacoalco and Tinajas-Ciudad Aleman-Tlacoatalpan highways were constructed. The Universidad Veracruzana was expanded as well. In 1960, the Xalapa Museum of Anthropology was inaugurated as well as the Coatzacoalco-Salina Cruz highway. The Veracruz city international airport was opened in the 1970s.\nIn the ten years after 2006, at least 3,600 people have disappeared within the state. Multiple mass graves have been found within the state. This is seen as part of the over 28,000 missing individuals related to the Mexican drug war. Within the state the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas have battled for control. Additionally, this has led to journalists being targeted and killed within the state.\nGeography.\nPolitical geography.\nThe state is a crescent-shaped strip of land wedged between the Sierra Madre Oriental to the west and the Gulf of Mexico to the east. Its total area is , accounting for about 3.7% of Mexico's total territory. It stretches about north to south, but its width varies from between , with an average of about in width. Veracruz borders Tamaulipas to the north; Oaxaca and Chiapas to the south; Tabasco to the southeast; and Hidalgo, Puebla, and San Luis Potos\u00ed to the west. Its coastline along the Gulf of Mexico extends for .\nNatural geography.\nThe natural geography can be categorized into nine regions: The Sierra de Zongolica, the Tecolutla Region, the Huayacocotla Region, the Metlac River area, the Tuxtlas Region, the Central Region, the Laguna del Castillo Region, the Pueblo Viejo-Tamiahua Region and the Laguna de Alvarado Region. The topography changes drastically, rising from the narrow coastal plains to the highlands of the eastern Sierra Madre. Elevation varies from sea level to the Pico de Orizaba, Mexico's highest peak at above sea level. The coast is home to numerous tidewater streams and lagoons, which alternate with low strips of sand. Most of the long coastline is narrow and sandy with unstable dunes, small shifting lagoons, and points.\nThe mountains are of the Sierra Madre Oriental and the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt. Mountain ranges include the Sierra de Topila, Sierra de Otontepec, Sierra de Huayacocotla, Sierra de Coxquihui, Sierra de Chiconquiaco, Sierra de Jalacingo, Sierra de Axocuapan, Sierra de Huatusco, Sierra de Zongolica, and the Sierra de Los Tuxtlas. Major peaks include Pico de Orizaba (), Cofre de Perote (), Cerro de Tecomates (), Cerro del Vig\u00eda Alta () and Cerro de 3 Tortas (). The Pico de Orizaba is covered in snow year round; the Cofre de Perote is covered in winter. Major valleys include the Acultzingo, C\u00f3rdoba, Maltrata, Orizaba and San Andr\u00e9s.\nVeracruz has over 40 rivers and tributaries, which transport rich silt from the state's highlands to its coastal regions and valleys. These rivers also provide water for hydroelectric power and irrigation. All of the rivers and streams that cross the state begin in the Sierra Madre Oriental or in the Central Mesa, flowing east to the Gulf of Mexico. The important ones include: Actopan River, Acuatempan river, R\u00edo Blanco, Cazones River, Coatzacoalcos River, R\u00edo de La Antigua, Ayyappan River, Jamapa River, Nautla River, P\u00e1nuco River, Papaloapan River, Tecolutla River, Tonal\u00e1 River, Tuxpan River and Xoloapa River. The largest in terms of water discharge are the P\u00e1nuco, Tuxpan, Papaloapan, Coazocoalcos and Uxpanapa. The Panuco, Tuxpan, Papaloapan and Coatzacoalcos are navigable. Two of Mexico's most polluted rivers, the Coatzacoalcos and the R\u00edo Blanco are located in the state. Much of the pollution comes from industrial sources, but the discharge of sewerage and uncontrolled garbage disposal are also major contributors. The state has very few sewage treatment plants, with only 10% of sewage being treated before discharge.\nThe state also has ten major waterfalls and ten major coastal lagoons. There is only one significant lake, called Lake Catemaco. Off the coast are the islands of Isla de Lobos, Isla de los Burros, Isla de Sacrificios, Isla de Salmendina, Isla del Idolo, Isladel Toro, Isla Frijoles, Isla Juan A Ramirez, Isla Pajaros and Isla Terr\u00f3n and the ocean reefs called Blanquilla, Medio, Tang\u00fcillo, Tuxpan, Gualleguilla, Gallega, Anegada de Adento Anegada de Afuera and Cabezo.\nMajor communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nThe large variation of altitude results in a wide mixture of climates, ranging from cold, snow-topped mountain peaks to hot, humid tropical areas on the coast. 32% of the state is classified as hot and humid, 52% as hot and semi humid, 9% as warm and humid, 6% as temperate and humid, and 1% as cold. Hot/humid and hot/semi-humid climates dominate from sea level to about above sea level. Average annual temperature ranges from with precipitation varying from to just over per year. Cooler and humid climates are found at elevations between . These have an average temperature of between with precipitation varying between . Temperate climates are found at higher altitudes, between . Temperatures here vary from with precipitation varying more, between . Cold climates are found at the highest elevations, reaching up to the Cofre de Perote and the Pico de Orizaba. There is a small semiarid region around the city of Perote and the west of the Huasteca area. This is due to a rain shadow caused by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt and the Sierra Madre Oriental, which do not permit the flow of moist Gulf air to this region.\nEcosystems.\nVarious types of forest cover the state, but evergreen tropical forest dominate. The state's ecology is of great importance for many plant and animal species. It is a center of plant endemism and has two separate endemic bird areas.\nThe northern part of the state and higher mountain areas are convergence zones between lowland evergreen tropical forests and more temperate flora and fauna. It is also the northernmost occurrence of subhumid tropical forest in Mexico, although little of this remains, mostly on steep slopes. The tropical forests of the Veracruz moist forests ecoregion are situated in the northeastern coastal plain and extend into southern Tamaulipas state, on the east side of the Sierra Madre Oriental. The soils here are volcanic and shallow, but with rich organic matter. Species that predominate include Mayan breadnut (\"Brosimum alicastrum\"), sapodilla (\"Manilkara zapota\"), rosadillo (\"Celtis monoica\"), \"Bursera simaruba\", \"Dendropanax arboreus\", and \"Sideroxylon capiri\". This ecoregion extends into the central part of the state, with vegetation changing to include mahogany (\"Swietenia macrophylla\"), sapodilla (\"Manilkara zapota\"), \"Bernoullia flammea\", and \"Astronium graveolens\". In the central part of the state, the Veracruz dry forests extend from the Sierra to the coast, south of the Sierra de Chiconquiaco. The Pet\u00e9n\u2013Veracruz moist forests occupy the southern part of the state, and extend eastwards through neighboring Chiapas and Tabasco states into Guatemala.\nVeracruz has been described as having one of the richest varieties of wildlife in the western hemisphere. There is an especially diverse array of endemic insects like the conspicuous \"Arsenura armida\". As well as insects, the state is known for its many arachnids, and features over 25 species of tarantula (Theraphosidae), of which many are endemic. The state is part of Birdlife International's Endemic Bird Area (EBA) project due to the number of endemic birds here. Some of these include green-cheeked amazon (\"Amazona viridigenalis\"), Tamaulipas crow (\"Corvus imparatus\"), Altamira yellowthroat (\"Geothlypis flavovelata\") and crimson-collared grosbeak (\"Rhodothraupis celaeno\"). Despite much of the deterioration of the forest areas, it is still an important stopover for migratory birds as well. Many endangered mammal species can be found here including two endemic rodents (\"Peromyscus ochraventer\" and \"Neotoma angustapalata\"), the jaguar (\"Panthera onca\"), ocelot (\"Leopardus pardalis\"), jaguarundi (\"Herpailurus yaguarondi\") and white-nosed coati (\"Nasua narica\"). The endangered Baird's tapir may occasionally be spotted in the state's southern jungle regions, such as Bi\u00f3sfera Los Tuxtlas. This region is also the northernmost extent of the primate \"Alouatta palliata\", or mantled howler.\nMost of Veracruz's native forests have been destroyed and replaced by scrub and secondary communities of trees. From 1900 to 1987, over of forest were logged, resulting in the loss of habitat and biodiversity. Much of the logging is due to commercial timber, search for tropical hardwoods, and the clearing of land for local farmers, especially for cattle grazing. Only 20% of Veracruz's original ecosystem remains, with 64% transformed by human exploitation. Despite some efforts at conservation and reclamation, exploitation continues to put pressure on remaining wild areas.\nThe state has 31 environmentally protected areas in 21 different municipalities. Nine are urban parks, three are national parks (Pico de Orizaba, Cofre de Perote and San Jos\u00e9 de los Molinos). The Cofre de Perote National Park is 11,700 hectares of pine and oyamel forest, which was created in 1937. The Los Tuxtlas Biosphere Reserve covers the municipalities of \u00c1ngel R. Cabada, Santiago Tuxtla, San Andres Tuxtla, Catemaco, Soteapan, Mecayapan, Pajapan and Tatahuicapan for a total of . It contains various volcanos such as San Mart\u00edn and Santa Marta and rich biodiversity as it stretches from sea level to higher elevations, with 16 climate regions groups into four climate types. Forest types range from evergreen tropical rainforest to pine. 75% of species here are also found in Central America and there is a total of 2,368 plant species. Some, such as \"Costus dirzoi, Daphnopsis megacarpa, Eugenia sotoesparzae, Inga sinacae, Miconia ibarrae, Mormodes tuxtlensis\", and \"Thelypteris rachyflexuosa\", are native only to this area. Wildlife includes 102 mammal species, 49 amphibian, 109 reptilian, 561 bird species and more. Species in danger of extinction include the jaguar, spider monkey and anteater.\nThe Veracruz Reef System is also considered to be a national park and is mostly off the coast of Veracruz city, Boca del R\u00edo and Alvarado. The area includes coral reefs, seaweed beds and other marine vegetation, covering an area of . There are seventeen reefs in total, some of which jut above the surface to form small islands. This system links with the reef systems of Campeche and Yucat\u00e1n.\nEconomy.\nVeracruz has one of Mexico's leading economies, based on agriculture and petroleum.\nAgriculture.\nThe primary sector of the economy (agriculture, forestry and fishing) has been important since pre-Hispanic times and continues to be important both as a source of income as well as culturally. The state has abundant rainfall and extremely fertile soils, as well as a long coastline and forest containing a wide variety of trees and other plants.\nThere is about 1\u00a0million hectares of cultivable land, half of which is privately owned and 43% is ejido or communal land; the rest is occupied by human settlements. There are 3,620 ejidos parceled out to 270,000 ejido members. 52.5% of agricultural land is used for the growing of crops or used as pasture and 43.1% is forest or rainforest. Chief agricultural products include coffee, vanilla, sugarcane, tobacco, bananas, coconuts, and vegetables, but local farmers depend mainly on corn and beans. Two corn crops per year are generally produced, planted on 644,936 hectares with a production of 1,114,325 tons. The state is the leading national producer of coffee, sugarcane, corn, and rice. Coffee is grown on 152,993 hectares producing 400,575 tons. Export earnings from this crop are about US$232\u00a0million annually. Most coffee is grown in the mountain areas of C\u00f3rdoba-Huatusco, Coatepec-Teocelo-Cosautl\u00e1n and Misantla-Tlapacoyan-Atzalan. Sugarcane is cultivated on 254,000 hectares, producing 16,867,958 tons annually. Veracruz is the largest producer of rice with 24,000 hectares producing 120,000 tons. Much is this crop is protected by import bans from Asia. \nThe state grows half of Mexico's citrus fruit, and produces the largest number of citrus varieties. Citrus cultivation occupies 180,577 hectares and yields 2,575,140 tons annually. Varieties include oranges, tangerines, mandarins, limes, and grapefruit. The majority of citrus is grown in the northern part of the state. Most of the limes grown are exported, which supports the packing and shipping industry. Veracruz is the largest mango producer in the country, with 31,640 hectares in cultivation that produce 287,000 tons, primarily of the manila variety, which is preferred in Mexico. 95% of mangoes grown in Veracruz are consumed fresh within Mexico, although exports to Canada have begun. Vanilla beans, another major Mexican crop, are native to Veracruz. Most vanilla beans are grown in the area known as Totonacapan in and around Papantla.\nLivestock raising is critical to the state's economy. There are over 300,000 production units in the state, most of which raise cattle. Veracruz is the main beef producer for Mexico, producing 14% of the country's total beef. In addition to beef cattle, other livestock species include dairy cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, horses, domestic fowl, and bees.\nThe state's inland tropical forests supply dyewoods, hardwoods, and rubber. About 20% of Veracruz is forested, with 220,000 hectares of temperate forest and 1,200,000 hectares of tropical forests. Logging in the state produces 128,254 m3 of wood products per year. The most exploited species include pine, oyamel, cypress and oak. Some tropical hardwoods are harvested as well.\nVeracruz's long coastline supports a large fishing industry, producing 20% of Mexico's catch. Most of the country's mojarra, oysters, and shrimp come from the state. Other major fish catches include crab, sea bass and red snapper.\nAgroindustry focuses on the processing of coffee and sugar products, with citrus packers holding an important position as well. \nNatural resources.\nVeracruz, a resource-rich state, plays a significant role in Mexico's economy. It hosts about 35% of the country's water supply, and is a key hub for oil production. While the state's mountains also contain unexploited coal, iron, gold, and silver reserves, its mining activity primarily focuses on non-metallic minerals such as calcium, feldspar, kaolin, marble, and silica. The state ranks fourth in the country for non-metallic mineral output. In total, mining contributes 1.5% to the state's economy.\nVeracruz was a pioneer in both the extraction and refining of petroleum products. The state has about one-fourth of Mexico's petroleum reserves and ranks third in petroleum production. Most of this production is concentrated in the northern part of the state. Approximately of oil are produced each year and of natural gas. Petrochemicals represent 28.1% of the state's manufacturing and ranks first nationally. There are 22 petrochemical plants, with the most important being La Cangrejera, J\u00e1ltipan de Morelos, Poza Rica, Cosoleacaque, Pajaritos and Minatitl\u00e1n.\nGolden Lane Oil Fields.\nThe \"Golden Lane\" (\"Dos Bocas-Alamo structure\" or The Ridge\") refers to a series of oil fields aligned in an arc onshore and a symmetrical alignment offshore, forming two sides of a Cretaceous atoll 180\u00a0km long. The structure was discovered in 1908 by Weetman Pearson's Mexican Eagle Petroleum Company San diego de la Mar No. 1 well, which flowed 2,500 barrels per day. The Golden Lane oil fields penetrate a massive elliptical reef platform, identified as the Sierra del Abra limestone (consisting of reef, backreef and lagoonal facies), which dips southeast. The selection of the discovery well site was opportune due to presence of petroleum seeps, just as was Edward Laurence Doheny's La Paz No. well in the Ebano-Panuco petroleum district west of Tampico, Tamaulipas, which was the first Mexican discovery well in 1904. In 1908, the infamous Dos Bocas oil fire occurred after the San Diego de la Mar No. 3 blowout. This was followed by the Potrero del Llano No. 4 well, which flowed 100,000 barrels per day during the three months that it was out of control. Doheny's Cerro Azul No. 4 well, located by Ezequiel Ordonez, became the largest daily production record holder in 1916 at 260,000 bbl. Geophysical studies, in particular gravimetry, starting in 1920 led to the discovery of the Poza Rica Field in 1932 and Moralillo Field in 1948, on the west flank of the Golden Lane in the Tamabra forereef facies. Refraction seismography surveys started in 1930, augemented in 1948 with reflection seismography, which led to the discovery of the southern extent of the atoll with the Ezequiel Ordonez No. 1 well in 1952 and additional discoveries through 1968. Marine seismic and magnetometer surveys starting in 1957 showed the extent of the atoll offshore and led to the first offshore well, Isla de Lobos No. 1-B, in 1963. The depths of wells are on the order of 500 m onshore and 2000 m offshore.\nIndustry, transportation and commerce.\nLaguna Verde Nuclear Power Plant (LVNPP) in Alto Lucero, Veracruz, produces about 4.5% of Mexico's electrical energy.\n21% to 33% of Veracruz's gross domestic product (GDP) is derrived from manufacturing, with the chemical and petrochemical sectors contributing about 64% of the manufacturing GDP. Other products produced include metals, processed foods, beverages, printing and publishing, textiles and machinery. Most of the state's industry takes place in the municipalities of Coatzacoalcos, Minatitl\u00e1n, Cosoleacaque, Poza Rica, C\u00f3rdoba, Orizaba, Tuxpan and Veracruz, with over 5,000 establishments. The rest is divided among nearly 11,000 smaller establishments. There are five major industrial parks: Bruno Pagliai, Ixtac, Petroquimico Morelos, C\u00f3rdoba-Amatl\u00e1n and Parque 2000. The largest of these is Bruno Pagliai, which covers .\nTransportation and commerce are important factors in the state, mostly linked to importing and exporting through its four deepwater ports. The focus of most of these activities is the port of Veracruz, whose location on the Gulf coast of Mexico makes it a key export hub. It handles 75% of Mexico's port activity, with exports from Veracruz traveling to Europe, Latin America, and the United States. Its primary exports include coffee, fertilizer, fish and crustaceans, and fresh fruits. Other ports include those in Tuxpan and Coatzacoalcos. Most highway, rail and air connections link to the port of Veracruz and other ports to the south. The state has 73 companies that have been classified as high-volume exporters and it is ranked sixth in the country for exports. The state contains five major food wholesale markets, 146 government sponsored markets, about 75,000 private stores and 201 supermarkets. Wholesale vendors focus on agricultural products such as wood, livestock and food products. The major focal point for international business is the World Trade Center EXPOVER in Boca del R\u00edo. Inaugurated in 1989, the center has facilities to accommodate 5,000 people in , an exhibition hall of , a business center and parking for over 800 vehicles.\nIn the industrial sector, relatively poor municipios are not catching up to relatively rich ones though the latter are not diverging either. A policy of encouraging much more domestic and/or foreign investment is called\nfor if poorer areas are to prosper and the outflow of residents is to stop.\nHandcrafts.\nIn the more rural and indigenous areas of the state, a number of handicrafts are still made and sold both to local buyers and to tourists. Many of these crafts are produced by communities that specialize in one or more types. Wood furniture and other items are made by the Huasteca people, mostly using cedar and palm trees. The best work comes from the towns of Ozulama and Castillo de Teayo. Teocelo and Monte Blanco are known for bamboo furniture and other items. Musical instruments of wood such as a guitar called \"jarana\" are constructed in the Los Tuxtlas area, especially in Catemaco, with flutes made in Papantla. Wooden masks are made in Teocelo, and items made with the wood of coffee plants are made in Misantla, Coatepec, Huastusco and Xico. Corn husks are used to make decorative figures, often religious, in Nautla and Naranjos de Amatl\u00e1n. Palm fronds are woven into fans, shoes and baskets in Jalcomulco, Ozulama and Tlalixcoyan.\nCeramics have been made in almost all parts of Veracruz since the Olmecs. One area known for its work is Papantla which also includes life sized representations of folk dancers from the area along with more mundane items of glazed and unglazed pottery. Minatitl\u00e1n is known for its production of ceramic cooking utensils which are also popular in the neighboring municipalities of Actopan and Naolinco. San Miguel Aguasuelos and Jalcomulco are known for their white clay wares which include water jars, toys, nativity scenes, bells and more.\nTraditional clothing and embroidery can be most easily found in the La Huasteca area, where elaborately decorated women's blouses can be seen, especially in the El Higo and Tlalixcoyan area. In Totonacalpan, men are still often seen in white shirts and pants with a bag to hold personal items. This dress dates back to the early colonial period and had not changed much since then. Other areas specialize in wool items such as Naranjos de Amatl\u00e1n, Minatil\u00e1n and the city of Veracruz where items such as dresses, skirts and jackets. These and other textiles such as tablecloths and napkins are often decorated with cross-stitch. Leather items include shoes, jackets, bags, wallets, belts and boots and are usually made in the La Huasteca region, Teocolo, Citlalt\u00e9petl and Naolinco.\nCulture.\nGastronomy.\nThe gastronomy of the state is unique in Mexico and mixed Spanish, indigenous, and Caribbean influences. From the pre-Hispanic period, the cuisine of the state was unique. The staple triumvirate of corn, beans, and squash was supplemented by tropical fruits, vanilla beans, and an herb called acuyo or hoja santa. Another important native contribution is seafood, which is featured in many dishes such as, arroz a la tumbada and caldo de mariscos (seafood soup).\nDuring the colonial period, a variety of spices and ingredients were introduced to Veracruz, significantly impacting the local cuisine. In terms of spices, the Spanish introduced bay laurel, cilantro, parsley, parsley, and thyme from Europe and cloves, cinnamon, and black pepper from Asia. They also brought almonds, capers, garlic, olives, olive oil, rice, and wheat. Capers, garlic, and olive oil are essential ingredients in what is perhaps the most famous specialty of the region, huachinango a la veracruzana, red snapper in a spicy tomato sauce. Caribbean imports such as sugar cane and pineapple were adapted as well as the peanut, brought from Africa by the Portuguese (although the peanut is originally from South America).\nVeracruz cuisine divides into six regions called Sotavento, Centro Norte, Centro Sur, Sierra, Costa Norte, and Los Tuxtlas. The Sotovento area is in the south of the state, and the dishes here are heavily based on rice. Common dishes include arroz a la tumbada, which is rice cooked with seafood or meat and rice with fried bananas. Seafood dishes are also prominent based mostly on fish and shrimp. A common ingredient in dishes is a herb called \"hoja santa\" or \"hierba Santa\", which is a plant of the family Piperaceae. The Centro Norte is centered on Xalapa. Dishes here tend to be more indigenous in nature, heavily flavored with mild chili peppers. Common dishes here include Chilehuates, similar to a tamale, stuffed chile peppers, and enchiladas. Less seafood and more pork and domestic fowl are consumed. The Centro Sur area is mostly indigenous and encompasses the area of, Huatusco, Coscomatepec, Cotaxtla, Orizaba, Amatl\u00e1n, Huilango y las espa\u00f1olas C\u00f3rdoba y Fort\u00edn de las Flores, la negra Yanga and San Lorenzo de los Negros. Dishes here are similar to Centro Norte, but chayotes appear more often as this region is a major producer of the vegetable. Meats in adobo sauce are common as well. The Sierra and Costa Norte encompass the northern part of the state, such as the P\u00e1nuco River area and Totonacapan. This area is noted for a number of unique dishes such as frijoles en achuchutl, made with black beans, pork rind, chayotes, squash seeds, and jalape\u00f1o peppers. Bocoles are a kind of filled tortilla made with corn dough, stuffed with black beans, chorizo, eggs, or seafood, which then are fried in lard. Tamales are often made with banana leaves. The area is also known for its breads, especially anise\u2013flavored rolls. The Los Tuxtlas area is centered on the communities of Santiago, San Andr\u00e9s and Catemaco, which were the center of the Olmec civilization. The cuisine in this area features yucca, \"chocos\" (a type of edible flower), fish, especially mojarra, and exotic meats such as monkey, and iguana.\nMuseums.\nThe state capital of Xalapa is also home to a number of important museums. The Museum of Anthropology contains the second most important collection of Mesoamerican artifacts in the country. It was built beginning in 1959 on six hectares. The complex is divided into various halls and galleries by theme, focusing on the Olmec and Totonac cultures. The Patio Olmeca contains the colossal head found in 1945 and known as El Rey (The King). Other important artifacts include giant stelae and San Martin Pajapan Monument 1 (at right).\nThe Museum of Science and Technology, located in Xalapa, contains more than 400 exhibitions in eight halls: Life, Ecology, Space, Transportation, Sciences, Energy, Water and Earth. The Pinoteca Diega Rivera was established by the state in the former Monastery of San Francisco in Xalapa. Its primary function is to preserve and display Rivera's works owned by the state, but it also contains early works by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Velasco, Jorge Cuesta and Teodoro A. Dehesa. Near the city is the Hacienda del Lencero, which was the home and headquarters of President Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna in the 19th century. It has been preserved and turned into a museum.\nThe Regional Museum of Anthropology in Tuxpan houses more than 400 pieces from pre-Hispanic groups in the region, displayed in four halls. Most of the pieces come from the center of the state and from the Huasteca region.On the edge of the Tuxpan River. The city also has the Mexican-Cuban Museum. It contains a collection of photographs from the Cuban Revolution as well as a statue of Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed.\nOther museums are scattered across the state. The Salvador Ferrando Museum is located in Tlacotalpan and contains many everyday items and art from the 16th to the 19th centuries. The Tuxteco Regional Museum in Santiago de Tuxtla contains Olmec and Totonac artifacts including art objects, farming implements, utensils and more. In the garden area, there are giant stone sculptures from the Tres Zapotes site. The Jard\u00edn Central (Central Garden) of the municipality of Tierra Blanca has a number of Totonac archeological pieces on display. The Archeological Museum of C\u00f3rdoba, located in the city of the same name, has three exhibition halls containing artifacts from the Maya, Olmec, Toltec and Huastec cultures. There is also a collection of historical photographs of the city. The Veracruz State Art Museum (Museo de Arte del Estado de Veracruz) is located in Orizaba in what was the monastery associated with the Concordia Church. Its collection includes works by Diego Rivera, Ignacio Rosas and Gonzalo Arg\u00fcelles. It also contains a collection of historical photographs related to Veracruz and art. The Malintzin Archeological Museum in the municipality of Nogales is a small museum with one hall that contains photographs and documents. It is located in the church where Malinche and Juan de Jaramillo were supposedly married.\nFairs and festivals.\nThe state is noted for its quantity and variety of festivals. The most important of these is Carnival in the city of Veracruz. This city's version of the event begins with the \"burning of bad humor\", which is represented in effigy. A number of kings and queens are \"crowned\" including categories for children but the most important is the Rey Feo (Ugly King) and the Reina del Carnaval (Queen of the Carnival). The latter is accompanies by cadets from the Naval Academy during the parade. This celebration is repeated all along the Veracruz coastline with other significant festivities taking place in Alvarado, Coatzacoalcos, San Rafael and Villa Jos\u00e9 Cardel. Minatitl\u00e1n's celebration draws people from the nearby states of Oaxaca and Tabasco. Day of the Dead is celebrated in almost all of Mexico from Oct 31 to November 2 but there are local twists in the state. In some places, it is commemorated during the months of August and September. In Papantla, boards or tables are placed on rooftops, which have been adorned with flowers, plant matter and more. In Tantoyuca, it is commemorated with costumes and music, similar to Carnival.\nThe Christian celebration of Candlemas is fused with traditions associated with Chalchiuhtlicua, the goddess of water, rivers, lakes and ocean. She was replaced by the Virgin of Candlemas, the protector of fishermen, making this celebration particularly important on the coast, especially in Tlacotalpan, where it is celebrated with much pomp. In J\u00e1ltipan de Morelos, ethnic Nahuas and Popolucas dress in elaborate costumes and arrange their hair in intricate styles. In Santa Mar\u00eda Magdalena, on July 22, bulls are set free to roam the streets. Corn harvest festivals are prominent in the Huasteca region in municipalities such as Chontla, Chicontepec, and Ixhuatl\u00e1n de Madero. These generally include native dances and foods based on corn.\nDance and music.\nThe state is well known in the country for its music and dance. The fandango is a dance brought over from Spanish. Today the state has two varieties: the jarocho and the huasteco. Indigenous and folk dances in the state are most often associated with rituals and religious festivals. These include one called Los Lisceres also called the Tigres from the Los Tuxtlas region. Participants wear Olmec style masks which represent the rain god Tlal\u00f3c. Another is Los Guaguas in which the participants pay homage to the sun, and Los Santiagos, which is related to the veneration of Saint James, patron saint of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s. One last one is called Los Negritos (The Little Black Ones) which was created by African slaves. According to tradition, the origin of this dance lies in a story about a boy who was bitten by a snake and the rituals his family held to heal him.\nHowever, the state's most famous dance is as much a ritual and daredevil act as movements performed to music. The Danza de los Voladores (Dance of the Flyers) is a ceremony/ritual which has its roots in the pre-Hispanic period and presently best known as associated with the town of Papantla, Veracruz. It is believed to have originated with the Nahua, Huastec and Otomi peoples in central Mexico, and then spread throughout most of Mesoamerica. The ritual consists of dance and the climbing of a 30-meter pole from which four of the five participants then launch themselves tied with ropes to descend to the ground. The fifth remains on top of the pole, dancing and playing a flute and drum. According to myth, the ritual was created to ask the gods to end a severe drought. Although the ritual did not originate with the Totonac people, today it is most strongly associated with them, especially those in and around Papantla, as the ceremony has died off in most other places. The ceremony was named an Intangible Cultural Heritage by UNESCO in order to help the ritual survive and thrive in the modern world.\nThe state's best-known musical style is called the \"son\". A \"son\" is a musical variation which traces its origins to Spain and developed during the 17th and 18th centuries. It is the state's most popular musical style shows influences from the many peoples who have lived here such as indigenous groups, Portuguese, Italians, Africans, French and others. The music is generally performed by harps, violins and guitars, with an occasional wind instrument. Son huasteco (also called son huapango) is a variety of son played in the north of the state mostly among the Totonacs. Son jarocho is the better known and more popular variety played in the south of the state. The famous Grammy award-winning song \"La Bamba\" by Los Lobos is said have its roots in a traditional folk song from Veracruz (hence the reference to the \"Marinero\" in that song).\nThe state has produced a number of musicians famous in the country. One of the best known is Francisco Gabilondo Soler. Gabilondo Soler is best known for creating a character known as \"Cri-cri\", a singing cricket for a radio show in the first half of the 20th century. As a musician, he specialized in writing children's songs such as \"Abuelito\", \"Caminito de la escuela\", \"El baile de los mu\u00f1ecos\", \"El burrito\" and \"La negrita Cucurumb\u00e9\". A number of his works have been translated into other languages. Another famous musician is Agust\u00edn Lara, who has had more international fame. Nicknamed \"Flaco de oro\" (golden skinny one), he always insisted that he was born in Tlacotalpan, Veracruz and not Mexico City as records show. Lara formed his first band in 1930 called El Son de Marab\u00fa and toured almost continuously in Mexico and abroad during his career. His most famous compositions include \"Veracruz\", \"Noche de Ronda\" and \"Solamente una vez\". Other prominent musicians include To\u00f1a \"La Negra\" or Mar\u00eda Antonia del Carmen Peregino, Narcisco Serradel, Lorenzo Barcelata and Mar\u00eda Greever.\nArt and architecture.\nDuring the colonial era, a movement called the \"estilo veracruzano\" (Veracruz style) developed mostly focusing on landscapes in the state with a certain amount of indigenous influence although the painters themselves were \"criollo\" or Mexico-born Spanish. These paintings focus on the mountains, valles, coasts, volcanos and other natural phenomena in the state. Most of the proponents of this were born in Veracruz itself and include Jos\u00e9 Justo Montiel (1824\u20131899), Gonzalo Arg\u00fcelles Bringas (1877\u20131942), Eugenio Landecio (teacher of Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Velasco), Natal Pesado and Ignacio Rosas.\nHowever, most of Veracruz's best-known artists are from the 19th and 20th centuries. In the 19th century, these include Miguel Mata Reyes, Salvador Ferrando, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Jara, Enrique Guerra and Alberto Fuster. Miguel Mata Reyes is best known for his contributions to the design of the Palacio de Bellas Artes as well a portrait of Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna. Salvador Ferrando was a portrait and landscape artist from the north of the state. Until recently, most of his work had been hidden in a museum named after him in the Tlacotalpan region. Much of it now is on display at the Museo de Arte de Veracruz in Orizaba. Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Jara is noted for his paintings of Veracruz customs, whose works include \"El Velorio\", which was presented at the World's Fair in Paris. Enrique Guerra was an important sculptor at the end of the 19th century. His best-known works are bas reliefs and include \"Asesinato de C\u00e9sar\", \"Coroliano\", \"Thais\" and \"Cris\u00e1lida\". Alberto Fuster was most active at the end of the century and is noted for bringing symbolism painting to Mexico from his stay in Europe. His works include \"El progreso\", \"Safo en el templo de Delfos\" and \"Nativa con loro\".\nThere are three important artists from the 20th century, Carlos Bracho, Norberto Mart\u00ednez and Teodoro Cano Garc\u00eda. Active in the first half of the century, sculptor Carlos Bracho's work has been compared to that of Juan Rulfo. His works have been done in plaster, bronze, terracotta and green onyx and include monumental works which can be found in the cities of Xalapa, Puebla, Pachuca and Mexico City. His best-known works are El abrazo, Cabeza verde and El campesino se apodera de la tierra. Norberto Mart\u00ednez only lived 45 years but is considered one of the most prolific of Mexican painters who dedicated most of his works to social themes. A number of these are early murals such as El comercio in the J\u00e1uregi de Xalapa market as well as an untitled work in a private home in C\u00f3rdoba which deals with the fusion of the Spanish, indigenous and African ethnicities in Mexico. Later works include the three murals in the main stairwell of the School of Law at the University of Xalapa and El hombre y el conocimiento at the Universidad Veracruzana. Teodoro Cano Garc\u00eda is one of Mexico's most famous muralists of the late 20th century, famous for the promotion of the Totonac culture of his hometown of Papantla. He has created paintings, sculptures, etchings, photography and mixed media works with his murals and sculptures most acclaimed. Examples of his work can be seen in various parts of public buildings in Papantla.\nMost of Veracruz's older architecture can be found in the inland cities of Xalapa and C\u00f3rdoba. Despite being the first Spanish settlement, the city of Veracruz lost most its older structures to the various invasions it has suffered. Architecture from the 16th to the 19th century includes colonial Spanish, Moorish, Neo gothic and Neoclassical. From the 20th century on, a number of names stand out. Armando Bravo Ram\u00edrez remodeled the State Government Palace and the facade of the Capillas de \u00c1nimas, both in Xalapa. Other prominent names responsible for many projects in the state include Luis Gonz\u00e1lez Aparicio, Bernal Lascura\u00edn Rangel and Luis Manuel Tello Deschamps.\nLiterature.\nThe literary arts reached their peak in Veracruz starting in the 19th century and extends to the \"Generation of the 1950s\". Salvador D\u00edaz Mir\u00f3n is one of Veracruz's most-distinguished poets. Over his lifetime from the latter 19th to early 20th centuries, he worked as a professor, politician and journalist contributing to periodicals such as El Veracruzano, El Orden, and El Imparcial. His creative works include some of the first Romantic pieces produced in Mexico such as Oda a V\u00edctor Hugo, Ojos verdes, Gloria and Voces interiores. Other works include \"Poes\u00edas A Tirsa\", \"Nox\" (also known as \"Claudia\") and his last works such as \"Al buen cura\" and \"La mujer de nieve\". He became a member of the Academia Mexicana de la Lengua and is buried at the Rotonda de los Hombres Ilustres in Mexico City. Mar\u00eda Enriqueta Camarillo was one of a number of women writers to gain prominence in Mexico at the end of the 19th century. While she wrote a number of works such as \"Jir\u00f3n del mundo\", \"Sorpresas de la vida\" and \"El Secreto\", she is best known for \"Rosas de la infancia\", with which many Mexicans learned to read.\nWriters born at the end of the 19th century, such as Gregorio L\u00f3pez y Fuentes, Manuel Maples Arce and Jorge Mateo Cuesta Porte-Petit were often concerned with social issues. Works of this type include El Indio by L\u00f3pez, Metr\u00f3polis by Maples and a poem called \"Canto a un dios mineral\" by Cuesta. The following generation, born in the first decades of the 20th century, became known as the Generation of the 1950s. During this time Veracruz's literary tradition consolidated and decided to break type. One example is Juan Hern\u00e1ndez Ram\u00edrez's writing of poetry in the Nahuatl spoken in the La Huasteca area of Veracruz. One important name from this generation is Emilio Carballido who wrote about 100 plays as well as scripts for radio and television. Some of his works include \"Rosalba y los llaveros\", \"Felicidad\" and \"Las visitaciones del Diablo\". In 1996, he won the Premio Nacional de Literatura and in 2002 he received the Ariel de Oro for his work in cinema.\nReligion.\nThe Catholic patron saint of Veracruz is Rafael Gu\u00edzar y Valencia.\nEducation.\nPublic education in the state is supervised by the state Direcci\u00f3n General de Educaci\u00f3n Popular and the Direcci\u00f3n General de Educaci\u00f3n Media Superior y Superior. The current system is the result of a number of reforms which took place in the 1980s and 1990s. In the late 1990s, 302 new school campuses were created statewide and 257 schools were remodeled. These included new schools for special education, distance learning and technological institutes, giving the state one of the highest number of school campuses in the country. There are a total of 20,479 schools, with nearly 2 million students and about 85,000 teachers. 93% of schools are in the basic education category (preschool, primary and middle schools). Preschools also include those geared towards the indigenous populations, focusing on bilingual and bicultural education in both the indigenous language and Spanish. One major focus of these and other schools is to eliminate illiteracy in indigenous communities. The \"Medio Superior\" level includes vocational high school and technical colleges. These account for 6.6% of schools in the public system. The Superior level includes teachers' colleges and universities. There are 166 institutes at this level, with about 68,000 students studying 221 different majors. There are also 63 master's degree programs and six PhD programs. These institutions serve about 135,000 students accounting for about 19% of the college-aged population (19- to 24-year-olds), slightly below the national average of 24%.\nThe major state university is the Universidad Veracruzana, with offers 56 bachelor's degrees, 37 master's degrees, and five PhDs. It is based in the capital of Xalapa and is noted for its large and varied sports programs. There are campuses in fourteen other cities. About 37% of university students attend the main public university, with a student population of 47,000 undergraduates and 2,000 postgraduates. Other important schools include Instituto Tecnologico de Veracruz in Veracruz, Universidad An\u00e1huac in Xalapa, Universidad de Xalapa in Xalapa, ITESM in C\u00f3rdoba, Universidad Crist\u00f3bal Col\u00f3n in Veracruz, the Veracruz Naval Academy and the Instituto Tecnol\u00f3gico del Mar.\nDemographics.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe state of Veracruz, especially its port, has been a crossroads for various cultures since the very early colonial period. The port of Veracruz has brought cargo, sailors, seamen, and slaves from various parts of the world, especially from the Caribbean and Europe. The state has indigenous cultural influences mixed with those from Europe, Africa and the Afro-Caribbean. These can be best seen in the music, the culinary traditions and in the people themselves.\nThe number of ethnic communities in the state has been calculated at 2,062. The most numerous include the Nahuas, Totonacs, Huastecs, Popolucs, Zapotecas, Chinantecas, Otomis, Mazatecas, Tepehuas, Mixtecas, Zoques, Mixes, Mayas and Tzotzils, all indigenous groups. The largest are Nahuas, who make up over half of the indigenous population. Most native communities can be found in 68 municipalities especially in Tehuipango, Mixtla de Altamirano, Astacinga, Soledad Atzompa, Atlahuilco, Tequila, Tlaquilpan, Los Reyes, Magdalena, San Andres Tenejapan, Tantoyuca, Zongolica, Chicontepec, Papantla, Ixhuatl\u00e1n de Madero, Soteapan, Playa Vicente, Mecayapan y Coyutla, Benito Ju\u00e1rez, Coxquihi, Espinal, Filomeno Mata, Ixcatepec, Mecatl\u00e1n and Zozocolco de Hidalgo. In 1998, about 10% of the population spoke an indigenous language; however, this does not take into account all indigenous peoples. The census of 2005 counted 605,135 as speaking an indigenous language.\nThere are also small immigrant communities of Spaniards, Italians, Basque and Lebanese. Africans were first brought to Mexico through slavery to the Veracruz port. At one point, they outnumbered Europeans and a significant number ran away from haciendas and plantations to form their own communities, sometimes allied with indigenous groups. One such rebellion was led by Yanga, who successfully negotiated a free African community with Spanish authorities in 1609. Like other groups, many of African descent would intermarry with other groups, with the category of \"mulatto\" existing in the old colonial caste system for those with African blood. Today, the vast majority of Afro-Mexicans in Veracruz and other parts of the country are spread out and intermixed with the rest of the population. According to the 2020 Census, 2.67% of Veracruz's population identified as Black, Afro-Mexican, or of African descent.\nWith a population of 7,110,214 (2005), Veracruz is the third most populous entity in the country, after the Federal District of Mexico City and the State of Mexico. Population growth has slowed in the state in the last decades, due to lower birthrates and the exodus of migrants, mostly men. Women outnumber men. One reason for the decline in birthrates is the elevation of education levels, especially among women. Another is urbanization, with about one-third of the state's population living in urban centers, especially Veracruz, Xalapa, Coatzacoalcos, Minatitl\u00e1n and Papantla. Most (90%) of the state's communities, outside of municipal seats have fewer than 500 people and contain only 21% of the total population. The migration of men outside the state has put more women into the state's workforce. Approximately 75% of the population is under 45 years of age and 30% under the age of 15.\nLife expectancy is just under the norm for the rest of the country. The overwhelming majority of people in the state are Catholic, however, there is a significant Protestant minority and a number who profess the Jewish faith.\nTourism.\nTourism mostly centers on the port city of Veracruz, but other tourist destinations exist throughout the state as well. There are over 1,000 hotels in the state, over half of which are small, family-owned enterprises. Almost all of the four- and five-star establishments are located in metropolitan area of Veracruz. Many of the state's major historical and cultural monuments are located in the port of Veracruz. Some of these attractions include the aquarium (Acuario de Veracruz), the Museum of the City (Museo de la Ciudad), The Agust\u00edn Lara Museum, the Santiago Fortress (Baluarte de Santiago) the Las Atarazanas Museum, and the San Juan de Ul\u00faa Fort.\nTo the north of the port city of Veracruz is the Sierra or Totonacalpan area of the state, home to the Totonac people. This area includes the important pre-Hispanic city of El Taj\u00edn and the present day city of Papantla. The modern city is best known as the home of the Totonac version of the \"danza de voladores\", wherein dancers spin from poles high. The area is also the native habitat of the vanilla bean.\nCatemaco, another prominent tourist city, is located along the coast to the south of the port city of Veracruz. The area's two main features are Lake Catemaco, which is located in the crater of an extinct volcano, and Isla Tanaxpillo, which located is just off the coast. This island is also called \"the island of the monkeys\" or \"the island of the baboons\" due to a group of feral monkeys that escaped and found refuge there.\nInland is the coffee-growing region in and around the cities of Coatepec and Xalapa. Another inland city, Orizaba, is best known for the volcano nearby, but also has a large waterfall called El Elefante and a canyon called Ca\u00f1on de R\u00edo Blanco.\nArcheological sites.\nThe remnants of pre-Hispanic Huastec, Olmec, and Totonac can be found in Veracruz. The ruins of one city, El Taj\u00edn, whose apex occurred between the 9th and 13th centuries CE, were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1992.\nEl Zapotal is an archeological site which was discovered in 1971 in a region known at Mixtequlla (between the Blanco and Papaloapan Rivers). This site is noted for its clay figurines with smiling faces, part of an extremely large offering in honor of the god of death Mictlantecuhtli.\nCempoala is an archeological site located on the coast between the modern settlements of La Antigua and Ciudad Cardel. It was occupied when Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s arrived, and he managed to form an alliance with the Totonacs here against the Aztecs. In the center of the site, there is a large plaza surrounded by temples and the palace of the Totonac chief. The site also has a small museum.\nQuiahuiztl\u00e1n is on the coast on a small mountain named Bernal. It is cut into the mountain as a series of terraces. It is located very close to where Cort\u00e9s founded the initial Spanish settlement of Villa Rica de la Vera-Cruz.\nThe Castillo de Teayo (Teayo Castle) is really a pyramid, whose original name was Zapotitl\u00e1n. It is located on the border between Huasctec and Totonac lands. It was abandoned in the 19th century.\nThe largest and most important site is El Taj\u00edn, located near the city of Papantla. The name is from the Totonac language and means \"thunder\", but no one knows what the true name of this city was. It is also unknown if the Totonac built it, but since they have dominated the region for centuries, they lay claim to it. The city developed from the end of the Classic period and the beginning of the Post Classic period, between 800 and 1150 C.E. It is divided into five zones, the Plaza del Arroyo Group, the Central Zone, the Gran Xicalcoliuhqui, Taj\u00edn Chico and the Column Complex. Its signature building is the Pyramid of the Niches, named after the 365 niches built into the levels of the structure. The site has a large number of Mesoamerican ball game courts, one with details reliefs showing the beheading of a ballplayer and his role in the afterlife.\nThe Tres Zapotes site is located the community of the same name. Covering 1.5 hectares, the main building has a square base, which is surrounded by gardens and trees. The most important find from his is Stele \"C\" which is on display at the Museo Nacional de Antropolog\u00eda in Mexico City.\nEl Pital is a site in the municipality of Mart\u00ednez de la Torre. It consists of a mound with a pyramid base and stairs on the east side. The site's culture is considered to be a link between the coastal and highland cultures of the region.\nLos Idolos is a site in the municipal city of Misantla, and was an important ceremonial site for the Totonacapan region. It consists of four rectangular patios linked by platforms and flat-topped mounds. Many of the structures are decorated with smooth river stone, thought to have come from the Misantla River.\nThe Centro Ceremonial Cuajilote is located on the Bobos River. It consists of a large plaza 400 meters long lined with structures. In the center of the plaza there are three shrines, one of which contains phallic figures.\nGovernment.\nVeracruz was officially established as a state in 1824. Its government consists of a governor, elected to a single six-year term, and a unicameral State Congress, whose members serve three-year terms. It is divided into 212 municipios (municipalities). The newest of these are the municipalities of San Rafael and Santiago Sochiapan which were created in 2003. These municipalities are grouped into regions called Huasteca Alta (with ten municipalities), Huasteca Baja (with 23 municipalities), Totonac (with 15 municipalities), Nautla (with 11 municipalities), Capital (with 33 municipalities), Sotavento (with 12 municipalities), De las Monta\u00f1as (with 57 municipalities), Papaloapan (with 22 municipalities), De los Tuxtlas (with four municipalities) and Olmeca (with 25 municipalities).\nFreedom of the press violations.\nAccording to many journalists' organizations, Veracruz is one of the most dangerous places for journalists, especially after governor Javier Duarte de Ochoa came to power in December 2010.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nThe road system in the state contains , representing 5.1% of the roads nationwide. For each of territory, there are of roads. are part of the federal highway system. State roads comprise with the rest maintained by local authorities. There are over of rural roads, but only are paved.\nThe state contains of railway. Most of this is conceded by the federal government to private companies, with strategic stretches maintained directly by the government. Some of the private companies include Kansas City Southern de M\u00e9xico and Ferrosur. These lines are used almost exclusively for the transportation of freight, which in 1999 added up to 37\u00a0million tons. Three rail lines serve the port of Veracruz exclusively. One is dedicated to the port of Coatzacalcos.\nThe ports of Veracruz are Tuxpan, Veracruz, Coatzacoalcos, Pajaritos, Minatitl\u00e1n-Nanchital, Tecolutla, Nautla, Alvarado and Tlacotalpan. The first three are the ports for heavy cargo ships, with Veracruz the most important of the three. The others are small ports for small ships, fishing boats and tourism. All ports are operated privately with the exception of Pajaritos, which is operated by PEMEX. Port traffic in Veracruz account for 10% of all commercial traffic in the country, 23.4% of the port traffic of Mexico and 21% of all port traffic in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean. Goods imported through the state reach 16 out of Mexico's 31 states plus Mexico City. The port of Veracruz alone handles over 12\u00a0million tons of freight per year. Coatzacoalcos is important for its handling of petroleum products.\nThe state contains three major airports. \"El Taj\u00edn\" in Tihuatl\u00e1n serving Poza Rica and \"Canticas\" in Minatitl\u00e1n provide national service. \"Heriberto Jara Corona\" in the city of Veracruz provides national and international service. There are also 31 smaller regional airfields in municipalities such as Acayuc\u00e1n, Cazones de Herrera, C\u00f3rdoba, Cuitlahuac, Ju\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez Clara, Ozuluama, Plat\u00f3n S\u00e1nchez, Playa Vicente, Soconusco, Tamal\u00edn, Tamiahua, Tecolutla, Temapache, Tempoal and Tierra Blanca.\nMedia.\nThere are 59 local newspapers and 40 magazines published in the state. These include El Dictamen, El Sol del Centro, la Opini\u00f3n de Minatitl\u00e1n, \"Diario de Xalapa\", \"El Diario de Minatitl\u00e1n\", \"El Mundo de C\u00f3rdoba\", \"El Mundo de Orizaba\", \"El Sol de C\u00f3rdoba\", \"El Sol de Orizaba\", \"Esto de Veracruz\", \"Imagen de Veracruz\", \"La Jornada Veracruz\", \"La Opini\u00f3n de Poza Rica\", \"Liberal del Sur\", \"Milenio El Portal\", \"Noreste Diario Regional Independiente\", and \"Sotavento.\"\nThere are 202 radio stations (57 AM, 35 FM). Most are commercial or private but some are operated by non-profits and governmental agencies. There are 22 television stations; two channels are local, and the rest are repeaters from national broadcasters. Five companies provide cable and satellite television. Telmex controls over 75% of the telephone service in the state.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63126", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63126", "title": "Clap skate", "text": "Type of skate with a spring mechanism\nThe clap skate (also called clapper skates, clapskates, slap skates, slapskates, from Dutch ) is a type of ice skate used in speed skating. Unlike in traditional skates where the blade is rigidly fixed to the boot, clap skates have the blade attached to the boot by a hinge at the front. This allows the blade to remain in contact with the ice longer, as the ankle can now be extended toward the end of the stroke, as well as for more natural movement, thereby distributing the energy of the leg more effectively and efficiently.\nClap skates were developed at the Faculty of Human Movement Sciences of the Vrije Universiteit of Amsterdam, led by Gerrit Jan van Ingen Schenau, although the idea of a clap skate is much older; designs dating from around 1900 are known.\nThe clap skate was used first in the 1984/1985 skating season. It was, however, not until the late 1990s that the idea was taken seriously. In the 1996/1997 season, the Dutch women's team started using the skates with great success. The rest of the skating world soon followed suit, causing a torrent of world records to be broken in the following seasons, including the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan.\nHistory.\nThe idea of a hinging skate was described and patented in 1894 by Karl Hannes, from Raitenhaslach, Burghausen. It was re-invented by Gerrit Jan van Ingen Schenau, who started work on a hinged speed skate in 1979, created his first prototype in 1980 and finished his PhD thesis on the subject in 1981 on the premise that a skater would benefit from the extended movement with the skate on the ice, allowing the calf muscles to longer partake in the skate movement. The construction of the hinge was refined further in collaboration with Viking. In 1985 Ron Ket was the first to ride the clap skates in an officially timed setting, a 500-meter sprint on the Jaap Eden baan, clocking in on a promising 40.65. In February 1986 Henk Gemser who was coaching the Dutch national speedskating squad at that time expressed his intention to start training with the clap skate, though no subsequent trials were run on the new skate. In the 1986\u20131987 season a small number of marathon skaters intended to use the clap skate competitively, but its use was prohibited by match officials due to increased risk of physical harm to the skaters in case of a fall. The then current Dutch speed skating top professionals Ids Postma, Bart Veldkamp and Rintje Ritsma were unimpressed by the skate.\nFor the 1994\u20131995 season, 11 skaters from the South Holland 14\u201318 age category started using the clap skate competitively. Those 11 showed an average improvement of 6.25% on their times, compared to 2.5% of the other skaters using regular speed skates. Ten of them placed for the national championship.\nIn the 1996\u20131997 season, the use of the clap skate caught on the highest level, and in 1997 Tonny de Jong was the first European all round champion using the clap skate, leaving Gunda Niemann, the defending world champion, in second place. Niemann remarked that the skate was illegal, and should be outlawed. In the following years the clap skate started to dominate the long track speedskating landscape. The design was banned from use in short track speed skating.\nResearch completed in 2001 by Dutch sport scientist Han Houdijk showed that the speed gain from using the clap skate does not originate in using the calf muscle to stretch the ankle, as was assumed in the creation of the clap skate, but in the fact that the point of rotation is moved from the tip of the skate to the hinge, facilitating the transfer of power to the ice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63127", "revid": "3499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63127", "title": "Clapskates", "text": ""}
{"id": "63128", "revid": "3499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63128", "title": "Slapskates", "text": ""}
{"id": "63129", "revid": "3499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63129", "title": "Slap skates", "text": ""}
{"id": "63130", "revid": "1213535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63130", "title": "Klapschaats", "text": ""}
{"id": "63132", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63132", "title": "Jon Bon Jovi", "text": "American rock musician (born 1962)\nJohn Francis Bongiovi Jr. (born March 2, 1962), known professionally as Jon Bon Jovi, is an American singer, songwriter, guitarist, and actor. He is best known as the founder and frontman of the rock band Bon Jovi, which was formed in 1983. He has released 16 studio albums with his band as well as two solo albums.\nIn the 1990s, Bon Jovi started an acting career, starring in the films \"Moonlight and Valentino, The Leading Man, Little City, Homegrown\", \"Pay It Forward\"\",\" \"U-571 and Cry Wolf\" and appearing on television in shows such as \"Sex and the City\", \"30 Rock\", \"Ally McBeal\", and \"The West Wing\".\nBon Jovi was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2009. In 2012, he ranked number 50 on the list of \"Billboard\" magazine's \"Power 100\", a ranking of \"The Most Powerful and Influential People in the Music Business\".\nBon Jovi is a founder and former majority owner of an Arena Football League team, the Philadelphia Soul.\nEarly life.\nJohn Francis Bongiovi Jr. was born in Perth Amboy, New Jersey. His father John Francis Bongiovi Sr. (born 1930) was a barber and a former Marine. His mother Carol (n\u00e9e Sharkey; 1940\u20132024), also a former Marine, was a florist and Playboy Bunny. His father was of Italian and Slovak ancestry; the name \"Bongiovi\" comes from Sciacca, Sicily. His mother was of German and Russian descent. In an interview about his family tree, Bon Jovi stated, \"I\u2019m not a blood relative of Frank Sinatra, but I\u2019ve always loved that rumour. Who wouldn\u2019t want to be related to the man?\" \nBon Jovi was raised Catholic. During the height of Beatlemania, his mother became a fervent admirer of The Beatles and dreamed that her son would achieve similar fame. To instill in him a love of music, she gave him his first guitar at the age of seven. Although Bongiovi received some lessons, he never enjoyed them and eventually abandoned the guitar in the basement. \"I liked the sound it made falling down the stairs more than any of those boring lessons,\" he later stated. He attended St. Joseph High School in Metuchen, New Jersey, during his freshman and sophomore years. He later transferred to Sayreville War Memorial High School in Parlin, New Jersey. \nAt 15, he attended a Bruce Springsteen concert with his friends, and it was then that he knew what he wanted to do for the rest of his life. He resumed his guitar lessons with a new teacher, Al Parinello, who was very demanding but also instilled in him a passion for music. Jon Bon Jovi later recalled the importance of those lessons and acknowledged that they were one of the best things that had ever happened to him. When Parinello passed away in 1995, the vocalist carved the initials AP into his acoustic guitar in honor of his mentor, something he continued to do for many years. \nMusical career.\nBeginnings.\nJon Bon Jovi began playing music in 1974, when he formed his first band Raze and took part in a talent contest at his school. At 16, he formed a band called Atlantic City Expressway and was joined by David Bryan, who would later become a member of the Bon Jovi band. Still in his teens, Bon Jovi played in the band John Bongiovi and the Wild Ones, performing in clubs such as the Fast Lane and opening for local acts. By 1980, he had formed his first original band, the Rest; the band opened for New Jersey acts such as Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes. In late 1979, Jon Bon Jovi joined the band The Rest\u2014founded by guitarist Jack Ponti\u2014with whom he began writing his first songs, including \"Shot Through the Heart,\" which years later would appear on Bon Jovi's debut album. However, after receiving no record offers, Ponti decided to disband the group.\nBy mid-1980, out of school and working part-time at a women's shoe store, Jon Bon Jovi took a job at the Power Station Studios, a Manhattan recording facility where his cousin Tony Bongiovi was co-owner. One day, he was sweeping the floor as Disco producer Meco was in the studio recording \"Christmas in the Stars: The Star Wars Christmas Album.\" Meco suggested that Bon Jovi sing \"R2-D2 We Wish You a Merry Christmas\", which became his first professional recording (credited as John Bongiovi).\nBon Jovi.\nJon made several demos\u00a0\u2013 including one produced by Billy Squier\u00a0\u2013 and sent them to record companies, though failing to make an impact. In 1982, Jon recorded \"Runaway\" in his cousin's studio, backed up by studio musicians. Jon visited a local radio station WAPP 103.5FM \"The Apple\" in Lake Success, New York, to write and sing the jingles for the station. He spoke with DJ Chip Hobart and to the promotion director, John Lassman, who suggested Jon let WAPP include the song \"Runaway\" on the station's compilation album of local homegrown talent. Jon was reluctant, but eventually gave them the song, which he had re-recorded in 1982 (following a rough early recording in 1981) with local studio musicians whom he designated The All Star Review\u00a0\u2013 guitarist Tim Pierce, keyboardist Roy Bittan (from Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band), drummer Frankie LaRocka, and bassist Hugh McDonald.\nThe song began to get airplay in the New York area, then other sister stations in major markets picked up the song. In March 1983, for a short tour supporting \"Runaway\" Jon Bon Jovi called David Bryan, who in turn called bassist Alec John Such and an experienced drummer named Tico Torres, both formerly of the band Phantom's Opera. Jon saw and was impressed with hometown guitarist Richie Sambora who was recommended by fellow bassist Alec John Such and drummer Tico Torres. Once the band began playing showcases and opening for local talent, they caught the attention of record executive Derek Shulman, who signed them to Mercury Records and who was part of the PolyGram company. Because Jon Bon Jovi wanted a group name, Pamela Maher, a friend of Richard Fischer and an employee of Doc McGhee, suggested they call themselves Bon Jovi, following the example of the other famous two-word bands such as Van Halen. This name was chosen instead of the original idea of Johnny Electric. Pamela's suggestion of the name was met with little enthusiasm, but two years later they hit the charts under that name.\nWith the help of their new manager Doc McGhee they recorded the band's debut album, \"Bon Jovi\", which was released on January 21, 1984. The album included the band's first hit single, \"Runaway\", reaching the top forty on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In 1985, Bon Jovi's second album, \"7800\u00b0 Fahrenheit\", was released. The album certified Gold by RIAA. In 1986, the band achieved widespread success and global recognition with its third album, \"Slippery When Wet\", which had sold 30 million copies worldwide. The first two singles from the album, \"You Give Love a Bad Name\" and \"Livin' on a Prayer\", both hit number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Its 1988 sequel New Jersey, and 1992's Keep the Faith were all international hits, each selling over ten million copies worldwide. They incorporated elements of soft rock and country, moves that helped them sustain their popularity into the 21st century. As of 2022, Bon Jovi has released 16 studio albums, three compilations and two live albums. The band has sold more than 149 million records worldwide, making it one of the bestselling American rock bands. Bon Jovi has performed more than 3,000 concerts in over 50 countries for more than 35 million fans. Bon Jovi was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2006 and into the U.S. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2018.\nSolo career.\nThe exhaustion of recording \"Slippery When Wet\" and \"New Jersey\" back to back and going on highly paced world tours took its toll. By the end of the \"New Jersey\" tour, the band had 16 months of concerts under its belt. The bandmates were exhausted physically, mentally and emotionally. Following the final tour date in Mexico, and without any clear plans for their future, the members of the band simply went home. The band has since stated that there were few if any goodbyes between them. During the time they took off from the scene, members of the band retreated to their own projects and showed no desire to make another album.\nIn 1990, Jon Bon Jovi recorded a soundtrack to the movie \"Young Guns II\". The soundtrack is commonly known as \"Blaze of Glory\". Having been originally approached by his friend Emilio Estevez to lend \"Wanted Dead or Alive\" as the theme song for his upcoming Billy the Kid sequel, Bon Jovi ended up composing an all-new theme song for the film's soundtrack and delivering his first solo album. The album featured guests such as Elton John, Little Richard and Jeff Beck. The title track, \"Blaze of Glory\", peaked at number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In 1991, \"Blaze of Glory\" won an award for Favorite Pop/Rock Single at the American Music Awards and won a Golden Globe as well. The song also earned Jon Bon Jovi an Academy Award nomination and a Grammy Award nomination.\nIn 1991, Jon Bon Jovi started his own label, Jambco Records, and produced Aldo Nova's album \"Blood on the Bricks\" and Billy Falcon's album \"Pretty Blue World\". Jon Bon Jovi's second solo album was 1997's \"Destination Anywhere\". A short movie of the same name was based entirely on the songs from the record; it starred Jon Bon Jovi, Demi Moore, Kevin Bacon and Whoopi Goldberg. The film debuted in 1997 on both MTV and VH1. In 2012, Jon Bon Jovi recorded a soundtrack to the movie \"Stand Up Guys\". The soundtrack is commonly known as \"Not Running Anymore\". The song \"Not Running Anymore\" was nominated for a Golden Globe Award that year.\nOther ventures.\nActing career.\nJon Bon Jovi is a credited actor in the films \"Moonlight and Valentino\", \"The Leading Man\", \"Destination Anywhere\", \"Homegrown\", \"Little City\", \"No Looking Back\", \"Row Your Boat\", \"Vampires Los Muertos\", \"U-571\", \"Cry Wolf\", \"National Lampoon's Pucked\", and \"New Year's Eve\". He also had a supporting role in the movie \"Pay It Forward\", where he played Helen Hunt's abusive ex-husband. His TV series appearances include \"Sex and the City\", \"30 Rock\", \"Las Vegas\", \"The West Wing\", and an extended stint on \"Ally McBeal\" as a plumber who was Ally's boyfriend for a short period of time. He also had a brief, uncredited role in the 1990 film \"Young Guns II\". On January 24, 2011, it was confirmed that Bon Jovi would be cast in the film \"New Year's Eve\", released later that year, as a successful rock star who is connected with Katherine Heigl's character.\nSports franchises.\nIn 2004, Bon Jovi became founder and primary owner of the Philadelphia Soul of the Arena Football League. He appeared in several television commercials for the league, typically with John Elway, Hall of Fame quarterback for the Denver Broncos and co-owner of the AFL's Colorado Crush. Bon Jovi is no longer part owner of the Soul.\nJBJ's Nashville.\nOn June 8, 2024, Jon Bon Jovi opened a rooftop restaurant and bar in Nashville, Tennessee, located at 405 Broadway. JBJ's is a Bon Jovi and rock music themed restaurant and bar. It hosts live music daily. The restaurant is multi-leveled, with each level having a balcony looking down upon the stage in the center of the venue. The grand opening included a performance by Bon Jovi and the rest of the band, which was their first full band live performance since the end of the 2022 tour. The grand opening was attended by Vince Neil of M\u00f6tley Crue, Jeremy and Ajay Popoff from Lit, Big Kenny, Jelly Roll, and Jamie O'Neal, amongst others. \nJBJ's also features the first ever permanent installation of a Proto hologram machine in a music venue, which can show Jon Bon Jovi and his band's holograms and \"beam in\" special guests.\nPhilanthropy.\nDuring an appearance on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\" in 2005, Bon Jovi (the band, not the individual) donated $1 million to the Angel Network foundation.\nIn July 2007, Jon Bon Jovi announced a project that would rehabilitate a block of 15 homes in North Philadelphia.\nThe Jon Bon Jovi Soul Foundation (formerly the Philadelphia Soul Charitable Foundation) was founded in 2006. It supports community efforts to break the cycle of poverty and homelessness. On October 19, 2011, it opened the JBJ Soul Kitchen, a community restaurant in Red Bank, New Jersey, where patrons pay what they can afford for their meals, either with money or by volunteering work. As of 2023[ [update]], three additional locations have been opened\u2014one in Toms River, another at the Newark campus of Rutgers University, and a third one inside the Gilligan Student Union at New Jersey City University.\nIn 2025, Mayor Dan Rodrick of Toms River, New Jersey, accused the organization of attracting homeless people from other parts of the country to congregate in the town.\nJon Bon Jovi is one of 21 artists singing on \"Everybody Hurts\", a charity single organized by Simon Cowell aiding victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake.\nActivism.\nDuring the 2004 presidential campaign, Jon Bon Jovi toured extensively on behalf of presidential candidate John Kerry, appearing at and playing acoustic sets with Richie Sambora at rallies for the Kerry-Edwards ticket throughout the U.S. In 2009, he played at a Manhattan fundraiser for former Secretary of State and 2016 presidential Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton to lessen some of her $6.3 million 2008 presidential campaign debt. On January 18, 2009, Bon Jovi performed a duet at Barack Obama's inauguration concert, performing the Sam Cooke song \"A Change is Gonna Come\" with Bettye LaVette. On June 4, 2009, Bon Jovi performed an acoustic benefit show for Democratic New Jersey Governor Jon Corzine at the NJPAC in Newark, New Jersey.\nOn June 24, 2009, Bon Jovi, Sambora and Andy Madadian recorded a musical message of worldwide solidarity with the people of Iran. The handwritten Persian sign in the video translates to \"we are one\".\nOn December 15, 2010, Bon Jovi was appointed by then U.S. president Barack Obama to the White House Council for Community Solutions.\nIn 2017, Bon Jovi raised money for Jim Renacci, a Republican representative from Ohio's 16th congressional district and then a potential candidate for Ohio governor with whom he had had common business interests several years prior.\nIn the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Bon Jovi endorsed fellow New Jersey resident Cory Booker for President of the United States.\nOn October 24, 2020, Bon Jovi performed at a drive-in event for Joe Biden at Dallas High School in Dallas, Pennsylvania.\nOn January 20, 2021, Bon Jovi and the Kings of Suburbia performed a cover of the Beatles' song \"Here Comes the Sun\" as part of the \"Celebrating America\" Inauguration of Joe Biden event.\nPersonal life.\nDuring a stop in Los Angeles on the New Jersey Syndicate Tour in 1989, Bon Jovi secretly took a trip to Las Vegas, where he married his high school sweetheart, Dorothea Hurley, on April 29 at the Graceland Wedding Chapel. The couple have four children: a daughter, Stephanie, born in 1993; and three sons, Jesse, Jake, and Romeo, born in 1995, 2002, and 2004, respectively. The British actress Millie Bobby Brown is his daughter-in-law; she married his son Jake in May 2024. Bon Jovi became a grandfather when Jake and Brown adopted a daughter in 2025.\nA former resident of Rumson, New Jersey, Bon Jovi established his Sanctuary Sound recording studio in the basement of his home there.\nBon Jovi has described himself as a recovering Catholic.\nBon Jovi is a close friend of New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft and former head coach Bill Belichick. He owns two Super Bowl rings from the Patriots and has performed several times at the Patriots' home field, Gillette Stadium.\nIn 2019, Bon Jovi received an honorary Doctor of Music degree from University of Pennsylvania and a second honorary doctorate from Princeton University in 2021, recognizing his contributions in music and social welfare.\nIn October 2021, Bon Jovi tested positive for COVID-19 at a fan event in Florida. He was reported as fully vaccinated and \"feeling great\". He had recovered from the disease by November 12, 2021. In April 2022, Bon Jovi spoke of how much his COVID-19 experience had affected him, including in his songwriting, saying about COVID-19 that it made him realize \"how volatile we are and how fragile life is. It didn't matter if you were young or old, American or Egyptian, no matter who you were or where you were from, the COVID-19 pandemic affected you. I was aware of that when I was writing the record.\"\nOn September 11, 2024, Bon Jovi helped prevent a woman from jumping off the John Seigenthaler Pedestrian Bridge in Nashville.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63133", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63133", "title": "Abu Masa Dshaffar", "text": ""}
{"id": "63135", "revid": "23031442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63135", "title": "Marc Chagall", "text": "Russian and French artist (1887\u20131985)\nMarc Chagall (born Moishe Shagal; 6 July\u00a0[O.S. 24 June]\u00a01887 \u2013 28 March 1985) was a Russian and French artist. An early modernist, he was associated with the \u00c9cole de Paris, as well as several major artistic styles and created works in a wide range of artistic formats, including painting, drawings, book illustrations, stained glass, stage sets, ceramics, tapestries and fine art prints.\nChagall was born in 1887, into a Jewish family near Vitebsk, today in Belarus, but at that time in the Pale of Settlement of the Russian Empire. Before World War I, he travelled between Saint Petersburg, Paris, and Berlin. During that period, he created his own mixture and style of modern art, based on his ideas of Eastern European and Jewish folklore. He spent the wartime years in his native Belarus, becoming one of the country's most distinguished artists and a member of the modernist avant-garde, founding the Vitebsk Arts College. He later worked in and near Moscow in difficult conditions during hard times in Russia following the Bolshevik Revolution, before leaving again for Paris in 1923. During World War II, he escaped occupied France to the United States, where he lived in New York City for seven years before returning to France in 1948.\nArt critic Robert Hughes referred to Chagall as \"the quintessential Jewish artist of the twentieth century\". According to art historian Michael J. Lewis, Chagall was considered to be \"the last survivor of the first generation of European modernists\". For decades, he \"had also been respected as the world's pre-eminent Jewish artist\". Using the medium of stained glass, he produced windows for the cathedrals of Reims and Metz as well as the Fraum\u00fcnster in Z\u00fcrich, windows for the UN and the Art Institute of Chicago and the Jerusalem Windows in Israel. He also did large-scale paintings, including part of the ceiling of the Paris Op\u00e9ra. He experienced modernism's \"golden age\" in Paris, where \"he synthesized the art forms of Cubism, Symbolism, and Fauvism, and the influence of Fauvism gave rise to Surrealism\". Yet throughout these phases of his style \"he remained most emphatically a Jewish artist, whose work was one long dreamy reverie of life in his native village of Vitebsk.\" \"When Matisse dies\", Pablo Picasso remarked in the 1950s, \"Chagall will be the only painter left who understands what colour really is\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nEarly life.\nMarc Chagall was born Moishe Shagal in 1887, into a Jewish family in Liozna, near the city of Vitebsk, Belarus, then part of the Russian Empire. At the time of his birth, Vitebsk's population was about 66,000. Half of the population was Jewish. A picturesque city of churches and synagogues, it was called \"Russian Toledo\" by artist Ilya Repin, after the cosmopolitan city of the former Spanish Empire. Because the city was built mostly of wood, little of it survived years of occupation and destruction during World War II.\nChagall was the eldest of nine children. The family name, Shagal, is a variant of the name Segal, which in a Jewish community was usually borne by a Levitic family. His father, Khatskl (Zachar) Shagal, was employed by a herring merchant, and his mother, Feige-Ite, sold groceries from their home. His father worked hard, carrying heavy barrels, earning 20 roubles each month (the average wages across the Russian Empire was 13 roubles a month). Chagall wrote of those early years:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Day after day, winter and summer, at six o'clock in the morning, my father got up and went off to the synagogue. There he said his usual prayer for some dead man or other. On his return he made ready the samovar, drank some tea and went to work. Hellish work, the work of a galley-slave. Why try to hide it? How tell about it? No word will ever ease my father's lot... There was always plenty of butter and cheese on our table. Buttered bread, like an eternal symbol, was never out of my childish hands.\nOne of the main sources of income for the Jewish population of the town was from the manufacture of clothing that was sold throughout the Russian Empire. They also made furniture and various agricultural tools. From the late 18th century to the First World War, the Imperial Russian government confined Jews to living within the Pale of Settlement, which included modern Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia, almost exactly corresponding to the territory of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth which was taken over by Imperial Russia in the late 18th century. That led to the creation of Jewish market-villages (shtetls) throughout today's Eastern Europe, with their own markets, schools, hospitals, and other community institutions.\nChagall wrote as a boy: \"I felt at every step that I was a Jew\u2014people made me feel it\". During a pogrom, Chagall wrote that: \"The street lamps are out. I feel panicky, especially in front of butchers' windows. There you can see calves that are still alive lying beside the butchers' hatchets and knives\". When asked by some \"pogromniks\" \"Jew or not?\", Chagall remembered thinking: \"My pockets are empty, my fingers sensitive, my legs weak and they are out for blood. My death would be futile. I so wanted to live\". Chagall denied being a Jew, leading the \"pogromniks\" to shout \"All right! Get along!\"\nMost of what is known about Chagall's early life has come from his autobiography, \"My Life\". In it, he described the major influence that the culture of Hasidic Judaism had on his life as an artist. Chagall related how he realised that the Jewish traditions in which he had grown up were fast disappearing and that he needed to document them. From the 1730s, Vitebsk itself had been a centre of that culture, with its teachings derived from the Kabbalah. Chagall scholar, Susan Tumarkin Goodman, describes the links and sources of his art to his early home:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chagall's art can be understood as the response to a situation that has long marked the history of Russian Jews. Though they were cultural innovators who made important contributions to the broader society, Jews were considered outsiders in a frequently hostile society ... Chagall himself was born of a family steeped in religious life; his parents were observant Hasidic Jews who found spiritual satisfaction in a life defined by their faith and organized by prayer.\nArt education.\nIn the Russian Empire at that time, Jewish children were not allowed to attend regular schools and universities imposed a quota on Jews. Their movement within the city was also restricted. Chagall therefore received his primary education at the local Jewish religious school, where he studied Hebrew and the Bible. At the age of 13, his mother tried to enrol him in a regular high school, and he recalled: \"But in that school, they don't take Jews. Without a moment's hesitation, my courageous mother walks up to a professor.\" She offered the headmaster 50 roubles to let him attend, which he accepted.\nA turning point of his artistic life came when he first noticed a fellow student drawing. Baal-Teshuva writes that, for the young Chagall, watching someone draw \"was like a vision, a revelation in black and white\". Chagall would later say that there was no art of any kind in his family's home and the concept was totally alien to him. When Chagall asked the schoolmate how he learned to draw, his friend replied, \"Go and find a book in the library, idiot, choose any picture you like, and just copy it\". He soon began copying images from books and found the experience so rewarding he then decided he wanted to become an artist.\nGoodman writes that Chagall eventually confided to his mother, \"I want to be a painter\", although she could not yet understand his sudden interest in art or why he would choose a vocation that \"seemed so impractical\". The young Chagall explained: \"There's a place in town; if I'm admitted and if I complete the course, I'll come out a regular artist. I'd be so happy!\" It was 1906, and he had noticed the studio of Yehuda (Yuri) Pen, a realist artist who operated a drawing school in Vitebsk. At the same time, future artists El Lissitzky and Ossip Zadkine were also Pen's students. Due to Chagall's youth and lack of income, Pen offered to teach him free of charge. However, after a few months at the school, Chagall realized that academic portrait painting did not suit him.\nArtistic inspiration.\nGoodman notes that during that period in Imperial Russia, Jews had two ways to join the art world: one was to \"hide or deny one's Jewish roots\", the other\u2014the one that Chagall chose\u2014was \"to cherish and publicly express one's Jewish roots\" by integrating them into art. For Chagall, that was also his means of \"self-assertion and an expression of principle\".\nChagall biographer, Franz Meyer, explains that with the connections between his art and early life \"the hassidic spirit is still the basis and source of nourishment for his art\". Lewis adds: \"As cosmopolitan an artist as he would later become, his storehouse of visual imagery would never expand beyond the landscape of his childhood, with its snowy streets, wooden houses, and ubiquitous fiddlers... [with] scenes of childhood so indelibly in one's mind and to invest them with an emotional charge so intense that it could only be discharged obliquely through an obsessive repetition of the same cryptic symbols and ideograms... \"\nYears later, at the age of 57, while living in the United States, Chagall confirmed that when he published an open letter entitled, \"To My City Vitebsk\":\nWhy? Why did I leave you many years ago? ... You thought, the boy seeks something, seeks such a special subtlety, that color descending like stars from the sky and landing, bright and transparent, like snow on our roofs. Where did he get it? How would it come to a boy like him? I don't know why he couldn't find it with us, in the city\u2014in his homeland. Maybe the boy is \"crazy\", but \"crazy\" for the sake of art. ...You thought: \"I can see, I am etched in the boy's heart, but he is still 'flying', he is still striving to take off, he has 'wind' in his head.\" ... I did not live with you, but I didn't have one single painting that didn't breathe with your spirit and reflection.\nArt career.\nRussian Empire (1906\u20131910).\nIn 1906, he moved to Saint Petersburg, which was then the capital of the Russian Empire and the center of the country's artistic life, with famous art schools. Since Jews were not permitted into the city without an internal passport, he managed to get a temporary passport from a friend. He enrolled in a prestigious art school and studied there for two years. By 1907, he had begun painting naturalistic self-portraits and landscapes. Chagall was an active member of the irregular freemasonic lodge, the Grand Orient of Russia's Peoples. He belonged to the \"Vitebsk\" lodge.\nBetween 1908 and 1910, Chagall was a student of L\u00e9on Bakst at the Zvantseva School of Drawing and Painting. While in Saint Petersburg, he discovered experimental theater, and the work of such artists as Paul Gauguin. Bakst, also Jewish, was a designer of decorative art and was famous as a draftsman designer of stage sets and costumes for the Ballets Russes, and helped Chagall by acting as a role model for Jewish success. Bakst moved to Paris a year later. Art historian Raymond Cogniat writes that after living and studying art on his own for four years, \"Chagall entered into the mainstream of contemporary art. ...His apprenticeship over, Russia had played a memorable initial role in his life.\"\nChagall stayed in Saint Petersburg until 1910, often visiting Vitebsk where he met Bella Rosenfeld. In \"My Life\", Chagall described his first meeting her: \"Her silence is mine, her eyes mine. It is as if she knows everything about my childhood, my present, my future, as if she can see right through me.\" Bella later wrote, of meeting him, \"When you did catch a glimpse of his eyes, they were as blue as if they'd fallen straight out of the sky. They were strange eyes \u2026 long, almond-shaped \u2026 and each seemed to sail along by itself, like a little boat.\"\nFrance (1910\u20131914).\n In 1910, Chagall relocated to Paris to develop his artistic style. Art historian and curator James Sweeney notes that when Chagall first arrived in Paris, Cubism was the dominant art form, and French art was still dominated by the \"materialistic outlook of the 19th century\". But Chagall arrived from Russia with \"a ripe color gift, a fresh, unashamed response to sentiment, a feeling for simple poetry and a sense of humor\", he adds. These notions were alien to Paris at that time, and as a result, his first recognition came not from other painters but from poets such as Blaise Cendrars and Guillaume Apollinaire. Art historian Jean Leymarie observes that Chagall began thinking of art as \"emerging from the internal being outward, from the seen object to the psychic outpouring\", which was the reverse of the Cubist way of creating.\nHe therefore developed friendships with Guillaume Apollinaire and other avant-garde artists including Robert Delaunay and Fernand L\u00e9ger. Baal-Teshuva writes that \"Chagall's dream of Paris, the city of light and above all, of freedom, had come true.\" His first days were a hardship for the 23-year-old Chagall, who was lonely in the big city and unable to speak French. Some days he \"felt like fleeing back to Russia, as he daydreamed while he painted, about the riches of Slavic folklore, his Hasidic experiences, his family, and especially Bella\".\nIn Paris, he enrolled at Acad\u00e9mie de La Palette, an avant-garde school of art where the painters Jean Metzinger, Andr\u00e9 Dunoyer de Segonzac and Henri Le Fauconnier taught, and also found work at another academy. He would spend his free hours visiting galleries and salons, especially the Louvre; artists he came to admire included Rembrandt, the Le Nain brothers, Chardin, van Gogh, Renoir, Pissarro, Matisse, Gauguin, Courbet, Millet, Manet, Monet, Delacroix, and others. It was in Paris that he learned the technique of gouache, which he used to paint Belarusian scenes. He also visited Montmartre and the Latin Quarter \"and was happy just breathing Parisian air\". Baal-Teshuva describes this new phase in Chagall's artistic development:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chagall was exhilarated, intoxicated, as he strolled through the streets and along the banks of the Seine. Everything about the French capital excited him: the shops, the smell of fresh bread in the morning, the markets with their fresh fruit and vegetables, the wide boulevards, the caf\u00e9s and restaurants, and above all the Eiffel Tower.\nAnother completely new world that opened up for him was the kaleidoscope of colors and forms in the works of French artists. Chagall enthusiastically reviewed their many different tendencies, having to rethink his position as an artist and decide what creative avenue he wanted to pursue.\nDuring his time in Paris, Chagall was constantly reminded of his home in Vitebsk, as Paris was also home to many painters, writers, poets, composers, dancers, and other \u00e9migr\u00e9s from the Russian Empire. However, \"night after night he painted until dawn\", only then going to bed for a few hours, and resisted the many temptations of the big city at night. \"My homeland exists only in my soul\", he once said. He continued painting Jewish motifs and subjects from his memories of Vitebsk, although he included Parisian scenes \u2014 the Eiffel Tower in particular, along with portraits. Many of his works were updated versions of paintings he had made in Russia, transposed into Fauvist or Cubist keys.\nChagall developed a whole repertoire of quirky motifs: ghostly figures floating in the sky, ... the gigantic fiddler dancing on miniature dollhouses, the livestock and transparent wombs and, within them, tiny offspring sleeping upside down. The majority of his scenes of life in Vitebsk were painted while living in Paris, and \"in a sense they were dreams\", notes Lewis. Their \"undertone of yearning and loss\", with a detached and abstract appearance, caused Apollinaire to be \"struck by this quality\", calling them \"surnaturel!\" His \"animal/human hybrids and airborne phantoms\" would later become a formative influence on Surrealism. Chagall, however, did not want his work to be associated with any school or movement and considered his own personal language of symbols to be meaningful to himself. But Sweeney notes that others often still associate his work with \"illogical and fantastic painting\", especially when he uses \"curious representational juxtapositions\".\nSweeney writes that \"This is Chagall's contribution to contemporary art: the reawakening of a poetry of representation, avoiding factual illustration on the one hand, and non-figurative abstractions on the other\". Andr\u00e9 Breton said that \"with him alone, the metaphor made its triumphant return to modern painting\".\nRussia (1914\u20131922).\nBecause he missed his fianc\u00e9e, Bella, who was still in Vitebsk\u2014\"He thought about her day and night\", writes Baal-Teshuva\u2014and was afraid of losing her, Chagall decided to accept an invitation from a noted art dealer in Berlin to exhibit his work, his intention being to continue on to Belarus, marry Bella, and then return with her to Paris. Chagall took 40 canvases and 160 gouaches, watercolors and drawings to be exhibited. The exhibit, held at Herwarth Walden's Sturm Gallery was a huge success, \"The German critics positively sang his praises.\"\nAfter the exhibit, he continued on to Vitebsk, where he planned to stay only long enough to marry Bella. However, after a few weeks, the First World War began, closing the Russian border for an indefinite period. A year later he married Bella Rosenfeld and they had their first child, Ida. Before the marriage, Chagall had difficulty convincing Bella's parents that he would be a suitable husband for their daughter. They were worried about her marrying a painter from a poor family and wondered how he would support her. Becoming a successful artist now became a goal and inspiration. According to Lewis, \"[T]he euphoric paintings of this time, which show the young couple floating balloon-like over Vitebsk\u2014its wooden buildings faceted in the Delaunay manner\u2014are the most lighthearted of his career\". His wedding pictures were also a subject he would return to in later years as he thought about this period of his life.\nIn 1915, Chagall began exhibiting his work in Moscow, first exhibiting his works at a well-known salon and in 1916 exhibiting pictures in St. Petersburg. He again showed his art at a Moscow exhibition of avant-garde artists. This exposure brought recognition, and a number of wealthy collectors began buying his art. He also began illustrating a number of Yiddish books with ink drawings. He illustrated I. L. Peretz's \"The Magician\" in 1917. Chagall was 30 years old and had begun to become well known.\nThe October Revolution of 1917 was a dangerous time for Chagall although it also offered opportunity. Chagall wrote he came to fear Bolshevik orders pinned on fences, writing: \"The factories were stopping. The horizons opened. Space and emptiness. No more bread. The black lettering on the morning posters made me feel sick at heart\". Chagall was often hungry for days, later remembering watching \"a bride, the beggars and the poor wretches weighted down with bundles\", leading him to conclude that the new regime had turned the Russian Empire \"upside down the way I turn my pictures\". By then he was one of Imperial Russia's most distinguished artists and a member of the modernist avant-garde, which enjoyed special privileges and prestige as the \"aesthetic arm of the revolution\". He was offered a notable position as a commissar of visual arts for the country, but preferred something less political, and instead accepted a job as commissar of arts for Vitebsk. This resulted in his founding the Vitebsk Arts College which, adds Lewis, became the \"most distinguished school of art in the Soviet Union\".\nIt obtained for its faculty some of the most important artists in the country, such as El Lissitzky and Kazimir Malevich. He also added his first teacher, Yehuda Pen. Chagall tried to create an atmosphere of a collective of independently minded artists, each with their own unique style. However, this would soon prove to be difficult as a few of the key faculty members preferred a Suprematist art of squares and circles, and disapproved of Chagall's attempt at creating \"bourgeois individualism\". Chagall then resigned as commissar and moved to Moscow.\nIn Moscow he was offered a job as stage designer for the newly formed State Jewish Chamber Theater. It was set to begin operation in early 1921 with a number of plays by Sholem Aleichem. For its opening he created a number of large background murals using techniques he learned from Bakst, his early teacher. One of the main murals was tall by long and included images of various lively subjects such as dancers, fiddlers, acrobats, and farm animals. One critic at the time called it \"Hebrew jazz in paint\". Chagall created it as a \"storehouse of symbols and devices\", notes Lewis. The murals \"constituted a landmark\" in the history of the theatre, and were forerunners of his later large-scale works, including murals for the New York Metropolitan Opera and the Paris Opera.\nThe First World War ended in 1918, but the Russian Civil War continued, and famine spread. The Chagalls found it necessary to move to a smaller, less expensive, town near Moscow, although Chagall now had to commute to Moscow daily, using crowded trains. In 1921, he worked as an art teacher along with his friend sculptor Isaac Itkind in a Jewish boys' shelter in suburban Malakhovka, which housed young refugees orphaned by pogroms. While there, he created a series of illustrations for the Yiddish poetry cycle \"Grief\" written by David Hofstein, who was another teacher at the Malakhovka shelter.\nAfter spending the years between 1921 and 1922 living in primitive conditions, he decided to go back to France so that he could develop his art in a more comfortable country. Numerous other artists, writers, and musicians were also planning to relocate to the West. He applied for an exit visa and while waiting for its uncertain approval, wrote his autobiography, \"My Life\".\nFrance (1923\u20131941).\nIn 1923, Chagall left Moscow to return to France. On his way he stopped in Berlin to recover the many pictures he had left there on exhibit ten years earlier, before the war began, but was unable to find or recover any of them. Nonetheless, after returning to Paris he again \"rediscovered the free expansion and fulfillment which were so essential to him\", writes Lewis. With all his early works now lost, he began trying to paint from his memories of his earliest years in Vitebsk with sketches and oil paintings.\nHe formed a business relationship with French art dealer Ambroise Vollard. This inspired him to begin creating etchings for a series of illustrated books, including Gogol's \"Dead Souls\", the Bible, and the \"La Fontaine's Fables\". These illustrations would eventually come to represent his finest printmaking efforts. In 1924, he travelled to Brittany and painted \"La fen\u00eatre sur l'\u00cele-de-Br\u00e9hat\". By 1926 he had his first exhibition in the United States at the Reinhardt gallery of New York which included about 100 works, although he did not travel to the opening. He instead stayed in France, \"painting ceaselessly\", notes Baal-Teshuva. It was not until 1927 that Chagall made his name in the French art world, when art critic and historian Maurice Raynal awarded him a place in his book \"Modern French Painters\". However, Raynal was still at a loss to accurately describe Chagall to his readers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chagall interrogates life in the light of a refined, anxious, childlike sensibility, a slightly romantic temperament ... a blend of sadness and gaiety characteristic of a grave view of life. His imagination, his temperament, no doubt forbid a Latin severity of composition.\nDuring this period he traveled throughout France and the C\u00f4te d'Azur, where he enjoyed the landscapes, colorful vegetation, the blue Mediterranean Sea, and the mild weather. He made repeated trips to the countryside, taking his sketchbook. He also visited nearby countries and later wrote about the impressions some of those travels left on him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I should like to recall how advantageous my travels outside France have been for me in an artistic sense\u2014in Holland or in Spain, Italy, Egypt, Palestine, or simply in the south of France. There, in the south, for the first time in my life, I saw that rich greenness\u2014the like of which I had never seen in my own country. In Holland I thought I discovered that familiar and throbbing light, like the light between the late afternoon and dusk. In Italy I found that peace of the museums which the sunlight brought to life. In Spain I was happy to find the inspiration of a mystical, if sometimes cruel, past, to find the song of its sky and of its people. And in the East [Palestine] I found unexpectedly the Bible and a part of my very being.\n\"The Bible\" illustrations.\nAfter returning to Paris from one of his trips, Vollard commissioned Chagall to illustrate the Old Testament. Although he could have completed the project in France, he used the assignment as an excuse to travel to Mandatory Palestine to experience for himself the Holy Land. In 1931 Marc Chagall and his family traveled to Tel Aviv on the invitation of Meir Dizengoff. Dizengoff had previously encouraged Chagall to visit Tel Aviv in connection with Dizengoff's plan to build a Jewish Art Museum in the new city. Chagall and his family were invited to stay at Dizengoff's house in Tel Aviv, which later became Independence Hall of the State of Israel.\nChagall ended up staying in the Holy Land for two months. Chagall felt at home in Israel where many people spoke Yiddish and Russian. According to Jacob Baal-Teshuva, \"he was impressed by the pioneering spirit of the people in the kibbutzim and deeply moved by the Wailing Wall and the other holy places\".\nChagall later told a friend that Palestine gave him \"the most vivid impression he had ever received\". Wullschlager notes, however, that whereas Delacroix and Matisse had found inspiration in the exoticism of North Africa, he as a Jew in Palestine had different perspective. \"What he was really searching for there was not external stimulus but an inner authorization from the land of his ancestors, to plunge into his work on the Bible illustrations\". Chagall stated that \"In the East I found the Bible and part of my own being.\"\nAs a result, he immersed himself in \"the history of the Jews, their trials, prophecies, and disasters\", notes Wullschlager. She adds that beginning the assignment was an \"extraordinary risk\" for Chagall, as he had finally become well known as a leading contemporary painter, but would now end his modernist themes and delve into \"an ancient past\". Between 1931 and 1934 he worked \"obsessively\" on \"The Bible\", even going to Amsterdam in order to carefully study the biblical paintings of Rembrandt and El Greco, to see the extremes of religious painting. He walked the streets of the city's Jewish quarter to again feel the earlier atmosphere. He told Franz Meyer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I did not see the Bible, I dreamed it. Ever since early childhood, I have been captivated by the Bible. It has always seemed to me and still seems today the greatest source of poetry of all time.\nChagall saw the Old Testament as a \"human story, ... not with the creation of the cosmos but with the creation of man, and his figures of angels are rhymed or combined with human ones\", writes Wullschlager. She points out that in one of his early Bible images, \"Abraham and the Three Angels\", the angels sit and chat over a glass of wine \"as if they have just dropped by for dinner\".\nHe returned to France and by the next year had completed 32 out of the total of 105 plates. By 1939, at the beginning of World War II, he had finished 66. However, Vollard died that same year. When the series was completed in 1956, it was published by Edition T\u00e9riade. Baal-Teshuva writes that \"the illustrations were stunning and met with great acclaim. Once again Chagall had shown himself to be one of the 20th century's most important graphic artists\". Leymarie has described these drawings by Chagall as \"monumental\" and,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...full of divine inspiration, which retrace the legendary destiny and the epic history of Israel to Genesis to the Prophets, through the Patriarchs and the Heroes. Each picture becomes one with the event, informing the text with a solemn intimacy unknown since Rembrandt.\nNazi campaigns against modern art.\nNot long after Chagall began his work on the \"Bible\", Adolf Hitler gained power in Germany. Anti-Semitic laws were being introduced and the first concentration camp at Dachau had been established. Wullschlager describes the early effects on art:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Nazis had begun their campaign against modernist art as soon as they seized power. Expressionist, cubist, abstract, and surrealist art\u2014anything intellectual, Jewish, foreign, socialist-inspired, or difficult to understand\u2014was targeted, from Picasso and Matisse going back to C\u00e9zanne and van Gogh; in its place traditional German realism, accessible and open to patriotic interpretation, was extolled.\nBeginning during 1937 about twenty thousand works from German museums were confiscated as \"degenerate\" by a committee directed by Joseph Goebbels. Although the German press had once \"swooned over him\", the new German authorities now made a mockery of Chagall's art, describing them as \"green, purple, and red Jews shooting out of the earth, fiddling on violins, flying through the air ... representing [an] assault on Western civilization\".\nAfter Germany invaded and occupied France, the Chagalls remained in Vichy France, unaware that French Jews, with the help of the Vichy government, were being collected and sent to German concentration camps, from which few would return. The Vichy collaborationist government, directed by Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain, immediately upon assuming power established a commission to \"redefine French citizenship\" with the aim of stripping \"undesirables\", including naturalized citizens, of their French nationality. Chagall had been so involved with his art, that it was not until October 1940, after the Vichy government, at the behest of the Nazi occupying forces, began approving anti-Semitic laws, that he began to understand what was happening. Learning that Jews were being removed from public and academic positions, the Chagalls finally \"woke up to the danger they faced\". But Wullschlager notes that \"by then they were trapped\". Their only refuge could be the US, but \"they could not afford the passage to New York\" or the large bond that each immigrant had to provide upon entry to ensure that they would not become a financial burden to the country.\nEscaping occupied France.\nAccording to Wullschlager, \"[T]he speed with which France collapsed astonished everyone: the [British-supported French army] capitulated even more quickly than Poland had done\" a year earlier. Shock waves crossed the Atlantic... as Paris had until then been equated with civilization throughout the non-Nazi world.\" Yet the attachment of the Chagalls to France \"blinded them to the urgency of the situation.\" Many other well-known Russian and Jewish artists eventually sought to escape: these included Cha\u00efm Soutine, Max Ernst, Max Beckmann, Ludwig Fulda, author Victor Serge and prize-winning author Vladimir Nabokov, who although not Jewish himself, was married to a Jewish woman. Russian author Victor Serge described many of the people living temporarily in Marseille who were waiting to emigrate to the US:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here is a beggar's alley gathering the remnants of revolutions, democracies and crushed intellects... In our ranks are enough doctors, psychologists, engineers, educationalists, poets, painters, writers, musicians, economists and public men to vitalize a whole great country.\nAfter prodding by their daughter Ida, who \"perceived the need to act fast\", and with help from Alfred Barr of the New York Museum of Modern Art, Chagall was saved by having his name added to the list of prominent artists whose lives were at risk and whom the United States should try to extricate. Varian Fry, the US journalist, and Hiram Bingham IV, the US Vice-Consul in Marseilles, ran a rescue operation to smuggle artists and intellectuals out of Europe to the US by providing them with forged visas to the US. In April 1941, Chagall and his wife were stripped of their French citizenship. The Chagalls stayed at the Hotel Moderne in Marseille where they were arrested along with other Jews. Varian Fry managed to pressure the French police to release him, threatening them of scandal. Chagall was one of over 2,000 who were rescued by this operation. He left France in May 1941, \"when it was almost too late\", adds Lewis. Picasso and Matisse were also invited to come to the US but they decided to remain in France. On 10 June 1941 Chagall and Bella left Lisbon aboard the Portuguese ship \"Mouzinho\". The passengers included 119 refugee children, to whom Chagall gave drawing lessons on the voyage. The ship reached Staten Island on 21 June, the day before Germany invaded the Soviet Union. Ida and her husband Michel followed on the notorious refugee ship with a large case of Chagall's work. A chance post-war meeting in a French caf\u00e9 between Ida and intelligence analyst Konrad Kellen led to Kellen carrying more paintings on his return to the United States.\nUnited States (1941\u20131948).\nEven before arriving in the United States in 1941, Chagall was awarded the Carnegie Prize third prize in 1939 for \"Les Fianc\u00e9s\". After being in the US he discovered that he had already achieved \"international stature\", writes Cogniat, although he felt ill-suited in this new role in a foreign country whose language he could not yet speak. He became a celebrity mostly against his will, feeling lost in the strange surroundings.\nAfter a while he began to settle in New York, which was full of writers, painters, and composers who, like himself, had fled from Europe during the Nazi invasions. He lived at 4 East 74th Street. He spent time visiting galleries and museums, and befriended other artists including Piet Mondrian and Andr\u00e9 Breton.\nBaal-Teshuva writes that Chagall \"loved\" going to the sections of New York where Jews lived, especially the Lower East Side. There he felt at home, enjoying the Jewish foods and being able to read the Yiddish press, which became his main source of information since he did not yet speak English.\nContemporary artists did not yet understand or even like Chagall's art. According to Baal-Teshuva, \"they had little in common with a folkloristic storyteller of Russo-Jewish extraction with a propensity for mysticism.\" The Paris School, which was referred to as 'Parisian Surrealism', meant little to them. Those attitudes would begin to change, however, when Pierre Matisse, the son of recognized French artist Henri Matisse, became his representative and managed Chagall exhibitions in New York and Chicago in 1941. One of the earliest exhibitions included 21 of his masterpieces from 1910 to 1941. Art critic Henry McBride wrote about this exhibit for the \"New York Sun\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chagall is about as gypsy as they come... these pictures do more for his reputation than anything we have previously seen... His colors sparkle with poetry... his work is authentically Russian as a Volga boatman's song...\n\"Aleko\" ballet (1942).\nHe was offered a commission by choreographer L\u00e9onide Massine of the Ballet Theatre of New York to design the sets and costumes for his new ballet, \"Aleko\". This ballet would stage the words of Alexander Pushkin's verse narrative \"The Gypsies\" with the music of Tchaikovsky. The ballet was originally planned for a New York debut, but as a cost-saving measure it was moved to Mexico where labor costs were cheaper than in New York. While Chagall had done stage settings before while in Russia, this was his first ballet, and it would give him the opportunity to visit Mexico. While there, he quickly began to appreciate the \"primitive ways and colorful art of the Mexicans\", notes Cogniat. He found \"something very closely related to his own nature\", and did all the color detail for the sets while there. Eventually, he created four large backdrops and had Mexican seamstresses sew the ballet costumes.\nWhen the ballet premiered at the Palacio de Bellas Artes in Mexico City on 8 September 1942 it was considered a \"remarkable success\". In the audience were other famous mural painters who came to see Chagall's work, including Diego Rivera and Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco. According to Baal-Teshuva, when the final bar of music ended, \"there was a tumultuous applause and 19 curtain calls, with Chagall himself being called back onto the stage again and again.\" The production then moved to New York, where it was presented four weeks later at the Metropolitan Opera and the response was repeated, \"again Chagall was the hero of the evening\". Art critic Edwin Denby wrote of the opening for the \"New York Herald Tribune\" that Chagall's work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;has turned into a dramatized exhibition of giant paintings... It surpasses anything Chagall has done on the easel scale, and it is a breathtaking experience, of a kind one hardly expects in the theatre.\nComing to grips with World War II.\nAfter Chagall returned to New York in 1943 current events began to interest him more, and this was represented by his art, where he painted subjects including the Crucifixion and scenes of war. He learned that the Germans had destroyed the town where he was raised, Vitebsk, and became greatly distressed. He also learned about the Nazi concentration camps. During a speech in February 1944, he described some of his feelings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Meanwhile, the enemy jokes, saying that we are a \"stupid nation\". He thought that when he started slaughtering the Jews, we would all in our grief suddenly raise the greatest prophetic scream, and would be joined by the Christian humanists. But, after two thousand years of \"Christianity\" in the world\u2014say whatever you like\u2014but, with few exceptions, their hearts are silent... I see the artists in Christian nations sit still\u2014who has heard them speak up? They are not worried about themselves, and our Jewish life doesn't concern them.\nIn the same speech he credited Soviet Russia with doing the most to save the Jews:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Jews will always be grateful to it. What other great country has saved a million and a half Jews from Hitler's hands, and shared its last piece of bread? What country abolished antisemitism? What other country devoted at least a piece of land as an autonomous region for Jews who want to live there? All this, and more, weighs heavily on the scales of history.\nOn 2 September 1944, Bella died suddenly due to a streptococcus infection, which could not be treated at the Mercy General Hospital as they had no penicillin due to wartime restrictions. As a result, he stopped all work for many months, and when he did resume painting his first pictures were concerned with preserving Bella's memory. Wullschlager writes of the effect on Chagall: \"As news poured in through 1945 of the ongoing Holocaust at Nazi concentration camps, Bella took her place in Chagall's mind with the millions of Jewish victims.\" He even considered the possibility that their \"exile from Europe had sapped her will to live\".\nAfter a year of living with his daughter Ida and her husband Michel Gordey, he entered into a romance with Virginia Haggard, daughter of diplomat Godfrey Haggard and great-niece of the author H. Rider Haggard; their relationship endured seven years. They had a child together, David McNeil, born 22 June 1946. Haggard recalled her \"seven years of plenty\" with Chagall in her book, \"My Life with Chagall\" (Robert Hale, 1986).\nA few months after the Allies succeeded in liberating Paris from Nazi occupation, with the help of the Allied armies, Chagall published a letter in a Paris weekly, \"To the Paris Artists\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In recent years I have felt unhappy that I couldn't be with you, my friends. My enemy forced me to take the road of exile. On that tragic road, I lost my wife, the companion of my life, the woman who was my inspiration. I want to say to my friends in France that she joins me in this greeting, she who loved France and French art so faithfully. Her last joy was the liberation of Paris... Now, when Paris is liberated, when the art of France is resurrected, the whole world too will, once and for all, be free of the satanic enemies who wanted to annihilate not just the body but also the soul\u2014the soul, without which there is no life, no artistic creativity.\nPost-war years.\nBy 1946, his artwork was becoming more widely recognized. The Museum of Modern Art in New York had a large exhibition representing 40 years of his work which gave visitors one of the first complete impressions of the changing nature of his art over the years. The war had ended and he began making plans to return to Paris. According to Cogniat, \"He found he was even more deeply attached than before, not only to the atmosphere of Paris, but to the city itself, to its houses and its views.\" Chagall summed up his years living in the US:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I lived here in America during the inhuman war in which humanity deserted itself... I have seen the rhythm of life. I have seen America fighting with Allies... the wealth that she has distributed to bring relief to the people who had to suffer the consequences of the war... I like America and the Americans... people there are frank. It is a young country with the qualities and faults of youth. It is a delight to love people like that... Above all I am impressed by the greatness of this country and the freedom that it gives.\nHe went back to France for good during the autumn of 1947, where he attended the opening of the exhibition of his works at the Mus\u00e9e National d'Art Moderne.\nFrance (1948\u20131985).\nAfter returning to France he traveled throughout Europe and chose to live in the C\u00f4te d'Azur which by that time had become somewhat of an \"artistic centre\". Matisse lived near Saint-Paul-de-Vence, about seven miles west of Nice, while Picasso lived in Vallauris. Although they lived nearby and sometimes worked together, there was artistic rivalry between them as their work was so distinctly different, and they never became long-term friends. According to Picasso's mistress, Fran\u00e7oise Gilot, Picasso still had a great deal of respect for Chagall, and once told her,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Matisse dies, Chagall will be the only painter left who understands what color is... His canvases are really painted, not just tossed together. Some of the last things he's done in Vence convince me that there's never been anybody since Renoir who has the feeling for light that Chagall has.\"\nIn April 1952, Virginia Haggard left Chagall for the photographer Charles Leirens; she went on to become a professional photographer herself.\nChagall's daughter Ida married art historian Franz Meyer in January 1952, and feeling that her father missed the companionship of a woman in his home, introduced him to Valentina (Vava) Brodsky, a woman from a similar Russian Jewish background, who had run a successful millinery business in London. She became his secretary, and after a few months agreed to stay only if Chagall married her. The marriage took place in July 1952\u2014though six years later, when there was conflict between Ida and Vava, \"Marc and Vava divorced and immediately remarried under an agreement more favourable to Vava\" (Jean-Paul Crespelle, author of \"Chagall, l'Amour le Reve et la Vie\", quoted in \"Haggard: My Life with Chagall\").\nIn 1954, he was engaged as set decorator for Robert Helpmann's production of Rimsky-Korsakov's opera \"Le Coq d'Or\" at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, but he withdrew. The Australian designer Loudon Sainthill was drafted at short notice in his place.\nIn the years ahead he was able to produce not just paintings and graphic art, but also numerous sculptures and ceramics, including wall tiles, painted vases, plates and jugs. He also began working in larger-scale formats, producing large murals, stained glass windows, mosaics and tapestries.\nCeiling of the Paris Opera (1963).\nIn 1963, Chagall was commissioned to paint the new ceiling for the Paris Opera (Palais Garnier), a majestic 19th-century building and national monument. Andr\u00e9 Malraux, France's Minister of Culture wanted something unique and decided Chagall would be the ideal artist. However, this choice of artist caused controversy: some objected to having a Russian Jew decorate a French national monument; others disliked the ceiling of the historic building being painted by a modern artist. Some magazines wrote condescending articles about Chagall and Malraux, about which Chagall commented to one writer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They really had it in for me... It is amazing the way the French resent foreigners. You live here most of your life. You become a naturalized French citizen... work for nothing decorating their cathedrals, and still they despise you. You are not one of them.\nNonetheless, Chagall continued the project, which took the 77-year-old artist a year to complete. The final canvas was nearly 2,400 square feet (220 sq. meters) and required of paint. It had five sections which were glued to polyester panels and hoisted up to the ceiling. The images Chagall painted on the canvas paid tribute to the composers Mozart, Wagner, Mussorgsky, Berlioz and Ravel, as well as to famous actors and dancers.\nIt was presented to the public on 23 September 1964 in the presence of Malraux and 2,100 invited guests. The Paris correspondent for the \"New York Times\" wrote, \"For once the best seats were in the uppermost circle: Baal-Teshuva writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To begin with, the big crystal chandelier hanging from the centre of the ceiling was unlit... the entire \"corps de ballet\" came onto the stage, after which, in Chagall's honour, the opera's orchestra played the finale of the \"Jupiter Symphony\" by Mozart, Chagall's favorite composer. During the last bars of the music, the chandelier lit up, bringing the artist's ceiling painting to life in all its glory, drawing rapturous applause from the audience.\nAfter the new ceiling was unveiled, \"even the bitterest opponents of the commission seemed to fall silent\", writes Baal-Teshuva. \"Unanimously, the press declared Chagall's new work to be a great contribution to French culture.\" Malraux later said, \"What other living artist could have painted the ceiling of the Paris Opera in the way Chagall did?... He is above all one of the great colourists of our time... many of his canvases and the Opera ceiling represent sublime images that rank among the finest poetry of our time, just as Titian produced the finest poetry of his day.\" In Chagall's speech to the audience he explained the meaning of the work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Up there in my painting I wanted to reflect, like a mirror in a bouquet, the dreams and creations of the singers and musicians, to recall the movement of the colourfully attired audience below, and to honour the great opera and ballet composers... Now I offer this work as a gift of gratitude to France and her \u00c9cole de Paris, without which there would be no colour and no freedom.\nArt styles and techniques.\nColor.\nAccording to Cogniat, in all Chagall's work during all stages of his life, it was his colors which attracted and captured the viewer's attention. During his earlier years his range was limited by his emphasis on form and his pictures never gave the impression of painted drawings. He adds, \"The colors are a living, integral part of the picture and are never passively flat, or banal like an afterthought. They sculpt and animate the volume of the shapes... they indulge in flights of fancy and invention which add new perspectives and graduated, blended tones... His colors do not even attempt to imitate nature but rather to suggest movements, planes and rhythms.\"\nHe was able to convey striking images using only two or three colors. Cogniat writes, \"Chagall is unrivalled in this ability to give a vivid impression of explosive movement with the simplest use of colors...\" Throughout his life his colors created a \"vibrant atmosphere\" which was based on \"his own personal vision.\"\nSubject matter.\nFrom life memories to fantasy.\nChagall's early life left him with a \"powerful visual memory and a pictorial intelligence\", writes Goodman. After living in France and experiencing the atmosphere of artistic freedom, his \"vision soared and he created a new reality, one that drew on both his inner and outer worlds.\" But it was the images and memories of his early years in Belarus that would sustain his art for more than 70 years.\nAccording to Cogniat, there are certain elements in his art that have remained permanent and seen throughout his career. One of those was his choice of subjects and the way they were portrayed. \"The most obviously constant element is his gift for happiness and his instinctive compassion, which even in the most serious subjects prevents him from dramatization...\" Musicians have been a constant during all stages of his work. After he first got married, \"lovers have sought each other, embraced, caressed, floated through the air, met in wreaths of flowers, stretched, and swooped like the melodious passage of their vivid day-dreams. Acrobats contort themselves with the grace of exotic flowers on the end of their stems; flowers and foliage abound everywhere.\" Wullschlager explains the sources for these images:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For him, clowns and acrobats always resembled figures in religious paintings... The evolution of the circus works... reflects a gradual clouding of his worldview, and the circus performers now gave way to the prophet or sage in his work\u2014a figure into whom Chagall poured his anxiety as Europe darkened, and he could no longer rely on the \"lumi\u00e9re-libert\u00e9\" of France for inspiration.\nChagall described his love of circus people:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why am I so touched by their makeup and grimaces? With them I can move toward new horizons... Chaplin seeks to do in film what I am trying to do in my paintings. He is perhaps the only artist today I could get along with without having to say a single word.\nHis early pictures were often of the town where he was born and raised, Vitebsk. Cogniat notes that they are realistic and give the impression of firsthand experience by capturing a moment in time with action, often with a dramatic image. During his later years, as for instance in the \"Bible series\", subjects were more dramatic. He managed to blend the real with the fantastic, and combined with his use of color the pictures were always at least acceptable if not powerful. He never attempted to present pure reality but always created his atmospheres through fantasy. In all cases Chagall's \"most persistent subject is life itself, in its simplicity or its hidden complexity... He presents for our study places, people, and objects from his own life\".\nJewish themes.\nAfter absorbing the techniques of Fauvism and Cubism (under the influence of Jean Metzinger and Albert Gleizes) Chagall was able to blend these stylistic tendencies with his own folkish style. He gave the grim life of Hasidic Jews the \"romantic overtones of a charmed world\", notes Goodman. It was by combining the aspects of Modernism with his \"unique artistic language\", that he was able to catch the attention of critics and collectors throughout Europe. Generally, it was his boyhood of living in a Belarusian provincial town that gave him a continual source of imaginative stimuli. Chagall would become one of many Jewish \u00e9migr\u00e9s who later became noted artists, all of them similarly having once been part of \"Russia's most numerous and creative minorities\", notes Goodman.\nWorld War I, which ended in 1918, had displaced nearly a million Jews and destroyed most of what remained of the provincial shtetl culture that had defined life for most Eastern European Jews for centuries. Goodman notes, \"The fading of traditional Jewish society left artists like Chagall with powerful memories that could no longer be fed by a tangible reality. Instead, that culture became an emotional and intellectual source that existed solely in memory and the imagination... So rich had the experience been, it sustained him for the rest of his life.\" Sweeney adds that \"if you ask Chagall to explain his paintings, he would reply, 'I don't understand them at all. They are not literature. They are only pictorial arrangements of images that obsess me...\"\nIn 1948, after returning to France from the U.S. after the war, he saw for himself the destruction that the war had brought to Europe and the Jewish populations. In 1951, as part of a memorial book dedicated to eighty-four Jewish artists who were killed by the Nazis in France, he wrote a poem entitled \"For the Slaughtered Artists: 1950\", which inspired paintings such as the \"Song of David\" (see photo):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I see the fire, the smoke and the gas; rising to the blue cloud, turning it black. I see the torn-out hair, the pulled-out teeth. They overwhelm me with my rabid palette. I stand in the desert before heaps of boots, clothing, ash and dung, and mumble my Kaddish. And as I stand\u2014from my paintings, the painted David descends to me, harp in hand. He wants to help me weep and recite chapters of Psalms.\nLewis writes that Chagall \"remains the most important visual artist to have borne witness to the world of East European Jewry... and inadvertently became the public witness of a now vanished civilization.\" Although Judaism has religious inhibitions about pictorial art of many religious subjects, Chagall managed to use his fantasy images as a form of visual metaphor combined with folk imagery. His \"Fiddler on the Roof\", for example, combines a folksy village setting with a fiddler as a way to show the Jewish love of music as important to the Jewish spirit.\nMusic played an important role in shaping the subjects of his work. While he later came to love the music of Bach and Mozart, during his youth he was mostly influenced by the music within the Hasidic community where he was raised. Art historian Franz Meyer points out that one of the main reasons for the unconventional nature of his work is related to the hassidism which inspired the world of his childhood and youth and had actually impressed itself on most Eastern European Jews since the 18th century. He writes, \"For Chagall this is one of the deepest sources, not of inspiration, but of a certain spiritual attitude... the hassidic spirit is still the basis and source of nourishment of his art.\" In a talk that Chagall gave in 1963 while visiting the US, he discussed some of those impressions.\nHowever, Chagall had a complex relationship with Judaism. On the one hand, he credited his Russian Jewish cultural background as being crucial to his artistic imagination. But however ambivalent he was about his religion, he could not avoid drawing upon his Jewish past for artistic material. As an adult, he was not a practicing Jew, but through his paintings and stained glass, he continually tried to suggest a more \"universal message\", using both Jewish and Christian themes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For about two thousand years a reserve of energy has fed and supported us, and filled our lives, but during the last century a split has opened in this reserve, and its components have begun to disintegrate: God, perspective, colour, the Bible, shape, line, traditions, the so-called humanities, love, devotion, family, school, education, the prophets and Christ himself. Have I too, perhaps, doubted in my time? I painted pictures upside down, decapitated people and dissected them, scattering the pieces in the air, all in the name of another perspective, another kind of picture composition and another formalism.\nHe was also at pains to distance his work from a single Jewish focus. At the opening of The Chagall Museum in Nice he said 'My painting represents not the dream of one people but of all humanity'.\nStained glass.\nOne of Chagall's major contributions to art has been his work with stained glass. This medium allowed him further to express his desire to create intense and fresh colors and had the added benefit of natural light and refraction interacting and constantly changing: everything from the position where the viewer stood to the weather outside would alter the visual effect (though this is not the case with his Hadassah windows). It was not until 1956, when he was nearly 70 years of age, that he designed windows for the \u00c9glise Notre-Dame de Toute Gr\u00e2ce du Plateau d'Assy, his first major project. The project was at the behest of Father Couturier, a monk who is credited with reviving religious art in France. Then, from 1958 to 1960, he created windows for Metz Cathedral. This was a collaboration with glassmaker Charles Marq and their interchanges focussed on how variations in natural lighting could transform the work.\nJerusalem Windows (1962).\nIn 1960, he began creating stained glass windows for the synagogue of Hebrew University's Hadassah Medical Center in Jerusalem. Leymarie writes that \"in order to illuminate the synagogue both spiritually and physically\", it was decided that the twelve windows, representing the twelve tribes of Israel, were to be filled with stained glass. Chagall envisaged the synagogue as \"a crown offered to the Jewish Queen\", and the windows as \"jewels of translucent fire\", she writes. Chagall then devoted the next two years to the task, and upon completion in 1961 the windows were exhibited in Paris and then the Museum of Modern Art in New York. They were installed permanently in Jerusalem in February 1962. Each of the twelve windows is approximately 11 feet high and wide, much larger than anything he had done before. Cogniat considers them to be \"his greatest work in the field of stained glass\", although Virginia Haggard McNeil records Chagall's disappointment that they were to be lit with artificial light, and so would not change according to the conditions of natural light.\nFrench philosopher Gaston Bachelard commented that \"Chagall reads the Bible and suddenly the passages become light.\" In 1973 Israel released a 12-stamp set with images of the stained-glass windows.\nThe windows symbolize the twelve tribes of Israel who were blessed by Jacob and Moses in the verses which conclude Genesis and Deuteronomy. In those books, notes Leymarie, \"The dying Moses repeated Jacob's solemn act and, in a somewhat different order, also blessed the twelve tribes of Israel who were about to enter the land of Canaan... In the synagogue, where the windows are distributed in the same way, the tribes form a symbolic guard of honor around the tabernacle.\" Leymarie describes the physical and spiritual significance of the windows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The essence of the Jerusalem Windows lies in color, in Chagall's magical ability to animate material and transform it into light. Words do not have the power to describe Chagall's color, its spirituality, its singing quality, its dazzling luminosity, its ever more subtle flow, and its sensitivity to the inflections of the soul and the transports of the imagination. It is simultaneously jewel-hard and foamy, reverberating and penetrating, radiating light from an unknown interior.\nAt the dedication ceremony in 1962, Chagall described his feelings about the windows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For me a stained glass window is a transparent partition between my heart and the heart of the world. Stained glass has to be serious and passionate. It is something elevating and exhilarating. It has to live through the perception of light. To read the Bible is to perceive a certain light, and the window has to make this obvious through its simplicity and grace... The thoughts have nested in me for many years, since the time when my feet walked on the Holy Land, when I prepared myself to create engravings of the Bible. They strengthened me and encouraged me to bring my modest gift to the Jewish people\u2014that people that lived here thousands of years ago, among the other Semitic peoples.\n\"Peace\", United Nations building (1964).\nIn 1964 Chagall created a stained-glass window, entitled \"Peace\", for the UN in honor of Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld, the UN's second secretary general who was killed in an airplane crash in Northern Rhodesia in 1961. The window is about wide and high and contains symbols of peace and love along with musical symbols. Chagall's own handwritten dedication reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To all who served the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations Charter, for which Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld gave his life\n\"Good Samaritan\", Union Church of Pocantico Hills (1964).\nIn 1967 he dedicated a stained-glass window to John D. Rockefeller in the Union Church of Pocantico Hills, New York.\nFraum\u00fcnster in Zurich, Switzerland (1967).\nThe Fraum\u00fcnster church in Zurich, Switzerland, founded in 853, is known for its five large stained glass windows created by Chagall in 1967. Each window is tall by wide. Religion historian James H. Charlesworth notes that it is \"surprising how Christian symbols are featured in the works of an artist who comes from a strict and Orthodox Jewish background.\" He surmises that Chagall, as a result of his Russian background, often used Russian icons in his paintings, with their interpretations of Christian symbols. He explains that his chosen themes were usually derived from biblical stories, and frequently portrayed the \"obedience and suffering of God's chosen people.\" One of the panels depicts Moses receiving the Torah, with rays of light from his head. At the top of another panel is a depiction of Jesus' crucifixion.\nSt Stephan's church in Mainz, Germany (1978).\nIn 1978 he began creating windows for St Stephan's church in Mainz, Germany. Today, 200,000 visitors a year visit the church, and \"tourists from the whole world pilgrim up St Stephan's Mount, to see the glowing blue stained glass windows by the artist Marc Chagall\", states the city's web site. \"St Stephan's is the only German church for which Chagall has created windows.\"\nThe website also notes, \"The colours address our vital consciousness directly, because they tell of optimism, hope and delight in life\", says Monsignor Klaus Mayer, who imparts Chagall's work in mediations and books. He corresponded with Chagall during 1973, and succeeded in persuading the \"master of colour and the biblical message\" to create a sign for Jewish-Christian attachment and international understanding. Centuries earlier Mainz had been \"the capital of European Jewry\", and contained the largest Jewish community in Europe, notes historian John Man. In 1978, at the age of 91, Chagall created the first window and eight more followed. Chagall's collaborator Charles Marq complemented Chagall's work by adding several stained glass windows using the typical colors of Chagall.\nAll Saints Church, Tudeley, UK (1963\u20131978).\nAll Saints Church, Tudeley, is the only church in the world to have all its twelve windows decorated by Chagall. The other three religious buildings with complete sets of Chagall windows are the Hadassah Medical Center synagogue, the Chapel of Le Saillant, Limousin, and the Union Church of Pocantico Hills, New York.\nThe windows at Tudeley were commissioned by Sir Henry and Lady Rosemary d'Avigdor-Goldsmid as a memorial tribute to their daughter Sarah, who died in 1963 aged 21 in a sailing accident off Rye. When Chagall arrived for the dedication of the east window in 1967, and saw the church for the first time, he exclaimed \"\" (\"It's beautiful! I will do them all!\") Over the next ten years Chagall designed the remaining eleven windows, made again in collaboration with the glassworker Charles Marq in his workshop at Reims in northern France. The last windows were installed in 1985, just before Chagall's death.\nChichester Cathedral, West Sussex, UK.\nOn the north side of Chichester Cathedral, there is a stained glass window designed and created by Chagall at the age of 90. The window, his last commissioned work, was inspired by Psalm 150, 'Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord', at the suggestion of Dean Walter Hussey. The window was unveiled by the Duchess of Kent in 1978.\nAmerica Windows, Chicago.\nChagall visited Chicago in the early 1970s to install his mural \"The Four Seasons\", and at that time was inspired to create a set of stained glass windows for the Art Institute of Chicago. After discussions with the Art Institute and further reflection, Chagall made the windows a tribute to the American Bicentennial, and in particular the commitment of the United States to cultural and religious freedom. The windows appeared prominently in the 1986 movie \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\". From 2005 to 2010, the windows were moved due to nearby construction on a new wing of the Art Institute, and for archival cleaning.\nOther forms of art.\nMurals, theatre sets and costumes.\nChagall first worked on stage designs in 1914 while living in Russia, under the inspiration of the theatrical designer and artist L\u00e9on Bakst. It was during this period in the Russian theatre that formerly static ideas of stage design were, according to Cogniat, \"being swept away in favor of a wholly arbitrary sense of space with different dimensions, perspectives, colors and rhythms.\" These changes appealed to Chagall who had been experimenting with Cubism and wanted a way to enliven his images. Designing murals and stage designs, Chagall's \"dreams sprang to life and became an actual movement.\"\nAs a result, Chagall played an important role in Russian artistic life during that time and \"was one of the most important forces in the current urge towards anti-realism\" which helped the new Russia invent \"astonishing\" creations. Many of his designs were done for the Jewish Theatre in Moscow which put on numerous Jewish plays by playwrights such as Gogol and Synge. Chagall's set designs helped create illusory atmospheres which became the essence of the theatrical performances.\nAfter leaving Russia, twenty years passed before he was again offered a chance to design theatre sets. In the years between, his paintings still included harlequins, clowns and acrobats, which Cogniat notes \"convey his sentimental attachment to and nostalgia for the theatre\". His first assignment designing sets after Russia was for the ballet \"Aleko\" in 1942, while living in the US. In 1945 he was also commissioned to design the sets and costumes for Stravinsky's \"Firebird\". These designs contributed greatly towards his enhanced reputation in the US as a major artist and, as of 2013, are still in use by New York City Ballet.\nCogniat describes how Chagall's designs \"immerse the spectator in a luminous, colored fairy-land where forms are mistily defined and the spaces themselves seem animated with whirlwinds or explosions.\" His technique of using theatrical color in this way reached its peak when Chagall returned to Paris and designed the sets for Ravel's \"Daphnis et Chlo\u00e9\" in 1958.\nIn 1964 he repainted the ceiling of the Paris Opera using of canvas. He painted two monumental murals which hang on opposite sides of the new Metropolitan Opera house at Lincoln Center in New York which opened in 1966. The pieces, \"The Sources of Music\" and \"The Triumph of Music\", which hang from the top-most balcony level and extend down to the Grand Tier lobby level, were completed in France and shipped to New York, and are covered by a system of panels during the hours in which the opera house receives direct sunlight to prevent fading. He also designed the sets and costumes for a new production of \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\" for the company which opened in February 1967 and was used through the 1981/1982 season.\nTapestries.\nChagall also designed tapestries which were woven under the direction of Yvette Cauquil-Prince, who also collaborated with Picasso. These tapestries are much rarer than his paintings, with only 40 of them ever reaching the commercial market. Chagall designed three tapestries for the state hall of the Knesset in Israel, along with 12-floor mosaics and a wall mosaic.\nCeramics and sculpture.\nChagall began learning about ceramics and sculpture while living in south France. Ceramics became a fashion in the C\u00f4te d'Azur with various workshops starting up at Antibes, Vence and Vallauris. He took classes along with other known artists including Picasso and Fernand L\u00e9ger. At first Chagall painted existing pieces of pottery but soon expanded into designing his own, which began his work as a sculptor as a complement to his painting.\nAfter experimenting with pottery and dishes he moved into large ceramic murals. However, he was never satisfied with the limits imposed by the square tile segments which Cogniat notes \"imposed on him a discipline which prevented the creation of a plastic image.\"\nFinal years and death.\nAuthor Serena Davies writes that \"By the time he died in France in 1985\u2014the last surviving master of European modernism, outliving Joan Mir\u00f3 by two years\u2014he had experienced at first hand the high hopes and crushing disappointments of the Russian Revolution, and had witnessed the end of the Pale of Settlement, the near annihilation of European Jewry, and the obliteration of Vitebsk, his home town, where only 118 of a population of 240,000 survived the Second World War.\"\nChagall's final work was a commissioned piece of art for the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago. The maquette painting titled \"Job\" had been completed, but Chagall died just before the completion of the tapestry.\nYvette Cauquil-Prince was weaving the tapestry under Chagall's supervision and was the last person to work with Chagall. She left Vava and Marc Chagall's home at 4 pm on 28 March after discussing and matching the final colors from the maquette painting for the tapestry. He died that evening.\nHis relationship with his Jewish identity was \"unresolved and tragic\", Davies states. He would have died without Jewish rites, had not a Jewish stranger stepped forward and said the kaddish, the Jewish prayer for the dead, over his coffin. Chagall is buried alongside his last wife Valentina \"Vava\" Brodsky Chagall, in the multi-denominational cemetery in the traditional artists' town of Saint-Paul-de-Vence, in the French region of Provence.\nCatalogue raisonn\u00e9.\nAn online catalogue raisonn\u00e9 of the artist, in progress, was initiated in 2019 by the Association des Amis de Marc Chagall under the direction of Ambre Gauthier, in conjunction with the Archives Marc et Ida Chagall and the Marc Chagall Committee. Its online publication began in 2023 with the 97 sculptures made by Marc Chagall, then in 2024 with the addition of his 350 ceramics.\nLegacy and influence.\nChagall biographer Jackie Wullschlager praises him as a \"pioneer of modern art and one of its greatest figurative painters... [who] invented a visual language that recorded the thrill and terror of the twentieth century.\" She adds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On his canvases we read the triumph of modernism, the breakthrough in art to an expression of inner life that ... is one of the last century's signal legacies. At the same time Chagall was personally swept up in the horrors of European history between 1914 and 1945: world wars, revolution, ethnic persecution, the murder and exile of millions. In an age when many major artists fled reality for abstraction, he distilled his experiences of suffering and tragedy into images at once immediate, simple, and symbolic to which everyone could respond.\nArt historians Ingo Walther and Rainer Metzger refer to Chagall as a \"poet, dreamer, and exotic apparition.\" They add that throughout his long life the \"role of outsider and artistic eccentric\" came naturally to him, as he seemed to be a kind of intermediary between worlds: \"as a Jew with a lordly disdain for the ancient ban on image-making; as a Russian who went beyond the realm of familiar self-sufficiency; or the son of poor parents, growing up in a large and needy family.\" Yet he went on to establish himself in the sophisticated world of \"elegant artistic salons.\"\nThrough his imagination and strong memories Chagall was able to use typical motifs and subjects in most of his work: village scenes, peasant life, and intimate views of the small world of the Jewish village (shtetl). His tranquil figures and simple gestures helped produce a \"monumental sense of dignity\" by translating everyday Jewish rituals into a \"timeless realm of iconic peacefulness\". Leymarie writes that Chagall \"transcended the limits of his century. He has unveiled possibilities unsuspected by an art that had lost touch with the Bible, and in doing so he has achieved a wholly new synthesis of Jewish culture long ignored by painting.\" He adds that although Chagall's art cannot be confined to religion, his \"most moving and original contributions, what he called 'his message', are those drawn from religious or, more precisely, Biblical sources.\"\nWalther and Metzger try to summarize Chagall's contribution to art:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His life and art together added up to this image of a lonesome visionary, a citizen of the world with much of the child still in him, a stranger lost in wonder\u2014an image which the artist did everything to cultivate. Profoundly religious and with a deep love of the homeland, his work is arguably the most urgent appeal for tolerance and respect of all that is different that modern times could make.\nAndr\u00e9 Malraux praised him. He said: \"[Chagall] is the greatest image-maker of this century. He has looked at our world with the light of freedom, and seen it with the colours of love.\"\nArt market.\nA 1928 Chagall oil painting, \"Les Amoureux\", measuring 117.3 x 90.5\u00a0cm, depicting Bella Rosenfeld, the artist's first wife and adopted home Paris, sold for $28.5\u00a0million (with fees) at Sotheby's New York, 14 November 2017, almost doubling Chagall's 27-year-old $14.85\u00a0million auction record.\nIn October 2010, his painting \"Bestiaire et Musique\", depicting a bride and a fiddler floating in a night sky amid circus performers and animals, \"was the star lot\" at an auction in Hong Kong. When it sold for $4.1\u00a0million, it became the most expensive contemporary Western painting ever sold in Asia.\nNazi-loot and restitution cases.\nThe earliest court case in the United States related to Nazi-looted art involved a painting by Chagall, called variously \"L'Echelle de Jacob\" or \"Le Paysan et l'Echelle\" or \"The Peasant and the Ladder\" or \"Jacob's Ladder,\" which had been seized by the Einsatzstab Rosenberg (ERR) Nazi looting organisation from the Menzel apartment in Brussels in 1941 after the Jewish family fled the Nazis\".\" In 1969 the widow Erna Menzel sued the US art collector Albert A. List, who had bought the painting from Perls Galleries in New York in 1955. In Menzel v List, the court awarded the Chagall painting to Menzel and ordered Klaus Perls to pay List the appreciated value of the painting.\nIn 2013, previously unknown works by Chagall were discovered in the stash of artworks hidden away by the son of one of Hitler's art dealers, Hildebrand Gurlitt. Chagall's \"Allegorical Scene\" was identified as having come from the collection of Savely Blumestein.\nIn 2022 France restituted \"The Father (Le P\u00e8re)\" to the heirs of David Cender, a Polish-Jewish violin maker and luthier who survived Auschwitz where his wife and daughter were killed. According to the French culture ministry, Chagall had repurchased his own painting after the war not knowing its provenance, before it was donated to the French national collections in 1988.\nIn February 2024, the \"New York Times\" reported that the Museum of Modern Art in New York (MoMa) had secretly restituted Chagall's \"\" to the heirs of Franz Matthiesen in 2021, and that the restitution involved a $4 million payment to the museum. The painting had passed through the Nazi dealer Kurt Feldhausser and the Wehye Gallery and its provenance was disputed.\nTheatre.\nIn the 1990s, Daniel Jamieson wrote \"The Flying Lovers of Vitebsk\", a play concerning the life of Chagall and partner Bella. It has been revived multiple times, most recently in 2020 with Emma Rice directing a production which was live-streamed from the Bristol Old Vic and then made available for on-demand viewing, in partnership with theaters around the world. This production had Marc Antolin in the role of Chagall and Audrey Brisson playing Bella Chagall; produced during the COVID epidemic, it required the entire crew to quarantine together to make the live performance and broadcast possible.\nIn 2022, James Sherman wrote \"Chagall in School\", a play concerning Chagall's leadership of the Vitebsk Art College. It premiered in Chicago at Theatre Wit with Georgette Verdin directing a production by Grippo Theatre Company. This production had John Drea in the role of Chagall and Yourtana Sulaiman playing Berta (Bella) Chagall. The production was well-received, with designer Erin Pleake winning a Non-Equity Jeff Award for Projection Design.\nExhibitions and tributes.\nDuring his lifetime, Chagall received several honors:\n\"Chagall\", a short 1963 documentary, features Chagall. It won the 1964 Academy Award for Best Short Subject Documentary.\nBecause of the international acclaim he enjoyed and the popularity of his art, a number of countries have issued commemorative stamps in his honor depicting examples from his works. In 1963 France issued a stamp of his painting, \"The Married Couple of the Eiffel Tower\". In 1969, Israel produced a stamp depicting his \"King David\" painting. In 1973 Israel released a 12-stamp set with images of the stained-glass windows that he created for the Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center Synagogue; each window was made to signify one of the \"Twelve Tribes of Israel\".\nIn 1987, as a tribute to recognize the centennial of his birth in Belarus, seven nations engaged in a special omnibus program and released postage stamps in his honor. The countries which issued the stamps included Antigua &amp; Barbuda, Dominica, The Gambia, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Grenada, which together produced 48 stamps and 10 souvenir sheets. Although the stamps all portray his various masterpieces, the names of the artwork are not listed on the stamps.\nThere were also several major exhibitions of Chagall's work during his lifetime and following his death.\nDuring the closing ceremony of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, a Chagall-like float with clouds and dancers passed by upside down hovering above 130 costumed dancers, 40 stilt-walkers and a violinist playing folk music.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63136", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63136", "title": "Picaresque novel", "text": "Genre of prose fiction with a roguish hero\nThe picaresque novel (Spanish: \"picaresca\", from \"p\u00edcaro\", for 'rogue' or 'rascal') is a genre of prose fiction. It depicts the adventures of a roguish but appealing hero, usually of low social class, who lives by his wits in a corrupt society. Picaresque novels typically adopt the form of \"an episodic prose narrative\" with a realistic style. There are often elements of comedy and satire.\nThe picaresque genre began with the Spanish novel \"Lazarillo de Tormes\" (1554), which was published anonymously during the Spanish Golden Age because of its anticlerical content. Literary works from Imperial Rome published during the 1st\u20132nd century AD, such as \"Satyricon\" by Petronius and \"The Golden Ass\" by Apuleius had a relevant influence on the picaresque genre and are considered predecessors. Other notable early Spanish contributors to the genre included Mateo Alem\u00e1n's \"Guzm\u00e1n de Alfarache\" (1599\u20131604) and Francisco de Quevedo's \"El Busc\u00f3n\" (1626). Some other ancient influences of the picaresque genre include Roman playwrights such as Plautus and Terence. \"The Golden Ass\" by Apuleius nevertheless remains, according to various scholars such as F. W. Chandler, A. Marasso, T. Somerville and T. Bodenm\u00fcller, the primary antecedent influence for the picaresque genre. Subsequently, following the example of Spanish writers, the genre flourished throughout Europe for more than 200 years and it continues to have an influence on modern literature and fiction.\nDefined.\nAccording to the traditional view of Thrall and Hibbard (first published in 1936), seven qualities distinguish the picaresque novel or narrative form, all or some of which an author may employ for effect:\nIn the English-speaking world, the term \"picaresque\" is often used loosely to refer to novels that contain some elements of this genre; e.g. an episodic recounting of adventures on the road. The term is also sometimes used to describe works which only contain some of the genre's elements, such as Miguel de Cervantes' \"Don Quixote\" (1605 and 1615), or Charles Dickens' \"The Pickwick Papers\" (1836\u20131837).\nEtymology.\nThe word \"\" first starts to appear in Spain with the current meaning in 1545, though at the time it had no association with literature. The word \"p\u00edcaro\" does not appear in \"Lazarillo de Tormes\" (1554), the novella credited by modern scholars with founding the genre. The expression \"picaresque novel\" was coined in 1810. Whether it has any validity at all as a generic label in the Spanish sixteenth and seventeenth centuries\u2014Cervantes certainly used \"picaresque\" with a different meaning than it has today\u2014has been called into question. There is unresolved debate within Hispanic studies about what the term means, or meant, and which works were, or should be, so called. The only work clearly called \"picaresque\" by its contemporaries was Mateo Alem\u00e1n's \"Guzm\u00e1n de Alfarache\" (1599\u20131604), which they considered \"El libro del p\u00edcaro\" (English: \"The Book of the P\u00edcaro\").\nHistory.\n\"Lazarillo de Tormes\" and its sources.\nWhile elements of literature by Geoffrey Chaucer and Giovanni Boccaccio have a picaresque feel and may have contributed to the style, the modern picaresque begins with \"Lazarillo de Tormes\", which was published anonymously in 1554 in Burgos, Medina del Campo, and Alcal\u00e1 de Henares in Spain, and also in Antwerp, which at the time was under Spanish rule as a major city in the Spanish Netherlands. It is variously considered either the first picaresque novel or at least the antecedent of the genre.\nThe protagonist, L\u00e1zaro, lives by his wits in an effort to survive and succeed in an impoverished country full of hypocrisy. As a \"p\u00edcaro\" character, he is an alienated outsider, whose ability to expose and ridicule individuals compromised within society gives him a revolutionary stance. L\u00e1zaro states that the motivation for his writing is to communicate his experiences of overcoming deception, hypocrisy, and falsehood (\"enga\u00f1o\").\nThe character type draws on elements of characterization already present in Roman literature, especially Petronius's \"Satyricon\". L\u00e1zaro shares some of the traits of the central figure of Encolpius, a former gladiator, though it is unlikely that the author had access to Petronius's work. From the comedies of Plautus, \"Lazarillo\" borrows the figure of the parasite and the supple slave. Other traits are taken from Apuleius's \"The Golden Ass\". \"The Golden Ass\" and \"Satyricon\" are rare surviving samples of the \"Milesian tale\", a popular genre in the classical world, and were revived and widely read in Renaissance Europe.\nThe principal episodes of \"Lazarillo\" are based on Arabic folktales that were well known to the Moorish inhabitants of Spain. The Arabic influence may account for the negative portrayal of priests and other church officials in \"Lazarillo\". Arabic literature, which was read widely in Spain in the time of Al-Andalus and possessed a literary tradition with similar themes, is thus another possible influence on the picaresque style. Al-Hamadhani (d.1008) of Hamadhan (Iran) is credited with inventing the literary genre of \"maq\u0101m\u0101t\" in which a wandering vagabond makes his living on the gifts his listeners give him following his extemporaneous displays of rhetoric, erudition, or verse, often done with a trickster's touch. Ibn al-Astarkuwi or al-Ashtarkuni (d.1134) also wrote in the genre \"maq\u0101m\u0101t\", comparable to later European picaresque.\nThe curious presence of Russian loanwords in the text of the \"Lazarillo\" also suggests the influence of medieval Slavic tales of tricksters, thieves, itinerant prostitutes, and brigands, who were common figures in the impoverished areas bordering on Germany to the west. When diplomatic ties to Germany and Spain were established under the emperor Charles V, these tales began to be read in Italian translations in the Iberian Peninsula.\nAs narrator of his own adventures, L\u00e1zaro seeks to portray himself as the victim of both his ancestry and his circumstance. This means of appealing to the compassion of the reader would be directly challenged by later picaresque novels such as \"Guzm\u00e1n de Alfarache\" (1599/1604) and \"El Busc\u00f3n\" (composed in the first decade of the 17th century and first published in 1626) because the idea of determinism used to cast the \"p\u00edcaro\" as a victim clashed with the Catholic Revival doctrine of free will.\nOther initial works.\nAn early example is Mateo Alem\u00e1n's \"Guzm\u00e1n de Alfarache\" (1599), characterized by religiosity. Guzm\u00e1n de Alfarache is a fictional character who lived in the city of San Juan de Aznalfarache, in Seville, Spain.\nFrancisco de Quevedo's \"El Busc\u00f3n\" (1604 according to Francisco Rico; the exact date is uncertain, yet it was certainly a very early work) is considered the absolute masterpiece of the genre by A. A. Parker, because of his baroque style and the study of delinquent psychology. However, a different school of thought, led by Francisco Rico, rejects Parker's view, contending instead that the protagonist is an unrealistic character and that\u2014as the structure of the novel is radically different from previous works in the picaresque genre\u2014Quevedo is using the form as a mere vehicle to show off his abilities with conceit and rhetoric (rather than to actually construct a satirical critique of Spanish Golden Age society).\nMiguel de Cervantes wrote several works \"in the picaresque manner, notably \"Rinconete y Cortadillo\" (1613) and \"El coloquio de los perros\" (1613; \"Colloquy of the Dogs\")\". \"Cervantes also incorporated elements of the picaresque into his greatest novel, \"Don Quixote\" (1605, 1615)\", the \"single most important progenitor of the modern novel\", that M. H. Abrams has described as a \"quasi-picaresque narrative\". Here the hero is not a rogue but a foolish knight.\nIn order to understand the historical context that led to the development of these paradigmatic picaresque novels in Spain during the 16th and 17th centuries, it is essential to take into consideration the circumstances surrounding the lives of \"conversos,\" whose ancestors had been Jewish, and whose New Christian faith was subjected to close scrutiny and mistrust.\nThe Spanish novels were read and imitated in other European countries where their influence can be found. In Germany, Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen wrote \"Simplicius Simplicissimus\" (1669), considered the most important of non-Spanish picaresque novels. It describes the devastation caused by the Thirty Years' War. Grimmelshausen's novel has been called an example of the German \"abenteuerroman\" (which literally means \"adventure novel\"). An \"abenteuerroman\" is Germany's version of the picaresque novel; it is an \"entertaining story of the adventures of the hero, but there is also often a serious aspect to the story.\"\nAlain-Ren\u00e9 Le Sage's \"Gil Blas\" (1715) is a classic example of the genre, which in France had declined into an aristocratic adventure. In Britain, the first example is Thomas Nashe's \"The Unfortunate Traveller\" (1594) in which a court page, Jack Wilson, exposes the underclass life in a string of European cities through lively, often brutal descriptions. The body of Tobias Smollett's work, and Daniel Defoe's \"Moll Flanders\" (1722) are considered picaresque, but they lack the sense of religious redemption of delinquency that was very important in Spanish and German novels. The triumph of Moll Flanders is more economic than moral. While the mores of the early 18th century wouldn't permit Moll to be a heroine \"per se\", Defoe hardly disguises his admiration for her resilience and resourcefulness.\nWorks with some picaresque elements.\nThe autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini, written in Florence beginning in 1558, also has much in common with the picaresque.\nThe classic Chinese novel \"Journey to the West\" is considered to have considerable picaresque elements. Having been published in 1590, it is contemporary with much of the above\u2014but is unlikely to have been directly influenced by the European genre.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nHenry Fielding proved his mastery of the form in \"Joseph Andrews\" (1742), \"The Life and Death of Jonathan Wild, the Great\" (1743) and \"The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling\" (1749), though Fielding attributed his style to an \"imitation of the manner of Cervantes, author of \"Don Quixote\"\".\nFollowing the Greek War of Independence (1821-1829) and the formation of the First Hellenic Republic, a circle of Greek intellectuals based in Athens started publishing novels inspired by the Romantic literary movement of the era, as well as the ancient Greek and Roman novels, such as \"Aethiopica\" by Heliodorus of Emesa, thus establishing the First Athenian School (1830-1880). Written in Katharevousa, and often describing semi-autobiographical and quasi-humorous episodes, novels such as Alexandros Soutsos's \"The Exile of 1831\" (1831) and Iakovos Pitsipios's \"Xouth the \u0391pe\" (1848) introduced the picaresque tradition to Modern Greek literature. Grigorios Palaiologos specifically cites Le Sage's \"Gil Blas\" as a source of inspiration for his picaresque novel, \"The Man of Many Sufferings\" (1839). Greek author and journalist Emmanuel Rhoides continued this tradition with his provocative novel The Papess Joanne (1866).\nWilliam Makepeace Thackeray is the master of the 19th-century English picaresque. His best-known work, \"Vanity Fair: A Novel Without a Hero\" (1847\u20131848) \u2014 a title ironically derived from John Bunyan's Puritan allegory of redemption \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" (1678) \u2014, follows the career of fortune-hunting adventuress Becky Sharp, her progress echoing the earlier \"Moll Flanders\". His earlier novel \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\" (1844) recounts the rise and fall of an Irish arriviste conniving his way into the 18th-century English aristocracy.\nThe 1880 Romanian novella \"Ivan Turbinc\u0103\" tells the story of a kind, but hedonistic and scheming ex-soldier who ends up tricking God, the Devil, and the Grim Reaper so that he can sneak into Heaven to party forever.\nAleko Konstantinov wrote the 1895 novel \"Bay Ganyo\" about the eponymous Bulgarian rogue. The character conducts business of uneven honesty around Europe before returning home to get into politics and newspaper publishing. Bay Ganyo is a well-known stereotype in Bulgaria.\nWorks influenced by the picaresque.\nIn the English-speaking world, the term \"picaresque\" has referred more to a literary technique or model than to the precise genre that the Spanish call \"picaresco\". The English-language term can simply refer to an episodic recounting of the adventures of an anti-hero on the road.\nLaurence Sterne's \"The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman\" (1761\u20131767) and \"A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy\" (1768) each have strong picaresque elements. Voltaire's satirical novel \"Candide\" (1759) contains elements of the picaresque. An interesting variation on the tradition of the picaresque is \"The Adventures of Hajji Baba of Ispahan\" (1824), a satirical view on early 19th-century Persia, written by James Morier. Another novel on the same theme is \"A Rogue's Life\" (1857) by Wilkie Collins.\nElements of the picaresque novel are found in Charles Dickens' \"The Pickwick Papers\" (1836\u201337). Nikolai Gogol occasionally used the technique, as in \"Dead Souls\" (1842\u201352). Mark Twain's \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" (1884) also has some elements of the picaresque novel.\n20th and 21st centuries.\n\"Kvachi Kvachantiradze\" is a novel by Mikheil Javakhishvili published in 1924. This is, in brief, the story of a swindler, a Georgian Felix Krull, or perhaps a cynical Don Quixote, named Kvachi Kvachantiradze: womanizer, cheat, perpetrator of insurance fraud, bank-robber, associate of Rasputin, filmmaker, revolutionary, and pimp.\n\"The Twelve Chairs\" (1928) and its sequel, \"The Little Golden Calf\" (1931), by Ilya Ilf and Yevgeni Petrov (together known as Ilf and Petrov) became classics of 20th-century Russian satire and the basis for numerous film adaptations.\n\"The Projects and Wanderings of Alfanhui\", a novel published in 1953 by Rafael S\u00e1nchez Ferlosio, is said to \"follow the Spanish picaresque tradition\" insofar as \"any Spanish book about a youth who travels during the period of a few years is likely to be classified as picaresque.\" Camilo Jos\u00e9 Cela's \"The Family of Pascual Duarte\" (1942), Ralph Ellison's \"Invisible Man\" (1952) and \"The Adventures of Augie March\" by Saul Bellow (1953) were also among mid-twentieth-century picaresque literature. John A. Lee's \"Shining with the Shiner\" (1944) tells amusing tales about New Zealand folk hero Ned Slattery (1840\u20131927) surviving by his wits and beating the 'Protestant work ethic'. So too is Thomas Mann's \"Confessions of Felix Krull\" (1954), which like many novels emphasizes the theme of a charmingly roguish ascent in the social order. \"Under the Net\" (1954) by Iris Murdoch, G\u00fcnter Grass's \"The Tin Drum\" (1959) is a German picaresque novel. John Barth's \"The Sot-Weed Factor\" (1960) is a picaresque novel that parodies the historical novel and uses black humor by intentionally incorrectly using literary devices.\nOther examples from the 1960s and 1970s include Jerzy Kosinski's \"The Painted Bird\" (1965), Vladimir Voinovich's \"The Life and Extraordinary Adventures of Private Ivan Chonkin\" (1969), and Arto Paasilinna's \"The Year of the Hare\" (1975).\nExamples from the 1980s include John Kennedy Toole's novel \"A Confederacy of Dunces\", which was published in 1980, eleven years after the author's suicide, and won the 1981 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. It follows the adventures of Ignatius J. Reilly, a well-educated but lazy and obese slob, as he attempts to find stable employment in New Orleans and meets many colorful characters along the way.\nLater examples include Umberto Eco's \"Baudolino\" (2000), and Aravind Adiga's \"The White Tiger\" (Booker Prize 2008).\nWilliam S. Burroughs was a devoted fan of picaresque novels, and gave a series of lectures involving the topic in 1979 at Naropa University in Colorado. He says it is impossible to separate the anti-hero from the picaresque novel, that most of these are funny, and they all have protagonists who are outsiders by their nature. His list of picaresque novels includes Petronius' novel \"Satyricon\" (54\u201368 AD), \"The Unfortunate Traveller\" (1594) by Thomas Nashe, both \"Maiden Voyage\" (1943) and \"A Voice Through a Cloud\" (1950) by Denton Welch, \"Two Serious Ladies\" (1943) by Jane Bowles, \"Death on Credit\" (1936) by Louis-Ferdinand C\u00e9line, and even himself.\nIn contemporary Latin American literature, there are Manuel Rojas' \"Hijo de ladr\u00f3n\" (1951), Joaqu\u00edn Edwards' \"El roto\" (1968), Elena Poniatowska's \"Hasta no verte Jes\u00fas m\u00edo\" (1969), Luis Zapata's \"Las aventuras, desventuras y sue\u00f1os de Adonis Garc\u00eda, el vampiro de la colonia Roma\" (1978) and Jos\u00e9 Baroja's \"Un hijo de perra\" (2017), among others.\nIn cinema.\nIn 1987 an Italian comedy film written and directed by Mario Monicelli was released under the Italian title \"I picari\". It was co-produced with Spain, where it was released as \"Los alegres p\u00edcaros\", and internationally as \"The Rogues\". Starring Vittorio Gassman, Nino Manfredi, Enrico Montesano, Giuliana De Sio and Giancarlo Giannini, the film is freely inspired by the Spanish novels \"Lazarillo de Tormes\" and \"Guzman de Alfarache\". The Disney film \"Aladdin\" (1992) can be considered a picaresque story.\nIn television.\nThe sixth episode of Season 1 of the Spanish fantasy television series, \"El ministerio del tiempo\" (English title: \"The Ministry of Time\"), entitled \"Tiempo de p\u00edcaros\" (Time of rascals) focuses on Lazarillo de Tormes as a young boy prior to his adventures in the genre-creating novel that bears his name. The Netflix series \"Inventing Anna\" (2022) has been called \"somewhat anhedonic post-internet picaresque\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "63137", "revid": "1309673059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63137", "title": "Mass production", "text": "High volume production of standardized products\nMass production, also known as series production, series manufacture, or continuous production, is the production of substantial amounts of standardized products in a constant flow, including and especially on assembly lines. Together with job production and batch production, it is one of the three main production methods.\nThe term \"mass production\" was popularized by a 1926 article in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" supplement that was written based on correspondence with Ford Motor Company. \"The New York Times\" used the term in the title of an article that appeared before the publication of the \"Britannica\" article.\nThe idea of mass production is applied to many kinds of products: from fluids and particulates handled in bulk (food, fuel, chemicals and mined minerals), to clothing, textiles, parts and assemblies of parts (household appliances and automobiles).\nSome mass production techniques, such as standardized sizes and production lines, predate the Industrial Revolution by many centuries; however, it was not until the introduction of machine tools and techniques to produce interchangeable parts were developed in the mid-19th century that modern mass production was possible.\nOverview.\nMass production involves making many copies of products (Mainly done through machines), very quickly, using assembly line techniques to send partially complete products to workers who each work on an individual step, rather than having a worker work on a whole product from start to finish. The emergence of mass production allowed supply to outstrip demand in many markets, forcing companies to seek new ways to become more competitive. Mass production ties into the idea of overconsumption and the idea that we as humans consume too much. \nMass production of fluid matter typically involves piping with centrifugal pumps or screw conveyors (augers) to transfer raw materials or partially complete products between vessels. Fluid flow processes such as oil refining and bulk materials such as wood chips and pulp are automated using a system of process control which uses various instruments to measure variables such as temperature, pressure, volumetric and level, providing feedback.\nBulk materials such as coal, ores, grains and wood chips are handled by belt, chain, slat, pneumatic or screw conveyors, bucket elevators and mobile equipment such as front-end loaders. Materials on pallets are handled with forklifts. Also used for handling heavy items like reels of paper, steel or machinery are electric overhead cranes, sometimes called bridge cranes because they span large factory bays.\nMass production is capital-intensive and energy-intensive, for it uses a high proportion of machinery and energy in relation to workers. It is also usually automated while total expenditure per unit of product is decreased. However, the machinery that is needed to set up a mass production line (such as robots and machine presses) is so expensive that in order to attain profits there must be some assurance that the product will be successful.\nOne of the descriptions of mass production is that \"the skill is built into the tool\" , which means that the worker using the tool may not need the skill. For example, in the 19th or early 20th century, this could be expressed as \"the craftsmanship is in the workbench itself\" (not the training of the worker). Rather than having a skilled worker measure every dimension of each part of the product against the plans or the other parts as it is being formed, there were jigs ready at hand to ensure that the part was made to fit this set-up. It had already been checked that the finished part would be to specifications to fit all the other finished parts\u2014and it would be made more quickly, with no time spent on finishing the parts to fit one another. Later, once computerized control came about (for example, CNC), jigs were obviated, but it remained true that the skill (or knowledge) was built into the tool (or process, or documentation) rather than residing in the worker's head. This is the specialized capital required for mass production; each workbench and set of tools (or each CNC cell, or each fractionating column) is different (fine-tuned to its task).\nHistory.\nPre-industrial.\nStandardized parts and sizes and factory production techniques were developed in pre-industrial times; before the invention of machine tools the manufacture of precision parts, especially metal ones, was highly labour-intensive.\nCrossbows made with bronze parts were produced in China during the Warring States period. The Qin Emperor unified China at least in part by equipping large armies with these weapons, which were fitted with a sophisticated trigger mechanism made of interchangeable parts. The Terracotta Army guarding the Emperor's tomb is also believed to have been created through the use of standardized molds on an assembly line.\nIn ancient Carthage, ships of war were mass-produced on a large scale at a moderate cost, allowing them to efficiently maintain their control of the Mediterranean. Many centuries later, the Republic of Venice would follow Carthage in producing ships with prefabricated parts on an assembly line: the Venetian Arsenal produced nearly one ship every day in what was effectively the world's first factory, which at its height employed 16,000 people.\nThe invention of movable type has allowed for documents such as books to be mass produced. The first movable type system was invented in China by Bi Sheng, during the reign of the Song dynasty, where it was used to, among other things, issue paper money. The oldest extant book produced using metal type is \"Jikji\", printed in Korea in the year 1377. Johannes Gutenberg, through his invention of the printing press and production of the Gutenberg Bible, introduced movable type to Europe. Through this introduction, mass production in the European publishing industry was made commonplace, leading to a democratization of knowledge, increased literacy and education, and the beginnings of modern science. \nFrench artillery engineer Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval introduced the standardization of cannon design in the late 18th century. He streamlined production and management of cannonballs and cannons by limiting them to only three calibers, and he improved their effectiveness by requiring more spherical ammunition. Redesigning these weapons to use interchangeable wheels, screws, and axles simplified mass production and repair.\nIndustrial.\nIn the Industrial Revolution, simple mass production techniques were used at the Portsmouth Block Mills in England to make ships' pulley blocks for the Royal Navy in the Napoleonic Wars. It was achieved in 1803 by Marc Isambard Brunel in cooperation with Henry Maudslay under the management of Sir Samuel Bentham. The first unmistakable examples of manufacturing operations carefully designed to reduce production costs by specialized labour and the use of machines appeared in the 18th century in England.\nThe Navy was in a state of expansion that required 100,000 pulley blocks to be manufactured a year. Bentham had already achieved remarkable efficiency at the docks by introducing power-driven machinery and reorganising the dockyard system. Brunel, a pioneering engineer, and Maudslay, a pioneer of machine tool technology who had developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800 which standardized screw thread sizes for the first time which in turn allowed the application of interchangeable parts, collaborated on plans to manufacture block-making machinery. By 1805, the dockyard had been fully updated with the revolutionary, purpose-built machinery at a time when products were still built individually with different components. A total of 45 machines were required to perform 22 processes on the blocks, which could be made into one of three possible sizes. The machines were almost entirely made of metal thus improving their accuracy and durability. The machines would make markings and indentations on the blocks to ensure alignment throughout the process. One of the many advantages of this new method was the increase in labour productivity due to the less labour-intensive requirements of managing the machinery. Richard Beamish, assistant to Brunel's son and engineer, Isambard Kingdom Brunel, wrote:\nSo that ten men, by the aid of this machinery, can accomplish with uniformity, celerity and ease, what formerly required the uncertain labour of one hundred and ten.\nBy 1808, annual production from the 45 machines had reached 130,000 blocks and some of the equipment was still in operation as late as the mid-twentieth century. Mass production techniques were also used to rather limited extent to make clocks and watches, and to make small arms, though parts were usually non-interchangeable. Though produced on a very small scale, Crimean War gunboat engines designed and assembled by John Penn of Greenwich are recorded as the first instance of the application of mass production techniques (though not necessarily the assembly-line method) to marine engineering. In filling an Admiralty order for 90 sets to his high-pressure and high-revolution horizontal trunk engine design, Penn produced them all in 90 days. He also used Whitworth Standard threads throughout. Prerequisites for the wide use of mass production were interchangeable parts, machine tools and power, especially in the form of electricity.\nSome of the organizational management concepts needed to create 20th-century mass production, such as scientific management, had been pioneered by other engineers (most of whom are not famous, but Frederick Winslow Taylor is one of the well-known ones), whose work would later be synthesized into fields such as industrial engineering, manufacturing engineering, operations research, and management consultancy. Although after leaving the Henry Ford Company which was rebranded as Cadillac and later was awarded the Dewar Trophy in 1908 for creating interchangeable mass-produced precision engine parts, Henry Ford downplayed the role of Taylorism in the development of mass production at his company. However, Ford management performed time studies and experiments to mechanize their factory processes, focusing on minimizing worker movements. The difference is that while Taylor focused mostly on efficiency of the worker, Ford also substituted for labor by using machines, thoughtfully arranged, wherever possible.\nIn 1807, Eli Terry was hired to produce 4,000 wooden movement clocks in the Porter Contract. At this time, the annual yield for wooden clocks did not exceed a few dozen on average. Terry developed a milling machine in 1795, in which he perfected Interchangeable parts. In 1807, Terry developed a spindle cutting machine, which could produce multiple parts at the same time. Terry hired Silas Hoadley and Seth Thomas to work the Assembly line at the facilities. The Porter Contract was the first contract which called for mass production of clock movements in history. In 1815, Terry began mass-producing the first shelf clock. Chauncey Jerome, an apprentice of Eli Terry mass-produced up to 20,000 brass clocks annually in 1840 when he invented the cheap 30-hour OG clock.\nThe United States Department of War sponsored the development of interchangeable parts for guns produced at the arsenals at Springfield, Massachusetts and Harpers Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia) in the early decades of the 19th century, finally achieving reliable interchangeability by about 1850. This period coincided with the development of machine tools, with the armories designing and building many of their own. Some of the methods employed were a system of gauges for checking dimensions of the various parts and jigs and fixtures for guiding the machine tools and properly holding and aligning the work pieces. This system came to be known as \"armory practice\" or the \"American system of manufacturing\", which spread throughout New England aided by skilled mechanics from the armories who were instrumental in transferring the technology to the sewing machines manufacturers and other industries such as machine tools, harvesting machines and bicycles. Singer Manufacturing Co., at one time the largest sewing machine manufacturer, did not achieve interchangeable parts until the late 1880s, around the same time Cyrus McCormick adopted modern manufacturing practices in making harvesting machines.\nDuring World War II, The United States mass-produced many vehicles and weapons, such as ships (i.e. Liberty Ships, Higgins boats ), aircraft (i.e. North American P-51 Mustang, Consolidated B-24 Liberator, Boeing B-29 Superfortress), jeeps (i.e. Willys MB), trucks, tanks (i.e. M4 Sherman) and M2 Browning and M1919 Browning machine guns. Many vehicles, transported by ships have been shipped in parts and later assembled on-site.\nFor the ongoing energy transition, many wind turbine components and solar panels are being mass-produced. Wind turbines and solar panels are being used in respectively wind farms and solar farms.\nIn addition, in the ongoing climate change mitigation, large-scale carbon sequestration (through reforestation, blue carbon restoration, etc) has been proposed. Some projects (such as the Trillion Tree Campaign) involve planting a very large amount of trees. In order to speed up such efforts, fast propagation of trees may be useful. Some automated machines have been produced to allow for fast (vegetative) plant propagation.Also, for some plants that help to sequester carbon (such as seagrass), techniques have been developed to help speed up the process .\nMass production benefited from the development of materials such as inexpensive steel, high strength steel and plastics. Machining of metals was greatly enhanced with high-speed steel and later very hard materials such as tungsten carbide for cutting edges. Fabrication using steel components was aided by the development of electric welding and stamped steel parts, both which appeared in industry in about 1890. Plastics such as polyethylene, polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can be easily formed into shapes by extrusion, blow molding or injection molding, resulting in very low cost manufacture of consumer products, plastic piping, containers and parts.\nAn influential article that helped to frame and popularize the 20th century's definition of mass production appeared in a 1926 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" supplement. The article was written based on correspondence with Ford Motor Company and is sometimes credited as the first use of the term.\nFactory electrification.\nElectrification of factories began very gradually in the 1890s after the introduction of a practical DC motor by Frank J. Sprague and accelerated after the AC motor was developed by Galileo Ferraris, Nikola Tesla and Westinghouse, Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky and others. Electrification of factories was fastest between 1900 and 1930, aided by the establishment of electric utilities with central stations and the lowering of electricity prices from 1914 to 1917.\nElectric motors were several times more efficient than small steam engines because central station generation were more efficient than small steam engines and because line shafts and belts had high friction losses. Electric motors also allowed more flexibility in manufacturing and required less maintenance than line shafts and belts. Many factories saw a 30% increase in output simply from changing over to electric motors.\nElectrification enabled modern mass production, as with Thomas Edison's iron ore processing plant (about 1893) that could process 20,000 tons of ore per day with two shifts, each of five men. At that time it was still common to handle bulk materials with shovels, wheelbarrows and small narrow-gauge rail cars, and for comparison, a canal digger in previous decades typically handled five tons per 12-hour day.\nThe biggest impact of early mass production was in manufacturing everyday items, such as at the Ball Brothers Glass Manufacturing Company, which electrified its mason jar plant in Muncie, Indiana, U.S., around 1900. The new automated process used glass-blowing machines to replace 210 craftsman glass blowers and helpers. A small electric truck was used to handle 150 dozen bottles at a time where previously a hand truck would carry six dozen. Electric mixers replaced men with shovels handling sand and other ingredients that were fed into the glass furnace. An electric overhead crane replaced 36 day laborers for moving heavy loads across the factory.\nAccording to Henry Ford:\nThe provision of a whole new system of electric generation emancipated industry from the leather belt and line shaft, for it eventually became possible to provide each tool with its own electric motor. This may seem only a detail of minor importance. In fact, modern industry could not be carried out with the belt and line shaft for a number of reasons. The motor enabled machinery to be arranged in the order of the work, and that alone has probably doubled the efficiency of industry, for it has cut out a tremendous amount of useless handling and hauling. The belt and line shaft were also tremendously wasteful \u2013 so wasteful indeed that no factory could be really large, for even the longest line shaft was small according to modern requirements. Also high speed tools were impossible under the old conditions \u2013 neither the pulleys nor the belts could stand modern speeds. Without high speed tools and the finer steels which they brought about, there could be nothing of what we call modern industry.\nMass production was popularized in the late 1910s and 1920s by Henry Ford's Ford Motor Company, which introduced electric motors to the then-well-known technique of chain or sequential production. Ford also bought or designed and built special purpose machine tools and fixtures such as multiple spindle drill presses that could drill every hole on one side of an engine block in one operation and a multiple head milling machine that could simultaneously machine 15 engine blocks held on a single fixture. All of these machine tools were arranged systematically in the production flow and some had special carriages for rolling heavy items into machining position. Production of the Ford Model T used 32,000 machine tools.\nBuildings.\nThe process of prefabrication, wherein parts are created separately from the finished product, is at the core of all mass-produced construction. Early examples include movable structures reportedly utilized by Akbar the Great, and the chattel houses built by emancipated slaves on Barbados. The Nissen hut, first used by the British during World War I, married prefabrication and mass production in a way that suited the needs of the military. The simple structures, which cost little and could be erected in just a couple of hours, were highly successful: over 100,000 Nissen huts were produced during World War I alone, and they would go on to serve in other conflicts and inspire a number of similar designs.\nFollowing World War II, in the United States, William Levitt pioneered the building of standardized tract houses in 56 different locations around the country. These communities were dubbed Levittowns, and they were able to be constructed quickly and cheaply through the leveraging of economies of scale, as well as the specialization of construction tasks in a process akin to an assembly line. This era also saw the invention of the mobile home, a small prefabricated house that can be transported cheaply on a truck bed.\nIn the modern industrialization of construction, mass production is often used for prefabrication of house components.\nFabrics and Materials.\nMass production has significantly impacted the fashion industry, particularly in the realm of fibers and materials. The advent of synthetic fibers, such as polyester and nylon, revolutionized textile manufacturing by providing cost-effective alternatives to natural fibers. This shift enabled the rapid production of inexpensive clothing, contributing to the rise of fast fashion. This reliance on mass production has raised concerns about environmental sustainability and labor conditions, spurring the need for greater ethical and sustainable practices within the fashion industry.\nThe use of assembly lines.\nMass production systems for items made of numerous parts are usually organized into assembly lines. The assemblies pass by on a conveyor, or if they are heavy, hung from an overhead crane or monorail.\nIn a factory for a complex product, rather than one assembly line, there may be many auxiliary assembly lines feeding sub-assemblies (i.e. car engines or seats) to a backbone \"main\" assembly line. A diagram of a typical mass-production factory looks more like the skeleton of a fish than a single line.\nVertical integration.\nVertical integration is a business practice that involves gaining complete control over a product's production, from raw materials to final assembly.\nIn the age of mass production, this caused shipping and trade problems in that shipping systems were unable to transport huge volumes of finished automobiles (in Henry Ford's case) without causing damage, and also government policies imposed trade barriers on finished units.\nFord built the Ford River Rouge Complex with the idea of making the company's own iron and steel in the same large factory site where parts and car assembly took place. River Rouge also generated its own electricity.\nUpstream vertical integration, such as to raw materials, is away from leading technology toward mature, low-return industries. Most companies chose to focus on their core business rather than vertical integration. This included buying parts from outside suppliers, who could often produce them as cheaply or cheaper.\nStandard Oil, the major oil company in the 19th century, was vertically integrated partly because there was no demand for unrefined crude oil, but kerosene and some other products were in great demand. The other reason was that Standard Oil monopolized the oil industry. The major oil companies were, and many still are, vertically integrated, from production to refining and with their own retail stations, although some sold off their retail operations. Some oil companies also have chemical divisions.\nLumber and paper companies at one time owned most of their timber lands and sold some finished products such as corrugated boxes. The tendency has been to divest of timber lands to raise cash and to avoid property taxes.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nThe economies of mass production come from several sources. The primary cause is a reduction of non-productive effort of all types. In craft production, the craftsman must bustle about a shop, getting parts and assembling them. He must locate and use many tools many times for varying tasks. In mass production, each worker repeats one or a few related tasks that use the same tool to perform identical or near-identical operations on a stream of products. The exact tool and parts are always at hand, having been moved down the assembly line consecutively. The worker spends little or no time retrieving and/or preparing materials and tools, and so the time taken to manufacture a product using mass production is shorter than when using traditional methods.\nThe probability of human error and variation is also reduced, as tasks are predominantly carried out by machinery; error in operating such machinery has more far-reaching consequences. A reduction in labour costs, as well as an increased rate of production, enables a company to produce a larger quantity of one product at a lower cost than using traditional, non-linear methods.\nHowever, mass production is inflexible because it is difficult to alter a design or production process after a production line is implemented. Also, all products produced on one production line will be identical or very similar, and introducing variety to satisfy individual tastes is not easy. However, some variety can be achieved by applying different finishes and decorations at the end of the production line if necessary. The starter cost for the machinery can be expensive so the producer must be sure it sells or the producers will lose a lot of money.\nThe Ford Model T produced tremendous affordable output but was not very good at responding to demand for variety, customization, or design changes. As a consequence Ford eventually lost market share to General Motors, who introduced annual model changes, more accessories and a choice of colors.\nWith each passing decade, engineers have found ways to increase the flexibility of mass production systems, driving down the lead times on new product development and allowing greater customization and variety of products.\nCompared with other production methods, mass production can create new occupational hazards for workers. This is partly due to the need for workers to operate heavy machinery while also working close together with many other workers. Preventative safety measures, such as fire drills, as well as special training is therefore necessary to minimise the occurrence of industrial accidents.\nSocioeconomic impacts.\nIn the 1830s, French political thinker and historian Alexis de Tocqueville identified one of the key characteristics of America that would later make it so amenable to the development of mass production: the homogeneous consumer base. De Tocqueville wrote in his \"Democracy in America\" (1835) that \"The absence in the United States of those vast accumulations of wealth which favor the expenditures of large sums on articles of mere luxury\u00a0... impact to the productions of American industry a character distinct from that of other countries' industries. [Production is geared toward] articles suited to the wants of the whole people\".\nMass production improved productivity, which was a contributing factor to economic growth and the decline in work week hours, alongside other factors such as transportation infrastructures (canals, railroads and highways) and agricultural mechanization. These factors caused the typical work week to decline from 70 hours in the early 19th century to 60 hours late in the century, then to 50 hours in the early 20th century and finally to 40 hours in the mid-1930s.\nMass production permitted great increases in total production. Using a European crafts system into the late 19th century it was difficult to meet demand for products such as sewing machines and animal powered mechanical harvesters. By the late 1920s many previously scarce goods were in good supply. One economist has argued that this constituted \"overproduction\" and contributed to high unemployment during the Great Depression. Say's law denies the possibility of general overproduction and for this reason classical economists deny that it had any role in the Great Depression.\nMass production allowed the evolution of consumerism by lowering the unit cost of many goods used.\nMass production has been linked to the Fast Fashion Industry, often leaving the consumer with lower quality garments for a lower cost. Most fast-fashion clothing is mass-produced, which means it is typically made of cheap fabrics, such as polyester, and constructed poorly in order to keep short turnaround times to meet the demands of consumers and shifting trends.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63138", "revid": "1306617647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63138", "title": "Alchemist (disambiguation)", "text": "An alchemist is a person who practices alchemy.\nAlchemist or Alchemyst may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
