{"id": "70600", "revid": "50696339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70600", "title": "Princes in the Tower", "text": "15th-century English siblings who disappeared\nThe Princes in the Tower refers to the mystery of the fate of the deposed King Edward V of England and his younger brother Prince Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York, heirs to the throne of King Edward IV of England. The brothers were the only sons of the king by his queen, Elizabeth Woodville, living at the time of their father's death in 1483. Aged 12 and 9 years old, respectively, they were lodged in the Tower of London by their paternal uncle and England's regent, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, in preparation for Edward V's forthcoming coronation. Before the young king's coronation, however, he and his brother were declared illegitimate by Parliament. Gloucester ascended the throne as Richard III.\nIt is unclear what happened to the two princes after the last recorded sighting of them in the tower. It is generally assumed that they were murdered; a common hypothesis is that the murder was commissioned by Richard III in an attempt to secure his hold on the throne. Their deaths may have occurred sometime in 1483, but apart from their disappearance, the only evidence is circumstantial. As a result, several other theories about their fates have been proposed, including the suggestion that they were murdered by their kinsman the Duke of Buckingham, their future brother-in-law King Henry VII, or his mother Lady Margaret Beaufort, among others. It has also been suggested that one or both princes may have escaped assassination. In 1487, Lambert Simnel initially was crowned in Dublin as \"King Edward\", but later claimed by others to be York's cousin the Earl of Warwick. And again several years later, from 1491 until his capture in 1497, Perkin Warbeck claimed to be the Duke of York, having supposedly escaped to Flanders. Warbeck's claim was supported by some contemporaries, including York's aunt the Duchess of Burgundy.\nIn 1674, workmen at the Tower of London excavated, from under a staircase, a wooden box containing two small human skeletons. The bones were widely accepted at the time as those of the princes, but this has not been proven and is far from certain. King Charles II had the bones buried in Westminster Abbey, where they remain.\nBackground.\nOn 9 April 1483, Edward IV of England died unexpectedly after an illness lasting around three weeks. At the time, Edward's son, the new King Edward V, was at Ludlow Castle in Shropshire, and the dead king's brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, was at Middleham Castle in Yorkshire. The news reached the Duke of Gloucester around 15 April, although he may have been forewarned of Edward's illness. It is reported that he then went to York Minster to publicly \"pledge his loyalty to his new king\". The \"Croyland Chronicle\" states that, before his death, Edward IV designated his brother Gloucester as Lord Protector. Edward's words may not have mattered, however, since \"as the precedent of Henry V showed, the Privy Council was not bound to follow the wishes of a dead king\".\nEdward V and Gloucester set out for London from the west and north respectively, meeting at Stony Stratford on 29 April. The following morning, Gloucester arrested Edward's retinue including the boys' uncle, Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers, and their half-brother Sir Richard Grey. They were sent to Pontefract Castle in Yorkshire where, on 25 June, Rivers and Grey were beheaded. Gloucester then took possession of the prince himself, prompting Elizabeth Woodville to take her other son, Richard, Duke of York, and her daughters into sanctuary at Westminster Abbey.\nEdward V and Gloucester arrived in London together. Plans continued for Edward's official coronation, but the date was postponed from 4 May to 25 June. On 19 May 1483, Edward was lodged in the Tower of London, then the traditional residence of monarchs prior to the coronation. On 16 June, he was joined by his younger brother Richard, Duke of York, who was previously in sanctuary. At this point, the date of Edward's coronation was indefinitely postponed by their uncle, Gloucester. On Sunday 22 June, a sermon was preached by Dr. Ralph Shaa, brother of the Lord Mayor of London, at Saint Paul's Cross claiming Gloucester to be the only legitimate heir of the House of York. On 25 June, \"a group of lords, knights and gentlemen\" petitioned Richard to take the throne. Both princes were subsequently declared illegitimate by Parliament; this was confirmed in 1484 by an Act of Parliament known as \"Titulus Regius\". The act stated that Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville's marriage was invalid because of Edward's pre-contract of marriage with Lady Eleanor Butler. Gloucester was crowned King Richard III of England on 6 July. The declaration of the boys' illegitimacy has been described by Rosemary Horrox as an \"ex post facto\" justification for Richard's accession.\nDisappearance.\nDominic Mancini, an Italian friar who visited England in the 1480s and who was in London in the spring and summer of 1483, recorded that after Richard III seized the throne, Edward and his younger brother Richard were taken into the \"inner apartments of the Tower\" and then were seen less and less, until they disappeared altogether. Mancini records that, during this period, Edward was regularly visited by a doctor, who reported that Edward, \"like a victim prepared for sacrifice, sought remission of his sins by daily confession and penance, because he believed that death was facing him\". The Latin reference to \"Argentinus medicus\", was originally translated as \"a Strasbourg doctor\"; however, D.E. Rhodes suggests it may actually refer to \"Doctor Argentine\", whom Rhodes identifies as John Argentine, an English physician who later served as provost of King's College, Cambridge, and as doctor to Arthur, Prince of Wales, eldest son of King Henry VII of England (Henry Tudor).\nThere are reports of the two princes being seen playing in the tower grounds shortly after Richard joined his brother, but there are no recorded sightings of either of them after the summer of 1483. An attempt to rescue them in late July failed. Their fate remains an enduring mystery.\nMany historians believe that the princes were murdered; some have suggested that the act may have happened towards the end of summer 1483. Maurice Keen argues that the rebellion against Richard in 1483 initially \"aimed to rescue Edward V and his brother from the Tower before it was too late\", but that, when the Duke of Buckingham became involved, it shifted to support of Henry Tudor because \"Buckingham almost certainly knew that the princes in the Tower were dead.\" Alison Weir proposes 3 September 1483 as a potential date; however, Weir's work has been criticised for \"arriving at a conclusion that depends more on her own imagination than on the uncertain evidence she has so misleadingly presented\".\nClements Markham suggests the princes may have been alive as late as July 1484, pointing to the regulations issued by Richard III's household which stated: \"the children should be together at one breakfast\". James Gairdner, however, argues that it is unclear to whom the phrase \"the children\" alludes, and that it may not have been a reference to the princes. It may refer to Edward, Earl of Warwick (son of the Duke of Clarence) and Edward IV's two youngest daughters (Catherine and Bridget), all of whom were living under Richard's care at Sheriff Hutton.\nRumours.\nSeveral sources suggest there were rumours of the princes' deaths in the time following their disappearance. Rumours of murder appeared in France. In January 1484, Guillaume de Rochefort, Lord Chancellor of France, urged the Estates General to \"take warning\" from the fate of the princes, as their own king, Charles VIII, was only 13. The early reports, including that of Rochefort, Philippe de Commines (French politician), Caspar Weinreich (contemporary German chronicler) and Jan Allertz (Recorder of Rotterdam), all state that Richard killed the princes before he seized the throne (thus before June 1483). De Commines' \"Memoirs\" (c.1500), however, identifies the Duke of Buckingham as the person \"who put them to death\".\nOther than their disappearance, there is no direct evidence that the princes were murdered, and \"no reliable, well-informed, independent or impartial sources\" for the associated events. Nevertheless, following their disappearance, rumours spread in France that they had been murdered. Before November 2023, only one contemporary narrative account of the boys' time in the tower was known to exist: that of Dominic Mancini. Mancini's account was not discovered until 1934, in the Municipal Library in Lille. Later accounts written after the accession of Henry Tudor are usually biased or influenced by Tudor propaganda.\nOnly Mancini's account, written in London before November 1483, is contemporary. The Croyland Chronicle and de Commines' account were written three and seventeen years later, respectively (and thus after Richard III's death and the accession of Henry VII). Markham, writing long before Mancini's account was discovered, argued that some accounts, including the Croyland Chronicle, might have been authored or heavily influenced by John Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury, in order to incriminate Richard III.\nEarly writers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKING RICHARD III\nDarest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?\nTYRREL\nAy, my lord;\nBut I had rather kill two enemies.\nKING RICHARD III\nWhy, there thou hast it: two deep enemies,\nFoes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers\nAre they that I would have thee deal upon:\nTyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.\n\u2013 William Shakespeare's \"King Richard III\" (Act IV, scene II)\nRobert Fabyan's \"Chronicles of London\", compiled around 30 years after the princes' disappearance, names Richard as murderer.\nThomas More (a Tudor loyalist who had grown up in the household of John Morton, an avowed foe of Richard III) wrote The \"History of King Richard III\", c.1513. This identified Sir James Tyrrell as the murderer, acting on Richard's orders. Tyrrell was the loyal servant of Richard III who is said to have confessed to the murder of the princes before his execution for treason in 1502. In his history, More said that the princes were smothered to death in their beds by two agents of Tyrrell (Miles Forrest and John Dighton) and were then buried \"at the stayre foote, metely depe in the grounde vnder a great heape of stones\", but were later disinterred and buried in a secret place. (\"Metely\" is a Middle English word describing a size as \"moderate, normal, average.\") Historian Tim Thornton claimed that the sons of Miles Forrest were at court in Henry VIII's England, and Thomas More's contacts with them could have given him the detail of the murder.\nPolydore Vergil, in his \"Anglica Historia\" (c.1513), also specifies that Tyrrell was the murderer, stating that he \"rode sorrowfully to London\" and committed the deed with reluctance, upon Richard III's orders, and that Richard himself spread the rumours of the princes' death in the belief that it would discourage rebellion.\n\"Holinshed's Chronicles\", written in the second half of the 16th century, claims that the princes were murdered by Richard III. The chronicles were one of the main sources used by William Shakespeare for his play \"Richard III\", which also portrays Richard as the murderer, in the sense that he commissions Tyrrell to have the boys killed. A. J. Pollard believes that the chronicle's account reflected the contemporary \"standard and accepted account\", but that by the time it was written, \"propaganda had been transformed into historical fact\".\nMore wrote his account with the intention of writing about a moral point rather than a closely mirrored history. While More's account does rely on some firsthand sources, the account is generally taken from other sources. Additionally, More's account is one of the bases for Shakespeare's \"Richard III\", which similarly indicts Richard for murdering the young princes.\nBodies.\nTower of London.\nOn 17 July 1674, workmen remodelling the Tower of London dug up a wooden box containing two small human skeletons. The bones were found buried under the staircase leading to the chapel of the White Tower. The remains were not the first children's skeletons found within the tower; the bones of two children had previously been found \"in an old chamber that had been walled up\", which Pollard suggests could equally well have been those of the princes. The reason the bones were attributed to the princes was because the location partially matched the account given by More. However, More further stated that they were later moved to a \"better place\", which disagrees with where the bones were discovered. The staircase that the bones were found underneath had not yet been built, at the time of Richard III. One anonymous report was that they were found with \"pieces of rag and velvet about them\"; the velvet could indicate that the bodies were those of aristocrats. Four years after their discovery, the bones were placed in an urn and, on the orders of King Charles II, interred in Westminster Abbey, in the wall of the Henry VII Lady Chapel. A monument designed by Christopher Wren marks the resting place of the putative princes. The inscription, written in Latin, states \"Here lie interred the remains of Edward V, King of England, and Richard, Duke of York, whose long desired and much sought after bones, after over a hundred and ninety years, were found interred deep beneath the rubble of the stairs that led up to the Chapel of the White Tower, on the 17 of July in the Year of Our Lord 1674.\"\nThe bones were removed and examined in 1933 by the archivist of Westminster Abbey, Lawrence Tanner; a leading anatomist, Professor William Wright; and the president of the Dental Association, George Northcroft. By measuring certain bones and teeth, they concluded the bones belonged to two children around the correct ages for the princes. The bones were found to have been interred carelessly along with chicken and other animal bones. There were also three very rusty nails. One skeleton was larger than the other, but many of the bones were missing, including part of the smaller jawbone and all of the teeth from the larger one. Many of the bones had been broken by the original workmen. The examination has been criticised, on the grounds that it was conducted on the presumption that the bones were those of the princes and concentrated only on whether the bones showed evidence of suffocation; no attempt was even made to determine whether the bones were male or female.\nNo further scientific examination has since been conducted on the bones, which remain in Westminster Abbey; further, DNA analysis (if DNA could be obtained) has not been attempted. A petition was started on the British government's \"e-petition\" website requesting that the bones be DNA tested, but was closed months before its expected close date. If it had received 100,000 signatories a parliamentary debate would have been triggered. Pollard points out that even if modern DNA and carbon dating proved the bones belonged to the princes, it would not prove who or what killed them.\nSt George's Chapel.\nIn 1789, workmen carrying out repairs in St. George's Chapel, Windsor, rediscovered and accidentally broke into the vault of Edward IV and Queen Elizabeth Woodville, discovering in the process what appeared to be a small adjoining vault. This vault was found to contain the coffins of two unidentified children. However, no inspection or examination was carried out and the tomb was resealed. The tomb was inscribed with the names of two of Edward IV's children: George, 1st Duke of Bedford who had died at the age of 2, and Mary of York who had died at the age of 14; both had predeceased the king.\nHowever, two lead coffins clearly labelled as George Plantagenet and Mary Plantagenet were subsequently discovered elsewhere in the chapel (during the excavation for the royal tomb house for King George III under the Wolsey tomb-house in 1810\u201313), and were moved into the adjoining vault of Edward IV's, but at the time no effort was made to identify the two lead coffins already in Edward IV's vault.\nIn the late 1990s, work was being carried out near and around Edward IV's tomb in St George's Chapel; the floor area was excavated to replace an old boiler and also to add a new repository for the remains of future Deans and Canons of Windsor. A request was forwarded to the Dean and Canons of Windsor to consider a possible examination of the two vaults either by fibre-optic camera or, if possible, a reexamination of the two unidentified lead coffins in the tomb also housing the lead coffins of two of Edward IV's children that were discovered during the building of the Royal Tomb for King George III (1810\u201313) and placed in the adjoining vault at that time. Royal consent would be necessary to open any royal tomb, so it was felt best to leave the medieval mystery unsolved for at least the next few generations. The 2012 discovery of the remains of Richard III has prompted renewed interest in re-excavating the skeletons of the \"two princes\", but Queen Elizabeth II never granted the approval required for any such testing of an interred royal. In 2022, Tracy Borman, joint chief curator of Historic Royal Palaces, stated that King Charles III held \"a very different view\" on the subject and could potentially support an investigation.\nTheories.\nThe absence of hard evidence of what happened to the princes has led to a number of theories being put forward. The most common theory is that they were murdered close to the time that they disappeared, and among historians and authors who accept the murder theory, the most common explanation is that they were murdered at the behest of Richard III.\nRichard III.\nMany historians assert that Richard III, the princes' uncle, is the likeliest culprit in the case of the disappearance of the princes for a number of reasons. Although the princes had been eliminated from the succession, Richard's hold on the monarchy was very insecure due to the way in which he had attained the crown, leading to a backlash against him by the Yorkist establishment. An attempt had already been made to rescue them and restore Edward to the throne, clear evidence that the existence of the princes would remain a threat as long as they were alive. The boys could have been used by Richard's enemies as figureheads for rebellion. Rumours of their death were in circulation by late 1483, but Richard never attempted to prove that they were alive by having them seen in public, which strongly suggests that they were dead by then. However, he did not remain silent on the matter. Raphael Holinshed, in his \"Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland\", written in 1577, reports that Richard, \"what with purging and declaring his innocence concerning the murder of his nephews towards the world, and what with cost to obtain the love and favour of the communal tie (which outwardlie glosed, and openly dissembled with him) ... gave prodigally so many and so great rewards, that now both he lacked, and scarce with honesty how to borrow\". Richard also failed to open any investigation into the matter, which would have been in his interest if he was not responsible for the deaths of his nephews.\nRichard was on a progression through the Yorkist heartlands at the time the princes were last seen alive. They were under guard in the Tower of London, which was controlled by his men, and access to them was strictly limited by his instructions. It is unlikely they could have been murdered without his knowledge. More and Polydore Vergil both name Sir James Tyrrell as the murderer. Tyrrell, an English knight who fought for the House of York on many occasions, was arrested by Henry VII's forces in 1502 for supporting another Yorkist claimant to the throne. Shortly before his execution, Tyrrell is said by More to have admitted, under torture, to having murdered the princes at the behest of Richard III. The only record of this is the writing of Thomas More, who wrote that, during his examination, Tyrrell made his confession as to the murders, saying that Richard III ordered their deaths. He also implicated two other men - relatives of these accomplices were present at the Tudor court, and More may have at least partially derived his account from them - despite further questioning, however, Tyrrell was unable to say where the bodies were, claiming that Brackenbury had moved them. William Shakespeare portrays him as the culprit, sought out by Richard after Buckingham demurs. This version of events is accepted by Alison Weir and Hicks notes that his successful career and rapid promotion after 1483 \"is consistent with his alleged murder of the princes\". However, the only record of Tyrrell's confession is through More, and \"no actual confession has ever been found\". Pollard casts doubts on the accuracy of More's accounts, suggesting it was \"an elaboration of one of several circulating accounts\"; however, he does not discount the possibility of it being \"just his own invention\", pointing to the \"clear similarities to the stories of the Babes in the Wood\". Clements Markham suggested that More's account was actually written by Archbishop Morton and that Tyrrell was induced to do the deed by Henry VII between 16 June and 16 July 1486, the dates of two general pardons that he received from the king. However, a registry copy of a will dated to 1516 has been rediscovered in the British National Archives, that of Tyrrell's sister-in-law Dame Margaret Capel, wife of William Capel, in which she bequeaths a gold chain to her son Giles that had belonged to her husband and before him, to Edward V, possibly his chain of office. William Capel appears to have given the chain to his wife while he was alive, as it is not mentioned in his will, nor is it mentioned in the will of Giles or any of his descendants. Although it is unknown how the chain came into William's possession, he is recorded to have exchanged jewellery with the Tyrrells. This revelation has revived interest in More's account.\nRichard's guilt was widely accepted by contemporaries. George Cely, Dominic Mancini, John Rous, Fabyan's Chronicle, the Crowland Chronicler and the London Chronicle all noted the disappearance of the Princes, and all bar Mancini (who noted that he had no knowledge of what had happened) repeated rumours naming Richard as the murderer. Guillaume de Rochefort, Chancellor of France, named Richard as the murderer to the Estates General at Tours in January 1484. It also appears to have been the belief of Elizabeth Woodville, who would go on to support Henry Tudor in his campaign against Richard III. One possible motive for Elizabeth Woodville subsequently making her peace with Richard and bringing her daughters out of sanctuary could be that Richard had to swear a solemn oath, before witnesses, to protect and provide for her surviving children, which made it much less likely they could be quietly murdered as it was believed their brothers had been.\nIn line with this contemporary opinion many current historians, including David Starkey, Michael Hicks, Helen Castor and A. J. Pollard regard Richard himself as the most likely culprit. There was no formal accusation against Richard III on the matter; the Bill of Attainder brought by Henry VII made no definitive mention of the Princes in the Tower, but it did accuse Richard of \"the unnatural, mischievous and great perjuries, treasons, homicides and murders, in shedding of infant's blood, with many other wrongs, odious offences and abominations against God and man\". The \"shedding of infant's blood\" may be an accusation of the Princes' murder. Hicks speculated that it was a reference to speeches made in Parliament condemning the murder of the princes, which suggested that Richard's guilt had become common knowledge, or at least common wisdom.\nHenry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham.\nThe plausibility of Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, Richard's right-hand man, as a suspect depends on the princes having already been dead by the time Stafford was executed in November 1483. It has been suggested that Buckingham had several potential motives. As a descendant of Edward III, through Thomas of Woodstock, 1st Duke of Gloucester, on his father's side, as well as through John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, through John Beaufort, on his mother's side, Buckingham may have hoped to accede to the throne himself in due course; alternatively, he may have been acting on behalf of a third party.\nSome, notably Paul Murray Kendall, regard Buckingham as the likeliest suspect: his execution, after he had rebelled against Richard in October 1483, might signify that he and the king had fallen out; Weir takes this as a sign that Richard had murdered the princes without Buckingham's knowledge and Buckingham had been shocked by it. A contemporary Portuguese document suggests Buckingham as the guilty party, stating \"... and after the passing away of King Edward in the year of 83, another one of his brothers, the Duke of Gloucester, had in his power the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York, the young sons of the said king and his brother, and turned them to the Duke of Buckingham, under whose custody the said Princes were starved to death\". A document dated some decades after the disappearance was found within the archives of the College of Arms in London in 1980; this stated that the murder \"be the vise of the Duke of Buckingham\". This led Michael Bennett to suggest that possibly some of Richard's prominent supporters, Buckingham and James Tyrrell, murdered the princes on their own initiative without waiting for Richard's orders. Bennett noted in support of this theory: \"After the King's departure Buckingham was in effective command in the capital, and it is known that when the two men met a month later there was an unholy row between them.\"\nBuckingham is the only person to be named as responsible in a contemporary chronicle other than Richard himself. However, for two reasons he is unlikely to have acted alone. First of all, if he were guilty of acting without Richard's orders, it is extremely surprising that Richard did not lay the blame for the princes' murder on Buckingham after Buckingham was disgraced and executed, especially as Richard could potentially have cleared his own name by doing so. Secondly, it is likely he would have required Richard's help to gain access to the princes, under close guard in the Tower of London, although Kendall argued as Constable of England, he might have been exempt from this ruling. As a result, although it is extremely possible that he was implicated in the decision to murder them, the hypothesis that he acted without Richard's knowledge is not widely accepted by historians. While Jeremy Potter suggested that Richard would have kept silent had Buckingham been guilty because nobody would have believed Richard was not party to the crime, he further notes that \"Historians are agreed that Buckingham would never have dared to act without Richard's complicity, or at least, connivance\". However, Potter also hypothesised that perhaps Buckingham was fantasising about seizing the crown himself at this point and saw the murder of the princes as a first step to achieving this goal. This theory formed the basis of Sharon Penman's historical novel, \"The Sunne in Splendour\".\nHenry VII.\nHenry VII (Henry Tudor), following his seizure of the crown, executed some of the rival claimants to the throne. John of Gloucester, illegitimate son of Richard III, is said by some sources to have been one of those executed. Henry was out of the country between the princes' disappearance and August 1485, thus his only opportunity to murder them would have been after his accession in 1485. Pollard suggests Henry (or those acting on his orders) is \"the only plausible alternative to Richard III\".\nThe year after becoming king, Henry married the princes' eldest sister, Elizabeth of York, to reinforce his claim to the throne. Not wanting the legitimacy of his wife or her claim as heir of Edward IV called into question, prior to the marriage he had repealed the \"Titulus Regius\" which had previously declared the princes (and Elizabeth) illegitimate. Markham (1906) suggested that the princes were executed under Henry's orders between 16 June and 16 July 1486, claiming that it was only after this date that orders went out to circulate the story that Richard had killed the princes; this claim has been disproven. Markham also suggested that the princes' mother, Elizabeth Woodville, knew that this story was false, and that this was the motivation behind Henry's decision, in February 1487, to confiscate all of her lands and possessions, and have her confined to Bermondsey Abbey, \"where she died six years afterwards\". However, Arlene Okerlund suggests that her retirement to the abbey was her own decision, while Michael Bennett and Timothy Elston suggest the move was precautionary, precipitated by Lambert Simnel's claim to be her son Richard. Pollard calls Markham's theory \"highly speculative\", and states that Henry's silence over the princes was more likely \"political calculation than personal guilt\". Henry was also never accused of the murder by any contemporary, not even by his enemies, which he likely would have been had contemporaries thought there was any possibility of his guilt. Jeremy Potter, at the time he wrote Chairman of the Richard III Society, noted, \"With Henry, as with Richard, there is no real evidence and one must suspect that if he had killed the princes himself he would quickly have produced the corpses and some ingeniously appropriate story implicating Richard.\" Further, Raphael Holinshed reported in 1577 that Richard \"purged and declared his innocence\" regarding \"the murther of his nephews towards the world\", indicating that the boys did indeed meet their end during Richard's days. It is also unlikely that the princes would have been kept alive in secret by Richard for two years after their last sighting while rumours of his responsibility for their murder circulated.\nOther suspects.\nSome scholars have accused John Howard, 1st Duke of Norfolk, Margaret Beaufort (Henry VII's mother), or Jane Shore (Edward IV's mistress). The Beaufort theory was supported by Philippa Gregory in a 2013 BBC documentary series \"The Real White Queen and her Rivals\", However, it has been sustained only by speculation about a possible motive, rather than evidence. Pollard has commented regarding such theories: \"None deserve serious consideration. The problem with all these accusations is that they beg the question of access to the Tower without Richard's knowledge and overlook the fact that Richard was responsible for the safekeeping of his nephews\".\nSurvival theories.\nHistorian David Baldwin suggests that Henry VII's reticence on the subject may have been because at least one of the princes was still alive; he considers that Richard is more likely to have survived, with Edward dying of a malady. Baldwin argues that it is \"impossible\" that no one knew what happened to the Princes after they entered the Tower; he believes Richard III and Henry VII, leading courtiers and their mother would all have known the boys' whereabouts and welfare. Baldwin argues that had this been the case, Henry VII would have had the choice of keeping quiet about the survival of Richard, or having him executed, and concluded, \"He [Henry] would have been happy to let people \"think\" the boys had been murdered, but not to speculate when or by whose hand.\"\nDuring the reign of Henry VII, two individuals claimed to be the princes who had somehow escaped death. Lambert Simnel was crowned as \"King Edward\" in Dublin, with his supporters naming him as Edward Plantagenet, 17th Earl of Warwick. Perkin Warbeck later claimed to be Richard, appearing in Ireland and calling himself king Richard IV. Margaret of York, Duchess of Burgundy, formally recognised Warbeck as Richard. Margaret, Richard III's sister, an unrelenting opponent of Henry VII, had previously recognised Simnel as Warwick. Warbeck was also accepted as Richard by James IV of Scotland. After a failed attempt to invade England he was captured. He retracted his claims, was imprisoned and later executed. Many modern historians believe he was an imposter, whose supporters accepted his claim for political reasons.\nThe fact that two persons claimed to be Richard led the 18th-century writer Horace Walpole to argue that Richard had in fact escaped death, and that Warbeck genuinely was Richard, a view also supported by the Scottish historian Malcolm Laing. Walpole, however, later retracted his views and stated that he now believed the princes to have been murdered by Richard III to secure his hold on the crown. In more recent times the theory that Warbeck was Richard has been endorsed by Annette Carson, a freelance writer with a \"lifelong interest\" in Richard III. She suggested that Richard smuggled the princes abroad to the custody of their aunt, the Duchess of Burgundy, and they were raised there under false identities. Baldwin suggested that by having removed them from sight to prevent them being a focus for opposition, he was then unable to bring them back to court to scotch rumours of their murder without once again having them become a threat. This theory has also been endorsed by Philippa Langley, known for the discovery of Richard III's body in 2012, who claims that contemporary documents show the two princes were alive and in contact with royals on the European continent as late as 1493, and suggests that the youths known to history as Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck were genuinely the Earl of Warwick and Richard, Duke of York. One of the sources is a statement (dated 1493) purported to have been written by Richard, describing his escape and flight to Europe, which has been independently authenticated as a late 15th-century document; another is a document claiming that Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, had identified a man as Prince Richard by examining three birthmarks on his body.\nIn 2021, researchers from the \"Missing Princes Project\" claimed to have found evidence that Edward had lived out his days in the rural Devon village of Coldridge. They have linked the 13-year-old prince with a man named John Evans, who arrived in the village around 1484, and was immediately given an official position and the title of Lord of the Manor. Researcher John Dike noted Yorkist symbols and stained glass windows depicting Edward V in a Coldridge chapel commissioned by Evans and built around 1511, unusual for the location.\nOther findings of the five-year investigation by The Missing Princes Project research initiative, suggesting the Princes' survival following the reign of Richard III (i.e. after 22 August 1485), was published in 2023 in Philippa Langley's book \"The Princes in the Tower: Solving History's Greatest Cold Case\". New archival discoveries had been made for both sons of Edward IV: Edward V in an accounting receipt for King Maximilian I dated 16 December 1487 in the archive in Lille, France, discovered by project member, Albert Jan de Rooij. The accounting receipt confirmed that weapons (400 pikes) purchased by Maximilian on behalf of Margaret of Burgundy for the Yorkist invasion of June 1487 was on behalf of a son of Edward IV. Langley claims that some details of the receipt confirm that the son in question was Edward V.\nThese discoveries were presented as evidence in the UK on Channel 4 in an original 1 hour 45-minute \"Factual Special\" documentary, \"The Princes in the Tower\" (18 November 2023, Brinkworth Productions, Dir: Janice Sutherland). The documentary was also broadcast by SBS in Australia (19 November 2023) and PBS in America (22 November 2023) as part of their \"Secrets of the Dead\" series. The programme followed criminal barrister Rob Rinder as he investigated new evidence from Langley's research initiative.\nImpact.\nThe political reality of the disappearance of the princes, whatever happened to them, is that they were believed to have been murdered and Richard was blamed for their murders. Even if he had not been directly responsible for their deaths, the fact that he had deposed them and kept them under tight guard made him responsible for their welfare in the eyes of contemporaries, and the belief that they had been murdered made him guilty. As Baldwin noted in support of his conclusion that Richard would not have murdered the princes, \"It seems incredible Richard ever supposed killing his nephews would help secure his position or make him more acceptable to his subjects.\" An initial uprising in September 1483, aimed at deposing Richard and restoring Edward V to the throne, was not stopped by rumours of Edward's murder. Instead, the rebels rallied around Henry Tudor as a potential alternative candidate; Horrox says Tudor was \"an inconceivable choice if Edward V and his brother were thought to be still available\".\nAnthony Cheetham, who considered Richard likely to have had the princes murdered, commented that it was \"a colossal blunder. Nothing else could have prompted the deflated Woodvilles to hitch themselves to Henry Tudor's bandwagon.\" The fact that the majority of the rebels were wealthy and powerful southern noblemen, loyal to Edward IV, suggests a degree of revulsion against Richard's usurpation of the throne: their willingness to fight on under an implausible alternative candidate suggests that they regarded anyone as preferable to Richard as King due to his usurpation and the murder of his nephews. Bennett suggested that perhaps those who had initially supported Richard in his seizure of power may have felt complicit in the crime, which he thought \"might explain the bitterness of the subsequent recriminations against him\". Hicks speculated that these men may have been \"appalled by the character of the regime...shocked by Richard's crimes\". Their defection severely weakened Richard, who had to impose his supporters among the northern lords as officeholders in the southern counties to maintain order, in itself a very unpopular act that further damaged his reputation. In Pollard's words, \"the belief that he had murdered his nephews seriously handicapped Richard's efforts to secure himself on the throne he had usurped\".\nIn popular culture.\nThe mystery of the Princes in the Tower has spawned best-selling novels such as Josephine Tey's \"The Daughter of Time\" and four novels in Philippa Gregory's \"Cousins' War\" series, and continues to attract the attention of historians and novelists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70601", "revid": "50975193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70601", "title": "Montreal Alouettes", "text": "Canadian football team\nThe Montreal Alouettes (), and colloquially known as the Als, are a professional Canadian football team based in Montreal, Quebec. Founded in 1946, the team has disbanded twice and been re-established twice. The Alouettes compete in the East Division of the Canadian Football League (CFL) and last won the Grey Cup in 2023, defeating the Winnipeg Blue Bombers in the 110th Grey Cup Game in 2023. Their home field is Percival Molson Memorial Stadium for the regular season and as of 2014 also home of their playoff games.\nThe original Alouettes team (1946\u20131981) won the Grey Cup four times and were particularly dominant in the 1970s; appearing in six Grey Cup Finals through that decade, they won in 1970, 1974 and 1977, while losing in 1975, 1978 and 1979 (all against the Edmonton Eskimos). After their collapse in 1982, they were immediately reconstituted under new ownership as the Montreal Concordes. After playing for four years as the Concordes, they revived the Alouettes name for the 1986 season. A second folding in 1987 led to a nine-year hiatus of CFL football in the city.\nThe current Alouettes franchise was established in 1996 by the owner of the Baltimore Stallions. The Stallions were disbanded at the same time as the Alouettes' re-establishment after having been the most successful of the CFL's American expansion franchises, culminating in a Grey Cup championship in 1995. Many players from the Stallions' 1995 roster signed with the Alouettes and formed the core of the team's 1996 roster.\nFor record-keeping purposes, the CFL considers all clubs that have played in Montreal as one franchise dating to 1946 and considers the Alouettes to have suspended operations in 1987 before returning in 1996. Although the Alouettes' re-establishment in 1996 is often considered a relocation of the Stallions, neither the league nor the Alouettes recognize the Baltimore franchise, or its records, as part of the Alouettes' official team history.\nThe latest incarnation of the Alouettes were arguably the best CFL team of the 2000s; they acceded to all but three Grey Cup Finals of the decade, taking home three Grey Cups in the process and bringing the franchise total to seven. The Alouettes had from 1996 to 2014 the CFL's longest active playoff streak, only having missed the playoffs three times since returning to the league. The streak came to an end in 2015. They have hosted a playoff game every year except 2001, 2007, 2013, and from 2015 to 2018. Their five losing seasons came in 2007, 2013 and from 2015 to 2018. The 2015 through 2018 Alouettes' seasons marked the first time the team missed the playoffs in consecutive years since their re-activation. Major stars of the recent era include Mike Pringle, the CFL career leader in rushing yards, and quarterback Anthony Calvillo, who led all of pro football in career passing yards before Drew Brees took over in late 2020.\nIn 2019 the CFL purchased the team from American businessman Robert Wetenhall, who could not find a buyer. Later that year the Alouettes were acquired by Crawford Steel executives Sid Spiegel and his son-in-law Gary Stern (through their subsidiary S and S Sportsco), who took over the team on January 6, 2020. In February 2023, the ownership was passed back to the league, which subsequently agreed to sell the team to Quebec media mogul and former Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois leader Pierre Karl P\u00e9ladeau in March of that year. On November 19, 2023, the Alouettes won their eighth Grey Cup in their first season under P\u00e9ladeau's ownership.\nHistory.\nOriginal Alouettes (1946\u20131981).\nCanadian football has a long history in Montreal, dating to the 1850s. The Alouettes were first formed in 1946 by Canadian Football Hall of Famer Lew Hayman along with stockbroker Eric Cradock and former Montreal Canadiens part-owner L\u00e9o Dandurand. They named themselves after \"Alouette\", a work song about plucking the feathers from a skylark, which had become a symbol of the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois. The origin of the team's name also comes from the Second World War-era No. 425 \"Alouette\" Squadron, a bomber squadron operating out of North Africa and later Yorkshire, England. 425 Squadron was also the Royal Canadian Air Force's primarily French-Canadian squadron.\nThey won their first Grey Cup championship in 1949, beating the Calgary Stampeders 28\u201315 led by quarterback Frank Filchock and running back Virgil Wagner.\nThe 1950s were a productive decade for the Als, with quarterback Sam Etcheverry throwing passes to John \"Red\" O'Quinn, \"Prince\" Hal Patterson, and with Pat Abbruzzi carrying the ball, Montreal fielded the most dangerous offence in all Canadian football. From 1954 to 1956, they reached the Grey Cup in three consecutive seasons, but questionable defensive units led the Alouettes to defeat versus the Edmonton Eskimos each time.\nThe team was purchased in 1954 by Ted Workman. Like all teams playing in the WIFU and IRFU, the Alouettes joined the newly-formed Canadian Football League in 1958. While the team continued to enjoy success for the rest of the 1950s, that all changed at the end of the 1960 season. To be more specific, the team was shaken by an announcement on November 10 \u2013 namely the trade of Hal Patterson and Sam Etcheverry to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats for Bernie Faloney and Don Paquette. Workman had concluded the deal without consulting with general manager Perry Moss. The deal quickly fell apart because Etcheverry had just signed a new contract with a no-trade clause; as a result, Etcheverry was now a free agent. The deal was reworked and Patterson was traded for Paquette. Sam Etcheverry went on to play in the NFL with the St. Louis Cardinals for 2 years (1961 and 1962) followed by the San Francisco 49ers in 1963. Faloney remained in Hamilton, and teamed with Patterson to form one of the most deadly quarterback-receiver combinations in CFL history.\nThis episode remains one of the most lopsided trades ever made in the Alouettes history, and it ushered in a dark decade for the team. During that time, they failed to register a single winning season. From 1968 to 1976 the team played in the Autostade stadium\u2014which had been built as a temporary stadium for Expo 67. The stadium's less-than-desirable location on Montreal's waterfront near the Victoria Bridge led to dismal attendance, putting more strain on the team's finances. \nWorkman sold half the team to Joe Atwell in 1965. Atwell bought the remaining shares in 1967. The change in ownership failed to reverse the Als' slide. They finally bottomed out in 1969, finishing 2\u201312. After that season, Atwell sold the team to the highly capable Sam Berger, a former part-owner of the Ottawa Rough Riders. Berger made immediate changes to the team. On December 9, the team announced that Red O'Quinn and Sam Etcheverry were returning to the organization, this time as the team's new general manager and head coach, respectively. The team also unveiled new uniforms\u2014their home jerseys were now predominantly green, with red and white trim. The white helmets with the red \"wings\" used during the 1960s also disappeared, replaced by a white helmet with a stylized green and red bird's head that formed a lower-case \"a.\" As one might expect from a team that had won only two games in 1969, many new players were brought in.\nThe changes paid immediate dividends. Although the team finished third in the East, they defeated the Toronto Argonauts and the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in the playoffs. The 1970 season culminated when the Alouettes won the 58th Grey Cup, played on November 28 at Toronto's Exhibition Stadium before a crowd of 32,669. Led by quarterback Sonny Wade (who was named the game's most valuable player, and who would soon become a fan favourite in Montreal\u2014not unlike the status his coach had enjoyed in the 1950s), halfback Moses Denson, receivers Gary Lefebvre and Tom Pullen, along with kicker George Springate, the team defeated the Calgary Stampeders 23\u201310 for the city's first Grey Cup since 1949, also against the Stamps.\nThat 1970 victory would herald the beginning of arguably the greatest decade in franchise history. During Berger's tenure as owner, the team played for six Grey Cups and won three (meeting both Alberta teams all of those times, and the Edmonton Eskimos in five of those six games). In 1974, the team changed their colours to match the other Montreal pro sports teams- red, white and blue. They finally moved out of the Autostade and into Olympic Stadium midway through the 1976 season and attendance shot up. In 1977, the Als had a very successful year both on the field and at the box office, winning the Grey Cup at their home field before a Grey Cup-record 68,318 fans (a CFL record that still stands as of 2023). They also averaged 59,595 fans per game at the \"Big O\" during the regular season, a league record that also still stands.\nHowever, the success ended with Berger's retirement in 1981. He sold the team to Vancouver businessman Nelson Skalbania. The flamboyant Skalbania set about signing two first-round picks from the 1981 National Football League draft and NFL name players such as Vince Ferragamo, James Scott, David Overstreet, Keith Gary and Billy \"White Shoes\" Johnson. Even with all that talent, the Alouettes suffered on the field, finishing with a dismal 3\u201313 record while attendance plummeted to under 30,000 per game. However, the East was so weak that year (Hamilton was the only team in the East to finish with a winning record) that they actually made the playoffs, finishing third in the East ahead of the 2\u201314 Toronto Argonauts. In the East Semi-Final, they made a fairly good showing against the second place (and eventual East Division champions) Rough Riders before losing by a final score of 20\u201316.\nThis would be the last game that the original Alouettes franchise would play. Skalbania was reported late in 1981 to be selling to oil magnate Pat Bowlen, who would later buy the NFL's Denver Broncos in 1984. Later in 1981, NFL coach George Allen obtained an option to purchase 51% of the club and was named Alouettes' president. While holding both the option and the post, Allen was surprised by Skalbania arranging a sale of the same controlling stake to Harry Ornest, who would later own the St. Louis Blues and the Toronto Argonauts. Ornest was reluctant to take control of the Alouettes as a result of the team's high level of debt and extensive commitments to high-profile stars. In early April 1982, Allen looked set to take control of the Alouettes. However, Allen left the club in late April after Skalbania was unable to resolve 1981 debts. With the franchise in collapse, Berger tried to force Skalbania to relinquish the team to him as payment for debt. Skalbania returned from a business trip to Hong Kong in late April and was able to regain control of the team. However, Skalbania's highly leveraged business interests collapsed a month later. Unable to meet his obligations, he was forced to return the team to the league on May 13.\nMontreal Concordes (1982\u20131985).\nThe CFL had anticipated the collapse of the Alouettes and was well prepared when Skalbania returned the franchise to the league. Among potential suitors for the troubled franchise was Montreal businessman Charles Bronfman, founder and owner of the Alouettes' co-tenants at the Big O, the Montreal Expos. Bronfman had made it clear to league officials that he would not deal with Skalbania, but would be willing to establish a replacement franchise on short notice if the Alouettes ceased operations. On May 14, 1982, a day after the original Alouettes franchise folded, the CFL granted the Montreal franchise rights to Bronfman. However, Skalbania continued to assert ownership of the Montreal Alouettes name, logos and related intellectual property even though he had given up the franchise.\nRather than risk a lawsuit from the notoriously litigious Skalbania, and unwilling to negotiate with him, Bronfman chose to operate his team under another aviation-inspired name, the Concordes. The new name was not only a reference to the then-revolutionary Concorde supersonic passenger jet, but appeared to be an appeal to both anglophones and francophones, Concorde was an Anglo-French joint venture. Unfortunately, the new name angered management at one of Montreal's most prominent corporations, aviation manufacturer Bombardier. After being a prominent sponsor of the Alouettes, Bombardier refused to have anything to do with a football team named for an aircraft built by one of its competitors, the French-based A\u00e9rospatiale.\nThe Concordes inherited the franchise history and records of the 1946\u20131981 Alouettes, as well as the CFL rights of all Alouettes players. Bronfman retained most of the Alouettes' coaching staff, including recently hired head coach Joe Galat, and most of the Alouettes' front office personnel. In an effort to bring the team's expenses under control, Bronfmam released the former NFL players signed by Skalbania. While many players returned to the U.S., one factor working in Bronfman's favour was that a players' strike was looming in the NFL (which would last 57 days from September to November), which helped persuade star quarterback Johnny Evans and a few other Skalbania signees to stay in Montreal.\nA nine-game losing streak to end the season doomed the 1982 Concordes to a 2\u201314 record \u2013 the worst record in franchise history (percentage points below the 1969 Als). The Concordes featured quarterback Luc Tousignant, the only Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois quarterback to start a CFL game besides Gerry Dattilio. The club also featured star collegiate running back David Overstreet (a holdover from the 1981 Alouettes) who rushed for 190 yards in six games before ending his season on the injured reserve list. Other stars on the club included quarterback Johnny Evans, quarterback Turner Gill, slot back Nick Arakgi, running back Lester Brown, wide receiver Brian DeRoo, local kick returner Denny Ferdinand, defensive tackle Glen Weir, safety Preston Young, defensive end Gordon Judges, kicker-punter Don Sweet, and linebacker William Hampton.\nThe team slowly rebounded on the field over the next three years. The Concordes won five games in 1983. While still well below .500, the East Division was so weak that year (only the eventual Grey Cup champion Argos finished with a winning record) that the Concordes were still in playoff contention on the season's final weekend. The Concordes' final game of the season was at Olympic Stadium against the Tiger-Cats. With Hamilton and Montreal tied at 5\u201310 for the division's third and final playoff spot, a respectable crowd of 41,157 converged to watch the Concordes play what was effectively a playoff game. These fans left heartbroken after Hamilton kicker Bernie Ruoff made a last-minute field goal to tie the game 21\u201321. Since overtime would not be introduced in the CFL regular season until 1986, the Tiger-Cats won the final Eastern playoff berth on account of a better head-to-head record (having beaten the Concordes earlier in the year).\nThe team returned to the playoffs in 1984, again doing so in a very weak East Division; only the defending champion Argos finished with a winning record. In 1985, they advanced all the way to the East Final. Their East Semifinal win over Ottawa that year was both their only home playoff game and only playoff win under the Concordes banner; 1984 and 1985 were the only playoff appearances for the franchise from 1982 to 1986. However, as in 1984, they made the playoffs in an extremely weak East Division; the Concordes and Ti-Cats both finished with identical 8\u20138 records, with the Ti-Cats getting the division title by virtue of sweeping the season series. No other team in the division even managed a .500 record.\nHowever, attendance did not keep pace with the team's performance. The Concordes' 1983 season finale against Hamilton was the only game to attract a crowd surpassing even 30,000 under Bronfman's ownership. Moreover, the 1985 East Semifinal was a disaster at the box office due in part to poor weather conditions and haphazard facility preparations. Only 11,372 fans attended what would turn out to be the team's last home game played under the Concordes name.\nRe-branding and demise (1986\u20131987).\nAfter quietly coming to terms with Skalbania, in 1986 the team attempted to embrace its predecessor's history and regenerate flagging fan interest by rebranding itself the \"new\" Montreal Alouettes. This would not prove to be successful, on or off the field. On the field, the team posted a 4\u201314 record, missing the playoffs in spite of once again finishing third in the East on account of the new \"cross-over rule\" the CFL had implemented for the 1986 season. Off the field, financial losses mounted and the team's attendance tumbled to 10,127 a game, including only 9,045 at the final home game (a contest against the BC Lions drew only 5200 fans, the smallest crowd at any CFL game since 1951).\nJust before the 1987 season, Carling O'Keefe tore up its deal to serve as the CFL's presenting television sponsor. The collapse of the CFL's television deal proved a death blow for the Alouettes. The franchise had lost at least $15 million under Bronfman's ownership. While Bronfman was far better financed than Skalbania, he was unwilling to spend millions of dollars underwriting his professional sports holdings indefinitely. Bronfman's overall situation was not helped by the then-emerging news that his other professional sports team, the Expos, were at the centre of a massive collusion scandal that was rocking Major League Baseball. Eventually, Bronfman decided to focus on the Expos and made it clear he would not field a football team for the 1987 CFL season unless the Alouettes sold thousands of additional season tickets. Neither the necessary season ticket sales nor a viable ownership group willing to take the franchise off Bronfman's hands materialized.\nWith the collapse of the league's television deal leaving several other franchises in serious distress, the league was not in a position to take over operating the team. Re-location was not an option either even though several Canadian cities had expressed interest in acquiring a CFL team (with London, Ontario being briefly considered). Even notwithstanding the logistical challenges of moving a team on short notice, no prospective city had a stadium that was suitable even for temporary use. At the time, the CFL was lukewarm to the possibility of expanding or re-locating to U.S. markets (the CFL's U.S. expansion experiment did not come until six years later).\nThe Alouettes played both of their two preseason games on the road. However, Bronfman was at the end of his tether and folded the new Alouettes on June 24, 1987, just a day before the 1987 regular season started. The league had been well-aware of this possibility for months, and immediately released a previously-drafted eight-team schedule. However, the Alouettes' demise came so late that the June 28 \"Washington Post\" still announced an ESPN broadcast of an Alouettes\u2013Stampeders game, a game that would never be played. To balance out the divisions, the easternmost-West Division team, the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, moved to the East Division to take the Alouettes' place (along with this, the \"cross-over rule\" for the playoffs was scrapped until 1997).\nThe CFL held a dispersal draft for the Alouettes players. Some of the players left out of work by the team's demise (both on the Alouettes and players on other CFL teams who were cut to make room for former Alouettes) played in the NFL as replacement players during another players' strike later that year. During the period that the Alouettes were inactive, professional gridiron football would return to Montreal in the form of the NFL-created World League of American Football's Montreal Machine, who played two seasons in 1991 and 1992 under American rules.\nBaltimore Stallions (1994\u20131995).\nThe Baltimore Football Club was granted an expansion franchise for 1994 by the Canadian Football League during their American expansion of the early-mid 1990s. After the NFL's Indianapolis Colts (who had moved from Baltimore in 1983) blocked attempts to name the new team the \"Baltimore CFL Colts,\" owner Jim Speros eventually settled on \"Stallions\" as a nickname. The Stallions were by far the most successful of the CFL's American teams, garnering strong fan support in the Baltimore area and appearing in the Grey Cup in both its seasons, losing in 1994 and winning in 1995. To date, they are the only American-based team to play for and win the Grey Cup. Only a week before the Stallions won the Grey Cup, Cleveland Browns owner Art Modell announced his intention to relocate his NFL club to Baltimore. Support for the Stallions dried up almost overnight. With no reasonable prospect of successfully competing with an NFL team, and unwilling to have his club effectively reduced to \"minor-league\" status in Baltimore, Speros decided to move the Stallions elsewhere.\nAt one point, Speros was very close to moving the team to Houston, Texas. Although Houston at the time was still home to the NFL's Oilers, fan support for that team had collapsed due their pending relocation to Nashville (to later become the Titans). Speros had reason to believe a CFL team there could repeat the success that had been enjoyed in Baltimore. In addition, a team in Houston would have been natural rivals for the San Antonio Texans, who were still planning to play the 1996 season had at least one other U.S. team survived. On the other hand, the proposed move to Houston was considered in some circles to be little more than a ploy to win concessions from the NFL, which presumably would not have wanted to risk the embarrassment of having one of its teams outdrawn by a team from another league in the same city. The NFL would return to Houston in 2002 in the form of the Texans.\nIn the end, under prodding from league commissioner and former Alouettes running back Larry Smith, Speros began talks with Montreal. Smith had been looking for a way to return the CFL to Canada's second-largest market and, at the same time, find a way out of the failing American expansion (which Smith had also presided over). He believed that the defending Grey Cup champions would be a better vehicle for reviving football in Montreal than what would have effectively been an expansion team.\nAt a league meeting on February 2, 1996; Speros formally requested permission to move the Stallions to Montreal. The request was granted, officially ending the CFL's American experiment. However, talks had been so far advanced that at least one Baltimore outlet reported that the Stallions were moving to Montreal in January. According to at least one Canadian outlet, at the same time Speros had already begun deciding whether to retain the Stallions moniker or \"revive\" the Alouettes. He ultimately chose the latter course, reconstituting his organisation as the third incarnation of the Alouettes. While Speros was able to reclaim the history of the 1946\u201386 Alouettes/Concordes franchise, he was not allowed to retain the history of the Stallions. As a result, according to official CFL records, Speros is now reckoned as having surrendered the Stallions franchise before \"reactivating\" the Alouettes franchise. The Alouettes are now retconned as having suspended operations from 1987 to 1995, while the Stallions are officially one of only three modern-era Grey Cup champions to fold (after the Rough Riders and the original Alouettes). The Alouettes, however, do briefly mention the Stallions on their history page.\nWhile all of the Stallions players were released from their contracts, general manager Jim Popp, who followed the team from Baltimore, was able to re-sign many of them. However, as with all the other U.S.-based CFL teams, the Stallions had been exempt from CFL rules that mandated a certain quota of Canadian \"non-import\" players on team rosters. For this reason, an expansion draft was held to help stock the Alouettes with the required number of Canadian players. Popp hired former Stallions assistant coach Bob Price to be the new head coach of the revived Alouettes. With the help of much of the core of the Stallions, the Alouettes were able to overcome a slow start to finish with their first winning record since 1979. They defeated the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in the East semifinal before being defeated by the Argos 43\u20137 in the East Final.\nIn 1997, Speros sold the team to developer and investor Robert Wetenhall, who owned the team until he officially transferred ownership to the league on May 31, 2019. Smith stepped down as league commissioner and became president of the Alouettes. Bob Price left the Alouettes to head south and coach in the NCAA. Popp hired former B.C. Lions head coach and Concordes defensive line coach Dave Ritchie as his successor.\nRebirth of the Montreal Alouettes (1996\u20131997).\nThe revived Alouettes franchise played their first two seasons at Olympic Stadium, but attendance in the cavernous domed stadium was very poor at first. The future of the franchise was very much in doubt until a twist of fate revitalized the floundering club. When a scheduled November 1997 U2 concert at Olympic Stadium conflicted with an unexpected home playoff game against the Lions (due to the CFL's recently re-established 'cross-over' playoff rule), the team decided to move the game to Molson Stadium, where they had played from 1954 to 1967. Interest in the team soared and the game was sold out, prompting the team to relocate permanently to the smaller venue beginning with the 1998 season. At the time of the Alouettes' return to Molson, the stadium's capacity was 20,202. Prior to every Sunday home game, the club plays \"Sunday Bloody Sunday\" over the PA system in tribute to the unintended role U2 played in saving the franchise. The team did not completely abandon the Olympic Stadium, and used it for one home game per year, from 2001 to 2009, and playoff games from 2001\u20132012. The Montreal Alouettes got off to a good start, winning 25 games and losing 11 in their first two seasons, and reaching the East Division Finals both times.\nAnthony Calvillo era (1998\u20132013).\nThe fortunes for the Alouettes improved during the 1998 season, when they acquired a young free agent quarterback from the Hamilton Tiger-Cats, Anthony Calvillo, and they drafted slotback Ben Cahoon. Veterans Tracy Ham and Mike Pringle led the team to a second-place finish in the East Division, but they suffered a last-second loss to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in the East Final. The Alouettes finally broke through in 1999, under new head coach Charlie Taaffe, winning their first division title since 1979. However, for the fourth consecutive season they lost the East Final match in a close game against the Tiger-Cats, 27\u201326.\nTracy Ham retired after the 1999 season, then Anthony Calvillo took over in the 2000 season as the full-time starting quarterback, and led the team to their first Grey Cup final since 1979, losing to BC in a close game, as they came within a missed two point convert of sending the game into overtime. After the season Charlie Taaffe resigned to become the head coach of the Maryland Terrapins. The 2001 season started under new coach Rod Rust at 9\u20132, but after Calvillo separated his shoulder, the team started struggling and after losing all their remaining games, GM Jim Popp fired Rust, led them into the playoffs, where they lost 24-12 to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats in the East Semi-Final.\nDuring the off-season, the Alouettes signed Don Matthews to lead the team in the future. The 2002 Alouettes finished with the best record (13\u20135) in the CFL and won their first Grey Cup since 1977 by defeating one of their oldest rivals, and Matthews' former team, the Edmonton Eskimos, 25\u201316. The Alouettes had the best record in the CFL during the 2004 season at 14\u20134 and seemed likely to represent the East Division in the Grey Cup, but in the East Final, Anthony Calvillo got hurt, and was replaced by backup Ted White, and the Toronto Argonauts rallied to defeat the Alouettes, 26\u201318. During the 2004\u20132005 off-season, all time CFL career rushing yards leader Mike Pringle signed a one-day contract, so he could retire as a member of the Montreal Alouettes. The 2005 team participated in the first Grey Cup overtime game in almost 50 years. The Edmonton Eskimos defeated the Alouettes, 38\u201335.\nDuring the 2006 season Matthews left his position as head coach near the end of the season due to health reasons, and Jim Popp took over for the rest of the season, leading the team to the Grey Cup, where they lost 25\u201314 to the B.C Lions.\nPopp stayed on to coach the team during the 2007 season, and the team suffered its first losing season since coming back to Montreal in 1996, with an 8\u201310 record, hindered by the loss of starting quarterback Anthony Calvillo, who left the team near the end of the season to be with his wife who was sick. The team lost the East Semi-Final, 24\u201322, to the Winnipeg Blue Bombers with backup quarterback Marcus Brady behind center. With Montreal hosting the 2008 Grey Cup, the Alouettes wanted to be there, so they hired an experienced NFL assistant coach in Marc Trestman, and head coach Trestman helped lead them to an 11\u20137 record and a berth in the Grey Cup against the visiting Calgary Stampeders led by Henry Burris. The Stampeders defeated the hometown Montreal Alouettes, 22\u201314, in front of over 66,000 fans.\nThe 2009 season was a record breaking season for the Montreal Alouettes, as they set a team record for wins in a regular season, were a CFL-best 15\u20133, and their defence allowed only 324 points, the CFL second-fewest for an 18-game season. Marc Trestman won the coach of the year. The Alouettes earned a 28\u201327 comeback victory in the 2009 Grey Cup, thanks to the great play of Anthony Calvillo, Ben Cahoon, and Jamel Richardson. The Alouettes trailed the Saskatchewan Roughriders, 27\u201311, with 8 minutes to play in the game, when they started their comeback. It all came down to the foot of field goal kicker Damon Duval, who after missing a 43-yard field on the last play, got a second chance, when the Roughriders were called for having too many players on the field (The 13th Man), which was a ten-yard penalty, so kicking from the 33 yard line, Duval nailed it through the uprights, giving Montreal an improbable Grey Cup victory, after trailing the entire game. The game turned into a Grey Cup classic, thanks to the great play of the Alouettes veterans, and broke a streak of 4 straight losses in Grey Cups. The 2010 season was another good season for Montreal, as they went 12\u20136 and became the first team since the 1997 Toronto Argonauts to repeat as Grey Cup Champions. They played against the Saskatchewan Roughriders for the second straight year, and after trailing at halftime 8-11, the Alouettes outscored the Roughriders 13-0 until 3:30 left to play in the fourth quarter and held on to win the Championship by a score of 21\u201318.\nThe 2011 season was another record breaking year for Anthony Calvillo, as he broke numerous records, all against the Argonauts. During their first meeting Calvillo broke the CFL all time touchdown passes record of 394 TD passes on a pass to Eric Deslauriers, Damon Allen was at the game at Molson Stadium and personally congratulated him on breaking his record. He tied Allen's record in Regina the week before with the only touchdown pass ever caught by Tim Maypray. During the teams' second meeting, he broke the completions record with a completion to Brandon London. In the teams' third meeting, Anthony Calvillo became pro football's all-time career passing yards leader, on a Jamel Richardson touchdown pass to end the third quarter. The play was stopped as his family joined him along with Mark Cohon for a special on field presentation and video tribute. NFL greats Warren Moon and Dan Marino, ESPN's Chris Berman, and Damon Allen each sent video messages congratulating Calvillo on becoming the all-time career passing yards leader. Calvillo was presented with a special plaque, with the number 72382, the new pro football all-time yardage mark. Hampered by injuries to the entire secondary, the 2011 Alouettes lost in the East Semi-Final at Olympic Stadium by a score of 52\u201344 to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats.\nThe 2012 season was another good year for the Alouettes; however, after an 11\u20137 season, they lost the East Division Final to the Toronto Argonauts after Brian Bratton dropped a game-tying touchdown pass from Calvillo with a minute left in the game, giving Toronto a 27\u201320 win.\nBefore the 2013 season, coach Marc Trestman left the Alouettes for the NFL, becoming the head coach of the Chicago Bears. Dan Hawkins, who had no pro experience, was hired as head coach. After starting the season with a 2\u20133 record, Jim Popp fired Hawkins, and coached the team for the rest of the year. Calvillo suffered a season-ending concussion in Saskatchewan on a hit by Ricky Foley. Heisman Trophy winner Troy Smith, Tanner Marsh and Josh Neiswander played at quarterback for the Alouettes for the remainder of the season. The team had an 8\u201310 record, and made the playoffs for an 18th straight year. They lost the East Semi-Final 19-16 against the Tiger-Cats.\nAnthony Calvillo announced his retirement on January 21, 2014, after a 20-year career, including the last 16 with the Alouettes.\nPost-Anthony Calvillo era (2014\u20132018).\nOn February 24, 2014, the Alouettes named former Edmonton Eskimos and Calgary Stampeders coach Tom Higgins as the 21st head coach in franchise history. Higgins coached the Eskimos against the Alouettes in both the 90th and 91st Grey Cup games. The Alouettes finished with a .500 record, qualifying for the playoffs. After dismantling the BC Lions 50-17 in an East Semi-final crossover match, the Alouettes were beaten by the Tiger-Cats 40\u201324.\nOn May 22, 2015, Michael Sam signed a two-year contract with the Alouettes. The signing made him the first openly gay player in the CFL's history. However, Michael Sam left after one game. On August 21, 2015, owner Robert Wettenhall announced he had relieved Tom Higgins of his head coaching responsibilities and that general manager Jim Popp would take over the duties of head coach. The 2015 season was a difficult one for the Alouettes, due to injuries to starting QB Jonathan Crompton, the Alouettes went through five different quarterbacks including two rookies Rakeem Cato, and Brandon Bridge, before trading for veteran Kevin Glenn. By that time the quarterback shuffle had taken its toll on the team and they finished the year with a 6\u201312 record and missed the playoffs for the first time since 1986, their last year before folding on the eve of the 1987 season and the first time since their 1996 re-activation.\nThe following season on September 19, 2016, Popp was relieved of his coaching duties, while remaining as the team's general manager. Jacques Chapdelaine was named interim head coach, becoming the first Quebec-born head coach in Alouettes' history. He was named the permanent coach on December 13, 2016. Kavis Reed took over duties as the team's new general manager. 2016 was a dismal year for the team, finishing with another losing record of 7\u201311. After a 3\u20138 start to the 2017 season, Chapdelaine was fired on September 13, 2017. The Alouettes ended the season with their worst record since reactivation, 3\u201315.\nOn December 20, 2017, former Green Bay Packers head coach Mike Sherman was named the team's new head coach. Under Sherman the team suffered its fourth consecutive losing season, finishing the year with 5 wins and 13 losses. In the five seasons following Anthony Calvillo's retirement, the team won 30 games and lost 60.\nSpiegel and Stern ownership, rebranding (2019\u20132023).\nOn February 1, 2019, the team unveiled a new logo and updated uniforms, designed by GRDN Studio, replacing the previous \"angry bird\" logo used since the team's reestablishment in 1996 with a stylized \"M\", designed to resemble a bird and plane, and introducing a new \"MontreALS\" tagline, playing upon the team's nickname. The team also partnered with Vice Media on aspects of accompanying marketing and content.\nOn May 31, 2019, Wetenhall surrendered his ownership of the Alouettes to the league, after having attempted to pursue a sale. The CFL would operate the team on its behalf while it searched for a new owner. Several prospective suitors for the team included Clifford Starke, a 35-year-old entrepreneur in medical cannabis who is friends with former Alouette player and CFL commissioner Larry Smith, who had been negotiating for a majority stake. Also interested was former Alouettes running back Eric Lapointe, whose 2017 bid had been rejected but had maintained interest in buying the team (though he withdrew in April 2019), and Vincenzo Guzzo, CEO of Quebec's Cin\u00e9mas Guzzo cinema chain. As of early June of that year, CFL sources indicated it would not accept Starke's bid, while Guzzo's was said to be on hold. Guzzo later stated that he was displeased with the state of the Alouettes organization as a business and that, had he not been a Montreal resident, he would have never considered buying the team.\nOn June 8, two days after their last pre-season game, and just six days before their 2019 season opener, Khari Jones took over from Mike Sherman as interim head coach. Jones guided the Alouettes to a 10\u20138 record, good for a second-place finish in the East Division, and the team's first playoff berth since 2014. The Alouettes improved play during that season was also attributable to the performance of their quarterback Vernon Adams who passed for almost 4,000 yards. Although the team lost in the East Semi-Final to the crossover Edmonton Eskimos 37\u201329, the Alouettes removed the interim tag from Khari Jones' head coach title, and signed Jones to a three-year extension on November 26, 2019. \nOn January 6, 2020, after almost a year of being owned by the league, the Alouettes found new ownership in Crawford Steel's Sid Spiegel and his son-in-law Gary Stern, whose holding company S and S Sportsco would oversee the team. Spiegel died on July 28, 2021, before being able to see the team he bought play a game (the 2020 season was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic); in effect, the team was controlled by his estate. On August 29, 2022 Gary Stern announced that he was stepping away from day-to-day operations with the club and resigning from his role with the Canadian Football League's board of governors, effective immediately.\nPierre Karl P\u00e9ladeau ownership era (2023\u2013present).\nOn February 14, 2023, the ownership of the Alouettes was transferred back to the CFL. Mario Cecchini was appointed as the interim President while the league sought to finalize a sale to new ownership. On March 10, 2023, the CFL announced that Pierre Karl P\u00e9ladeau had purchased the team. On March 28, 2023, Pierre Karl P\u00e9ladeau announced the hiring of Mark Weightman as president and CEO of the team. The 2023 season saw the Alouettes go 11\u20137, finishing second in the East Division, but then upsetting the heavily favoured Toronto Argonauts 38-17 to win the East Division Final, and then win the Grey Cup in a 28\u201324 upset against the heavily favoured Winnipeg Blue Bombers. The team returned to the Grey Cup in 2025, losing to the Saskatchewan Roughriders 25\u201317.\nTelevision and radio.\nThe Alouettes' English radio network is fronted by Bell Media's CKGM, while Cogeco's CHMP-FM is the French-language flagship.\nGames are also heard on Sirius XM Canada and their French service Influence Franco (XM 174) and Attitude Franco (Sirius 164).\nThe Alouettes' main television coverage is fronted by TSN and French sister network RDS.\nMascots.\nTouch\u00e9 is the mascot for the Montreal Alouettes. The team introduced a second mascot in 1999 named Blitz, but Blitz was discontinued at the start of the 2013 season.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70602", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70602", "title": "Jacques Cartier", "text": "French maritime explorer of North America (1491\u20131557)\nJacques Cartier (; 31 December 1491\u00a0\u2013 1 September 1557) was a French maritime explorer from Brittany. Jacques Cartier was the first European to describe and map the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and the shores of the Saint Lawrence River, which he named \"The Country of Canadas\" after the Iroquoian names for the two big settlements he saw at Stadacona (Quebec City) and at Hochelaga (Montreal Island).\nJacques Cartier, author of now-lost maps and accounts of his voyages, was the first European to describe and name this region and its inhabitants\u2014at a time when the Spanish had already settled in the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central America, and were beginning their conquest of Peru.\nEarly life.\nJacques Cartier was born in 1491 in Saint-Malo, the port on the north-east coast of Brittany. Cartier, who was a respectable mariner, improved his social status in 1520 by marrying Mary Catherine des Granches, member of a leading aristocratic family. His good name in Saint-Malo is recognized by its frequent appearance in baptismal registers as godfather or witness.\nFirst voyage (1534).\nIn 1534, two years after the Duchy of Brittany was formally united with the French crown in the Edict of Union, Cartier was introduced to King Francis I by Jean Le Veneur, bishop of Saint-Malo and abbot of Mont Saint-Michel, at the Manoir de Brion. The King had previously invited (although not formally commissioned) the Florentine explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano to explore the eastern coast of North America on behalf of France in 1524. Le Veneur cited voyages to Newfoundland and Brazil as proof of Cartier's ability to \"lead ships to the discovery of new lands in the New World\".\nOn April 20, 1534, Cartier set sail under a commission from the king, hoping to discover a western passage to the wealthy markets of the East Indies. In the words of the commission, he was to \"discover certain islands and lands where it is said that a great quantity of gold and other precious things are to be found\".\nIt took him twenty days to sail across the ocean. Starting on May 10 of that year, he explored parts of Newfoundland, the Strait of Belle Isle and southern shore of the Labrador Peninsula, the Gasp\u00e9 and North Shore coastlines on the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and some parts of the coasts of the Gulf's main islands, including Prince Edward Island, Anticosti Island and the Magdalen Islands. During one stop at \u00celes aux Oiseaux (Islands of the Birds, now the Rochers-aux-Oiseaux federal bird sanctuary, northeast of Brion Island in the Magdalen Islands), his crew slaughtered around 1000 birds, most of them great auks (extinct since 1852). Cartier's first two encounters with aboriginal peoples in Canada on the north side of Chaleur Bay, most likely the Mi'kmaq, were brief; some trading occurred.\nHis third encounter took place on the shores of Gasp\u00e9 Bay with a party of St. Lawrence Iroquoians, where on July 24 he planted a cross to claim the land for France. The 10-metre cross bearing the words \"Long Live the King of France\" claimed possession of the territory in the King's name. The change in mood was a clear indication that the Iroquoians understood Cartier's actions. Here he kidnapped the two sons of their chief, Donnacona. Cartier wrote that they later told him this region where they were captured (Gasp\u00e9) was called by them \"Honguedo\". The natives' chief at last agreed that they could be taken, under the condition that they return with European goods to trade.\nCartier returned to France in September 1534, sure that he had reached an Asian land.\nSecond voyage (1535\u20131536).\nJacques Cartier set sail for a second voyage on May 19 of the following year with three ships, 110 men, and his two Iroquoian captives. Reaching the St. Lawrence, he sailed upriver for the first time, and reached the Iroquoian capital of Stadacona, where Chief Donnacona ruled. Cartier claimed a land near St. Lawrence River in 1534; but France paid little attention to the colony for 60 years. Not until King Henry IV sent Samuel de Champlain in 1608 to New France as its governor and built a permanent settlement and a fur-trading post called Quebec.\nCartier left his main ships in a harbour close to Stadacona, and used his smallest ship to continue on to Hochelaga (now Montreal), arriving on October 2, 1535. Hochelaga was far more impressive than the small and squalid village of Stadacona, and a crowd of over a thousand came to the river's edge to greet the Frenchmen. The site of their arrival has been confidently identified as the beginning of the Sainte-Marie Sault \u2013 where the bridge named after him now stands. The expedition could proceed no further, as the river was blocked by rapids. So certain was Cartier that the river was the Northwest Passage, and that the rapids were all that was preventing him from sailing to China, that the rapids and the town that eventually grew near them came to be named after the French word for China, \"La Chine\": the Lachine Rapids and the town of Lachine, Quebec.\nAfter spending two days among the people of Hochelaga, Cartier returned to Stadacona on October 11. It is not known exactly when he decided to spend the winter of 1535\u20131536 in Stadacona, and it was by then too late to return to France. Cartier and his men prepared for the winter by strengthening their fort, stacking firewood, and salting down game and fish.\nFrom mid-November 1535 to mid-April 1536, the French fleet lay frozen solid at the mouth of the St. Charles River, under the Rock of Quebec. Ice was over a fathom (1.8 m) thick on the river, with snow four feet (1.2 m) deep ashore. To add to the misery, scurvy broke out \u2013 first among the Iroquoians, and then among the French. Cartier estimated the number of dead Iroquoians at 50. On a visit by Domagaya to the French fort, Cartier inquired and learned from him that a concoction made from a tree known as annedda, probably Spruce beer, or \"arbor vitae\", would cure scurvy. This remedy likely saved the expedition from destruction, allowing 85 Frenchmen to survive the winter. In his journal, Cartier states that by mid-February, \"out of 110 that we were, not ten were well enough to help the others, a pitiful thing to see\". The Frenchmen used up the bark of an entire tree in a week on the cure, and the dramatic results prompted Cartier to proclaim it a Godsend, and a miracle.\nReady to return to France in early May 1536, Cartier decided to kidnap Chief Donnacona and take him to France, so that he might personally tell the tale of a country further north, called the \"Kingdom of Saguenay\", said to be full of gold, rubies and other treasures. After an arduous trip down the St. Lawrence and a three-week Atlantic crossing, Cartier and his men arrived in Saint-Malo on July 15, 1536, concluding the second, 14-month voyage, which was to be Cartier's most profitable.\nThird voyage (1541\u20131542).\nOn October 17, 1540, Francis ordered the navigator Jacques Cartier to return to Canada to lend weight to a colonization project of which he would be \"captain general\". However, January 15, 1541, saw Cartier supplanted by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de La Rocque de Roberval, a Huguenot courtier and friend of the king named as the first lieutenant general of French Canada. Roberval was to lead the expedition, with Cartier as his chief navigator. While Roberval waited for artillery and supplies, he gave permission to Cartier to sail on ahead with his ships.\nOn May 23, 1541, Cartier departed Saint-Malo on his third voyage with five ships. This time, any thought of finding a passage to the Orient was forgotten. The goals were now to find the \"Kingdom of Saguenay\" and its riches, and to establish a permanent settlement along the St. Lawrence River.\nAnchoring at Stadacona, Cartier again met the Iroquoians, but found their \"show of joy\" and their numbers worrisome, and decided not to build his settlement there. Sailing a few kilometres upriver to a spot he had previously observed, he decided to settle on the site of present-day Cap-Rouge, Quebec. The convicts and other colonists were landed, the cattle that had survived three months aboard ship were turned loose, earth was broken for a kitchen garden, and seeds of cabbage, turnip, and lettuce were planted. A fortified settlement was thus created and was named Charlesbourg-Royal. Another fort was also built on the cliff overlooking the settlement, for added protection.\nThe men also began collecting what they believed to be diamonds and gold, but which upon return to France were discovered to be merely quartz crystals and iron pyrites, respectively\u2014which gave rise to a French expression: \"faux comme les diamants du Canada\" (\"As false as Canadian diamonds\"). Two of the ships were sent on their journey home with some of these minerals on September 2.\nHaving set tasks for everyone, Cartier left with the longboats for a reconnaissance in search of \"Saguenay\" on September 7. Having reached Hochelaga, he was prevented by bad weather and the numerous rapids from continuing up to the Ottawa River.\nReturning to Charlesbourg-Royal, Cartier found the situation ominous. The Iroquoians no longer made friendly visits or peddled fish and game, but prowled about in a sinister manner. No records exist about the winter of 1541\u20131542 and the information must be gleaned from the few details provided by returning sailors. It seems the natives attacked and killed about 35 settlers before the Frenchmen could retreat behind their fortifications. Even though scurvy was cured through the native remedy (Thuja occidentalis infusion), the impression left is of a general misery, and of Cartier's growing conviction that he had insufficient manpower either to protect his base or to go in search of the Saguenay Kingdom.\nCartier left for France in early June 1542, encountering Roberval and his ships along the Newfoundland coast, at about the time Roberval marooned Marguerite de La Rocque. Despite Roberval's insistence that he accompany him back to Saguenay, Cartier slipped off under the cover of darkness and continued on to France, still convinced his vessels contained a wealth of gold and diamonds. He arrived there in October, in what proved to be his last voyage. Meanwhile, Roberval took command at Charlesbourg-Royal, but it was abandoned in 1543 after disease, foul weather and hostile natives drove the would-be settlers to despair.\nLater life.\nCartier spent the rest of his life in Saint-Malo and his nearby estate, where he often was useful as an interpreter in Portuguese. He died at age 65 on September 1, 1557, during an epidemic, possibly of typhus, though many sources list his cause of death as unknown. Cartier is interred in Saint-Malo Cathedral.\nNo permanent European settlements were made in Canada before 1605, when Pierre Dugua, with Samuel Champlain, founded Port Royal in Acadia.\nLegacy.\nHaving located the entrance to the St. Lawrence on his first voyage, he opened up a major waterway for the European penetration of North America. He produced an intelligent estimate of the resources of Canada, both natural and human, albeit with a considerable exaggeration of its mineral wealth. While some of his actions toward the St. Lawrence Iroquoians were dishonourable, he did try at times to establish friendship with them and other native peoples living along the St. Lawrence River\u2014an indispensable preliminary to French settlement in their lands.\nCartier was the first to document the name Canada to designate the territory on the shores of the St-Lawrence River. The name is derived from the Huron\u2013Iroquois word , or village, which was incorrectly interpreted as the native term for the newly discovered land. Cartier used the name to describe Stadacona, the surrounding land and the river itself. And Cartier named the inhabitants (Iroquoians) he had seen there. Thereafter the name Canada was used to designate the small French colony on these shores, and the French colonists were called until the mid-nineteenth century, when the name started to be applied to the loyalist colonies on the Great Lakes and later to all of British North America. In this way Cartier is not strictly the European discoverer of Canada as this country is understood today, a vast federation stretching (from sea to sea). Eastern parts had previously been visited by the Norse, as well as Basque, Galician and Breton fishermen, and perhaps the Corte-Real brothers and John Cabot (in addition of course to the natives who first inhabited the territory). Cartier's particular contribution to the discovery of Canada is as the first European to penetrate the continent, and more precisely the interior eastern region along the St. Lawrence River. His explorations consolidated France's claim of the territory that would later be colonized as New France, and his third voyage produced the first documented European attempt at settling North America since that of Lucas V\u00e1zquez de Ayll\u00f3n in 1526\u201327.\nCartier's professional abilities can be easily ascertained. Considering that Cartier made three voyages of exploration in dangerous and hitherto unknown waters without losing a ship, and that he entered and departed some 50 undiscovered harbours without serious mishap, he may be considered one of the most conscientious explorers of the period.\nCartier was also one of the first to formally acknowledge that the New World was a land mass separate from Europe/Asia.\nRediscovery of Cartier's first colony.\nOn August 18, 2006, Quebec Premier Jean Charest announced that Canadian archaeologists had discovered the precise location of Cartier's lost first colony of Charlesbourg-Royal. The colony was built at the confluence of the Rivi\u00e8re du Cap Rouge with the St. Lawrence River and is based on the discovery of burnt wooden timber remains that have been dated to the mid-16th century, and a manufactured in Faenza, Italy, between 1540 and 1550, that could only have belonged to a member of the French aristocracy in the colony. Most probably this was the Sieur de Roberval, who replaced Cartier as the leader of the settlement. This colony was the first known European settlement in modern-day Canada since the c. 1000 L'Anse aux Meadows Viking village in northern Newfoundland. Its rediscovery has been hailed by archaeologists as the most important find in Canada since the L'Anse aux Meadows rediscovery.\nMonuments, remembrances and other art.\nJacques Cartier Island, located on the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador in the town of Quirpon, is said to have been named by Jacques Cartier himself on one of his voyages through the Strait of Belle Isle during the 1530s.\nPopular references.\nThe Banque Jacques-Cartier existed, and printed banknotes, between 1861 and 1899 in Lower Canada, then Quebec. It was folded into the Banque provinciale du Canada, and later still the National Bank of Canada.\nIn 2005, Cartier's \"Bref r\u00e9cit et succincte narration de la navigation faite en MDXXXV et MDXXXVI\" was named one of the 100 most important books in Canadian history by the \"Literary Review of Canada\".\nCanadian rock band The Tragically Hip reference Jacques Cartier in their 1992 song \"Looking for a Place to Happen\". The song deals with the subject of European encroachment in the New World and the eventual annexation of indigenous lands in North America.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70603", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70603", "title": "Hermeneutics", "text": "Theory and methodology of text interpretation\nHermeneutics () is the theory and methodology of interpretation, especially the interpretation of biblical texts, wisdom literature, and philosophical texts. As necessary, hermeneutics may include the art of understanding and communication.\nModern hermeneutics includes both verbal and non-verbal communication, as well as semiotics, presuppositions, and pre-understandings. Hermeneutics has been broadly applied in the humanities, especially in law, history and theology.\nHermeneutics was initially applied to the interpretation, or exegesis, of scripture, and has been later broadened to questions of general interpretation. The terms \"hermeneutics\" and \"exegesis\" are sometimes used interchangeably. Hermeneutics is a wider discipline which includes written, verbal, and nonverbal communication. Exegesis focuses primarily upon the word and grammar of texts.\nHermeneutic, as a count noun in the singular, refers to some particular method of interpretation (see, in contrast, double hermeneutic).\nEtymology.\n\"Hermeneutics\" is derived from the Greek word (, \"translate, interpret\"), from (, \"translator, interpreter\"). While the etymology is uncertain, both R. S. P. Beekes (2009) and Zsolt Simon (2019) suggest an Anatolian (Carian) origin. \nThe technical term (, \"interpretation, explanation\") was introduced into philosophy mainly through the title of Aristotle's work (), commonly referred to by its Latin title \"De Interpretatione\" and translated in English as \"On Interpretation\". It is one of the earliest (c.\u2009360\u00a0BCE) extant philosophical works in the Western tradition to deal with the relationship between language and logic in a comprehensive, explicit and formal way.\nThe early usage of \"hermeneutics\" places it within the boundaries of the sacred. A divine message must be received with implicit uncertainty regarding its truth. This ambiguity is an irrationality; it is a sort of madness that is inflicted upon the receiver of the message. Only one who possesses a rational method of interpretation (i.e., a hermeneutic) could determine the truth or falsity of the message.\nFolk etymology.\nFolk etymology places its origin with Hermes, the mythological Greek deity who was the 'messenger of the gods'. Aside from being a mediator among the gods and between the gods and men, he led souls to the underworld upon death.\nMoreover, Hermes was considered the inventor of language and speech, an interpreter, a liar, a thief, and a trickster. These multiple roles made Hermes an ideal representative figure for hermeneutics. As Socrates noted, words have the power to reveal or conceal and can deliver messages in an ambiguous way. The Greek view of language as consisting of signs that could lead to truth or to falsehood was the essence of Hermes, who was said to relish the uneasiness of those who received the messages he delivered.\nIn religious traditions.\nTalmudic hermeneutics.\nSummaries of the principles by which Torah can be interpreted date back to, at least, Hillel the Elder, although the thirteen principles set forth in the Baraita of Rabbi Ishmael are perhaps the best known. These principles ranged from standard rules of logic (e.g., \"a fortiori\" argument [known in Hebrew as \u00a0\u2013\u00a0]) to more expansive ones, such as the rule that a passage could be interpreted by reference to another passage in which the same word appears (Gezerah Shavah). The rabbis did not ascribe equal persuasive power to the various principles.\nTraditional Jewish hermeneutics differed from the Greek method in that the rabbis considered the Tanakh (the Jewish Biblical canon) to be without error. Any apparent inconsistencies had to be understood by means of careful examination of a given text within the context of other texts. There were different levels of interpretation: some were used to arrive at the plain meaning of the text, some expounded the law given in the text, and others found secret or mystical levels of understanding.\nVedic hermeneutics.\nVedic hermeneutics involves the exegesis of the Vedas, the earliest holy texts of Hinduism. The Mimamsa was the leading hermeneutic school and their primary purpose was understanding what Dharma (righteous living) involved by a detailed hermeneutic study of the Vedas. They also derived the rules for the various rituals that had to be performed precisely.\nThe foundational text is the Mimamsa Sutra of Jaimini (c. 3rd to 1st century BCE) with a major commentary by \u015aabara (c. the 5th or 6th century CE). The Mimamsa sutra summed up the basic rules for Vedic interpretation.\nBuddhist hermeneutics.\nBuddhist hermeneutics deals with the interpretation of the vast Buddhist literature, particularly those texts which are said to be spoken by the Buddha (Buddhavacana) and other enlightened beings. Buddhist hermeneutics is deeply tied to Buddhist spiritual practice and its ultimate aim is to extract skillful means of reaching spiritual enlightenment or nirvana. A central question in Buddhist hermeneutics is which Buddhist teachings are explicit, representing ultimate truth, and which teachings are merely conventional or relative.\nBiblical hermeneutics.\nBiblical hermeneutics is the study of the principles of interpretation of the Bible. While Jewish and Christian biblical hermeneutics have some overlap, they have very different interpretive traditions.\nThe early patristic traditions of biblical exegesis had few unifying characteristics in the beginning but tended toward unification in later schools of biblical hermeneutics.\nAugustine offers hermeneutics and homiletics in his \"De doctrina christiana\". He stresses the importance of humility in the study of Scripture. He also regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith. In Augustine's hermeneutics, signs have an important role. God can communicate with the believer through the signs of the Scriptures. Thus, humility, love, and the knowledge of signs are an essential hermeneutical presupposition for a sound interpretation of the Scriptures. Although Augustine endorses some teaching of the Platonism of his time, he recasts it according to a theocentric doctrine of the Bible. Similarly, in a practical discipline, he modifies the classical theory of oratory in a Christian way. He underscores the meaning of diligent study of the Bible and prayer as more than mere human knowledge and oratory skills. As a concluding remark, Augustine encourages the interpreter and preacher of the Bible to seek a good manner of life and, most of all, to love God and neighbor.\nThere is traditionally a fourfold sense of biblical hermeneutics: literal, moral, allegorical (spiritual), and anagogical.\nLiteral.\nEncyclop\u00e6dia Britannica states that literal analysis means \"a biblical text is to be deciphered according to the 'plain meaning' expressed by its linguistic construction and historical context.\" The intention of the authors is believed to correspond to the literal meaning. Literal hermeneutics is often associated with the verbal inspiration of the Bible.\nMoral.\nMoral interpretation searches for moral lessons which can be understood from writings within the Bible. Allegories are often placed in this category.\nAllegorical.\nAllegorical interpretation states that biblical narratives have a second level of reference that is more than the people, events and things that are explicitly mentioned. One type of allegorical interpretation is known as typological, where the key figures, events, and establishments of the Old Testament are viewed as \"types\" (patterns). In the New Testament this can also include foreshadowing of people, objects, and events. According to this theory, readings like Noah's Ark could be understood by using the Ark as a \"type\" of the Christian church that God designed from the start.\nAnagogical.\nThis type of interpretation is more often known as mystical interpretation. It claims to explain the events of the Bible and how they relate to or predict what the future holds. This is evident in the Jewish Kabbalah, which attempts to reveal the mystical significance of the numerical values of Hebrew words and letters.\nIn Judaism, anagogical interpretation is also evident in the medieval Zohar. In Christianity, it can be seen in Mariology.\nPhilosophical hermeneutics.\nModern hermeneutics.\nThe discipline of hermeneutics emerged with the new humanist education of the 15th\u00a0century as a historical and critical methodology for analyzing texts. In a triumph of early modern hermeneutics, the Italian humanist Lorenzo Valla proved in 1440 that the \"Donation of Constantine\" was a forgery. This was done through intrinsic evidence of the text itself. Thus, hermeneutics expanded from its medieval role of explaining the true meaning of the Bible.\nHowever, biblical hermeneutics did not die off. For example, the Protestant Reformation brought about a renewed interest in the interpretation of the Bible, which took a step away from the interpretive tradition developed during the Middle Ages back to the texts themselves. Martin Luther and John Calvin emphasized \"scriptura sui ipsius interpres\" (scripture interprets itself). Calvin used \"brevitas et facilitas\" as an aspect of theological hermeneutics.\nThe rationalist Enlightenment led hermeneutists, especially Protestant exegetists, to view Scriptural texts as secular classical texts. They interpreted Scripture as responses to historical or social forces so that, for example, apparent contradictions and difficult passages in the New Testament might be clarified by comparing their possible meanings with contemporary Christian practices.\nFriedrich Schleiermacher (1768\u20131834) explored the nature of understanding in relation not just to the problem of deciphering sacred texts but to all human texts and modes of communication.\nThe interpretation of a text must proceed by framing its content in terms of the overall organization of the work. Schleiermacher distinguished between grammatical interpretation and psychological interpretation. The former studies how a work is composed from general ideas; the latter studies the peculiar combinations that characterize the work as a whole. He said that every problem of interpretation is a problem of understanding and even defined hermeneutics as the art of avoiding misunderstanding. Misunderstanding was to be avoided by means of knowledge of grammatical and psychological laws.\nDuring Schleiermacher's time, a fundamental shift occurred from understanding not merely the exact words and their objective meaning, to an understanding of the writer's distinctive character and point of view.\nNineteenth- and twentieth-century hermeneutics emerged as a theory of understanding (\"Verstehen\") through the work of Friedrich Schleiermacher (Romantic hermeneutics and methodological hermeneutics), August B\u00f6ckh (methodological hermeneutics), Wilhelm Dilthey (epistemological hermeneutics), Martin Heidegger (ontological hermeneutics, hermeneutic phenomenology, and transcendental hermeneutic phenomenology), Hans-Georg Gadamer (ontological hermeneutics), Leo Strauss (Straussian hermeneutics), Paul Ric\u0153ur (hermeneutic phenomenology), Walter Benjamin (Marxist hermeneutics), Ernst Bloch (Marxist hermeneutics), Jacques Derrida (radical hermeneutics, namely deconstruction), Richard Kearney (diacritical hermeneutics), Fredric Jameson (Marxist hermeneutics), and John Thompson (critical hermeneutics).\nRegarding the relation of hermeneutics with problems of analytic philosophy, there has been, particularly among analytic Heideggerians and those working on Heidegger's philosophy of science, an attempt to try and situate Heidegger's hermeneutic project in debates concerning realism and anti-realism: arguments have been presented both for Heidegger's hermeneutic idealism (the thesis that meaning determines reference or, equivalently, that our understanding of the being of entities is what determines entities as entities) and for Heidegger's hermeneutic realism (the thesis that (a) there is a nature in itself and science can give us an explanation of how that nature works, and (b) that (a) is compatible with the ontological implications of our everyday practices).\nPhilosophers that worked to combine analytic philosophy with hermeneutics include Georg Henrik von Wright and Peter Winch. Roy J. Howard termed this approach analytic hermeneutics.\nOther contemporary philosophers influenced by the hermeneutic tradition include Charles Taylor (engaged hermeneutics) and Dagfinn F\u00f8llesdal.\nDilthey (1833\u20131911).\nWilhelm Dilthey broadened hermeneutics even more by relating interpretation to historical objectification. Understanding moves from the outer manifestations of human action and productivity to the exploration of their inner meaning. In his last important essay, \"The Understanding of Other Persons and Their Manifestations of Life\" (1910), Dilthey made clear that this move from outer to inner, from expression to what is expressed, is not based on empathy, understood as a direct identification with the Other. Interpretation, on a hermeneutical conception of empathy involves an indirect or mediated understanding that can only be attained by placing human expressions in their historical context. Thus, understanding is not a process of reconstructing the state of mind of the author, but one of articulating what is expressed in his work.\nDilthey divided sciences of the mind (human sciences) into three structural levels: experience, expression, and comprehension.\nHeidegger (1889\u20131976).\nIn the 20th\u00a0century, Martin Heidegger's philosophical hermeneutics shifted the focus from interpretation to existential understanding as rooted in fundamental ontology, which was treated more as a direct\u2014and thus more authentic\u2014way of being-in-the-world (\"In-der-Welt-sein\") than merely as \"a way of knowing.\" For example, he called for a \"special hermeneutic of empathy\" to dissolve the classic philosophic issue of \"other minds\" by putting the issue in the context of the being-with of human relatedness. (Heidegger himself did not complete this inquiry.)\nAdvocates of this approach claim that some texts, and the people who produce them, cannot be studied by means of using the same scientific methods that are used in the natural sciences, thus drawing upon arguments similar to those of antipositivism. Moreover, they claim that such texts are conventionalized expressions of the experience of the author. Thus, the interpretation of such texts will reveal something about the social context in which they were formed, and, more significantly, will provide the reader with a means of sharing the experiences of the author.\nThe reciprocity between text and context is part of what Heidegger called the hermeneutic circle. Among the key thinkers who elaborated this idea was the sociologist Max Weber.\nGadamer (1900\u20132002).\nHans-Georg Gadamer's hermeneutics is a development of the hermeneutics of his teacher, Heidegger. Gadamer asserted that methodical contemplation is opposite to experience and reflection. We can reach the truth only by understanding or mastering our experience. According to Gadamer, our understanding is not fixed but rather is changing and always indicating new perspectives. The most important thing is to unfold the nature of individual understanding.\nGadamer pointed out that prejudice is an element of our understanding and is not \"per se\" without value. Indeed, prejudices, in the sense of pre-judgements of the thing we want to understand, are unavoidable. Being alien to a particular tradition is a condition of our understanding. He said that we can never step outside of our tradition\u2014all we can do is try to understand it. This further elaborates the idea of the hermeneutic circle.\nNew hermeneutic.\nNew hermeneutic is the theory and methodology of interpretation to understand Biblical texts through existentialism. The essence of new hermeneutic emphasizes not only the existence of language but also the fact that language is eventualized in the history of individual life. This is called the event of language. Ernst Fuchs, Gerhard Ebeling, and James M. Robinson are the scholars who represent the new hermeneutics.\nMarxist hermeneutics.\nThe method of Marxist hermeneutics has been developed by the work of, primarily, Walter Benjamin and Fredric Jameson. Benjamin outlines his theory of the allegory in his study \"Ursprung des deutschen Trauerspiels\" (\"Trauerspiel\" literally means \"mourning play\" but is often translated as \"tragic drama\"). Fredric Jameson draws on Biblical hermeneutics, Ernst Bloch, and the work of Northrop Frye, to advance his theory of Marxist hermeneutics in his influential \"The Political Unconscious\". Jameson's Marxist hermeneutics is outlined in the first chapter of the book, titled \"On Interpretation\" Jameson re-interprets (and secularizes) the fourfold system (or four levels) of Biblical exegesis (literal; moral; allegorical; anagogical) to relate interpretation to the mode of production, and eventually, history.\nObjective hermeneutics.\nKarl Popper first used the term \"objective hermeneutics\" in his \"Objective Knowledge\" (1972).\nIn 1992, the Association for Objective Hermeneutics (AGOH) was founded in Frankfurt am Main by scholars of various disciplines in the humanities and social sciences. Its goal is to provide all scholars who use the methodology of objective hermeneutics with a means of exchanging information.\nIn one of the few translated texts of this German school of hermeneutics, its founders declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our approach has grown out of the empirical study of family interactions as well as reflection upon the procedures of interpretation employed in our research. For the time being we shall refer to it as objective hermeneutics in order to distinguish it clearly from traditional hermeneutic techniques and orientations. The general significance for sociological analysis of objective hermeneutics issues from the fact that, in the social sciences, interpretive methods constitute the fundamental procedures of measurement and of the generation of research data relevant to theory. From our perspective, the standard, nonhermeneutic methods of quantitative social research can only be justified because they permit a shortcut in generating data (and research \"economy\" comes about under specific conditions). Whereas the conventional methodological attitude in the social sciences justifies qualitative approaches as exploratory or preparatory activities, to be succeeded by standardized approaches and techniques as the actual scientific procedures (assuring precision, validity, and objectivity), we regard hermeneutic procedures as the basic method for gaining precise and valid knowledge in the social sciences. However, we do not simply reject alternative approaches dogmatically. They are in fact useful wherever the loss in precision and objectivity necessitated by the requirement of research economy can be condoned and tolerated in the light of prior hermeneutically elucidated research experiences.\nOther recent developments.\nBernard Lonergan's (1904\u20131984) hermeneutics is less well known, but a case for considering his work as the culmination of the postmodern hermeneutical revolution that began with Heidegger was made in several articles by Lonergan specialist Frederick G. Lawrence.\nPaul Ric\u0153ur (1913\u20132005) developed a hermeneutics that is based upon Heidegger's concepts.\nKarl-Otto Apel (1922\u20132017) elaborated a hermeneutics based on American semiotics. He applied his model to discourse ethics with political motivations akin to those of critical theory.\nJ\u00fcrgen Habermas (b. 1929) criticized the conservatism of previous hermeneutists, especially Gadamer, because their focus on tradition seemed to undermine possibilities for social criticism and transformation. He also criticized Marxism and previous members of the Frankfurt School for missing the hermeneutical dimension of critical theory.\nHabermas incorporated the notion of the lifeworld and emphasized the importance for social theory of interaction, communication, labor, and production. He viewed hermeneutics as a dimension of critical social theory.\nRudolf Makkreel (b. 1939) has proposed an orientational hermeneutics that brings out the contextualizing function of reflective judgment. It extends ideas of Kant and Dilthey to supplement the dialogical approach of Gadamer with a diagnostic approach that can deal with an ever-changing and multicultural world.\nAndr\u00e9s Ortiz-Os\u00e9s (1943\u20132021) developed his symbolic hermeneutics as the Mediterranean response to Northern European hermeneutics. His main statement regarding symbolic understanding of the world is that meaning is a symbolic healing of injury.\nTwo scholars who have published criticism of Gadamer's hermeneutics are the Italian jurist Emilio Betti and the American literary theorist E. D. Hirsch.\nOther hermeneutic scholars include Jean Grondin (b. 1955) and Maurizio Ferraris (b. 1956).\nApplications.\nArchaeology.\nIn archaeology, hermeneutics means the interpretation and understanding of material through analysis of possible meanings and social uses.\nProponents argue that interpretation of artifacts is unavoidably hermeneutic because we cannot know for certain the meaning behind them. We can only apply modern values when interpreting. This is most commonly seen in stone tools, where descriptions such as \"scraper\" can be highly subjective and actually unproven until the development of microwear analysis some thirty years ago.\nOpponents argue that a hermeneutic approach is too relativist and that their own interpretations are based on common-sense evaluation.\nArchitecture.\nThere are several traditions of architectural scholarship that draw upon the hermeneutics of Heidegger and Gadamer, such as Christian Norberg-Schulz, and Nader El-Bizri in the circles of phenomenology. Lindsay Jones examines the way architecture is received and how that reception changes with time and context (e.g., how a building is interpreted by critics, users, and historians). Dalibor Vesely situates hermeneutics within a critique of the application of overly scientific thinking to architecture. This tradition fits within a critique of the Enlightenment and has also informed design-studio teaching. Adrian Snodgrass sees the study of history and Asian cultures by architects as a hermeneutical encounter with otherness. He also deploys arguments from hermeneutics to explain design as a process of interpretation. Along with Richard Coyne, he extends the argument to the nature of architectural education and design.\nEducation.\nHermeneutics motivates a broad range of applications in educational theory. The connection between hermeneutics and education has deep historical roots. The ancient Greeks gave the interpretation of poetry a central place in educational practice, as indicated by Dilthey: \"systematic exegesis (\"hermeneia\") of the poets developed out of the demands of the educational system.\" \nGadamer more recently wrote on the topic of education, and more recent treatments of educational issues across various hermeneutical approaches are to be found in Fairfield and Gallagher.\nEnvironment.\nEnvironmental hermeneutics applies hermeneutics to environmental issues conceived broadly to subjects including \"nature\" and \"wilderness\" (both terms are matters of hermeneutical contention), landscapes, ecosystems, built environments (where it overlaps architectural hermeneutics ), inter-species relationships, the relationship of the body to the world, and more.\nInternational relations.\nInsofar as hermeneutics is a basis of both critical theory and constitutive theory (both of which have made important inroads into the postpositivist branch of international relations theory and political science), it has been applied to international relations.\nSteve Smith refers to hermeneutics as the principal way of grounding foundationalist yet postpositivist theory of international relations.\nRadical postmodernism is an example of a postpositivist anti-foundationalist paradigm of international relations.\nLaw.\nSome scholars argue that law and theology are particular forms of hermeneutics because of their need to interpret legal tradition or scriptural texts. Moreover, the problem of interpretation has been central to legal theory since at least the 11th\u00a0century.\nIn the Middle Ages and Italian Renaissance, the schools of \"glossatores\", \"commentatores\", and \"usus modernus\" distinguished themselves by their approach to the interpretation of \"laws\" (mainly Justinian's Corpus Juris Civilis). The University of Bologna gave birth to a \"legal Renaissance\" in the 11th\u00a0century, when the Corpus Juris Civilis was rediscovered and systematically studied by men such as Irnerius and Johannes Gratian. It was an interpretative Renaissance. Subsequently, these were fully developed by Thomas Aquinas and Alberico Gentili.\nSince then, interpretation has always been at the center of legal thought. Friedrich Carl von Savigny and Emilio Betti, among others, made significant contributions to general hermeneutics. Legal interpretivism, most famously Ronald Dworkin's, may be seen as a branch of philosophical hermeneutics.\nPhenomenology.\nIn qualitative research, the beginnings of phenomenology stem from German philosopher and researcher Edmund Husserl. In his early days, Husserl studied mathematics, but over time his disinterest with empirical methods led him to philosophy and eventually phenomenology. Husserl's phenomenology inquires on the specifics of a certain experience or experiences and attempts to unfold the meaning of experience in everyday life. Phenomenology started as philosophy and then developed into methodology over time. American researcher Don Ihde contributed to phenomenological research methodology through what he described as experimental phenomenology: \"Phenomenology, in the first instance, is like an investigative science, an essential component of which is an experiment.\" His work contributed heavily to the implementation of phenomenology as a methodology.\nThe beginnings of hermeneutic phenomenology stem from a German researcher and student of Husserl, Martin Heidegger. Both researchers attempted to pull out the lived experiences of others through philosophical concepts, but Heidegger's main difference from Husserl was his belief that consciousness was not separate from the world but a formation of who we are as living individuals. Hermeneutic phenomenology stresses that every event or encounter involves some type of interpretation from an individual's background, and that we cannot separate this from an individual's development through life. Ihde also focuses on hermeneutic phenomenology within his early work, and draws connections between Husserl and French philosopher Paul Ricoeur's work in the field. Ricoeur focuses on the importance of symbols and linguistics within hermeneutic phenomenology. Overall, hermeneutic phenomenological research focuses on historical meanings and experiences, and their developmental and social effects on individuals.\nPolitical philosophy.\nItalian philosopher Gianni Vattimo and Spanish philosopher Santiago Zabala in their book \"Hermeneutic Communism\", when discussing contemporary capitalist regimes, stated that, \"A politics of descriptions does not impose power in order to dominate as a philosophy; rather, it is functional for the continued existence of a society of dominion, which pursues truth in the form of imposition (violence), conservation (realism), and triumph (history).\"\nVattimo and Zabala also stated that they view interpretation as anarchy and affirmed that \"existence is interpretation\" and that \"hermeneutics is weak thought.\"\nPsychoanalysis.\nPsychoanalysts have made ample use of hermeneutics since Sigmund Freud first gave birth to their discipline. In 1900 Freud wrote that the title he chose for \"The Interpretation of Dreams\" \"makes plain which of the traditional approaches to the problem of dreams I am inclined to follow...[\"i.e.\"] 'interpreting' a dream implies assigning a 'meaning' to it.\"\nThe French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan later extended Freudian hermeneutics into other psychical realms. His early work from the 1930s\u20131950s is particularly influenced by Heidegger, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty's hermeneutical phenomenology.\nPsychology and cognitive science.\nPsychologists and Cognitive science have recently become interested in hermeneutics, especially as an alternative to cognitivism.\nHubert Dreyfus's critique of conventional artificial intelligence has been influential among psychologists who are interested in hermeneutic approaches to meaning and interpretation, as discussed by philosophers such as Martin Heidegger (cf. Embodied cognition) and Ludwig Wittgenstein (cf. Discursive psychology).\nHermeneutics is also influential in humanistic psychology.\nReligion and theology.\nThe understanding of a theological text depends upon the reader's particular hermeneutical viewpoint. Some theorists, such as Paul Ric\u0153ur, have applied modern philosophical hermeneutics to theological texts (in Ric\u0153ur's case, the Bible).\nMircea Eliade, as a hermeneutist, understands religion as 'experience of the sacred', and interprets the sacred in relation to the profane. The Romanian scholar underlines that the relation between the sacred and the profane is not of opposition, but of complementarity, having interpreted the profane as a hierophany. The hermeneutics of the myth is a part of the hermeneutics of religion. Myth should not be interpreted as an illusion or a lie, because there is truth in myth to be rediscovered. Myth is interpreted by Eliade as 'sacred history'. He introduces the concept of 'total hermeneutics'.\nThe term was notably used in 2005 by Pope Benedict XVI saying the Second Vatican Council needs to be viewed through the lens of a \"hermeneutic of reform\" rather than a \"hermeneutic of discontinuity and rupture\". In subsequent discourse, this has become a \"hermeneutic of continuity\" contrasted with a \"hermeneutic of rupture,\" and applied to dissident tendencies questioning recent church teaching in general and the teaching of Pope Francis. Following this, the term is now widely used: e.g. of suspicion, of tradition and \"kenosis\", and of synodality. Benedict also spoke of the \"hermeneutic of the cross\", \"of faith\" necessary for exegesis, \"of unity\", while deploring a \"hermeneutic of politics\". Francis has warned against a \"hermeneutic of conspiracy\". Pope John Paul II taught a \"hermeneutic of the gift\".\nSafety science.\nIn the field of safety science, and especially in the study of human reliability, scientists have become increasingly interested in hermeneutic approaches.\nIt has been proposed by ergonomist Donald Taylor that mechanist models of human behaviour will only take us so far in terms of accident reduction, and that safety science must look at the meaning of accidents for human beings.\nOther scholars in the field have attempted to create safety taxonomies that make use of hermeneutic concepts in terms of their categorisation of qualitative data.\nSociology.\nIn sociology, hermeneutics is the interpretation and understanding of social events through analysis of their meanings for the human participants in the events. It enjoyed prominence during the 1960s and 1970s, and differs from other interpretive schools of sociology in that it emphasizes both context and form within any given social behaviour.\nThe central principle of sociological hermeneutics is that it is only possible to know the meaning of an act or statement within the context of the discourse or world view from which it originates. Context is critical to comprehension; an action or event that carries substantial weight to one person or culture may be viewed as meaningless or entirely different to another. For example, giving the \"thumbs-up\" gesture is widely accepted as a sign of a job well done in the United States, while other cultures view it as an insult. Similarly, marking a piece of paper and putting it into a box might be considered a meaningless act unless it is put into the context of an election (the act of putting a ballot paper into a box).\nFriedrich Schleiermacher, widely regarded as the father of sociological hermeneutics believed that, in order for an interpreter to understand the work of another author, they must familiarize themselves with the historical context in which the author published their thoughts. His work led to the inspiration of Heidegger's \"hermeneutic circle\" a frequently referenced model that claims one's understanding of individual parts of a text is based on their understanding of the whole text, while the understanding of the whole text is dependent on the understanding of each individual part. Hermeneutics in sociology was also heavily influenced by Gadamer.\nCriticism.\nJ\u00fcrgen Habermas criticizes Gadamer's hermeneutics (see above) as being unsuitable for understanding society because it is unable to account for questions of social reality, like labor and domination.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable precursors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70608", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70608", "title": "Helen Stephens", "text": "American athlete (1918\u20131994)\nHelen Herring Stephens (February 3, 1918 \u2013 January 17, 1994) was an American athlete and a double Olympic champion in 1936.\nBiography.\nStephens, nicknamed the \"Fulton Flash\" after her birthplace, Fulton, Missouri, was a strong athlete in sprint events\u2014she never lost a race in her entire career\u2014and also in weight events such as the shot put and discus throw. She won national titles in both categories.\nWhen she was 18, Stephens participated in the 1936 Summer Olympics. There she won the 100 m final, beating reigning champion and world record holder, Stanis\u0142awa Walasiewicz (aka Stella Walsh) of Poland. Stephen's time of 11.5 s was below the world record, but was not recognized because a strong tailwind was blowing at the time of the race. Next, Stephens anchored the American 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team that won the Olympic title after the leading German team dropped its baton.\nStephens is quoted by Olympic historian, David Wallechinsky, about her post-race experience with Adolf Hitler. \"He comes in and gives me the Nazi salute. I gave him a good, old-fashioned Missouri handshake,\" she said. \"Once more Hitler goes for the jugular vein. He gets hold of my fanny and begins to squeeze and pinch, and hug me up. And he said: 'You're a true Aryan type. You should be running for Germany.' So after he gave me the once over and a full massage, he asked me if I'd like to spend the weekend in Berchtesgaden.\" Stephens refused.\nStephens retired from athletics shortly after the games and played professional baseball and softball. She attended William Woods University, Fulton High School, and Middle River School in Fulton. She was later inducted into the William Woods Owls Hall of Fame, described as \"the most well-known athlete in Fulton\u2019s history.\" From 1938 to 1952, she was the owner and manager of her own semi-professional basketball team; she was the first woman to own and manage a semi-professional basketball team. She was employed for many years in the Research Division of the U.S. Aeronautical Chart and Information Service (later, a part of the Defense Mapping Agency) in St. Louis, Missouri.\nHer longtime partner was Mabel O. Robbe (n\u00e9e Wires), a dietician at Francis Shimer College.\nIn 1993, she was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.\nShe died in Saint Louis at age 75.\n1936 Olympic gender controversy.\nAt the 1936 Olympics, it was suggested that both Stephens and Stanis\u0142awa Walasiewicz were, in fact, male. Stephens received scrutiny over her gender after her 100 m victory, with the Warsaw-based newspaper Kurier Poranny writing, \"It is scandalous that the Americans entered a man in the women's competition.\" Other newspapers soon also reported on Stephens alleged lack of femininity. Stephens later told her biographer that she told reporters who questioned her about her gender \"to check the facts with the Olympic committee physician who sex-tested all athletes prior to competition.\"\nNewspapers soon reported that German officials had given Stephens a so-called sex test and let her compete only after they had confirmed she was a woman. The \"Harrisbug Telegraph\" reported that International Olympic Committee performed a physical check on Stephens and concluded that she was a woman. These reports were denied by IOC committee member Avery Brundage and no further evidence surfaced. In 1938, Paul Gallico in his book \"Farewell to Sport\" suggested that American sports officials had examined Stephens prior to the Olympic games. On August 28, following the Olympics but before returning to New York, Stephens wrote in her diary that she was inspected by American officials. Walasiewicz in fact had been born intersex, a fact not made public until after her death in 1980.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70613", "revid": "28078513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70613", "title": "James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell", "text": "Consort of Mary, Queen of Scots in 1567\nJames Hepburn, 1st Duke of Orkney and 4th Earl of Bothwell (c.\u20091534\u00a0\u2013 14 April 1578), better known simply as Lord Bothwell, was the third husband of Mary, Queen of Scots. He was accused of the murder of Mary's second husband, Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, a charge of which he was acquitted. His marriage to Mary was controversial and divided the country; when he fled the growing rebellion to Norway, he was arrested and lived the rest of his life imprisoned in Denmark.\nEarly life.\nJames Hepburn was the son of Patrick Hepburn, 3rd Earl of Bothwell, and Agnes Sinclair (d. 1572), daughter of Henry, Lord Sinclair, and was styled \"the Master of Bothwell\" from birth. He succeeded his father as Earl of Bothwell and Lord Hailes in 1556.\nMarriages.\nAs Lord High Admiral of Scotland, Lord Bothwell visited Copenhagen around 1559. He fell in love with Anna Tronds, known in English as Anna Throndsen or Anna Rustung. She was a Norwegian noblewoman whose father, Kristoffer Trondson, a famous Norwegian admiral, was serving as Danish Royal Consul. After their engagement, or more likely marriage under Norwegian law, Anna left with Bothwell. In Flanders, he said he was out of money and asked Anna to sell all her possessions. She complied and visited her family in Denmark to ask for more money. Anna was unhappy and apparently given to complaining about Bothwell. His treatment of Anna played a part in his eventual downfall.\nIn February 1566, Bothwell married Lady Jean Gordon, daughter of the 4th Earl of Huntly and sister of Sir John Gordon and the 5th Earl of Huntly. They were divorced on 7 May 1567, citing his adultery with her servant Bessie Crawford as cause. He married Mary, Queen of Scots, eight days later.\nMeeting Queen Mary in France.\nLord Bothwell appears to have met Queen Mary when he visited the French Court in the autumn of 1560, after he left Anna Rustung in Flanders. He was kindly received by the Queen and her husband, King Francis II of France, and, as he put it: \"The Queen recompensed me more liberally and honourably than I had deserved\" \u2013 receiving 600 Crowns and the post and salary of gentleman of the French King's Chamber. He visited France again in the spring of 1561, and by 5 July was back in Paris for the third time \u2013 this time accompanied by the Bishop of Orkney and the Earl of Eglinton. By August, the widowed Queen was on her way back to Scotland in a French galley, some of the organisation having been dealt with by Bothwell in his naval capacity.\nUnder Mary of Guise's regency.\nBothwell supported Mary of Guise, queen dowager and Regent of Scotland, against the Protestant Lords of the Congregation. Bothwell and 24 followers took 6000 crowns of English money destined to be used against Guise from the Laird of Ormiston on Halloween 1559 at an ambush near Haddington. In retaliation the Protestant leader, the Duke of Ch\u00e2telherault, sent his son the Earl of Arran and the Master of Maxwell to seize Bothwell's home Crichton Castle and force the Earl, who was nearby at Borthwick, to join them. Bothwell remained true to the Regent, though it was said in January he was \"weary of his part\". The English diplomat Thomas Randolph also hinted at this time of a scandal involving his sister Jean Hepburn.\nAt Queen Mary's court.\nAfter Protestant Lords gained power following Mary of Guise's death and the return to Scotland of Mary, Queen of Scots, Bothwell appears to have been not much more than a troublesome noble at court. His open quarrel with the Earl of Arran and the Hamiltons, who accused him of intriguing against the Crown, caused some degree of anguish to the Queen. The Earl of Arran accused Bothwell of plotting to kidnap Mary and the Earl of Moray from the deer park at Falkland Palace at Easter 1562. Although the Earl of Arran was eventually declared mad, Bothwell was nevertheless imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle without trial. Later that year, while the Queen was in the Highlands, Bothwell escaped and went to Hermitage Castle.\nThe Queen and Bothwell were by now very close. Bothwell married Lady Jean Gordon, daughter of the Earl of Huntly, on 24 February 1566 and Queen Mary attended the wedding at Holyrood. The banquet was held at Kinloch's house on the Canongate. According to Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie there followed five days of jousting and tournaments. The marriage lasted just over a year.\nIn October 1566, after the birth of Prince James, Queen Mary came to Jedburgh to hold justice courts. Upon hearing that Bothwell had been seriously wounded and was likely to die, Mary rode to be with him at Hermitage Castle. Subsequently, Mary was unwell and resided at Jedburgh until she recovered. Antonia Fraser asserts that Queen Mary was already on her way to visit Bothwell on matters of state before she heard about his illness, and that therefore this visit is not evidence that they were already lovers at the time of his accident. Alison Weir agrees, and in fact the records show that Mary waited a full six days after learning of his injuries before going to visit Bothwell. The story of her mad flight to his side was put about later by her enemies to discredit her.\nDarnley's murder.\nOn 9 February 1567 Bothwell left his lodging at Todrick's Wynd on the south side of the Royal Mile in Edinburgh (east of Blackfriars Street) and with accomplices Dalgliesh, Powrie and Wilson, carried several kegs of gunpowder to Kirk o'Field lodging to the south, almost encountering Queen Mary en route. At Kirk O'Field they lit the gunpowder destroying part of the building and killing Darnley and his aide.\nBothwell was publicly accused of having murdered the Queen's consort, Lord Darnley. Darnley's father, the Earl of Lennox, and other relatives agitated for vengeance and the Privy Council began proceedings against Bothwell on 12 April 1567. Sir William Drury reported to Sir William Cecil, Secretary of State to Elizabeth I of England, that the Queen was in continuous ill-health \"for the most part either melancholy or sickly\". On the appointed day Bothwell rode magnificently down the Canongate, with the Earl of Morton and William Maitland of Lethington flanking him, and his Hepburns trotting behind. The trial lasted from noon till seven in the evening. Bothwell was acquitted and it was widely rumoured that he would marry Mary.\nAbduction of and marriage to Queen Mary.\nThe next Wednesday, Queen Mary rode to the Estates of Parliament, with Lord Bothwell carrying the Sceptre, where the proceedings of Bothwell's trial were officially declared to be just according to the law of the land. On Saturday 19 April 1567, eight bishops, nine earls, and seven Lords of Parliament put their signatures to what became known as the Ainslie Tavern Bond, a manifesto declaring that Mary should marry a native-born subject, and handed it to Bothwell.\nOn 24 April, while Mary was on the road from Linlithgow Palace to Edinburgh, Bothwell suddenly appeared with 800 men. He assured her that danger awaited her in Edinburgh, and told her that he proposed to take her to his castle at Dunbar, out of harm's way. She agreed to accompany him and arrived at Dunbar at midnight. There, Mary was taken prisoner by Bothwell and allegedly raped by him to secure marriage to her and the crown (though whether she was his accomplice or his unwilling victim remains a controversial issue). On 12 May the Queen created him Duke of Orkney and Marquess of Fife at Holyrood.\nOn 15 May they were married in the Great Hall at Holyrood, according to Protestant rites officiated by Adam Bothwell, Bishop of Orkney and John Craig. Mary was married in mourning clothes, described as \"dule weed\". According to William Drury, an English commander at Berwick, there were only a few witnesses who heard a sermon the palace's chamber of presence. The French ambassador, Philibert du Croc did not attend the Duke's creation or the wedding. On the day of the wedding, Mary ordered a gown of black figured velvet embroidered with silver and gold. Mary gave her new husband a fur lined night-gown. There were few festivities until two weeks after the wedding, when there was a triumph and tilt and Bothwell \"ran at the ring\" at Leith.\nThe marriage divided the country into two camps, and on 16 June, the Lords opposed to Mary and the Duke of Orkney (as Bothwell had newly become) signed a Bond denouncing them. A showdown between the two opposing sides followed at Carberry Hill on 15 June, from which Orkney (as Lord Bothwell was now known) fled, after one final embrace, never to be seen again by Mary. In December that year, Bothwell's titles and estates were forfeited by Act of Parliament.\nEscape to Scandinavia and imprisonment.\nAfter fleeing the confrontation at Carberry Hill, the Duke of Orkney (as Bothwell was now) went to Huntly Castle and Spynie Palace. He took ship from Aberdeen to Shetland, where he was helped by Olave Sinclair. Bothwell was pursued by William Kirkcaldy of Grange and William Murray of Tullibardine, who sailed into Bressay Sound near Lerwick. Four of the Duke of Orkney's ships in the Sound set sail north to Unst, where Orkney was negotiating with German captains to hire more ships. Kirkcaldy's flagship, the \"Lion\", chased one of Orkney's ships, and both ships were damaged on a submerged rock. The Duke of Orkney sent his treasure ship to Scalloway, and fought a three-hour-long sea battle off the Port of Unst, where the mast of one of Orkney's ships was shot away. Subsequently, a storm forced the Duke to sail towards Norway.\nOrkney may have hoped to reach Denmark and raise an army with the support of Frederick II of Denmark to put Mary back on the throne. He was caught off the coast of Norway (then in a union with Denmark) at H\u00f8yevarde lighthouse in Karmsundet without proper papers, and was escorted to the port of Bergen. This was the native home of Anna Throndsen. Anna raised a complaint against Orkney, which was enforced by her powerful family; her cousin Erik Rosenkrantz, a high-level official in Norway, remanded Orkney to the Bergenhus Fortress, while Anna sued him for abandonment and return of her dowry. Anna may have had a soft spot for Orkney, as he persuaded her to take custody of his ship, as compensation. Orkney would have been released, but King Frederick heard that the Scottish government was seeking Orkney for the murder of Darnley, and decided to take him into custody in Denmark.\nThe Duke of Orkney was sent to Copenhagen, where the Danish monarch, Frederik II, deliberated on his fate. The Duke was sent across \u00d8resund to the fortress and prison Malm\u00f8hus Castle. However, as news from both England and Scotland arrived, Frederik eventually understood that Mary never again would become Queen. Without Mary, the King considered him insignificant.\nDeath.\nHe was imprisoned at Dragsholm Castle, west of Copenhagen, and was held in what were said to be appalling conditions. Meanwhile, the Parliament of Scotland officially stripped him of all his Scottish titles, including the Dukedom of Orkney, in December 1567. He died in April 1578, and was buried in a vault at F\u00e5revejle church near the castle.\nA pillar to which he was chained for the last ten years of his life can still be seen, with a circular groove in the floor around the pillar.\nIn 1858, the body was exhumed and declared to be that of Lord Bothwell. It was in a dried condition and was thereafter referred to as \"Bothwell's mummy\". His extended family tried to get his body sent back to Scotland, but their request has not been granted. The identity of the body has never been conclusively proven.\nA body referred to as \"Bothwell's mummy\" materialised in 1976 in the Edinburgh Wax Museum on the Royal Mile, as the only non-wax exhibit. The guide book claimed it was brought to Scotland in 1858.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70614", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70614", "title": "David Rizzio", "text": "Italian courtier (1533\u20131566)\nDavid Rizzio ( ; ; c.\u20091533 \u2013 9 March 1566) or Riccio ( , ) was an Italian courtier and the private secretary of Mary, Queen of Scots. Mary's husband, Lord Darnley, is said to have been jealous of their friendship because of rumours that Rizzio had impregnated Mary, and he joined in a conspiracy of Protestant nobles to murder him, led by Patrick Ruthven, 3rd Lord Ruthven. Mary was having dinner with Rizzio and a few ladies-in-waiting when Darnley joined them, accused his wife of adultery and then had a group murder Rizzio, who was hiding behind Mary. Mary was held at gunpoint and Rizzio was stabbed numerous times. His body took 57 dagger wounds. The murder was the catalyst of the downfall of Darnley, and had serious consequences for Mary's subsequent reign.\nCareer.\nRizzio was born in Pancalieri close to Turin, a descendant of an ancient and noble family still living in Piedmont, the Riccio Counts of San Paolo e Solbrito.\nRizzio (whose name appears in Italian records as Davide Riccio di Pancalieri in Piemonte) went first from Turin to the Court of the Duke of Savoy, then at Nice. However, finding no opportunities for advancement there, he found means in 1561 to get himself admitted into the train of Carlo Ubertino Solaro, Count of Moretta, who was about to lead an embassy to Scotland. The Count in Scotland had no employment for Rizzio, and dismissed him. Rizzio however, had made friends with the Queen's musicians, who had come with her from France. James Melville, a friend of Rizzio, said that \"Her Majesty had three valets in her chamber, who sung three parts, and wanted a bass to sing the fourth part\".\nRizzio and Mary's musicians were employed as valets of her chamber and the royal accounts also call Rizzio her \"chamber child\". Other valets who were musicians include Adrian Lefeau, John Adesoun (who played the lute), and James Lauder. Mary bought matching clothes for three lute players in February 1562. One of the \"sangstaris\" was called Missall.\nSecretary.\nRizzio was considered a good musician and excellent singer, which brought him to the attention of the cosmopolitan young queen. Towards the end of 1564, having grown wealthy under her patronage, Rizzio became the queen's secretary for relations with France, replacing Augustine Raullet. Rizzio was ambitious, controlling access to the queen and seeing himself as almost a Secretary of State. Other courtiers felt that as a Catholic and a foreigner he was too close to the queen.\nRelationship with Darnley and with Mary.\nRizzio became an ally of Lord Darnley, and helped with plans for his marriage to Mary. George Buchanan described Rizzio gaining Darnley's favour. As their familiarity grew, Rizzio was admitted to Darnley's chamber, bed, and secret confidence. David Calderwood later wrote that Rizzio had \"insinuated himself in the favours of Lord Darnley so far, that they would lie some times in one bed together\".\nGeorge Buchanan wrote about events and plots in June 1565 before the royal wedding. He claims that Mary summoned her brother, the Earl of Moray, to meet her at Perth. There, a quarrel between Moray and Darnley would escalate, Rizzio would strike the first blow, and others would ensure Moray was killed. Thomas Randolph described this plan differently, and his version does not involve Rizzio. Moray however did not come to Perth, but stayed at Lochleven Castle. Rumours followed that Moray and the Earl of Argyll planned to kidnap Mary and Darnley as they passed by Kinross.\nBefore the wedding of Mary and Darnley, Rizzio was with the couple when they walked in disguise or masque costume on Edinburgh's High Street. After the marriage in July 1565, rumours became rife that Mary was having an adulterous affair with Rizzio. It was said (in 1568) that Mary and Darnley's love decayed after they returned from the campaign against Moray's rebellion, known as the Chaseabout Raid, when Mary was \"using the said David more like a lover than a servant, forsaking her husband's bed\". According to the report of a French diplomat, Paul de Foix, Darnley discovered Rizzio in the closet of Mary's bedchamber at Holyrood house in the middle of the night dressed only in a fur gown over his shirt. George Buchanan included a similar story in his \"History\", that Darnley had a key to a secondary door to Mary's bedchamber, but found it locked or barred against him. Thereafter, he resolved to be revenged on Rizzio.\nFollowing Darnley's murder, Lord Ruthven, in the account known as \"Ruthven's Relation\", revealed that Darnley had described the circumstances of his jealousy to Mary. This account also focusses on Rizzio's presence in Mary's bedchamber:Since yon fellow Davie fell in credit and familiarity with your Majesty, you regarded me not, neither treated me nor entertained me after your wonted fashion; for every day before dinner, you would come to my chamber and pass time with me, and thus long time ye have not done done so; and when I come to your Majesty's chamber, you bear me little company, except Davie had been the third \"marrow\" [companion]: and after supper your Majesty hath a use to sit at cards with the said Davie till one or two of the clock after midnight; and this is the entertainment that I have had of you this long time.\nThe chronicle account, the \"Historie of James the Sext\", tells the story in a different way, asserting that Mary's secretary, William Maitland of Lethington, was jealous of Rizzio's increasing power. Maitland made Darnley jealous of Rizzio, hoping that the naive king-consort would destroy his rival.\nWealth, possessions and costume.\nHis annual salary for the post of valet was 150 Francs or \u00a375 Scots. The sum was paid from the \"Thirds of Benefices\" as were some other household expenses, and not through the treasurer's accounts. In 1565, Rizzio received \u00a380 in four installments paid by George Wishart of Drymme.\nMary gave him gifts of rich fabric from her wardrobe, including black velvet figured with gold, and five pieces of gold cloth figured with scales. It was said that Rizzio took bribes. William Douglas of Lochleven wrote that he offered Rizzio \u00a35,000 to prevent the forfeit of the Earl of Moray, but Rizzio refused saying he would not act for \u00a320,000. Rizzio's involvement with pardons for the Chaseabout rebels sparked Darnley's envy.\nAccording to a letter of Thomas Randolph, Rizzio took part in a costumed masque in February 1566, celebrating the arrival of Nicolas d'Angennes, seigneur de Rambouillet, who brought the Order of Saint Michael for Darnley.\nMary had given Rizzio \u00a3200 in January 1566 to refurbish his chamber at Holyrood Palace. After his murder, it was noted that Rizzio had been living in wealthy circumstances. He was said to have \u00a32,000 Sterling in gold coins, good clothing including 18 pairs of velvet hose, and his chamber at Holyroodhouse was well-furnished with a variety of hand-guns described as daggs, pistolets, and arquebuses, and 22 swords. He was said to be wearing a very rich jewel at his neck when he was killed, and was wearing a satin doublet and a furred damask night gown, perhaps the garment mentioned in the earlier French report.\nMurder.\nJealousy precipitated Rizzio's murder in the Queen's supper chamber in the Palace of Holyroodhouse at 8 o'clock on Saturday, 9 March 1566. Mary, Rizzio, Jean Stewart, Countess of Argyll, Robert Beaton of Creich and Arthur Erskine were seated at the supper table. Darnley, according to James Melville of Halhill, was leaning on Mary's chair. The supper room, which still exists as part of the bedchamber, and was then \"a cabinet about XII foot square, in the same a little low reposinge bedde, and a table\" according to an account of the murder written by Francis, Earl of Bedford, and Thomas Randolph. The room had been decorated by Mary's servant Servais de Cond\u00e9.\nOn the night of the murder the royal guards were overpowered and the palace was turned over to the control of the rebels. According to James Melville, the Earls of Bothwell and Huntly escaped from the palace by jumping from the window into the \"little garden where the lions are lodged\". The Queen was six months pregnant (with James VI) at the time, and some accused Rizzio of having impregnated her. The rebels burst into the supper room, led by Lord Ruthven and George Douglas, and demanded that Rizzio be handed over. The Queen refused. Rizzio then hid behind Mary, or held her about the waist, but was nevertheless seized.\nMary would allege that one of the intruders, Patrick Bellenden (brother of the Lord Justice Clerk), pointed his gun at her pregnant belly, while Andrew Ker of Faldonside threatened to stab her. Lord Ruthven denied this. Anthony Standen later wrote that Bellenden drew his dagger at the Queen's left side and Standen disarmed him, while another man had a snaphance pistol which failed to fire.\nAfter this violent struggle, Rizzio was dragged through the bed-chamber into the adjacent audience chamber or outer hall. He was stabbed an alleged 57 times. His body was thrown down the main staircase nearby (now disused) and stripped of his jewels and fine clothes. The location of Rizzio's murder is marked with a small plaque in the Audience Chamber, underneath which is a red mark on the floorboards, which reportedly was left when Rizzio was stabbed to death.\nRizzio was first buried in the cemetery of Holyrood Abbey. Buchanan states that shortly afterwards his body was removed by the Queen's orders and deposited in the tomb of the kings of Scotland in Holyrood Abbey. This strengthened the previous rumours of her familiarity with him. Rumours circulated about the motive for the murder: that Darnley was jealous, or that powerful lords sought to manipulate Darnley and remove an irritating presence at court.\nAftermath.\nImmediately after the murder Mary was able to speak to Lord Darnley, and may have convinced him they were both in danger and captives in the palace. The guard around her was relaxed and at midnight the next day they escaped and she rode behind Arthur Erskine of Blackgrange, master of her stable, to Seton Palace and then to safety at Dunbar Castle. An English servant of Lord Darnley, Anthony Standen, later claimed to have accompanied the queen with John Stewart of Traquair and his brother William Stewart. Mary returned to Edinburgh with her supporters, and took up lodgings on the Royal Mile rather than return to the palace. On 21 March she had Darnley declared innocent of the murder.\nRobert Melville arrived in Edinburgh from London and reported back to Elizabeth and Cecil on the aftermath of the murder. He noted that Morton, Lord Ruthven, Lord Lindsay, William Maitland of Lethington, the Clerk Register James Balfour, the Lord Justice Clerk John Bellenden (whose brother was alleged to have pointed a gun at the queen), and some gentlemen of Lothian, who were all suspected of having knowledge of the plan had fled.\nWilliam Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley and a French diplomat, Paul de Foix discussed the news. De Foix seems at first to have been misled about the events, thinking that Darnley had killed Rizzio because he found such a lowly servant having an adulterous relationship with Mary, an idea not present in the reports of the murder.\nRizzio's brother, Joseph, arrived in Scotland with Michel de Castelnau and was appointed secretary in David's place by 25 April 1566. Joseph and an Italian colleague, Joseph Lutyni, had some trouble over coins taken from the queen's purse, and in April 1567 he was accused and acquitted with Bothwell of Darnley's murder.\nLegacy and memorial.\nDavid Rizzio's career was remembered and referred to by Henry IV of France. Mocking the pretension of James VI of Scotland to be the \"Scottish Solomon\", he remarked that \"he hoped he was not David the fiddler's son\", alluding to the possibility that Rizzio, not Darnley, fathered King James. According to the Master of Gray, James wept with his friend Cuthbert Armourer over the rumours that Rizzio was his father.\nGeorge Buchanan wrote in 1581 that David was first buried outside the door of Holyrood Abbey, and then Mary arranged for him to be buried in the tomb of her father James V and Madeleine of France within. Buchanan described this circumstance as reflecting badly on the Queen. Fearing that Mary's son, James VI, would suppress his book, Buchanan's friend James Melville tried to get Buchanan to rewrite the passage while the book was at the printers. Buchanan asked his cousin, Thomas Buchanan, a schoolmaster in Stirling, if he thought the story was true, and the cousin agreed. The story was published.\nIt is sometimes said that Rizzio was buried at the Canongate Kirk and burying ground. Holyroodhouse is within the old Canongate jurisdiction, and Rizzio's death was recorded in the Canongate registers. This pre-dated the building of the Canongate Kirk in 1688, and it is unlikely he could be buried there.\nRepresentation in fiction.\nRizzio was played by John Carradine in the 1936 RKO picture \"Mary of Scotland\"; by Ian Holm in the 1971 movie \"Mary, Queen of Scots\"; by Tadeusz Pasternak in the BBC mini-series \"Gunpowder, Treason, and Plot\"; by Andrew Shaver in The CW network television show \"Reign\"; and by Ismael Cruz C\u00f3rdova in the 2018 film \"Mary Queen of Scots\".\nThe murder of Rizzio and the subsequent downfall of Darnley form the main subject of the 1830 play \"Maria Stuart\" by Juliusz S\u0142owacki.\nRizzio's life and death are a key plot element in Caleb Carr's Sherlock Holmes story \"The Italian Secretary\", Holmes vocally dismissing the idea that Rizzio was ever anything more than entertainment.\nArthur Conan Doyle used the death of Rizzio as a plot point in his 1908 story, \u201cThe Silver Mirror\u201d.\nRizzio's murder is also the subject of Scottish author Denise Mina's 2021 novella, \"Rizzio\".\nThe takers in hand.\nThomas Randolph listed these men among the participants and suspected conspirators in Rizzio's murder:\nOn 19 March, the Privy Council sent letters summoning several men who were suspected of involvement, requiring they attend in Edinburgh to answer questions and charges. These included those in Randolph's list and others such as William Tweedie of Drummelzier, Adam Tweedy of Drava, and John Somerville of Cambusnethan.\nOn 8 June, the Queen's advocates John Spens of Condie and Robert Crichton of Eliock proclaimed some the suspects were rebels and had had fled. It would be unlawful to help them. The lawyers included the names of some Edinburgh craftsmen, William Jonston, a bow maker, a shoemaker Thomas Broun, and the cutler James Young who made sword blades.\nJohn Carmichael of Meadowflat, later Captain of Crawford, was given a remission or pardon in 1574 for his \"art and part\" in the detention of Mary at Holyrood from the 9 to 11 March 1566.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70615", "revid": "20813426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70615", "title": "List of premiers of Alberta", "text": "There have been 19 heads of government of the Canadian province of Alberta since it was created in 1905. Three were Liberal, three belonged to the United Farmers of Alberta, three were Social Credit, seven were Progressive Conservatives, two have belonged to the United Conservatives and one was New Democratic. The current premier of Alberta is Danielle Smith of the United Conservative Party.\nAlberta uses a unicameral Westminster-style parliamentary government, in which the premier is the leader of the party that controls the most seats in the Legislative Assembly. The premier is Alberta's head of government, while the King of Canada is its head of state and is represented by the lieutenant governor of Alberta. The premier picks a cabinet, usually from the elected members of the Legislative Assembly, to form the Executive Council of Alberta, and presides over that body.\nMembers are elected to the legislature during general elections or by-elections. Barring special legislation occasioned by a war or an emergency (which has never happened in Alberta's history, although it has federally), general elections must be called by the lieutenant governor, at the premier's advice, no later than five years after the previous election, but the premier may ask (and almost always has asked) for dissolution of the legislative assembly and a subsequent election earlier than that. Under Alberta's fixed-election legislation of 2024, a general election is to be held on the third Monday in October in the fourth calendar year following the most recent general election, but the premier can bindingly advise the lieutenant governor to call an election earlier than the fixed date.\nAn election may also happen if the governing party loses the confidence of the legislature, by the defeat of a supply bill or tabling of a confidence motion, but in Alberta's history of massive majorities in the assembly, this has never happened. William Aberhart's first mandate as premier was almost cut short, when a large part of his caucus showed willingness to vote against his government's budget; but when he promised to bring in radical banking reform they were satisfied.\nA leader of a party is chosen by the party, following an internal constitution unique to each party that comprises a framework to elect or appoint a leader. Leaders, not already possessing a seat, must then win a seat in a by-election or general election to sit in the Assembly. Leaders of a party without a seat must sit in the legislature gallery. While sitting in the gallery a premier cannot exercise any legislative powers.\nPrior to 1905, Alberta was part of the North-West Territories and as part of this jurisdiction was governed by the North-West Legislative Council, composed of elected and appointed officials, led by lieutenant governors of the North-West Territories until 1897, and by lieutenant governors of the Northwest Territories and the premier of the North-West Territories from 1897 to 1905.\nSince 1905 Alberta's premiers have belonged to six different political parties. However, there have been only five changes of government, as governments once elected are usually in for long periods and have always been majority governments. No defeated party has yet returned to power. As of 2024[ [update]], three women have served as Premier of Alberta, more than any other province.\nHistory.\nLiberal Party (1905\u20131921).\nThe Liberal party got its start in power in Alberta when Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier appointed Alexander Rutherford, a prominent liberal and former elected NWT Assembly member, as interim premier in 1905. He and other Liberals organized the province's first election.\nRutherford's Liberal party was elected, with a majority of the popular vote and a majority of seats in the Legislative Assembly in the province's first election, the 1905 Alberta election. The north-central constituency boundaries radiated out from Edmonton and some say this was a case of gerrymandered electoral boundaries. Rutherford's government received a majority of votes in the election and emerged from the March 1909 election leading another formidable majority, which clearly reflected the broad popular support he and his government enjoyed. He would resign as premier 14 months later, in May 1910, after his government was implicated in the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal.\nArthur Sifton replaced Rutherford as premier. Shortly before the 1913 election Sifton's Liberals jammed through a controversial bill greatly expanding the size of the legislative assembly. The bill was once again said to gerrymander boundaries in Liberals' favor, although the Liberals again received more votes than any other party in the 1913 election. The press and opposition would term his reign as premier \"Siftonism\" implying that his reign was a disease on Alberta. Sifton only lasted one mandate as premier as he left to pursue a career in federal politics.\nCharles Stewart replaced Sifton and held the Liberal government through the lackluster 1917 election which 11 MLAs serving in the armed forces were automatically re-elected. The elected opposition was the strongest so far in the province's 12-year history. The Conservatives, which formed the official opposition with 19 seats, slightly more than one-third of the seats in the Assembly, expressed hopes they had the upper hand on the waning Liberal government.\nBoth would be surprised by the United Farmers who routed the Liberals and Conservatives in rural areas to form the government in the 1921 election.\nUnited Farmers (1921\u20131935).\nAlberta's second dynasty was the United Farmers of Alberta, a farmers' movement organization, formed in 1909 as a lobby group, whose political wing rose from a minor party named the Alberta Non-Partisan League, formed in 1916. Henry Wise Wood led the party at the time of the 1921 election, although he did not run himself. The loosely organized farmer candidates running in rural constituencies captured a majority of the seats. The party was allied with Labour candidates, so it did not contest urban ridings, aside from one in Edmonton. Wood did not want the job as premier so the farmers were forced to shop around. UFA lawyer John Brownlee was asked first but declined. UFA executive member Herbert Greenfield, the second choice, became the new premier, although he too had not run in the election so had to await success in a by-election to take his seat.\nGreenfield resigned four years later because he was often absent due to illness and lost much of his energy due to the death of his wife shortly after the election.\nJohn Brownlee, who had previously been offered the job, succeeded Greenfield. Brownlee's reign as government leader was troubled by the onset of the Great Depression. He resigned in scandal after he was accused of sexual acts with a minor in the Attorney General's office. This and another scandalous divorce by UFA MLA Oran McPherson, speaker of the Legislative Assembly, gave the United Farmers an image of moral decay. In 1934 Richard Reid replaced Brownlee but served as premier for less than two years, leading the United Farmers government into total defeat at the hands of the new Social Credit party.\nSocial Credit (1935\u20131971).\nAlbertans turned away from the United Farmers government and began to follow evangelical radio preacher William Aberhart, known as Bible Bill. The Social Credit party had been founded in 1932. Voters flocked to the radical monetary reforms proposed by Aberhart and British SC theorist Clifford Douglas, looking for an escape to the Great Depression. Social Credit was elected with a majority (54 percent of the vote) in the 1935 election completely wiping out the United Farmers representation (although the UFA did receive 11 percent of the vote). Aberhart had difficulty implementing the Social Credit theory and his popularity began to decline. His government almost fell during a 1936 caucus rebellion, in which his own MLAs forced him to promise to try to reform the banking system. But it rebounded and in the 1940 election it garnered more votes than any other party and also captured a large majority of the seats. Aberhart died in 1943; he is the only premier to die in office in Alberta's history.\nErnest Manning succeeded Aberhart as premier. Under Manning, Social Credit moved away from the monetary theory of Douglas and towards traditional conservatism. Manning led the party through seven-straight massive majorities, (although in 1955 his government received barely more seats than Aberhart had received in 1940, due to a strong but short-lived Liberal drive). During his premiership, his government abolished the hybrid STV/Instant-runoff voting system the province had been using since 1924, and the government received a windfall of seats in the 1959 election. After 24 years as premier, Manning resigned in 1967.\nHarry Strom, a long time cabinet minister, replaced Manning and led the party to defeat in the 1971 election at the hands of the Progressive Conservatives under Peter Lougheed. Strom and his government looked old and tired and out of touch compared to the new Progressive Conservatives.\nProgressive Conservative (1971\u20132015).\nThe fourth government of Alberta was first led by Peter Lougheed, defeating the 36-year reign of Social Credit in 1971.\nPeter Lougheed served as premier, winning four elections, until 1985 when he retired from public office. Some of Lougheed's notable accomplishments were the limited Alberta Bill of Rights, and the Heritage Trust Fund.\nDon Getty, one of Lougheed's long-time cabinet ministers, returned to politics to win the leadership of the party. Getty's premiership was endorsed by a win in the 1986 general election that saw the NDP climb to 16 seats as the official opposition. Getty's reign became very unpopular as he led Alberta into large deficit spending, and marked an era of big government that, some said, the province could not afford. In the 1989 election he was defeated in his Edmonton-Whitemud riding, while his party still won a majority. He sat in the gallery as premier, until he won a seat in a by-election in Stettler. His refusal to leave as premier helped Laurence Decore's Liberals skyrocket in popularity. Getty resigned and was replaced in a bitter leadership battle by Ralph Klein.\nRalph Klein, the former mayor of Calgary, led the party into the 1993 election, promising a new era of debt reduction and fiscal accountability. He walked away with a slim majority. Ralph Klein's folksy appeal helped the Progressive Conservatives renew themselves. He led the party through two elections, gaining in popularity each time. The price of oil rebounded and the government, despite low rates of taxes on the wealthy and corporations, was showing a surplus of $3 billion every year. In early 2004, Klein announced that the Alberta debt had been paid in full. He was rewarded by voters in the 2004 election, despite running a campaign with no new policies. His party lost a number of seats to the Liberals, and during the campaign he stated this would be his last election. In 2006 at a Progressive Conservative convention delegates forced him to pick a retirement date by giving him relatively low numbers in a leadership review.\nEd Stelmach succeeded Klein as premier, following his win of the leadership of the Alberta Progressive Conservative party in 2006. He won the 2008 provincial election, but, troubled by dissension within his party as well as lagging in polls behind the upstart Wildrose Party, resigned as the party celebrated its 40 years in power in 2011.\nAlison Redford subsequently was elected party leader and became the first female premier of Alberta. Despite strong opposition from the Wildrose Party that most polls and media predicted would end the PC's 41-year dynasty, Redford and the PC party won re-election in April 2012, making Redford Alberta's first elected female premier. Due to a steep decline in approval ratings and a spending controversy, Alison Redford announced her resignation on March 19, 2014, as premier of Alberta, effective March 23.\nAlberta Deputy Premier Dave Hancock was selected as premier and interim party leader by the Progressive Conservative caucus on March 20, 2014, and became premier on March 23, 2014.\nJim Prentice was elected as the permanent leader of the PC Party on September 6, 2014, and succeeded Hancock as premier on September 15, 2014. He turned the government around on a number of crucial issues, cancelling the closure of the Michener Centre, for example. He was elected to the constituency of Calgary-Foothill in an October 27, 2014 by-election, as the PC Party won the four by-elections held that day while the rival Wildrose Party did very poorly. Less than two months later, most of the Wildrose Party caucus\u2014including leader Danielle Smith, crossed the floor to sit with the PC Party. However, Prentice government's popularity dropped sharply by spring 2015, due to a budget that was unpopular among the political spectrum, with the collapse in PC support also attributed to falling oil prices and the past scandals under the Redford government. Prentice had over a year before he was obliged to dissolve the legislature, nonetheless he decided to call a snap election. On May 5, 2015, the PC Party's 44 straight years of government ended as they lost 60 seats in the Legislature to fall to third place in the legislature, while the NDP won a majority government over the resurgent Wildrose Party which finished second and become the Official Opposition. Prentice resigned as party leader and as an MLA, leaving the PC Party with only 9 seats.\nNew Democratic Party (2015\u20132019).\nOn May 5, 2015, Rachel Notley successfully led the New Democratic party to a majority government in the 2015 Alberta general election, defeating the incumbent government led by Jim Prentice of the Progressive Conservative Party, with 54 seats and 41% of the popular vote and securing only the fourth change of government in Alberta's political history.\nRachel Notley was appointed and sworn in as premier on May 24, 2015, following her party's capturing of 54 out of 87 seats in the Legislature. The NDP's surprise victory was attributed to the unpopularity of the Prentice government's budget, a strong performance by Notley in the leaders' debates, and splitting of the right-wing vote between the PC and Wildrose parties. On May 22, 2015, Notley suspended a caucus member, leaving her party with 53 out of 87 seats, which did not change the balance of power in the legislature. The NDP held 52 seats at the time of the legislature's dissolution in March 2019, and were defeated in the ensuing general election on April 16, 2019, making it the first one-mandate government in provincial history.\nUnited Conservative Party (since 2019).\nOn April 16, 2019, Jason Kenney successfully led the United Conservative Party to a majority government in the 2019 Alberta general election, defeating the incumbent government led by Rachel Notley of the New Democratic Party with 63 seats and 54.88% of the popular vote and securing only the fifth change of government in Alberta's political history. Kenney, a former federal cabinet minister, had entered provincial politics to become PC Party leader where he led its merger with Wildrose, and then won the leadership of the newly combined party, the UCP. As of 2022 Danielle Smith took office after Jason Kenney resigned for not enough support in his party.\nList of premiers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt; \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70624", "revid": "36339275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70624", "title": "\u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans", "text": "Island in the Saint Lawrence River, Quebec, Canada\n\u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans (; ) is an island located in the Saint Lawrence River about east of downtown Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. It was one of the first parts of the province to be colonized by the French, and a large percentage of French Canadians can trace ancestry to early residents of the island. The island has been described as the \"microcosm of traditional Quebec and as the birthplace of francophones in North America.\"\nIt has about 7,000 inhabitants, spread over six villages.\nThe island is accessible from the mainland via the \u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans Bridge from Beauport. Route 368 is the sole provincial route on the island, which crosses the bridge and circles the perimeter of the island. At the village of Sainte-P\u00e9tronille toward the western end of the island, a viewpoint overlooks the impressive \"Chute Montmorency\" (Montmorency Falls), as well as a panorama of the St. Lawrence River and Quebec City.\nGeography.\nThe Island of Orleans is situated between the Laurentian Plateau or Canadian Shield to the north and the Appalachian Mountains to the south. Its north-eastern point marks of the St Lawrence river middle estuary, where the fresh water begins to mix with salt water.\nThe island is separated from the mainland by two channels; to the north-west is the \u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans Channel and to the south-east is the Grands Voiliers Channel.\nOf irregular form with jagged coves and capes, the Island of Orleans is long and wide at the widest point. It is in circumference, with a total surface area of . It has a hilly relief, small valleys, and gradual crests that reach a maximum height of about at Sainte-P\u00e9tronille and Saint-Laurent in the south.\nThe main streams of \u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans are: \nAdministratively, the island is within Quebec's Capitale-Nationale region, and constitutes the L'\u00cele-d'Orl\u00e9ans Regional County Municipality. It is further subdivided in the municipalities of:\nThe entire island is part of the Montmorency\u2014Charlevoix\u2014Haute-C\u00f4te-Nord federal electoral riding, and the Charlevoix\u2013C\u00f4te-de-Beaupr\u00e9 provincial electoral riding.\nHistory.\nThe island had long been inhabited by Indigenous peoples. The Hurons called it \"Minigo\" (meaning \"Enchantress\") because of its charm. The French explorer Jacques Cartier first set foot on the island in 1535 near the present-day village of Saint-Fran\u00e7ois. And called it \"\u00cele de Bascuz\" (from Bacchus) because of the abundance of wild grapes growing on the island. Officials later changed the name to \u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans in honour of the second son of King Francis I, who became Henri II, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans. The island was also known as \"Grande \u00cele\", \"Sainte-Marie\", and \"Saint-Laurent\" for certain periods in the 17th and the 18th centuries.\nEarly French settlers, mostly from Normandy and other provinces in northwestern France, were attracted to the island because of its fertile soil. They colonized it according to the seigneurial system of New France, which is still evident in its layout by featuring residences close together with outlying long and narrow fields and a common. In 1661, the first parish of Sainte-Famille was founded, followed by another four parishes in 1679 and 1680. By 1685, there were 1205 mostly French inhabitants and 917 livestock.\nIn 1744, colonists completed the \"Chemin Royal\" (Royal Road), which encircles the entire island. Jean Mauvide, a surgeon for the King of France, built the \"Manoir Mauvide-Genest\" in 1734 as his residence. In 1759, it was occupied by British General James Wolfe when his forces occupied the island shortly before the Battle of the Plains of Abraham during the Seven Years' War in which Britain was victorious.\nIn the 19th and early 20th century, several boatbuilding yards operated on the island, especially in Saint-Laurent-de-l'\u00cele-d'Orl\u00e9ans. Together with the thriving fishing industry of that era, they gave the island a maritime character.\nIn 1935 the Pont de l'\u00cele was completed, and the bridge brought much more traffic. However, the island has maintained its pastoral image and historic character, with more than 600 buildings classified or recognized as heritage property. In 1990, the entire island was designated a National Historic Site of Canada.\nToday, the island is a mix of suburban communities and farms and is a popular destination for day trippers and bicyclists.\nEconomy.\nSince the days of the first French settlers, agriculture has been the main economic activity. Potatoes, strawberries, apples, blueberries, raspberries and maple syrup is produced. There is also viticulture and cheese production. The island, known as the \"Garden of Quebec\", is still an essentially rural place famous locally for its produce, especially strawberries, apples, potatoes and wineries. Sugar maple stands produce maple syrup and other products.\nWhile the old trades of fishing and boat building have been abandoned, the island's rich cultural heritage and pastoral scenery has led to a flourishing tourism industry. It attracts more than 600,000 visitors each year. Numerous bed-and-breakfast inns, regional cuisine restaurants, roadside fruit stands, art galleries and craft shops also attract visitors:\nAlso for years there has been a strong movement of the inhabitants of city of Quebec, who own second homes around the periphery of the island of Orleans.\nNotable people.\nF\u00e9lix Leclerc is buried in Saint-Pierre. There is the Espace F\u00e9lix Leclerc, today a museum and performance hall, in his honour.\nIn art and culture.\nSeveral chansonniers have made reference to \u00cele d'Orl\u00e9ans in their songs, in particular:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70630", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70630", "title": "Fraga", "text": "Fraga (; ) is the main town of the \"comarca\" of Bajo Cinca () in the province of Huesca, Aragon, Spain. It is located by the river Cinca. According to the 2014 census, the municipality has a population of 14,926.\nKing Alfonso I of Aragon died at its walls in 1134 while trying to capture it during the Battle of Fraga. It was eventually taken from the Moors by the Count Ramon Berenguer IV of Barcelona in 1149.\nThe local language, called \"Fragat\u00ed\", is western Catalan.\nHistorically, there was a Jewish community in Fraga. Jews in Fraga enjoyed civil rights under Muslim rule, which was not always the case in other historical Spanish Jewish communities. They were given autonomy, including the right to defend themselves against attacks and the right to elect their representatives. The community ceased to exist due to the expulsion of the Muslims and \nJews in 1492.\nHistory.\nHistorical pictures\nHistorical pictures\nSights.\nHistorical pictures\nHistorical pictures\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, the town participated in the Spanish revolution and was collectivised by the CNT."}
{"id": "70631", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70631", "title": "Alexander von Humboldt", "text": "German polymath (1769\u20131859)\nFriedrich Wilhelm Heinrich Alexander von Humboldt (14 September 1769 \u2013 6 May 1859) was a German polymath, geographer, naturalist, explorer, and proponent of Romantic philosophy and science. He was the younger brother of the Prussian minister, philosopher, and linguist Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767\u20131835). Humboldt's quantitative work on botanical geography laid the foundation for the field of biogeography, while his advocacy of long-term systematic geophysical measurement pioneered modern geomagnetic and meteorological monitoring. Humboldt and Carl Ritter are both regarded as the founders of modern geography as they established it as an independent scientific discipline.\nBetween 1799 and 1804, Humboldt travelled extensively in the Americas, exploring and describing them for the first time from a non-Spanish European scientific point of view. On these travels, along with French explorer Aim\u00e9 Bonpland, he traversed thousands of miles through some of the most difficult and little-known places on Earth, to include identifying the source of the Orinoco River and in 1802 climbing the highest mountain in Ecuador to a height of 19,286 feet, at the time a world record altitude for a Westerner. His description of the journey was written up and published in several volumes over 21 years.\nHumboldt resurrected the use of the word \"cosmos\" from the ancient Greek and assigned it to his multivolume treatise, \"Kosmos\", in which he sought to unify diverse branches of scientific knowledge and culture. This important work also motivated a holistic perception of the universe as one interacting entity, which introduced concepts of ecology leading to ideas of environmentalism. In 1800, and again in 1831, he described scientifically, on the basis of observations generated during his travels, local impacts of development causing human-induced climate change.\nHumboldt is seen as \"the father of ecology\" and \"the father of environmentalism\".\nEarly life, family and education.\nAlexander von Humboldt was born in Berlin in Prussia on 14 September 1769. He was baptized as a baby in the Lutheran faith, with the Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel serving as godfather.\nHis father, Alexander Georg von Humboldt (1720-1779), belonged to a prominent German noble family from Pomerania. Although not one of the titled gentry, he was a major in the Prussian Army, who had served with the Duke of Brunswick. At age 42, Alexander Georg was rewarded for his services in the Seven Years' War with the post of royal chamberlain. He profited from the contract to lease state lotteries and tobacco sales. \nAlexander's grandfather was Johann Paul von Humboldt (1684-1740), who married Sophia Dorothea von Schweder (1688-1749), daughter of Prussian General Adjutant Michael von Schweder (1663-1729). In 1766, his father, Alexander Georg married Maria Elisabeth Colomb, a well-educated woman and widow of Baron Friedrich Ernst von Holwede (1723-1765), with whom she had a son Heinrich Friedrich Ludwig (1762-1817). Alexander Georg and Maria Elisabeth had four children: two daughters, Karoline and Gabriele, who died young, and then two sons, Wilhelm and Alexander. Her first-born son, Wilhelm and Alexander's half-brother, Rittmaster in the Gendarme regiment was something of a ne'er-do-well, not often mentioned in the family history.\nAlexander Georg died in 1779, leaving the brothers Humboldt in the care of their emotionally distant mother. She had high ambitions for Alexander and his older brother Wilhelm, hiring excellent tutors, who were Enlightenment thinkers, including Kantian physician Marcus Herz and botanist Carl Ludwig Willdenow, who became one of the most important botanists in Germany. Humboldt's mother expected them to become civil servants of the Prussian state. The money left to Alexander's mother by Baron Holwede became instrumental in funding Alexander's explorations after her death; contributing more than 70% of his private income.\nDue to his youthful penchant for collecting and labeling plants, shells, and insects, Alexander received the playful title of \"the little apothecary\". Marked for a political career, Alexander studied finance for six months in 1787 at the University of Frankfurt (Oder), which his mother might have chosen less for its academic excellence than its closeness to their home in Berlin. On 25 April 1789, he matriculated at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, then known for the lectures of C. G. Heyne and anatomist J. F. Blumenbach. His brother Wilhelm was already a student at G\u00f6ttingen, but they did not interact much, since their intellectual interests were quite different. His vast and varied interests were by this time fully developed.\nAt the University of G\u00f6ttingen, Humboldt met Steven Jan van Geuns, a Dutch medical student, with whom he travelled to the Rhine in the fall of 1789. In Mainz, they met Georg Forster, a naturalist who had been with Captain James Cook on his second voyage. Humboldt's scientific excursion resulted in his 1790 treatise \"Mineralogische Beobachtungen \u00fcber einige Basalte am Rhein\" (Brunswick, 1790) (\"Mineralogic Observations on Several Basalts on the River Rhine\"). The following year, 1790, Humboldt returned to Mainz to embark with Forster on a journey to England, Humboldt's first sea voyage, the Netherlands, and France. In England, he met Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, who had travelled with Captain Cook; Banks showed Humboldt his huge herbarium, with specimens of the South Sea tropics. The scientific friendship between Banks and Humboldt lasted until Banks's death in 1820, and the two shared botanical specimens for study. Banks also mobilized his scientific contacts in later years to aid Humboldt's work. In Paris, Humboldt and Forster witnessed the preparations for the Festival of the Federation. Yet, Humboldt's take on the French Revolution remained ambivalent.\nHumboldt's passion for travel was of long standing. He devoted to prepare himself as a scientific explorer. With this emphasis, he studied commerce and foreign languages at Hamburg, geology at Freiberg School of Mines in 1791 under A.G. Werner, leader of the Neptunist school of geology; from anatomy at Jena under J.C. Loder; and astronomy and the use of scientific instruments under F.X. von Zach and J.G. K\u00f6hler. At Freiberg, he met a number of men who were to prove important to him in his later career, including Spaniard Manuel del R\u00edo, who became director of the School of Mines the crown established in Mexico; Christian Leopold von Buch, who became a regional geologist; and, most importantly, Carl Freiesleben, who became Humboldt's tutor and close friend. During this period, his brother Wilhelm married, but Alexander did not attend the nuptials.\nTravels and work in Europe.\nHumboldt graduated from the Freiberg School of Mines in 1792 and was appointed to a Prussian government position in the Department of Mines as an inspector in Bayreuth and the Fichtel Mountains. Humboldt was excellent at his job, with production of gold ore in his first year outstripping the previous eight years. During his period as a mine inspector, Humboldt demonstrated his deep concern for the men laboring in the mines. He opened a free school for miners, paid for out of his own pocket, which became an unchartered government training school for labor. He also sought to establish an emergency relief fund for miners, aiding them following accidents.\nHumboldt's researches into the vegetation of the mines of Freiberg led to the publication in Latin (1793) of his \"Florae Fribergensis, accedunt Aphorismi ex Doctrina, Physiologiae Chemicae Plantarum\", which was a compendium of his botanical researches. That publication brought him to the attention of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who had met Humboldt at the family home when Alexander was a boy, but Goethe was now interested in meeting the young scientist to discuss metamorphism of plants. An introduction was arranged by Humboldt's brother, who lived in the university town of Jena, not far from Goethe. Goethe had developed his own extensive theories on comparative anatomy. Working before Darwin, he believed that animals had an internal force, an \"urform\", that gave them a basic shape and then they were further adapted to their environment by an external force. Humboldt urged him to publish his theories. Together, the two discussed and expanded these ideas. Goethe and Humboldt soon became close friends.\nHumboldt often returned to Jena in the years that followed. Goethe remarked about Humboldt to friends that he had never met anyone so versatile. Humboldt's drive served as an inspiration for Goethe. In 1797, Humboldt returned to Jena for three months. During this time, Goethe moved from his residence in Weimar to reside in Jena. Together, Humboldt and Goethe attended university lectures on anatomy and conducted their own experiments. One experiment involved hooking up a frog leg to various metals. They found no effect until the moisture of Humboldt's breath triggered a reaction that caused the frog leg to leap off the table. Humboldt described this as one of his favorite experiments because it was as if he were \"breathing life into\" the leg.\nDuring this visit, a thunderstorm killed a farmer and his wife. Humboldt obtained their corpses and analyzed them in the anatomy tower of the university.\nIn 1794, Humboldt was admitted to the famous group of intellectuals and cultural leaders of Weimar Classicism. Goethe and Schiller were the key figures at the time. Humboldt contributed (7 June 1795) to Schiller's new periodical, \"Die Horen\", a philosophical allegory entitled \"(The Life Force, or the Rhodian Genius).\" In this short piece, the only literary story Humboldt ever authored, he tried to summarize the often contradictory results of the thousands of Galvanic experiments he had undertaken.\nIn 1792 and 1797, Humboldt was in Vienna; in 1795 he made a geological and botanical tour through Switzerland and Italy. Although this service to the state was regarded by him as only an apprenticeship to the service of science, he fulfilled its duties with such conspicuous ability that not only did he rise rapidly to the highest post in his department, but he was also entrusted with several important diplomatic missions.\nNeither brother attended the funeral of their mother on 19 November 1796. Humboldt had not hidden his aversion to his mother, with one correspondent writing of him after her death, \"her death... must be particularly welcomed by you\". After severing his official connections, he awaited an opportunity to fulfill his long-cherished dream of travel.\nHumboldt was able to spend more time on writing up his research. He had used his own body for experimentation on muscular irritability, recently discovered by Luigi Galvani and published his results, (Berlin, 1797) (\"Experiments on Stimulated Muscle and Nerve Fibres\"), enriched in the French translation with notes by Blumenbach.\nSpanish American expedition, 1799\u20131804.\nSeeking a foreign expedition.\nWith the financial resources to fund his scientific travels, he sought a ship on a major expedition. In the meantime, he went to Paris, where his brother Wilhelm was living. Paris was a great center of scientific learning and his brother and sister-in-law Caroline were well connected in those circles. Louis-Antoine de Bougainville urged Humboldt to accompany him on a major expedition, likely to last five years, but the French revolutionary Directoire placed Nicolas Baudin at the head of it rather than the aging scientific traveler. On the postponement of Captain Baudin's proposed voyage of circumnavigation due to continuing warfare in Europe, which Humboldt had been officially invited to accompany, Humboldt was deeply disappointed. He had already selected scientific instruments for his voyage. He did, however, have a stroke of luck with meeting Aim\u00e9 Bonpland, the botanist and physician for the voyage.\nDiscouraged, the two left Paris for Marseille, where they hoped to join Napoleon Bonaparte in Egypt, but North Africans were in revolt against the French invasion in Egypt and French authorities refused permission to travel. Humboldt and Bonpland eventually found their way to Madrid, where their luck changed spectacularly.\nSpanish royal authorization, 1799.\nIn Madrid, Humboldt sought authorization to travel to Spain's realms in the Americas; he was aided in obtaining it by the German representative of Saxony at the royal Bourbon court. Baron Forell had an interest in mineralogy and science endeavors and was inclined to help Humboldt. At that time, the Bourbon Reforms sought to reform administration of the realms and revitalize their economies. At the same time, the Spanish Enlightenment was in florescence. For Humboldt \"the confluent effect of the Bourbon revolution in government and the Spanish Enlightenment had created ideal conditions for his venture\".\nThe Bourbon monarchy had already authorized and funded expeditions, with the Botanical Expedition to the Viceroyalty of Peru to Chile and Peru (1777\u201388), New Granada (1783\u20131816), New Spain (Mexico) (1787\u20131803), and the Malaspina Expedition (1789\u201394). These were lengthy, state-sponsored enterprises to gather information about plants and animals from the Spanish realms, assess economic possibilities, and provide plants and seeds for the Royal Botanical Garden in Madrid (founded 1755). These expeditions took naturalists and artists, who created visual images as well as careful written observations as well as collecting seeds and plants themselves. Crown officials as early as 1779 issued and systematically distributed \"Instructions concerning the most secure and economic means to transport live plants by land and sea from the most distant countries\", with illustrations, including one for the crates to transport seeds and plants.\nWhen Humboldt requested authorization from the crown to travel to Spanish America, most importantly, with his own financing, it was given positive response. Spain under the Habsburg monarchy had guarded its realms against foreigner travelers and intruders. The Bourbon monarch was open to Humboldt's proposal. Spanish Foreign Minister Don Mariano Luis de Urquijo received the formal proposal and Humboldt was presented to the monarch in March 1799. Humboldt was granted access to crown officials and written documentation on Spain's empire. With Humboldt's experience working for the absolutist Prussian monarchy as a government mining official, Humboldt had both the academic training and experience of working well within a bureaucratic structure.\nBefore leaving Madrid in 1799, Humboldt and Bonpland visited the Natural History Museum, which held results of Mart\u00edn Sess\u00e9 y Lacasta and Jos\u00e9 Mariano Moci\u00f1o's botanical expedition to New Spain. Humboldt and Bonpland met Hip\u00f3lito Ruiz L\u00f3pez and Jos\u00e9 Antonio Pav\u00f3n y Jim\u00e9nez of the royal expedition to Peru and Chile in person in Madrid and examined their botanical collections.\nVenezuela, 1799\u20131800.\nArmed with authorization from the King of Spain, Humboldt and Bonpland made haste to sail, taking the ship \"Pizarro\" from A Coru\u00f1a, on 5 June 1799. The ship stopped six days on the island of Tenerife, where Humboldt climbed the volcano Teide, and then sailed on to the New World, landing at Cuman\u00e1, Venezuela, on 16 July.\nThe ship's destination was not originally Cuman\u00e1, but an outbreak of typhoid on board meant that the captain changed course from Havana to land in northern South America. Humboldt had not mapped out a specific plan of exploration, so that the change did not upend a fixed itinerary. He later wrote that the diversion to Venezuela made possible his explorations along the Orinoco River to the border of Portuguese Brazil. With the diversion, the \"Pizarro\" encountered two large dugout canoes each carrying 18 Guayaqui Indians. The \"Pizarro\"'s captain accepted the offer of one of them to serve as pilot. Humboldt hired this Indian, named Carlos del Pino, as a guide.\nVenezuela from the 16th to the 18th centuries was a relative backwater compared to the seats of the Spanish viceroyalties based in New Spain (Mexico) and Peru, but during the Bourbon reforms, the northern portion of Spanish South America was reorganized administratively, with the 1777 establishment of a captaincy-general based at Caracas. A great deal of information on the new jurisdiction had already been compiled by Fran\u00e7ois de Pons, but was not published until 1806.\nRather than describe the administrative center of Caracas, Humboldt started his researches with the valley of Aragua, where export crops of sugar, coffee, cacao, and cotton were cultivated. Cacao plantations were the most profitable, as world demand for chocolate rose. It is here that Humboldt is said to have developed his idea of human-induced climate change. Investigating evidence of a rapid fall in the water level of the valley's Lake Valencia, Humboldt credited the desiccation to the clearance of tree cover and to the inability of the exposed soils to retain water. With their clear cutting of trees, the agriculturalists were removing the woodland's \"threefold\" moderating influence upon temperature: cooling shade, evaporation and radiation.\nHumboldt visited the mission at Caripe and explored the Gu\u00e1charo cavern, where he found the oilbird, which he was to make known to science as \"Steatornis caripensis\". He also described the Guanoco asphalt lake as \"The spring of the good priest\" (\"Quelle des guten Priesters\"). Returning to Cuman\u00e1, Humboldt observed, on the night of 11\u201312 November, a remarkable meteor shower (the Leonids). He proceeded with Bonpland to Caracas where he climbed the Avila mount with the young poet Andr\u00e9s Bello, the former tutor of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, who later became the leader of independence in northern South America. Humboldt met the Venezuelan Bol\u00edvar himself in 1804 in Paris and spent time with him in Rome. The documentary record does not support the supposition that Humboldt inspired Bol\u00edvar to participate in the struggle for independence, but it does indicate Bol\u00edvar's admiration for Humboldt's production of new knowledge on Spanish America.\nIn February 1800, Humboldt and Bonpland left the coast with the purpose of exploring the course of the Orinoco River and its tributaries. This trip, which lasted four months and covered of wild and largely uninhabited country, had an aim of establishing the existence of the Casiquiare canal (a communication between the water systems of the rivers Orinoco and Amazon). Although, unbeknownst to Humboldt, this existence had been established decades before, his expedition had the important results of determining the exact position of the bifurcation, and documenting the life of several native tribes such as the Maipures and their extinct rivals the Atures (several words of the latter tribe were transferred to Humboldt by one parrot). Around 19 March 1800, Humboldt and Bonpland discovered dangerous electric eels, whose shock could kill a man. To catch them, locals suggested they drive wild horses into the river, which brought the eels out from the river mud, and resulted in a violent confrontation of eels and horses, some of which died. Humboldt and Bonpland captured and dissected some eels, which retained their ability to shock; both received potentially dangerous electric shocks during their investigations. The encounter made Humboldt think more deeply about electricity and magnetism, typical of his ability to extrapolate from an observation to more general principles. Humboldt returned to the incident in several of his later writings, including his travelogue \"Personal Narrative\" (1814\u201329), \"Views of Nature\" (1807), and \"Aspects of Nature\" (1849).\nTwo months later, they explored the territory of the Maipures and that of the then-recently extinct Atures Indians. Humboldt laid to rest the persistent myth of Walter Raleigh's Lake Parime by proposing that the seasonal flooding of the Rupununi savannah had been misidentified as a lake.\nCuba, 1800, 1804.\nOn 24 November 1800, the two friends set sail for Cuba, landing on 19 December, where they met fellow botanist and plant collector John Fraser. Fraser and his son had been shipwrecked off the Cuban coast, and did not have a license to be in the Spanish Indies. Humboldt, who was already in Cuba, interceded with crown officials in Havana, as well as giving them money and clothing. Fraser obtained permission to remain in Cuba and explore. Humboldt entrusted Fraser with taking two cases of Humboldt and Bonpland's botanical specimens to England when he returned, for eventual conveyance to the German botanist Willdenow in Berlin. Humboldt and Bonpland stayed in Cuba until 5 March 1801, when they left for the mainland of northern South America again, arriving there on 30 March.\nHumboldt is considered to be the \"second discoverer of Cuba\" due to the scientific and social research he conducted on this Spanish colony. During an initial three-month stay at Havana, his first tasks were to survey that city properly and the nearby towns of Guanabacoa, Regla, and Bejucal. He befriended Cuban landowner and thinker Francisco de Arango y Parre\u00f1o; together they visited the area in south Havana, the valleys of Matanzas Province, and the Valley of the Sugar Mills in Trinidad. Those three areas were, at the time, the first frontier of sugar production in the island. During those trips, Humboldt collected statistical information on Cuba's population, production, technology and trade, and with Arango, made suggestions for enhancing them. He predicted that the agricultural and commercial potential of Cuba was huge and could be vastly improved with proper leadership in the future.\nOn their way back to Europe from the Americas, Humboldt and Bonpland stopped again in Cuba, leaving from the port of Veracruz and arriving in Cuba on 7 January 1804, staying until 29 April 1804. In Cuba, he collected plant material and made extensive notes. During this time, he socialized with his scientific and landowner friends, conducted mineralogical surveys, and finished his vast collection of the island's flora and fauna that he eventually published as \"Essai politique sur l'\u00eesle de Cuba\".\nThe Andes, 1801\u20131803.\nAfter their first stay in Cuba of three months, they returned to the mainland at Cartagena de Indias (now in Colombia), a major center of trade in northern South America. Ascending the swollen stream of the Magdalena River to Honda, they arrived in Bogot\u00e1 on 6 July 1801, where they met the Spanish botanist Jos\u00e9 Celestino Mutis, head of the Royal Botanical Expedition to New Granada, staying there until 8 September 1801. Mutis was generous with his time and gave Humboldt access to the huge pictorial record he had compiled since 1783. Mutis was based in Bogot\u00e1, but as with other Spanish expeditions, he had access to local knowledge and a workshop of artists, who created highly accurate and detailed images. This type of careful recording meant that even if specimens were not available to study at a distance, \"because the images travelled, the botanists did not have to\". Humboldt was astounded at Mutis's accomplishment; when Humboldt published his first volume on botany, he dedicated it to Mutis \"as a simple mark of our admiration and acknowledgement\".\nHumboldt had hopes of connecting with the French sailing expedition of Baudin, now finally underway, so Bonpland and Humboldt hurried to Ecuador. They crossed the frozen ridges of the Cordillera Real and reached Quito on 6 January 1802, after a tedious and difficult journey.\nTheir stay in Ecuador was marked by the ascent of the active volcano Pichincha and their climb of the extinct, snow-capped volcano Chimborazo, where Humboldt and his party, consisting of himself, Bonpland, a number of Indians and the Ecuadorian nobleman Carlos Mont\u00fafar, reached an altitude of . This was a world record at the time, higher even than had been ascended in a balloon, (for a westerner\u2014Incas had climbed much higher altitudes centuries before), but 1000 feet short of the summit. Humboldt's journey concluded with an expedition to the sources of the Amazon \"en route\" for Lima, Peru.\nAt Callao, the main port for Peru, Humboldt observed the transit of Mercury on 9 November and studied the fertilizing properties of guano, rich in nitrogen, the subsequent introduction of which into Europe was due mainly to his writings.\nNew Spain (Mexico), 1803\u20131804.\nHumboldt and Bonpland had not intended to go to New Spain, but when they were unable to join a voyage to the Pacific, they left the Ecuadorian port of Guayaquil and headed for Acapulco on Mexico's west coast. Even before Humboldt and Bonpland started on their way to New Spain's capital on Mexico's central plateau, Humboldt realized the captain of the vessel that brought them to Acapulco had reckoned its location incorrectly. Since Acapulco was the main west-coast port and the terminus of the Asian trade from the Spanish Philippines, having accurate maps of its location was extremely important. Humboldt set up his instruments, surveying the deep-water bay of Acapulco, to determine its longitude.\nHumboldt and Bonpland landed in Acapulco on 15 February 1803, and from there they went to Taxco, a silver-mining town in modern Guerrero. In April 1803, he visited Cuernavaca, Morelos. Impressed by its climate, he nicknamed the city the \"City of Eternal Spring\". Humboldt and Bonpland arrived in Mexico City, having been officially welcomed via a letter from the king's representative in New Spain, Viceroy Don Jos\u00e9 de Iturrigaray. Humboldt was also given a special passport to travel throughout New Spain and letters of introduction to intendants, the highest officials in New Spain's administrative districts (intendancies). This official aid to Humboldt allowed him to have access to crown records, mines, landed estates, canals, and Mexican antiquities from the prehispanic era. Humboldt read the writings of Bishop-elect of the important diocese of Michoacan Manuel Abad y Queipo, a classical liberal, that were directed to the crown for the improvement of New Spain.\nThey spent the year in the viceroyalty, traveling to different Mexican cities in the central plateau and the northern mining region. The first journey was from Acapulco to Mexico City, through what is now the Mexican state of Guerrero. The route was suitable only for mule train, and all along the way, Humboldt took measurements of elevation. When he left Mexico a year later in 1804, from the east coast port of Veracruz, he took a similar set of measures, which resulted in a chart in the \"Political Essay\", the physical plan of Mexico with the dangers of the road from Acapulco to Mexico City, and from Mexico City to Veracruz. This visual depiction of elevation was part of Humboldt's general insistence that the data he collected be presented in a way more easily understood than statistical charts. A great deal of his success in gaining a more general readership for his works was his understanding that \"anything that has to do with extent or quantity can be represented geometrically. Statistical projections [charts and graphs], which speak to the senses without tiring the intellect have the advantage of bringing attention to a large number of important facts\".\nHumboldt was impressed with Mexico City, which at the time was the largest city in the Americas, and one that could be counted as modern. He declared \"no city of the new continent, without even excepting those of the United States, can display such great and solid scientific establishments as the capital of Mexico\". He pointed to the Royal College of Mines, the Royal Botanical Garden and the Royal Academy of San Carlos as exemplars of a metropolitan capital in touch with the latest developments on the continent and insisting on its modernity. He also recognized important criollo savants in Mexico, including Jos\u00e9 Antonio de Alzate y Ram\u00edrez, who died in 1799, just before Humboldt's visit; Miguel Vel\u00e1squez de Le\u00f3n; and Antonio de Le\u00f3n y Gama.\nHumboldt spent time at the Valenciana silver mine in Guanajuato, central New Spain, at the time the most important in the Spanish empire. The bicentennial of his visit in Guanajuato was celebrated with a conference at the University of Guanajuato, with Mexican academics highlighting various aspects of his impact on the city. Humboldt could have simply examined the geology of the fabulously rich mine, but he took the opportunity to study the entire mining complex as well as analyze mining statistics of its output. His report on silver mining is a major contribution, and considered the strongest and best informed section of his \"Political Essay\". Although Humboldt was himself a trained geologist and mining inspector, he drew on mining experts in Mexico. One was Fausto Elhuyar, then head of the General Mining Court in Mexico City, who, like Humboldt was trained in Freiberg. Another was Andr\u00e9s Manuel del R\u00edo, director of Royal College of Mines, whom Humboldt knew when they were both students in Freiberg. The Bourbon monarchs had established the mining court and the college to elevate mining as a profession, since revenues from silver constituted the crown's largest source of income. Humboldt also consulted other German mining experts, who were already in Mexico. While Humboldt was a welcome foreign scientist and mining expert, the Spanish crown had established fertile ground for Humboldt's investigations into mining.\nSpanish America's ancient civilizations were a source of interest for Humboldt, who included images of Mexican manuscripts (or codices) and Inca ruins in his richly illustrated \"Vues des cordill\u00e8res et monuments des peuples indig\u00e8nes de l'Amerique\" (1810\u20131813), the most experimental of Humboldt's publications, since it does not have \"a single ordering principle\" but his opinions and contentions based on observation. For Humboldt, a key question was the influence of climate on the development of these civilizations. When he published his \"Vues des cordill\u00e8res\", he included a color image of the Aztec calendar stone (which had been discovered in 1790 buried in the main plaza of Mexico City), along with select drawings of the Dresden Codex and others he sought out later in European collections. His aim was to muster evidence that these pictorial and sculptural images could allow the reconstruction of prehispanic history. He sought out Mexican experts in the interpretation of sources from there, especially Antonio Pichardo, who was the literary executor of Antonio de Le\u00f3n y Gama's work. For American-born Spaniards (criollos) who were seeking sources of pride in Mexico's ancient past, Humboldt's recognition of these ancient works and dissemination in his publications was a boon. He read the work of exiled Jesuit Francisco Javier Clavijero, which celebrated Mexico's prehispanic civilization, and which Humboldt invoked to counter the pejorative assertions about the new world by Buffon, de Pauw, and Raynal. Humboldt ultimately viewed both the prehispanic realms of Mexico and Peru as despotic and barbaric. However, he also drew attention to indigenous monuments and artifacts as cultural productions that had \"both ... historical \"and\" artistic significance\".\nOne of his most widely read publications resulting from his travels and investigations in Spanish America was the \"Essai politique sur le royaum de la Nouvelle Espagne\", quickly translated to English as \"Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain\" (1811). This treatise was the result of Humboldt's own investigations as well as the generosity of Spanish colonial officials for statistical data.\nThe United States, 1804.\nLeaving from Cuba, Humboldt decided to take an unplanned short visit to the United States. Knowing that the current U.S. president, Thomas Jefferson, was himself a scientist, Humboldt wrote to him saying that he would be in the United States. Jefferson warmly replied, inviting him to visit the White House in the nation's new capital. In his letter Humboldt had gained Jefferson's interest by mentioning that he had discovered mammoth teeth near the Equator. Jefferson had previously written that he believed mammoths had never lived so far south. Humboldt had also hinted at his knowledge of New Spain.\nArriving in Philadelphia, which was a center of learning in the U.S., Humboldt met with some of the major scientific figures of the era, including chemist and anatomist Caspar Wistar, who pushed for compulsory smallpox vaccination, and botanist Benjamin Smith Barton, as well as physician Benjamin Rush, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, who wished to hear about cinchona bark from a South American tree, which cured fevers. Humboldt's treatise on cinchona was published in English in 1821.\nAfter arriving in Washington D.C, Humboldt held numerous intense discussions with Jefferson on both scientific matters and also his year-long stay in New Spain. Jefferson had only recently concluded the Louisiana Purchase, which now placed New Spain on the southwest border of the United States. The Spanish minister in Washington, D.C. had declined to furnish the U.S. government with information about Spanish territories, and access to the territories was strictly controlled. Humboldt was able to supply Jefferson with the latest information on the population, trade agriculture and military of New Spain. This information would later be the basis for his \"Essay on the Political Kingdom of New Spain\" (1810).\nJefferson was unsure of where the border of the newly-purchased Louisiana was precisely, and Humboldt wrote him a two-page report on the matter. Jefferson would later refer to Humboldt as \"the most scientific man of the age\". Albert Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury, said of Humboldt \"I was delighted and swallowed more information of various kinds in less than two hours than I had for two years past in all I had read or heard.\" Gallatin, in turn, supplied Humboldt with information he sought on the United States.\nAfter six weeks, Humboldt set sail for Europe from the mouth of the Delaware and landed at Bordeaux on 3 August 1804.\nTravel diaries.\nHumboldt kept a detailed diary of his sojourn to Spanish America, running some 4,000 pages, which he drew on directly for his multiple publications following the expedition. The leather-bound diaries themselves are now in Germany, having been returned from Russia to East Germany, where they were taken by the Red Army after World War II. Following German reunification, the diaries were returned to a descendant of Humboldt. For a time, there was concern about their being sold, but that was averted. A government-funded project to digitize the Spanish American expedition as well as his later Russian expedition has been undertaken (2014\u20132017) by the University of Potsdam and the German State Library\u2013Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation.\nAchievements of the Hispanic American expedition.\nHumboldt's decades' long endeavor to publish the results of this expedition not only resulted in multiple volumes, but also made his international reputation in scientific circles. Humboldt came to be well-known with the reading public as well, with popular, densely illustrated, condensed versions of his work in multiple languages. Bonpland, his fellow scientist and collaborator on the expedition, collected botanical specimens and preserved them, but unlike Humboldt who had a passion to publish, Bonpland had to be prodded to do the formal descriptions. Many scientific travelers and explorers produced huge visual records which remained unseen by the general public until the late nineteenth century. In the case of the Malaspina Expedition, it was not until the late twentieth century when Mutis's botanical, some 12,000 drawings from New Granada, was published. Humboldt, by contrast, published immediately and continuously, using and ultimately exhausting his personal fortune, to produce both scientific and popular texts. Humboldt's name and fame were made by his travels to Spanish America, particularly his publication of the \"Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain\"; his image as the premier European scientist was a later development.\nFor the Bourbon crown, which had authorized the expedition, the returns were not only tremendous in terms of sheer volume of data on their New World realms, but in dispelling the vague and pejorative assessments of the New World by Guillaume-Thomas Raynal, Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, and William Robertson. The achievements of the Bourbon regime, especially in New Spain, were evident in the precise data Humboldt systematized and published.\nThis memorable expedition may be regarded as having laid the foundation of the sciences of physical geography, plant geography, and meteorology. Key to that was Humboldt's meticulous and systematic measurement of phenomena with the most advanced instruments then available. He closely observed plant and animal species in situ, not just in isolation, noting all elements in relation to one other. He collected specimens of plants and animals, dividing the growing collection so that if a portion was lost, other parts might survive.\nHumboldt saw the need for an approach to science that could account for the harmony of nature among the diversity of the physical world. For Humboldt, \"the unity of nature\" meant that it was the interrelation of all physical sciences\u2014such as the conjoining between biology, meteorology and geology\u2014that determined where specific plants grew. He found these relationships by unraveling myriad, painstakingly collected data, data extensive enough that it became an enduring foundation upon which others could base their work. Humboldt viewed nature holistically, and tried to explain natural phenomena without the appeal to religious dogma. He believed in the central importance of observation, and as a consequence had amassed a vast array of the most sophisticated scientific instruments then available. Each had its own velvet lined box and was the most accurate and portable of its time; nothing quantifiable escaped measurement. According to Humboldt, everything should be measured with the finest and most modern instruments and sophisticated techniques available, for that collected data was the basis of all scientific understanding.\nThis quantitative methodology would become known as Humboldtian science. Humboldt wrote \"Nature herself is sublimely eloquent. The stars as they sparkle in firmament fill us with delight and ecstasy, and yet they all move in orbit marked out with mathematical precision.\" However, Andreas Daum has recently revisited the concept of Humboldtian Science and set it apart from \"Humboldt's science\".\nHis \"Essay on the Geography of Plants\" (published first in French and then German, both in 1807) was based on the then novel idea of studying the distribution of organic life as affected by varying physical conditions. This was most famously depicted in his published cross-section of Chimborazo, approximately two feet by three feet (54\u00a0cm x 84\u00a0cm) color pictorial, he called \"Ein Naturgem\u00e4lde der Anden\" and what is also called the Chimborazo Map. It was a fold-out at the back of the publication. Humboldt first sketched the map when he was in South America, which included written descriptions on either side of the cross-section of Chimborazo. These detailed the information on temperature, altitude, humidity, atmosphere pressure, and the animal and plants (with their scientific names) found at each elevation. Plants from the same genus appear at different elevations. The depiction is on an east-west axis going from the Pacific coast lowlands to the Andean range of which Chimborazo was a part, and the eastern Amazonian basin. Humboldt showed the three zones of coast, mountains, and Amazonia, based on his own observations, but he also drew on existing Spanish sources, particularly Pedro Cieza de Le\u00f3n, which he explicitly referred to. The Spanish American scientist Francisco Jos\u00e9 de Caldas had also measured and observed mountain environments and had earlier come to similar ideas about environmental factors in the distribution of life forms. Humboldt was thus not putting forward something entirely new, but it is argued that his finding is not derivative either. The Chimborazo map displayed complex information in an accessible fashion. The map was the basis for comparison with other major peaks. \"The Naturgem\u00e4lde showed for the first time that nature was a global force with corresponding climate zones across continents.\" Another assessment of the map is that it \"marked the beginning of a new era of environmental science, not only of mountain ecology but also of global-scale biogeophysical patterns and processes.\"\nBy his delineation (in 1817) of isothermal lines, he at once suggested the idea and devised the means of comparing the climatic conditions of various countries. He first investigated the rate of decrease in mean temperature with the increase in elevation above sea level, and afforded, by his inquiries regarding the origin of tropical storms, the earliest clue to the detection of the more complicated law governing atmospheric disturbances in higher latitudes. This was a major contribution to climatology.\nHis discovery of the decrease in intensity of Earth's magnetic field from the poles to the equator was communicated to the Paris Institute in a memoir read by him on 7 December 1804. Its importance was attested by the speedy emergence of rival claims.\nHis services to geology were based on his attentive study of the volcanoes of the Andes and Mexico, which he observed and sketched, climbed, and measured with a variety of instruments. By climbing Chimborazo, he established an altitude record which became the basis for measurement of other volcanoes in the Andes and the Himalayas. As with other aspects of his investigations, he developed methods to show his synthesized results visually, using the graphic method of geologic-cross sections. He showed that volcanoes fell naturally into linear groups, presumably corresponding with vast subterranean fissures; and by his demonstration of the igneous origin of rocks previously held to be of aqueous formation, he contributed largely to the elimination of erroneous views, such as Neptunism.\nHumboldt was a significant contributor to cartography, creating maps, particularly of New Spain, that became the template for later mapmakers in Mexico. His careful recording of latitude and longitude led to accurate maps of Mexico, the port of Acapulco, the port of Veracruz, and the Valley of Mexico, and a map showing trade patterns among continents. His maps also included schematic information on geography, converting areas of administrative districts (intendancies) using proportional squares. The U.S. was keen to see his maps and statistics on New Spain, since they had implication for territorial claims following the Louisiana Purchase. Later in life, Humboldt published three volumes (1836\u201339) examining sources that dealt with the early voyages to the Americas, pursuing his interest in nautical astronomy in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. His research yielded the origin of the name \"America\", put on a map of the Americas by Martin Waldseem\u00fcller.\nHumboldt conducted a census of the indigenous and European inhabitants in New Spain, publishing a schematized drawing of racial types and populations distribution, grouping them by region and social characteristics. He estimated the population to be six million individuals. He estimated Indians to be forty percent of New Spain's population, but their distribution being uneven; the most dense were in the center and south of Mexico, the least dense in the north. He presented these data in chart form, for easier understanding. He also surveyed the non-Indian population, categorized as Whites (Spaniards), \"Negroes\", and castes (\"castas\"). American-born Spaniards, so-called \"creoles\" had been painting depictions of mixed-race family groupings in the eighteenth century, showing father of one racial category, mother of another, and the offspring in a third category in hierarchical order, so racial hierarchy was an essential way elites viewed Mexican society. Humboldt reported that American-born Spaniards were legally racial equals of those born in Spain, but the crown policy since the Bourbons took the Spanish throne privileged those born in Iberia. Humboldt observed that \"the most miserable European, without education and without intellectual cultivation, thinks himself superior to whites born in the new continent\". The truth in this assertion, and the conclusions derived from them, have been often disputed as superficial, or politically motivated, by some authors, considering that between 40% and 60% of high offices in the new world were held by creoles.\nThe enmity between some creoles and the peninsular-born whites increasingly became an issue in the late period of Spanish rule, with creoles increasingly alienated from the crown. Humboldt's assessment was that royal government abuses and the example of a new model of rule in the United States were eroding the unity of whites in New Spain. Humboldt's writings on race in New Spain were shaped by the memorials of the classical liberal, enlightened Bishop-elect of Michoac\u00e1n, Manuel Abad y Queipo, who personally presented Humboldt with his printed memorials to the Spanish crown critiquing social and economic conditions and his recommendations for eliminating them.\nOne scholar says that his writings contain fantastical descriptions of America, while leaving out its inhabitants, stating that Humboldt, coming from the Romantic school of thought, believed '...\u00a0nature is perfect till man deforms it with care'. The further assessment is that he largely neglected the human societies amidst nature. Views of indigenous peoples as 'savage' or 'unimportant' leaves them out of the historical picture. Other scholars counter that Humboldt dedicated large parts of his work to describing the conditions of slaves, indigenous peoples, mixed-race castas, and society in general. He often showed his disgust for the slaveryand inhumane conditions in which indigenous peoples and others were treated and he often criticized Spanish colonial policies.\nHumboldt was not primarily an artist, but he could draw well, allowing him to record a visual record of particular places and their natural environment. Many of his drawings became the basis for illustrations of his many scientific and general publications. Artists whom Humboldt influenced, such as Johann Moritz Rugendas, followed in his path and painted the same places Humboldt had visited and recorded, such as the basalt formations in Mexico, which was an illustration in his \"Vues des Cordill\u00e8res\".\nThe editing and publication of the encyclopedic mass of scientific, political and archaeological material that had been collected by him during his absence from Europe was now Humboldt's most urgent desire. After a short trip to Italy with Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac for the purpose of investigating the law of magnetic declination and a stay of two and a half years in Berlin, in the spring of 1808, he settled in Paris. His purpose for being located there was to secure the scientific cooperation required for bringing his great work through the press. This colossal task, which he at first hoped would occupy but two years, eventually cost him twenty-one, and even then it remained incomplete.\nScholarly and public recognition.\nDuring his lifetime Humboldt became one of the most famous men in Europe. Academies, both native and foreign, were eager to elect him to their membership, the first being The American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia, which he visited at the tail end of his travel through the Americas. He was elected to the Prussian Academy of Sciences in 1805.\nOver the years other learned societies in the U.S. elected him a member, including the American Antiquarian Society (Worcester, MA) in 1816; the Linnean Society of London in 1818; the New York Historical Society in 1820; a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822; the American Ethnological Society (New York) in 1843; and the American Geographical and Statistical Society, (New York) in 1856. He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1810. The Royal Society, whose president Sir Joseph Banks had aided Humboldt as a young man, now welcomed him as a foreign member.\nAfter Mexican independence from Spain in 1821, the Mexican government recognized him with high honors for his services to the nation. In 1827, the first President of Mexico, Guadalupe Victoria granted Humboldt Mexican citizenship and in 1859, the President of Mexico, Benito Ju\u00e1rez, named Humboldt a hero of the nation (\"benem\u00e9rito de la naci\u00f3n\"). The gestures were purely honorary; he never returned to the Americas following his expedition.\nImportantly for Humboldt's long-term financial stability, King Frederick William III of Prussia conferred upon him the honor of the post of royal chamberlain, without at the time exacting the duties. The appointment had a pension of 2,500 thalers, afterwards doubled. This official stipend became his main source of income in later years when he exhausted his fortune on the publications of his research. Financial necessity forced his permanent relocation to Berlin in 1827 from Paris. In Paris he found not only scientific sympathy, but the social stimulus which his vigorous and healthy mind eagerly craved. He was equally in his element as the lion of the salons and as the savant of the Institut de France and the observatory.\nOn 12 May 1827 he settled permanently in Berlin, where his first efforts were directed towards the furtherance of the science of terrestrial magnetism. In 1827, he began giving public lectures in Berlin, which became the basis for his last major publication, \"Kosmos\" (1845\u201362).\nFor many years, it had been one of his favorite schemes to secure, by means of simultaneous observations at distant points, a thorough investigation of the nature and law of \"magnetic storms\" (a term invented by him to designate abnormal disturbances of Earth's magnetism). The meeting at Berlin, on 18 September 1828, of a newly formed scientific association, of which he was elected president, gave him the opportunity of setting on foot an extensive system of research in combination with his diligent personal observations. His appeal to the Russian government, in 1829, led to the establishment of a line of magnetic and meteorological stations across northern Asia. Meanwhile, his letter to the Duke of Sussex, then (April 1836) president of the Royal Society, secured for the undertaking, the wide basis of the British dominions.\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", Eleventh Edition, observes, \"Thus that scientific conspiracy of nations which is one of the noblest fruits of modern civilization was by his exertions first successfully organized\". However, earlier examples of international scientific cooperation exist, notably the 18th-century observations of the transits of Venus.\nIn 1856, U.S. diplomat John Bigelow published \"Memoir of the Life and Public Services of John Charles Fremont\". He dedicated it \"To Alexander von Humboldt, this memoir of one whose genius he was among the first to discover and acknowledge, is respectfully inscribed by The Author.\"\nIn 1869, the 100th year of his birth, Humboldt's fame was so great that cities all over America celebrated his birth with large festivals. In New York City, a bust of his head was unveiled in Central Park.\nScholars have speculated about the reasons for Humboldt's declining renown among the public. Sandra Nichols has argued that there are three reasons for this:\nExpedition in Russia, 1829.\nIn 1811, and again in 1818, projects of Asiatic exploration were proposed to Humboldt, first by Tsar Nicholas I's Russian government, and afterwards by the Prussian government; but on each occasion, untoward circumstances interposed. It was not until he had begun his sixtieth year that he resumed his early role of traveler in the interests of science.\nThe Russian Finance Minister, Count Georg von Cancrin, contacted Humboldt about whether a platinum-based currency was possible in Russia and invited him to visit the Ural Mountains. Humboldt was not encouraging about a platinum-based currency, when silver was the standard as a world currency. But the invitation to visit the Urals was intriguing, especially since Humboldt had long dreamed of going to Asia. He had wanted to travel to India and made considerable efforts to persuade the British East India Company to authorize a trip, but those efforts were fruitless.\nWhen Russia renewed its earlier invitation to Humboldt, he accepted. The Russians sought to entice Humboldt by engaging his enduring interest in mining sites, for comparative scientific purposes for Humboldt, but for the Russians to gain expert knowledge about their resources. For Humboldt, the Russian monarch's promise to fund the trip was extremely important, since Humboldt's inherited 100,000 thaler fortune was gone and he lived on the Prussian government pension of 2,500\u20133,000 thalers as the monarch's chamberlain. The Russian government gave an advance of 1200 in Berlin and another 20,000 when he arrived in Saint Petersburg.\nHumboldt was eager to travel not just to the Urals, but also across the steppes of Siberia to Russia's border with China. Humboldt wrote Cancrin saying that he intended to learn Russian to read mining journals in the language. As the details of the expedition were worked out, Humboldt said that he would travel to Russia in his own French coach, with a German servant, as well as Gustav Rose, a professor of chemistry and mineralogy. He also invited Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg to join the expedition, to study water micro-organisms in Lake Baikal and the Caspian Sea. Humboldt himself was keen to continue his studies of magnetism of mountains and mineral deposits. As was usual for his research, he brought scientific instruments to take the most accurate measurements. The Russians organized the local arrangements, including lodging, horses, accompanying crew. Humboldt's title for the expedition was as an official of the Department of Mines. As the expedition neared dangerous areas, he had to travel in a convoy with an escort.\nPhysically Humboldt was in good condition, despite his advancing years, writing to Cancrin \"I still walk very lightly on foot, nine to ten hours without resting, despite my age and my white hair\".\nBetween May and November 1829 he and the growing expedition traversed the wide expanse of the Russian empire from the Neva to the Yenisei, accomplishing in twenty-five weeks a distance of . Humboldt and the expedition party travelled by coach on well maintained roads, with rapid progress being made because of changes of horses at way stations. The party had grown, with Johann Seifert, who was a huntsman and collector of animal specimens; a Russian mining official; Count Adolphe Polier, one of Humboldt's friends from Paris; a cook; plus a contingent of Cossacks for security. Three carriages were filled with people, supplies, and scientific instruments. For Humboldt's magnetic readings to be accurate, they carried an iron-free tent. This expedition was unlike his Spanish American travels with Bonpland, with the two alone and sometimes accompanied by local guides.\nThe Russian government was interested in Humboldt's finding prospects for mining and commercial advancement of the realm and made it clear that Humboldt was not to investigate social issues, nor criticize social conditions of Russian serfs. In his publications on Spanish America, he did comment on the conditions of the indigenous populations, and deplored black slavery, but well after he had left those territories. As Humboldt discovered, the government kept tight control of the expedition, even when it was from Moscow, with local government officials greeting the expedition at every stop. The itinerary was planned with Tobolsk the farthest destination, then a return to Saint Petersburg.\nHumboldt wrote to the Russian Minister Cancrin that he was extending his travel, knowing that the missive would not reach him in time to scuttle the plan. The further east he journeyed into wilder territory, the more Humboldt enjoyed it. They still followed the Siberian Highway and made excellent progress, sometimes a hundred miles (160\u00a0km) in a day. Although they were halted at the end of July and warned of an anthrax outbreak, Humboldt decided to continue despite the danger. \"At my age, nothing should be postponed\".\nThe journey though carried out with all the advantages afforded by the immediate patronage of the Russian government, was too rapid to be profitable scientifically. The correction of the prevalent exaggerated estimate of the height of the Central Asian plateau, and the prediction of the discovery of diamonds in the gold-washings of the Urals, were important aspects of these travels. In the end, the expedition took 8 months, travelled 15,500\u00a0km, stopped at 658 post stations, and used 12,244 horses.\nOne writer claims that \"Nothing was quite as Humboldt wanted it. The entire expedition was a compromise.\" The Russian emperor offered Humboldt an invitation to return to Russia, but Humboldt declined, due to his disapproval of Nicholas's restrictions on his freedom of movement during the expedition and his ability to freely report on it. Humboldt published two works on the Russian expedition, first in 1831, based on lectures he gave on the topic. In 1843, he completed the three-volume \"Asie Centrale\", which he dedicated to Tsar Nicholas, which he called \"an unavoidable step, as the expedition was accomplished at his expense\". As of 2016, these works have not been translated to English. His 1829 expedition to Russia when he was an old man is much less known than his five-year travels in Spanish America, which had resulted in many published volumes over the decades since his 1804 return. Nevertheless, it gave Humboldt comparative data for his various later scientific publications.\nWorks.\n\"Cosmos\".\n\"Kosmos\" was Humboldt's multi-volume effort in his later years to write a work bringing together all the research from his long career. The writing took shape in lectures he delivered before the University of Berlin in the winter of 1827\u201328. These lectures would form \"the cartoon for the great fresco of the \"[K]osmos\"\". His 1829 expedition to Russia supplied him with data comparative to his Latin American expedition.\nThe first two volumes of the \"Kosmos\" were published between the years 1845 and 1847 and were intended to comprise the entire work, but Humboldt published three more volumes, one of which was posthumous. Humboldt had long aimed to write a comprehensive work about geography and the natural sciences. The work attempted to unify the sciences then known in a Kantian framework. With inspiration from German Romanticism, Humboldt sought to create a compendium of the world's environment. He spent the last decade of his long life\u2014as he called them, his \"improbable\" years\u2014continuing this work. The third and fourth volumes were published in 1850\u201358; a fragment of a fifth appeared posthumously in 1862.\nHis reputation had long since been made with his publications on the Spanish American expedition. There is not a consensus on the importance of \"Kosmos\". One scholar, who stresses the importance of Humboldt's \"Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain\" as essential reading, dismisses \"Kosmos\" as \"little more than an academic curiosity\". A different opinion is that \"Kosmos\" was his \"most influential book\".\nAs with most of Humboldt's works, \"Kosmos\" was also translated into multiple languages in editions of uneven quality. It was very popular in Britain and America. In 1849 a German newspaper commented that in England two of the three different translations were made by women, \"while in Germany most of the men do not understand it\". The first translation by Augustin Pritchard\u2014published anonymously by Mr. Bailli\u00e8re (volume I in 1845 and volume II in 1848)\u2014suffered from being hurriedly made. In a letter Humboldt said of it: \"It will damage my reputation. All the charm of my description is destroyed by an English sounding like Sanskrit.\"\nThe other two translations were made by Elizabeth Juliana Leeves Sabine under the superintendence of her husband Col. Edward Sabine (4 volumes 1846\u20131858), and by Elise Ott\u00e9 (5 volumes 1849\u20131858, the only complete translation of the 4 German volumes). These three translations were also published in the United States. The numbering of the volumes differs between the German and the English editions. Volume 3 of the German edition corresponds to the volumes 3 and 4 of the English translation, as the German volume appeared in 2 parts in 1850 and 1851. Volume 5 of the German edition was not translated until 1981, again by a woman. Ott\u00e9's translation benefited from a detailed table of contents, and an index for every volume; of the German edition only volumes 4 and 5 had (extremely short) tables of contents, and the index to the whole work only appeared with volume 5 in 1862. Less well known in Germany is the atlas belonging to the German edition of the Cosmos \"Berghaus' Physikalischer Atlas\", better known as the pirated version by Traugott Bromme under the title \"Atlas zu Alexander von Humboldt's Kosmos\" (Stuttgart 1861).\nIn Britain, Heinrich Berghaus planned to publish together with Alexander Keith Johnston a \"Physical Atlas\". But later Johnston published it alone under the title \"The Physical Atlas of Natural Phenomena\". In Britain its connection to the \"Cosmos\" seems not have been recognized.\nOther publications.\nAlexander von Humboldt published prolifically throughout his life. Many works were published originally in French or German, then translated to other languages, sometimes with competing translation editions. Humboldt himself did not keep track of all the various editions. He wrote specialized works on particular topics of botany, zoology, astronomy, mineralogy, among others, but he also wrote general works that attracted a wide readership, especially his \"Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent during the years 1799\u20131804\". His \"Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain\" was widely read in Mexico itself, the United States, as well as in Europe.\nMany of the original works have been digitally scanned by the Biodiversity Heritage Library. There have been new editions of print works, including his \"Views of the Cordilleras and Monuments of the Indigenous Peoples of the Americas\" (2014), which includes reproductions of all the color and black and white plates. In the original edition, the publication was in a large format and quite expensive. There is a 2009 translation of his \"Geography of Plants\" and a 2014 English edition of \"Views of Nature\".\nInfluence on scientists and artists.\nHumboldt was generous toward his friends and mentored young scientists. He and Bonpland parted ways after their return to Europe, and Humboldt largely took on the task of publishing the results of their Latin American expedition at Humboldt's expense, but he included Bonpland as co-author on the nearly 30 published volumes. Bonpland returned to Latin America, settling in Buenos Aires, Argentina, then moved to the countryside near the border with Paraguay. The forces of Dr. Jos\u00e9 Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia, the strong man of Paraguay, abducted Bonpland after killing Bonpland's estate workers. Bonpland was accused of \"agricultural espionage\" and of threatening Paraguay's virtual monopoly on the cultivation of yerba mate.\nDespite international pressure, including the British government and Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar's, along with European scientists including Humboldt, Francia kept Bonpland prisoner until 1831. He was released after nearly 10 years in Paraguay. Humboldt and Bonpland maintained a warm correspondence about science and politics until Bonpland's death in 1858.\nDuring Humboldt's time in Paris, he met in 1818 the young and brilliant Peruvian student of the Royal Mining School of Paris, Mariano Eduardo de Rivero y Ustariz. Subsequently, Humboldt acted as a mentor of the career of this promising Peruvian scientist. Another recipient of Humboldt's aid was Louis Agassiz (1807\u20131873), who was directly aided with needed cash from Humboldt, assistance in securing an academic position, and help with getting his research on zoology published. Agassiz sent him copies of his publications and went on to gain considerable scientific recognition as a professor at Harvard. Agassiz delivered an address to the Boston Society of Natural History in 1869, on the centenary of his patron's birth. When Humboldt was an elderly man, he aided another young scholar, Gotthold Eisenstein, a brilliant, young, Jewish mathematician in Berlin, for whom he obtained a small crown pension and whom he nominated for the Academy of Science.\nHumboldt's popular writings inspired many scientists and naturalists, including Charles Darwin, Henry David Thoreau, John Muir, George Perkins Marsh, Ernst Haeckel, Ida Laura Pfeiffer as well as brothers Richard and Robert Schomburgk and Robert, Adolf, and Hermann Schlagintweit.\nHumboldt carried on correspondence with many contemporaries and two volumes of letters to Karl August Varnhagen von Ense have been published.\nCharles Darwin made frequent reference to Humboldt's work in his \"Voyage of the Beagle\", where Darwin described his own scientific exploration of the Americas. In one note, he placed Humboldt first on the \"list of American travellers\". Darwin's work was influenced by Humboldt's writing style as well. Darwin's sister remarked to him \"you had, probably from reading so much of Humboldt, got his phraseology and the kind of flowery French expressions he uses\".\nWhen Darwin's \"Journal\" was published, he sent a copy to Humboldt, who responded, \"You told me in your kind letter that, when you were young, the manner in which I studied and depicted nature in the torrid zones contributed toward exciting in you the ardour and desire to travel in distant lands. Considering the importance of your work, Sir, this may be the greatest success that my humble work could bring.\" In his autobiography, Darwin recalled, reading \"with care and profound interest Humboldt's \"Personal Narrative\"\" and finding it one of the two most influential books on his work, which stirred in him \"a burning zeal to add even the most humble contribution to the noble structure of Natural Science\".\nHumboldt would later reveal to Darwin in the 1840s that he had been deeply interested in Darwin's grandfather's poetry. Erasmus Darwin had published the poem \"The Loves of the Plants\" in the early 1800s. Humboldt praised the poem for combining nature and imagination, a theme that permeated Humboldt's own work.\nA number of nineteenth-century artists travelled to Latin America, following in the footsteps of Humboldt, painting landscapes and scenes of everyday life. Johann Moritz Rugendas, Ferdinand Bellermann, and Eduard Hildebrandt were three important European painters. Frederic Edwin Church was the most famous landscape painter in the U.S. in the nineteenth century. His paintings of Andean volcanoes that Humboldt climbed helped make Church's reputation. His 5 foot by 10 foot painting entitled \"The Heart of the Andes\" \"caused a sensation\" when it was completed. Church had hoped to ship the painting to Berlin to show the painting to Humboldt, but Humboldt died a few days after Church's letter was written. Church painted Cotopaxi three times, twice in 1855 and then in 1859 in eruption.\nGeorge Catlin, most famous for his portraits of North American Indians and paintings of life among various North American tribes, also travelled to South America, producing a number of paintings. He wrote to Humboldt in 1855, sending him his proposal for South American travels. Humboldt replied, thanking him and sending a memorandum helping guide his travels.\nIda Laura Pfeiffer, one of the first female travelers who completed two trips around the world from 1846 to 1855, followed in Humboldt's footsteps. The two explorers met in Berlin in 1851 before Pfeiffer's second tour and again in 1855 when she returned to Europe. Humboldt provided Pfeiffer with an open letter of introduction in which he bade anyone who knew of his name to assist Madame Pfeiffer for her \"inextinguishable energy of character which she has everywhere shown, to wheresoever's she has been called or better put, driven by her unconquerable passion to study nature and man.\"\nOther aspects of Humboldt's life and career.\nHumboldt and the Prussian monarchy.\nIn the Napoleonic wars, Prussia had capitulated to France, signing the Treaty of Tilsit. The Prussian royal family returned to Berlin, but sought better terms of the treaty and Friedrich Wilhelm III commissioned his younger brother Prince Wilhelm with this. Friedrich Wilhelm III asked Alexander to be part of the mission, charged with introducing the prince to Paris society. This turn of events for Humboldt could not have been better, since he desired to live in Paris rather than Berlin.\nIn 1814 Humboldt accompanied the allied sovereigns to London. Three years later he was summoned by the king of Prussia to attend him at the congress of Aachen. Again in the autumn of 1822 he accompanied the same monarch to the Congress of Verona, proceeded thence with the royal party to Rome and Naples and returned to Paris in the spring of 1823. Humboldt had long regarded Paris as his true home. Thus, when at last he received from his sovereign a summons to join his court at Berlin, he obeyed reluctantly.\nBetween 1830 and 1848 Humboldt was frequently employed in diplomatic missions to the court of King Louis Philippe of France, with whom he always maintained the most cordial personal relations. Charles X of France had been overthrown, with Louis-Philippe of the house of Orl\u00e9ans becoming king. Humboldt knew the family, and he was sent by the Prussian monarch to Paris to report on events to his monarch. He spent three years in France, from 1830 to 1833. His friends Fran\u00e7ois Arago and Fran\u00e7ois Guizot, were appointed to posts in Louis-Philippe's government.\nHumboldt's brother, Wilhelm, died on 8 April 1835. Alexander lamented that he had lost half of himself with the death of his brother. Upon the accession of the crown prince Frederick William IV in June 1840, Humboldt's favor at court increased. Indeed, the new king's craving for Humboldt's company became at times so importunate as to leave him only a few waking hours to work on his writing.\nRepresentation of indigenous population.\nHumboldt's publications such as \"Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent during the years 1799\u20131804\" originate from a time when colonialism was prevalent. Within recent academic publications, there are arguments for and against Humboldt's own imperial bias. Within the book \"Imperial Eyes\", Pratt argues for an implicit imperial bias within Humboldt's writing. While Humboldt financed his expedition to the Spanish colonies independently, the Spanish monarchy allowed him to travel to South America. Due to unrest within the Spanish colonies in South America, the Spanish crown implemented liberal reforms which led to greater support of the Spanish monarchy within the lower class. However, Pratt points out that the reforms created opposition towards the Spanish rule within the upper class as the declining control of the Spanish monarchy would result in the white South American elite losing their privileges. When Humboldt wrote about the natural world within South America, he portrayed it as neutral and free of people: If the indigenous population was mentioned within Humboldt's writing, Pratt argues, they were only represented when they were beneficial for Europeans. Others argue that Humboldt was a German Columbus, as he described a virginal country that could be used for commerce by Europeans.\nOther scholars counter Pratt's argumentation and refer to the abolitionist and anti-colonialist standpoint that Humboldt represents within his writing. An example is Humboldt's descriptions of the South American colonies in which he critiqued Spanish colonial rule. His close relationship with Enlightenment values such as liberty and freedom led to his support of democracy and his subsequent support of the independence of South America. In order to improve the material and political situation of the indigenous population, Humboldt included propositions within his writing that he also presented to the Spanish monarchy. When witnessing a slave market, Humboldt was shocked by the treatment of black people which led him to become opposed to slavery and support the abolitionist movement throughout his life. Within his descriptions in \"Personal Narratives\", Humboldt also included the answers that were given to him by indigenous people. Additionally, Lubrich argues that despite the colonial and orientalist notions of his writing, Humboldt did not recreate these stereotypes, but deconstructed them.\nReligion.\nBecause Humboldt did not mention God in his work \"Cosmos\", and sometimes spoke unfavourably of religious attitudes, it was occasionally speculated that he was a materialist philosopher, or perhaps an atheist. However, unlike irreligious figures such as Robert G. Ingersoll, who went so far as to use Humboldtian science to campaign against religion, Humboldt himself denied imputations of atheism. In a letter to Varnhagen von Ense he emphasized that he believed the world had indeed been created, writing of \"Cosmos\": \"...'creation' and the 'created world' are never lost sight of in the book. And did I not, only eight months ago, in the French translation, say, in the plainest terms: 'It is this necessity of things, this occult but permanent connection, this periodical return in the progress, development of formation, phenomena, and events which constitute 'Nature' submissive to a controlling power?'\"\nIt has been argued that \"although Humboldt emphasizes the basis of morality in the nature of man, he does acknowledge that a belief in God is linked directly to acts of virtue\" and therefore \"the dignity of man lies at the centre of Humboldt's religious thought\".\nHumboldt also believed firmly in an afterlife. A letter he wrote to his friend Charlotte Hildebrand Diede states: \"God constantly appoints the course of nature and of circumstances; so that, including his existence in an eternal future, the happiness of the individual does not perish, but on the contrary grows and increases.\"\nHumboldt remained distant of organized religion, typical of a Protestant in Germany relating to the Catholic Church; Humboldt held deep respect for the ideal side of religious belief and church life within human communities. He differentiated between \"negative\" religions, and those \"all positive religions [which] consist of three distinct parts\u2014a code of morals which is nearly the same in all of them, and generally very pure; a geological chimera, and a myth or a little historical novel\". In \"Cosmos\", he wrote about how rich geological descriptions were found in different religious traditions, and stated: \"Christianity gradually diffused itself, and, wherever it was adopted as the religion of the state, it not only exercised a beneficial condition on the lower classes by inculcating the social freedom of mankind, but also expanded the views of men in their communion with Nature...this tendency to glorify the Deity in his works gave rise to a taste for natural observation.\"\nHumboldt showed religious tolerance towards Judaism, and he criticized the political \"Jews Bill\", which was an initiative intended to establish legal discrimination against Jews. He called this an \"abominable\" law, since he hoped to see Jews being treated equally in society.\nSociality.\nMuch of Humboldt's private life remains a mystery because he destroyed his private letters. While a gregarious personality, he may have harbored a sense of social alienation, which drove his passion for escape through travel.\nSexuality.\nHumboldt never married: while he was friendly with a number of women, including Henriette, the wife of his mentor Marcus Herz, his sister-in-law Caroline von Humboldt stated \"nothing will ever have a great influence on Alexander that doesn't come through men\". He had many strong male friendships, and at times had romances with men.\nAs a student he became infatuated with Wilhelm Gabriel Wegener, a theology student, penning a succession of letters expressing his \"fervent love\". At 25 he met Reinhardt von Haeften (1772\u20131803), a 22-year-old lieutenant, with whom he lived and travelled for two years, and to whom he wrote in 1794: \"I only live through you, my good precious Reinhardt\". When von Haeften became engaged, Humboldt begged to remain living with him and his wife: \"Even if you must refuse me, treat me coldly with disdain, I should still want to be with you... the love I have for you is not just friendship or brotherly love, it is veneration\".\nA traveling companion in the Americas for five years was Aim\u00e9 Bonpland, and in Quito in 1802 he met the Ecuadorian aristocrat Don Carlos Mont\u00fafar, who travelled with Humboldt to Europe and lived with him. In France, Humboldt travelled and lived with the physicist and balloonist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac. Later he had a deep friendship with the married French astronomer Fran\u00e7ois Arago, whom he met daily for 15 years.\nHumboldt once wrote \"I don't know sensual needs\". However, a pious travelling companion, Francisco Jos\u00e9 de Caldas, accused him of frequenting houses in Quito where \"impure love reigned\", of making friends with \"obscene dissolute youths\", of giving vent to \"shameful passions of his heart\", and dropping him to travel with \"Bonpland and his Adonis\" [Mont\u00fafar].\nHumboldt inherited a significant fortune, but the expense of his travels, and most especially of publishing (thirty volumes in all), had by 1834 made him totally reliant on the pension of King Frederick William III. Although he preferred living in Paris, by 1836 the King had insisted he return to Germany. He lived with the Court at Sanssouci, and latterly in Berlin, with his valet Seifert, who had accompanied him to Russia in 1829.\nFour years before his death, Humboldt executed a deed of gift transferring his entire estate to Seifert, who had by then married and set up a household near Humboldt's apartment. Humboldt had become godfather to his daughter. The scale of the bequest has always drawn speculation, especially as Seifert was some thirty years younger, and introducing lower class partners into households under the guise of servants was then a common practice.\nIn 1908, the sexual researcher Paul N\u00e4cke gathered reminiscences from homosexuals including Humboldt's friend the botanist Carl Bolle, then nearly 90 years old: some of the material was incorporated by Magnus Hirschfeld into his 1914 study \"Homosexuality in Men and Women\". However, speculations about Humboldt's private life and possible homosexuality continue to remain a fractious issue amongst scholars, particularly as earlier biographers had portrayed him as \"a largely asexual, Christ-like Humboldt figure...suitable as a national idol\".\nIllness and death.\nOn 24 February 1857, Humboldt suffered a minor stroke, which passed without perceptible symptoms. It was not until the winter of 1858\u20131859 that his strength began to decline; on 6 May 1859, he died peacefully in Berlin, aged 89. His last words were reported to be \"How glorious these sunbeams are! They seem to call Earth to the Heavens!\" His remains were conveyed in state through the streets of Berlin, in a hearse drawn by six horses. Royal chamberlains led the cort\u00e8ge, each charged with carrying a pillow with Humboldt's medals and other decorations of honor. Humboldt's extended family, descendants of his brother Wilhelm, walked in the procession. Humboldt's coffin was received by the prince-regent at the door of the cathedral. He was interred at the family resting-place at Tegel, alongside his brother Wilhelm and sister-in-law Caroline.\nHonours and namesakes.\nThe honours which had been showered on Humboldt during their life continued after his death. More species are named after Humboldt than after any other human being. The first centenary of Humboldt's birth was celebrated on 14 September 1869, with great enthusiasm in both the New and Old Worlds. Numerous monuments were constructed in his honour, such as Humboldt Park in Chicago, planned that year and constructed shortly after the Chicago fire. Newly explored regions and species named after Humboldt, as discussed below, also stand as a measure of his wide fame and popularity.\n\"Scarcely was there a European order which Humboldt had not the right to wear\", and \"more than a hundred and fifty societies to which he had been elected\". These included \"the most celebrated Academies of the leading nations of Europe and America, and not merely those of a purely scientific character, but any which had for their object the spread of education and the advancement of civilisation.\" Additionally, he was at least an honorary member of academies and learned societies throughout Europe and America and \"was invested with the degree of Doctor in three faculties\".\nSpecies named after Humboldt.\nHumboldt described many geographical features and species that were hitherto unknown to Europeans. Species named after him include:\nGeographical features named after Humboldt.\nFeatures named after him include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlaces named after Humboldt.\nThe following places are named for Humboldt:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeological objects.\nThe mineral humboldtine was named for Alexander by Mariano de Rivero in 1821.\nLecture series.\nAlexander von Humboldt also lends his name to a prominent lecture series in Human geography in the Netherlands (hosted by the Radboud University Nijmegen). It is the Dutch equivalent of the widely known annual Hettner lectures at the University of Heidelberg.\nThe Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.\nAfter his death, Humboldt's friends and colleagues created the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (\"Stiftung\" in German) to continue his generous support of young academics. Although the original endowment was lost in the German hyperinflation of the 1920s, and again as a result of World War II, the Foundation has been re-endowed by the German government to award young academics and distinguished senior academics from abroad. It plays an important role in attracting foreign researchers to work in Germany and enabling German researchers to work abroad for a period.\nDedications.\nEdgar Allan Poe dedicated his last major work, \"\", to Humboldt, \"With Very Profound Respect\". Humboldt's attempt to unify the sciences in his \"Kosmos\" was a major inspiration for Poe's project.\nIn 2019, Josefina Benedetti composed \"Humboldt\" an Orchestral Suite in five movements.\nShips.\n\"Alexander von Humboldt\" is also a German ship named after the scientist, originally built in 1906 by the German shipyard AG Weser at Bremen as Reserve Sonderburg. She was operated throughout the North and Baltic Seas until being retired in 1986. Subsequently, she was converted into a three-masted barque by the German shipyard Motorwerke Bremerhaven, and was re-launched in 1988 as \"Alexander von Humboldt\".\nThe Jan De Nul Group operates a hopper dredger built in 1998 also named \"Alexander von Humboldt\".\nRecognitions by contemporaries.\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar wrote that \"The real discoverer of South America was Humboldt, since his work was more useful for our people than the work of all conquerors\". Charles Darwin expressed his debt to Humboldt, and admiration for his work, writing to Joseph Dalton Hooker that Humboldt was the \"greatest scientific traveller who ever lived\". Wilhelm von Humboldt wrote that \"Alexander is destined to combine ideas and follow chains of thoughts which would otherwise have remained unknown for ages. His depth, his sharp mind and his incredible speed are a rare combination.\" Johann Wolfgang Goethe observed that \"Humboldt showers us with true treasures\". Friedrich Schiller wrote that \"Alexander impresses many, particularly when compared to his brother\u2014because he shows off more!\" Jos\u00e9 de la Luz y Caballero wrote that \"Columbus gave Europe a New World; Humboldt made it known in its physical, material, intellectual, and moral aspects\".\nNapol\u00e9on Bonaparte remarked \"You have been studying Botanics? Just like my wife!\" Claude Louis Berthollet said \"This man is as knowledgeable as a whole academy\". Thomas Jefferson remarked \"I consider him the most important scientist whom I have met\". Emil du Bois-Reymond wrote that \"Every assiduous scholar ... is Humboldt's son; we are all his family.\" Robert G. Ingersoll wrote that \"He was to science what Shakespeare was to the drama\".\nHermann von Helmholtz wrote that \"During the first half of the present century we had an Alexander von Humboldt, who was able to scan the scientific knowledge of his time in its details, and to bring it within one vast generalization. At the present juncture, it is obviously very doubtful whether this task could be accomplished in a similar way, even by a mind with gifts so peculiarly suited for the purpose as Humboldt's was, and if all his time and work were devoted to the purpose.\"\nWorks.\nScientific works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Le voyage aux r\u00e9gions equinoxiales du Nouveau Continent, fait en 1799\u20131804, par Alexandre de Humboldt et Aim\u00e9 Bonpland\" (Paris, 1807, etc.), consisted of thirty folio and quarto volumes, including:\nOther works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Humb. is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterary works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPortrayals in film.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70633", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70633", "title": "Acritarch", "text": "Microfossils\nAcritarchs (from gre \" achritos\"\u00a0'uncertain' and \" arch\u00e9\"\u00a0'origin') are organic microfossils, known from the Precambrian to the present. The classification is a catch all term used to refer to any organic microfossils that cannot be assigned to other groups. Their diversity reflects major ecological events such as the appearance of predation and the Cambrian explosion. Many acritarchs likely represent resting cysts of single-celled marine phytoplanktonic algae, similar to those produced by living dinoflagellates.\nDefinition.\nAcritarchs were originally defined as non-acid soluble (i.e. non-carbonate, non-siliceous) organic-walled microfossils consisting of a central cavity, and whose biological affinities cannot be determined with certainty. Most commonly they are composed of thermally altered acid-insoluble carbon compounds (kerogen).\nAcritarchs may include the remains of a wide range of quite different kinds of organisms\u2014ranging from the egg cases of small metazoans to resting cysts of many kinds of chlorophyta (green algae). It is likely that most acritarch species from the Paleozoic represent various stages of the life cycle of algae that were ancestral to the dinoflagellates. The nature of the organisms associated with Precambrian acritarchs is generally not well understood, though many are probably related to unicellular marine algae. In theory, when the biological source (taxon) of an acritarch does become known, that particular microfossil is removed from the acritarchs and classified with its proper group.\nWhile the classification of acritarchs into form genera is entirely artificial, it is not without merit, as the form taxa show traits similar to those of genuine taxa\u2014for example an 'explosion' in the Cambrian and a mass extinction at the end of the Permian.\nClassification.\nThe informal group Acritarcha Evitt 1963 was originally divided into these Subgroups: Acanthomorphitae, Polygonomorphitae, Prismatomorphitae, O\u00f6morphitae, Netromorphitae, Dinetromorphitae, Stephanomorphitae, Pteromorphitae, Herkomorphitae, Platymorphitae, Sphaeromorphitae, and Disphaeromorphitae.\nAcritarchs were most likely eukaryotes. While archaea and bacteria (prokaryotes) usually produce simple fossils of a very small size, eukaryotic unicellular fossils are usually larger and more complex, with external morphological projections and ornamentation such as spines and hairs that only eukaryotes can produce; as most acritarchs have external projections (e.g., hair, spines, thick cell membranes, etc.), they are predominantly eukaryotes, although simple eukaryote acritarchs also exist.\nThe recent application of atomic force microscopy, confocal microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and other sophisticated analytic techniques to the study of the ultrastructure, life history, and systematic affinities of mineralized, but originally organic-walled microfossils, has shown that some acritarchs are actually fossilized microalgae. In the end, it may well be, as Moczyd\u0142owska et al. suggested in 2011, that many acritarchs will, in fact, turn out to be algae.\nOccurrence.\nAcritarchs are found in sedimentary rocks from the present back into the Archean. They are typically isolated from siliciclastic sedimentary rocks using hydrofluoric acid but are occasionally extracted from carbonate-rich rocks. They are excellent candidates for index fossils used for dating rock formations in the Paleozoic Era and when other fossils are not available. Because most acritarchs are thought to be marine (pre-Triassic), they are also useful for palaeoenvironmental interpretation.\nThe Archean and earliest Proterozoic microfossils termed \"acritarchs\" may actually be prokaryotes. The earliest eukaryotic acritarchs known (as of 2020[ [update]]) are from between 1950 and 2150 million years ago.\nDiversity.\nAt about 1 billion years ago the organisms responsible for acritarchs started to increase in abundance, diversity, size, complexity of shape, and especially, the size and number of spines. Their populations crashed during periods of extensive worldwide glaciations that covered the majority of the planet, but they proliferated in the Cambrian explosion and reached their highest diversity in the Paleozoic. The increased spininess 1000 million years ago possibly resulted from the need for defense against predators, especially predators large enough to swallow them or tear them apart. Other groups of small organisms from the Neoproterozoic era also show signs of anti-predator defenses.\nFurther evidence that acritarchs were subject to herbivory around this time comes from a consideration of taxon longevity. The abundance of planktonic organisms that evolved between 1,700 and 1,400 million years ago was limited by nutrient availability \u2013 a situation which limits the origination of new species because the existing organisms are so specialised to their niches, and no other niches are available for occupation. Approximately 1,000 million years ago, species longevity fell sharply, suggesting that predation pressure, probably by protist herbivores, became an important factor. Predation would have kept populations in check, meaning that some nutrients were left unused, and new niches were available for new species to occupy.\nEtymology.\n\"Acritarch\" was coined in 1963 from the Greek \"\u00e1kritos\" meaning \"confused\" (\"a krit\u0113s\", \"without critic\") and \"arch\u0113\" meaning \"origin\" (confer archaic).\nSelected genera.\nThere are over 900 described genera; the following is a partial list, from Fossilid.info.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70634", "revid": "1798972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70634", "title": "Bill Whelan", "text": "Irish composer and musician\nWilliam Michael Joseph 'Bill' Whelan (born 22 May 1950) is an Irish composer and musician. He is best known for composing a piece for the interval of the 1994 Eurovision Song Contest. The result, \"Riverdance\", was a seven-minute piece of original music accompanying a new take on traditional Irish stepdance that became a full-length stage production and spawned a worldwide craze for Irish traditional music and dance. The corresponding soundtrack album earned him a Grammy. \"Riverdance\" was released as a single in 1994, credited to \"Bill Whelan and An\u00fana featuring the RT\u00c9 Concert Orchestra\". It reached number one in Ireland for 18 weeks and number nine in the UK. The album of the same title reached number 31 in the album charts in 1995.\nWhelan has also arranged a symphonic suite version of \"Riverdance\", with its premiere performed by the Ulster Orchestra on BBC Radio 3 in August 2014.\nA studio recording was released on CD (on the RT\u00c9 lyric fm label) in 2018.\nBiography.\nWhelan is a native of Limerick city, and was educated at Crescent College. He gained his Bachelor of Civil Law degree at University College Dublin in 1973 and then went to King's Inns. In 2011, Whelan was awarded the UCD Foundation Day Medal in recognition of his outstanding achievements and his contribution to Irish music worldwide. While he is best known for his \"Riverdance\" composition and the theatrical show of the same name, Whelan has been involved in many ground-breaking projects in Ireland since the 1970s. In his autobiography, he especially mentions the major influence of James W. Flannery.\nAs a producer he has worked with U2 (on their \"War\" album), Van Morrison, Kate Bush, The Dubliners, Planxty, Andy Irvine &amp; Davy Spillane, Patrick Street, Stockton's Wing and fellow Limerickman Richard Harris.\nAs an arranger and composer, his credits include:\nIn theatre, Whelan received a Laurence Olivier Award nomination for his adaption of Gilbert and Sullivan's \"H.M.S. Pinafore\". His film credits include, \"Dancing at Lughnasa\" (starring Meryl Streep), \"Some Mother's Son\", \"Lamb\" (starring Liam Neeson) and the award-winning \"At The Cinema Palace\".\nCareer timeline.\nWhelan's lifetime of musical endeavours include:\nDiscography.\nAs a keyboard player, or as an arranger, he has contributed to these albums:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70635", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70635", "title": "Matthew George Easton", "text": "Presbyterian preacher and biblical scholar from Scotland (1823-1894)\nMatthew George Easton (3 June 1823 \u2013 27 February 1894) was a Scottish minister and writer. His most known work is the \"Illustrated Bible Dictionary\" (1893), later known as \"Easton's Bible Dictionary\".\nThe English translations of two of Franz Delitzsch's commentaries are among his other works.\nHe studied at the University of Glasgow and served as minister of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Girvan 1848, then Darvel 1861, then Free Church Darvel 1876 to death on the amalgamation of the RPC and Free Church of Scotland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70636", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70636", "title": "Choreographer", "text": ""}
{"id": "70637", "revid": "3206409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70637", "title": "Bess of Hardwick", "text": "English noblewoman and businesswoman (1521\u20131608)\nElizabeth Cavendish, later Elizabeth Talbot, Countess of Shrewsbury (n\u00e9e Hardwick; c.\u200927 July 1521 \u00a0\u2013 13 February 1608), known as Bess of Hardwick, of Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire, was a notable figure of Elizabethan English society. By a series of well-made marriages, she rose to the highest levels of English nobility and became enormously wealthy. Bess was reportedly a shrewd businesswoman, increasing her assets with business interests including mines and glass-making workshops.\nHer life encompassed the full sequence of religious changes brought about by the Tudor monarchs during the reformation. She would have been brought up as a Roman Catholic in Henry VIII's reign, then she would have had to conform to the protestant changes under Edward VI before having to revert back to Roman Catholicism during Queen Mary's reign and finally becoming a protestant again during Elizabeth I's reign. \nShe was married four times. Her first husband was Robert Barley (or Barlow), who died aged about 14 or 15 on 24 December 1544. Her second husband was the courtier Sir William Cavendish. Her third husband was Sir William St Loe. Her last husband was George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury, sometime keeper to the captive Mary, Queen of Scots. An accomplished needlewoman, Bess joined her husband's captive charge at Chatsworth House for extended periods in 1569, 1570, and 1571, during which time they worked together on the Oxburgh Hangings.\nIn 1601, Bess ordered an inventory of the household furnishings, including textiles, at her three properties at Chatsworth, Hardwick, and Chelsea, which survives. In her will she bequeathed these items to her heirs to be preserved in perpetuity. The 400-year-old collection, now known as the Hardwick Hall textiles, is the largest collection of tapestry, embroidery, canvaswork, and other textiles to have been preserved by a single private family. Bess is also well known for her building projects, the most famous of which are Chatsworth, now the seat of the Dukes of Devonshire (whose family name is Cavendish as they descend from the children of her second marriage), and Hardwick Hall.\nOrigins.\nElizabeth Hardwick was the daughter of John Hardwick of Derbyshire by his wife Elizabeth Leeke, daughter of Thomas Leeke and Margaret Fox. Her exact birthdate is unknown, occurring in the period 1521 to 1527; that said, according to her witness statement under oath at a court hearing in October 1546, in which she gives her age at the time of her first marriage in May 1543 as being \"of tender years\", i.e. less than 16, would indicate 1527. It cannot be later than 1527 because of the date of her father's death, given in his Inquisition Post Mortem.\nThe Hardwicks had arrived in Derbyshire from Sussex by the mid-thirteenth century, and farmed land granted by Robert Savage, lord of the manor of Stainsby, on the north-east border of Derbyshire, looking over Nottinghamshire. By the mid-fifteenth century the family had risen to \"gentleman-yeoman\" stock, with an estate of a few hundred acres located mainly in the parish of Ault Hucknall in the manor of Stainsby. The Hardwick coat of arms of Hardwick was probably granted c. 1450 to William Hardwick. The blazon is: \"Argent, a saltier engrailed azure on a chief of the second three cinquefoils of the first\". When giving evidence of his right to arms in 1569, Bess's only brother, James Hardwick (1525-1580/1), provided the heralds with a pedigree of his family which began with this William, who died c.\u20091453.\nJames was the last surviving legitimate male member of the Hardwick family. The Hardwicks were members of the minor gentry of Scarsdale; no male member of the Hardwick family rose above the status of esquire or held any important local or county offices. Bess was born into this relatively minor gentry family. Her fourth marriage to the earl of Shrewsbury in 1567 elevated her to the rank of \"countess\", and following the earl's death in November 1590, Bess became one of the richest women in the kingdom. She set about building her greatest monument, Hardwick New Hall, which was completed in 1599.\nEarly life.\nJohn Hardwick died aged about 40 leaving a widow, son (and heir), and four daughters (five daughters were alive at the time he wrote his will). His widow Elizabeth Leeke then married Ralph, the second son of the neighbouring Leche (or Leach) family of Chatsworth, in Derbyshire, by whom she would leave an additional three co-heiresses.\nLittle is known of Bess's early life. She appears to have been espoused to her first husband during the 1530s, and probably married for the first time in 1543. Despite the story being often repeated, there is no contemporary evidence whatsoever to support Dugdale's later claims that she became familiar with city life and the Tudor Court after being sent to live, aged twelve, in the London household of Anne Gainsford, Lady Zouche of Codnor Castle in Derbyshire, where she was supposedly influenced by Lady Zouche. Despite a lack of evidence, it is possible \u2013 but no more than that \u2013 that at some point, perhaps after the death of her first husband, she entered the service of the Zouches at Codnor Castle in Derbyshire.\nA close family associate was a man named Henry Marmion whose family held land close to Codnor, and may have commended Bess to the Zouches who, along with the Vernons, were the only major Derbyshire family likely to have taken in such children. However, Anne Gainsford was in service in the households of Anne Boleyn and Jane Seymour, and despite marrying Sir George Zouche in 1533, spent much of her time at court until after 1536, when she and Sir George made Codnor Castle their main residence. Not surprisingly, this period coincides with the time that Dugdale claimed Bess was in service to Anne Gainsford in London and at Codnor. However, there is no evidence to support the story, and Dugdale would have known much more about the early life of Lady Zouche than was known of Bess's origins. Again, according to Dugdale, from Codnor Bess entered the service of the Greys at Bradgate in Leicestershire, where she met and married her second husband, Sir William Cavendish. She certainly married Sir William at Bradgate, but that in itself does not prove that Bess was in service at Bradgate. It remains possible that she met Sir William elsewhere, possibly at Codnor. More likely, she was recommended to the Greys by Henry Grey's sister, Margaret, Lady Willoughby. Henry Marmion was one the Willoughby's most trusted upper servants, he was also one of the two men appointed in Bess's father's will and guardians of his children. (the other was Bess's uncle, John Leake).\nBess's four marriages.\nFirst marriage.\nIn 1543, Bess married 13-year-old Robert Barley (or Barlow), heir to a neighbouring estate. The exact date of her marriage to Robert is unknown. It is thought that the marriage took place late May 1543, shortly before the death of Robert's father on 28 May. There is no evidence that they lived together as husband and wife. Robert died in December 1544. There was no issue from the marriage, which had been arranged locally, probably initially to protect the Barley patrimony and to mitigate the impact of wardship on the Barley estate should Robert succeed his father as an underage heir. The traditional story that Robert and Bess met in London while in the service of a \"Lady Zouche\" is based on oral history, which can only be dated to the late seventeenth century (some eighty years after Bess's death). The marital claims to Robert's estate were disputed, and following his death Bess was refused dower by Peter Freschevile. A court battle ensued, which resulted in Bess being awarded her claim on the Barley estate and compensation, albeit several years after Robert's death.\nSecond marriage.\nOn 20 August 1547, Bess married the twice-widowed Sir William Cavendish, Treasurer of the King's Chamber, and became Lady Cavendish. The wedding took place at two o'clock in the morning, at the home of the Grey family, friends of the couple. Sir William was more than twice Bess's age and the father of two daughters. His fortune had been made following the Dissolution of the Monasteries, since as an official of the Court of Augmentations he was able to select choice properties for himself. Possibly acting on Bess's advice, Sir William sold his lands in the south of England and bought the Chatsworth estates in her home county of Derbyshire. Sir William Cavendish died on 25 October 1557, leaving Bess widowed a second time and in deep debt to the Crown. Upon his death, Bess claimed the sum of his property, having insisted that his land be settled on their heirs.\nThe eight children of the marriage, two of whom died in infancy, were as follows:\nThird marriage.\nIn 1559 Bess married a third time, to Sir William St Loe (1518\u20131565) (\"alias\" St Lowe, Saintlowe, Sentloe, etc.) and became Lady St Loe. Her new husband was Captain of the Guard to Queen Elizabeth I and Chief Butler of England. Due to his relationship with Queen Elizabeth I, he was able to reduce the debt Bess owed and paid it back in full on her behalf. He owned large West Country estates at Tormarton in Gloucestershire and Chew Magna in Somerset, while his principal residence was at Sutton Court in Stowey. When he died without male issue in 1564/5, in suspicious circumstances (probably poisoned by his younger brother), he left everything to Bess, to the detriment of his daughters and brother. In addition to her own six surviving children, Bess was now responsible for the two daughters of Sir William St Loe from his first marriage. However, those two daughters were already adults and otherwise well provided for.\nSir William St Loe's death left Bess one of the wealthiest women in England. Her annual income was calculated to amount to \u00a360,000, . Further, she was a Lady of the Bedchamber with daily access to the Queen, whose favour she enjoyed. Still in her late 30s, Bess retained her looks and good health, and a number of important men began courting her.\nFourth marriage.\nDespite being courted by several suitors, Bess did not remarry until 1568, when she married for the fourth time to become Countess of Shrewsbury. Her new husband, George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury, was one of the premier aristocrats of the realm, and the father of seven children by his first marriage. Indeed, two of his children were married to two of hers in a double ceremony in February 1568: Bess's daughter Mary Cavendish, aged 12, was given in marriage to Shrewsbury's eldest son Gilbert, aged 16; while Bess's son, Sir Henry Cavendish, aged 18, married Shrewsbury's daughter Lady Grace Talbot, aged 8.\nBess and Mary, Queen of Scots.\nIn the year before Bess and the Earl of Shrewsbury were married, a political disturbance arose in Scotland, which would profoundly affect their lives. Rebel Scottish lords rose up against Mary, Queen of Scots, imprisoned her, and forced her to abdicate in favour of her infant son, James. In May 1568, Mary escaped and fled south towards England, seeking the protection of her cousin, Queen Elizabeth. However, the English authorities were not sure how to receive her. On 18 May, she was taken into protective custody at Carlisle Castle by local officials.\nQueen Elizabeth felt obliged to host and protect Mary, her cousin, against the rebellious Scottish lords. However, due to Mary's persistent claim to the English throne, Elizabeth also regarded her as a threat. Elizabeth had Mary moved to Bolton Castle in Yorkshire, where she was lodged under the guard of Francis Knollys, pending the York Conference inquiry, regarding Mary's fate. The inquiry results were inconclusive; yet Elizabeth did not set Mary free.\nInstead, Mary would be detained under the custody of the Earl of Shrewsbury and his wife Bess. Elizabeth's instruction to Bess and her husband amounted to little more than Mary's house arrest. Mary reached her new residence, Tutbury Castle, in February 1569, when she was 26 years old, and would remain in the custody of Shrewsbury and Bess for 15 years. While in the care of the earl and countess, Queen Mary lived at one or another of their many houses in the Midlands: Tutbury, Wingfield Manor, Chatsworth House, Sheffield Castle, and Sheffield Manor.\nThroughout this period, Bess spent time as Mary's companion, working with her on embroidery and textile projects. Indeed, all Mary's work later became part of Bess's historical collection at Hardwick Hall.\n Bess joined Mary at Chatsworth for extended periods in 1569, 1570, and 1571, during which time they worked together on the Oxburgh Hangings. Bess sent Elizabeth I a remarkable dress as a New Year's Day gift for 1577, according to Elizabeth Wingfield, who wrote;Her Majesty never liked any thing you gave her so well, the colour and strange trimming of the garments, with the rich and great cost bestowed upon that, has caused her to give out such good speeches of my lord and your Ladyship as I never heard of better, she told my Lord of Leicester and my Lord Chamberlain that you had given her such garments this year as she never had any so well liked her, and said that good noble couple, they show in all things what love they bear me.\nElizabeth shifted the costs of the imprisonment to Shrewsbury. It was recorded that Mary would use the couple's insecurities against each other, even convincing Talbot that Bess was stealing. Mary's presence in their home, as well as the financial costs and political tensions, may have contributed to a rift between Shrewsbury and Bess.\nIt was not until Mary was removed to another keeper, Sir Amias Paulet, that she got into the trouble that would lead ultimately to her execution. Previous to the Queen's change in custody, Shrewsbury and Bess separated for good. They had been apart, off and on, since about 1580; and even Queen Elizabeth had tried to get them to reconcile. Mary seems to have aggravated, if not created, their problems by playing them off against each other. The Countess spread rumors that her husband Shrewsbury had been in a relationship with Mary, a charge which has never been proved or disproved, and in any case which she later retracted. Mary was outraged and wrote a famous \"scandal letter\" listing comments that Bess had allegedly made about Elizabeth.\nThe Stuart connection.\nIn 1574 Bess arranged a marriage between one of her daughters and the son of the Countess of Lennox. This was a significant match for Bess because the Countess of Lennox was Margaret Douglas, a member of the royal family, being the daughter of Margaret Tudor, Queen Dowager of Scotland and sister of Henry VIII, and therefore, also Queen Elizabeth's first cousin.\nIn this match, the bride was Bess's daughter, Elizabeth Cavendish, and the groom was Charles Stuart, who was himself also the first cousin of Mary, Queen of Scots, (through their grandmother, the same Margaret Tudor). The groom was also the younger brother of Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley who had been married to Mary until his death. This marriage, therefore, enabled a claim to the throne for any of Bess's grandchildren born of the marriage.\nThe marriage ceremony took place without the knowledge of Shrewsbury, who, though well aware of the suggested match some time prior to this event, declined to accept any responsibility. Due to the Lennox family's claim to the throne, the marriage was considered potentially treasonable, since Queen Elizabeth's consent had not been obtained.\nThe Countess of Lennox, mother of the bridegroom, went to the Tower for several months, and Bess was ordered to London to face an official inquiry, but she ignored the summons, and remained in Sheffield until the row died down. The child of the marriage was Arbella Stuart, who had a claim to the thrones of Scotland and England as the second cousin to King James VI of Scotland (later King James I of England), through their great-grandmother, Margaret Tudor.\nArbella was at times invited to Elizabeth's court, but spent most of her time with her grandmother. A BBC documentary showed that Bess very much desired Arbella to become Queen, even imprisoning the young lady to prevent her from eloping. Arbella blamed her grandmother for this, and the two fell out irrevocably when Arbella attempted to run away and marry a man who, as a descendant of Henry VII, also had a claim to the throne. Bess cut Arbella from her will and begged the Queen to take her granddaughter off her hands.\nArbella's royal claim was never recognized. Despite disinheriting Arbella and her eldest son (Henry: for aiding Arbella's escape); Bess later had a \"lukewarm reconciliation with her granddaughter. Bess has been an ancestor of the royal line since 1952; Queen Elizabeth II being Bess's descendant through the dukes of Portland, in whose family was Elizabeth II's maternal grandmother, Cecilia Cavendish-Bentinck.\nLater life.\nOn the death of her husband in 1590, Bess became Dowager Countess of Shrewsbury. She lived mostly at Hardwick, where she built the new mansion Hardwick Hall, which inspired the rhyme, \"Hardwick Hall, more glass than wall\", because of the number and size of its windows. She was indeed one of the greatest builders of her time at Hardwick, Chatsworth House, and Oldcoates.\nIn 1604 Bess was involved with Queen Anne in an unsuccessful attempt to found a college or university at Ripon in Yorkshire. The scheme was promoted by Cecily Sandys, the widow of the Bishop Edwin Sandys.\nDeath and burial.\nBess of Hardwick died at 5\u00a0pm on Saturday 13 February 1608, aged c.87. At the time of her death she remained \"one of the richest, and most powerful women in the kingdom\". On 16 February her body was placed in a vault in All Saints Church, Derby, then the parish church of that city (demolished 1723 and rebuilt, since 1927 Derby Cathedral), under an elaborate monument with a laudatory inscription which she took care to put up in her lifetime. The monument with effigy survives, having been saved from the former demolished building. Stories of her body lying in state for weeks in the Great Chamber at Hardwick are mythical. Her accumulated estates were left to her children from her second marriage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70638", "revid": "1256027646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70638", "title": "Leading tone", "text": "Tonal degree of the diatonic scale\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c\" {\n \\stemUp \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\time 4/4\n \\override NoteHead.color = #red b1 c \n \\new Voice \\relative c\" {\n \\stemDown\n g1 g\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\stemUp \\clef bass \\key c \\major \\time 4/4\n d1 e\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\stemDown\n g1 c, \\bar \" In this example, the leading tone of C major (B) resolves to the tonic (C) in a perfect authentic cadence.\nIn music theory, a leading tone (also called subsemitone or leading note in the UK) is a note or pitch which resolves or \"leads\" to a note one semitone higher or lower, being a lower and upper leading tone, respectively. Typically, the leading tone refers to the seventh scale degree of a major scale (), a major seventh above the tonic. In the movable do solf\u00e8ge system, the leading tone is sung as \"si\".\nA leading-tone triad is a triad built on the seventh scale degree in a major key (viio in Roman numeral analysis), while a leading-tone seventh chord is a seventh chord built on the seventh scale degree (vii\u00f87). Walter Piston considers and notates viio as V, an incomplete dominant seventh chord. (For the Roman numeral notation of these chords, see Roman numeral analysis.)\nNote.\nSeventh scale degree (or lower leading tone).\nTypically, when people speak of \"the\" leading tone, they mean the seventh scale degree () of the major scale, which has a strong affinity for and leads melodically to the tonic. It is sung as \"si\" in movable-do solf\u00e8ge. For example, in the F major scale, the leading note is the note E.\n &lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n\\relative f' {\n \\clef treble \\key f \\major \\time 7/4 f4 g a bes c d \\once \\override NoteHead.color = #red e f2\n&lt;/score&gt;\nAs a diatonic function, the leading tone is the seventh scale degree of any diatonic scale when the distance between it and the tonic is a single semitone. In diatonic scales in which there is a whole tone between the seventh scale degree and the tonic, such as the Mixolydian mode, the seventh degree is called the \"subtonic\". However, in modes without a leading tone, such as Dorian and Mixolydian, a raised seventh is often featured during cadences, such as in the harmonic minor scale.\nA leading tone outside of the current scale is called a \"secondary leading tone\", leading to a \"secondary tonic\". It functions to briefly tonicize a scale tone (usually the 5th degree) as part of a secondary dominant chord. In the second measure of Beethoven's \"Waldstein Sonata\" (shown below), the F\u266f's function as secondary leading tones, which resolve to G in the next measure.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\" lang=\"lilypond\"&gt; {\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c {\n \\once\\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #4\n \\clef bass \\time 4/4\n \\tempo \"Allegro con brio\" 4 = 176\n \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #2.5\n r8\\pp &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt;\n &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;c e&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt;\n &lt;d g&gt;4.( b'16 a) g8 r r4\n \\clef treble \\grace { cis\"8( } d4~)( d16 c b a g4-.) r4\n\u00bb\n \\new Staff { \\relative c, {\n \\clef bass\n c8 &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt;\n &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c g'&gt; &lt;c a'&gt; &lt;c a'&gt;\n [ ]\n\u00bb } } \n&lt;/score&gt;\nDescending, or upper, leading tone.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\" override_midi=\"Escribano - Lamentation, upper leading-tone cadence.mid\"&gt;\n\u00ab \\new StaffGroup \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\clef treble \\time 2/2\n \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\time 2/2\n e2 f2~ f4 e d2~ d4 \\once \\set suggestAccidentals = ##t cis8 b \\once \\set suggestAccidentals = ##t cis!2 d1\\fermata\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\clef treble \\time 2/2\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n r2 a f g a1 a1\\fermata\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\clef bass \\time 2/2\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n a1 d, e d\\fermata\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\clef bass \\time 2/2\n \\new Voice \\relative c {\n a1 bes a d\\fermata \\bar \" Cadence featuring a descending leading tone (B flat \u2013 A in the bass voice) from a well-known 16th-century lamentation, the debate over which was documented in Rome c.1540.\nBy contrast, a descending, or upper, leading tone is a leading tone that resolves \"down\", as opposed to the seventh scale degree (a \"lower\" leading tone) which resolves up. The descending, or upper, leading tone usually is a lowered second degree (\u266d) resolving to the tonic, but the expression may at times refer to a \u266d resolving to the dominant. In German, the term \"Gegenleitton\" (\"counter leading tone\") is used by Hugo Riemann to denote the descending or upper leading-tone (\u266d), but Heinrich Schenker uses (\"descending leading tone\") to mean the descending diatonic supertonic (\u266e).)\nThe tritone substitution, chord progression ii\u2013subV\u2013I on C (Dm\u2013Db7\u2013C), results in an upper leading note.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\" lang=\"lilypond\"&gt; { \n\\new Staff \u00ab\n\\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\time 4/4 \n \\override NoteColumn.force-hshift = #1 \\override NoteHead.color = #red s2 des \\override NoteColumn.force-hshift = #0.5 c1\n\\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\time 4/4 \n &lt;d f a c&gt;2 &lt;f aes ces&gt; &lt;e g c&gt;1 \\bar \"||\"\n&lt;/score&gt;\nAnalysis.\nAccording to Ernst Kurth, the major and minor thirds contain \"latent\" tendencies towards the perfect fourth and whole tone, respectively, and thus establish tonality. However, Carl Dahlhaus contests Kurth's position, holding that this drive is in fact created through or with harmonic function, a root progression in another voice by a whole tone or fifth, or melodically (monophonically) by the context of the scale. For example, the leading tone of alternating C chord and F minor chords is either the note E leading to F (if F is tonic), or A\u266d leading to G (if C is tonic).\nIn works from the 14th- and 15th-century Western tradition, the leading tone is created by the progression from imperfect to perfect consonances, such as a major third to a perfect fifth or minor third to a unison. The same pitch outside of the imperfect consonance is not a leading tone.\nForte claims that the leading tone is only one example of a more general tendency: the strongest progressions, melodic and harmonic, are by half step. He suggests that one play a G major scale and stop on the seventh note (F\u266f) to personally experience the feeling of lack caused by the \"particularly strong attraction\" of the seventh note to the eighth (F\u266f\u2192G'), thus its name.\nLeading-tone triad.\nA leading-tone chord is a triad built on the seventh scale degree in major and the raised seventh-scale-degree in minor. The quality of the leading-tone triad is diminished in both major and minor keys. For example, in both C major and C minor, it is a B diminished triad (though it is usually written in first inversion, as described below).\nAccording to John Bunyan Herbert, (who uses the term \"subtonic\", which later came to usually refer to a seventh scale degree pitched a whole tone below the tonic note),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The subtonic [leading-tone] chord is founded upon seven (the leading tone) of the major key, and is a diminished chord... The subtonic chord is very much neglected by many composers, and possibly a little overworked by others. Its occasional use gives character and dignity to a composition.\nOn the whole, the chord has a poor reputation. Its history, in brief, seems to be: Much abused and little used.\nFunction.\nThe leading-tone triad is used in several functions. It is commonly used as a passing chord between a root position tonic triad and a first inversion tonic triad: that is, \"In addition to its basic function of passing between I and I6, VII6 has another important function: it can form a neighboring chord to I or I6.\" In that instance, the leading-tone triad prolongs tonic through neighbor and passing motion. The example below shows two measures from the fourth movement of Beethoven's Piano Sonata No. 3 in C major, Op. 2 in which a leading-tone triad functions as a passing chord between I and I6.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c\" {\n \\stemUp \\clef treble \\key f \\major \\time 6/8\n a4. g f\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\stemDown\n &lt;c f&gt;4. &lt;bes e&gt; \n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c, {\n \\clef \"bass_8\" \\key f \\major \\time 6/8\n &lt;f f'&gt;4. &lt;g g'&gt; \n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nThe leading-tone triad may also be regarded as an incomplete dominant seventh chord: \"A chord is called 'Incomplete' when its root is omitted. This omission occurs, occasionally, in the chord of the dom.-seventh, and the result is a triad upon the leading tone.\"\n&lt;score lang=\"lilypond\"&gt;\n\\override Score.TimeSignature\n\\override Score.SpacingSpanner.strict-note-spacing = ##t\n\\set Score.proportionalNotationDuration = #(ly:make-moment 1/4)\n\\time 4/4 \n\\relative c\" { \n&lt;/score&gt;\n&lt;score&gt;\n \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c\" {\n \\stemUp \\clef treble \\key d \\major \\time 4/4\n a4 a b cis d d cis\\fermata\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\stemDown\n &lt;d fis&gt;4 &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d g&gt; &lt;e g&gt; &lt;fis a&gt; &lt;d gis&gt; &lt;e a&gt;\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\relative c {\n \\clef bass \\key d \\major \\time 4/4\n d4 d g e d b a\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt; A leading-tone triad (beat 4) and secondary leading-tone triad (beat 6) in the first phrase of the Bach chorale \"Gott der Vater, wohn' uns bei\" (slightly simplified)\nSome sources say the chord is not a chord; some argue it is an incomplete dominant seventh chord, especially when the diminished triad is written in its first inversion (resembling a second inversion dominant seventh without a root):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The subtonic [i.e. leading-tone] chord is a very common chord and a useful one. The triad differs in formation from the preceding six [major and minor diatonic] triads. It is dissonant and active... a diminished triad. The subtonic chord belongs to the dominant family. The factors of the triad are the same tones as the three upper factors of the dominant seventh chord and progress in the same manner. These facts have led many theorists to call this triad a 'dominant seventh chord without root.'... The subtonic chord in both modes has suffered much criticism from theorists although it has been and is being used by masters. It is criticized as being 'overworked', and that much can be accomplished with it with a minimum of technique.\nFor example, viio6 often substitutes for V, which it closely resembles, and its use may be required in situations by voice leading: \"In a strict four-voice texture, if the bass is doubled by the soprano, the VII6 [viio6] is required as a substitute for the V\".\nVoice leading.\nSince the leading-tone triad is a diminished triad, it is usually found in its first inversion: According to Carl Edward Gardner, \"The first inversion of the triad is considered, by many, preferable to root position. The second inversion of the triad is unusual. Some theorists forbid its use.\"\nIn a four-part chorale texture, the third of the leading-tone triad is doubled in order to avoid adding emphasis on the tritone created by the root and the fifth. Unlike a dominant chord where the leading tone can be frustrated and not resolve to the tonic if it is in an inner voice, the leading tone in a leading-tone triad must resolve to the tonic. Commonly, the fifth of the triad resolves down since it is phenomenologically similar to the seventh in a dominant seventh chord. All in all, the tritone resolves \"inward\" if it is written as a diminished fifth (m. 1 below) and \"outward\" if it is written as an augmented fourth (m. 2).\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\time 4/4 \n 2 &lt;c e&gt; \\bar \"||\"\n &lt;f b&gt;2 &lt;e c'&gt; \\bar \"||\"\n&lt;/score&gt;\nLeading-tone seventh chord.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\" override_midi=\"Leading-tone seventh chords in Beethoven's no 5 op 10 no 1 I 13-16.mid\"&gt;\n \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\relative c\" {\n \\set Score.currentBarNumber = #13\n \\bar \"\"\n \\clef treble \\key c \\minor \\time 3/4\n \\grace { g16_\\markup { \\italic \"rinf.\" } c es } &lt;g, g'&gt;4.( &lt;f f'&gt;8) &lt;es~ es'~&gt;4(\n &lt;es es'&gt; &lt;d d'&gt;-.) &lt;c~ c'~&gt;-&gt;(\n &lt;c c'&gt; -.) &lt;aes~ aes'~&gt;-&gt;(\n &lt;aes aes'&gt; &lt;g g'&gt;-.) r\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\relative c {\n \\clef bass \\key c \\minor \n \\grace { s16 s s } r4 r &lt;es g c&gt;(\n &lt;f aes b&gt;2-&gt; &lt;es g&gt;4 \n &lt;d f&gt;2 &lt;c es&gt;4 \n ) r r\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt; Leading-tone seventh chords (with suspensions) functioning as dominant chords in Beethoven's Piano Sonata No. 5, mvmt. I.\nThe leading-tone seventh chords are vii\u00f87 and viio7, the half-diminished and diminished seventh chords on the seventh scale degree () of the major and harmonic minor. For example, in C major and C minor, the leading-tone seventh chords are B half-diminished (B\u2013D\u2013F\u2013A) and B diminished (B\u2013D\u2013F\u2013A\u266d), respectively.\nLeading-tone seventh chords were not characteristic of Renaissance music but are typical of the Baroque and Classical period. They are used more freely in Romantic music but began to be used less in classical music as conventions of tonality broke down. They are integral to ragtime and contemporary popular and jazz music genres.\nComposers throughout the common practice period often employed modal mixture when using the leading-tone seventh chord in a major key, allowing for the substitution of the half-diminished seventh chord with the fully diminished seventh chord (by lowering its seventh). This mixture is commonly used when the leading-tone seventh chord is functioning as a secondary leading-tone chord.\nThe example below shows fully diminished seventh chords in the key of D major in the right hand in the third movement of Mozart's Piano Sonata No. 5 in G major.\n&lt;score&gt;\n \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\relative c' {\n \\clef treble \\key g \\major \\time 3/8\n \\set Score.currentBarNumber = #64\n \\bar \"\"\n &lt;e e'&gt;8 e'16[ dis fis e]\n \\once \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3.5 g16([\\p e cis bes)] \\once \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3.5 a8\\f\n g'16([ e cis bes)] \\once \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3.5 a8\\f\n g'16([ e cis bes)] \\once \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3.5 a8\\f\n g'16([ e cis bes)] \\once \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3.5 a8\\f\n r r &lt;d fis a&gt;\\f\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new Voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef bass \\key g \\major \\time 3/8\n R4. \n r8 r \\clef treble &lt;cis e g&gt;\n r8 r &lt;cis e g&gt;\n r8 r &lt;cis e g&gt;\n r8 r &lt;cis e g&gt;\n \\clef bass \\once \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #3.5 d,16([^\\p fis a d)] fis8\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nFunction.\nThe leading-tone seventh chord has a dominant function and may be used in place of V or V7. Just as viio is sometimes considered an incomplete dominant seventh chord, a leading-tone seventh chord is often considered a \"dominant ninth chord without root\".)\n &lt;score lang=\"lilypond\"&gt;\n\\override Score.TimeSignature\n\\override Score.SpacingSpanner.strict-note-spacing = ##t\n\\set Score.proportionalNotationDuration = #(ly:make-moment 1/7)\n\\time 4/4 \n\\relative c\" { \n&lt;/score&gt;\nFor variety, leading-tone seventh chords are frequently substituted for dominant chords, with which they have three common tones: \"The seventh chord founded upon the subtonic [in major]... is occasionally used. It resolves directly to the tonic... This chord may be employed without preparation.\"\nVoice leading.\nIn contrast to leading-tone triads, leading-tone seventh chords appear in root position. The example below shows leading-tone seventh chords (in root position) functioning as dominants in a reduction of Mozart's \"Don Giovanni\", K. 527, act 1, scene 13.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\relative c' {\n \\set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \\tempo 4 = 86\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"voice oohs\"\n \\clef treble \\key b \\minor \\time 4/4\n \\set Score.currentBarNumber = #116\n \\bar \"\"\n fis4 r r r8 g' fis b, r g' fis b, r f'\n \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"piano\"\n \\clef treble \\key b \\minor \\time 4/4\n \\relative c' {\n r16 &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; r &lt;e g&gt; &lt;e g&gt; &lt;e g&gt;\n r &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; r &lt;e g&gt; &lt;e g&gt; &lt;e g&gt;\n r &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; r &lt;e g&gt; &lt;e g&gt; &lt;e g&gt;\n r &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; &lt;d fis&gt; r &lt;d f&gt; &lt;d f&gt; &lt;d f&gt;\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\clef bass \\key b \\minor \\time 4/4\n \\relative c' {\n b8 r &lt;ais cis&gt; r b r &lt;ais cis&gt; r\n b r &lt;ais cis&gt; r b r &lt;gis b&gt; r\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nFran\u00e7ois-Joseph F\u00e9tis tunes the leading-tone seventh in major 5:6:7:9.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "70639", "revid": "214427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70639", "title": "Library Linking (Computer Science)", "text": ""}
{"id": "70640", "revid": "30699314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70640", "title": "Key (music)", "text": "Most common pitches in a piece of music\nIn music theory, the key of a piece is the group of pitches, or scale, that forms the basis of a musical composition in Western classical music, jazz music, art music, and pop music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tonality (from \"Tonic\") or key: Music which uses the notes of a particular scale is said to be \"in the key of\" that scale or in the tonality of that scale.\nA particular key features a \"tonic (main) note\" and its corresponding \"chords\", also called a \"tonic\" or \"tonic chord\", which provides a subjective sense of arrival and rest. The tonic also has a unique relationship to the other pitches of the same key, their corresponding chords, and pitches and chords outside the key. Notes and chords other than the tonic in a piece create varying degrees of tension, resolved when the tonic note or chord returns.\nThe key may be in the major mode, minor mode, or one of several other modes. Musicians assume major when this is not specified; for example, the sentence \"this piece is in C\" implies that the key of the piece is C major. Popular songs and classical music from the common practice period are usually in a single key; longer pieces in the classical repertoire may have sections in contrasting keys. Key changes within a section or movement are known as modulation.\nBackground.\nMusic is made from audible vibrations, such as from oscillating strings or air moving through reeds.. Humans generally perceive some vibrations as sounding \"higher\" or \"lower\" than others, creating a subjective perception called \"pitch\". As a medium vibrates faster, its higher frequency is perceived as higher pitch. In Western tonal music, specific frequencies are grouped into twelve \"pitch classes\". Seven of these are considered \"natural\" pitches, and are represented by the letters A, B, C, D, E, F, and G.\nHumans perceive frequencies logarithmically, not linearly. The ratio between two frequencies determines how different they sound. If one vibration has twice the frequency of another, they sound similar enough to be considered the same pitch class; they are said to be one \"octave\" apart. Pitches separated by an octave are sometimes given numbers to reduce ambiguity. For example, the lowest C playable on a standard piano is designated \"C1\", while the pitch with twice the frequency (one octave higher) is \"C2\".\nOn a piano, each white key represents one of the seven \"natural\" pitches. These are arranged from A to G, followed by another A one octave higher. Among these pitches, the relative increases in frequency from \"B\" to \"C\" and from \"E\" to \"F\" are smaller than the changes between other adjacent pitches. This smaller distance is called a \"semitone\", while the larger distance from e.g. \"A\" to \"B\" is a whole tone. When two natural pitches are a whole tone apart, a black key represents an intermediate pitch. Instead of using separate letters, these pitches are denoted with the \"accidentals\" \u266f (sharp) and \u266d (flat), which represent raising or lowering a natural pitch by one semitone. The pitch between \"G\" and \"A\" may be denoted as either \"G\u266f\" (G plus one semitone) or \"A\u266d\" (A minus one semitone). In musical terminology, G\u266f and A\u266d are considered \"enharmonic\". \nMost Western music is built around major and minor \"scales\". These scales use seven of the twelve pitches, arranged in ascending or descending order, and beginning and ending with the same pitch one octave apart. An ascending major scale moves between pitches with the pattern \"tone, tone, semitone, tone, tone, tone, semitone\". An ascending minor scale instead uses the pattern \"tone, semitone, tone, tone, semitone, tone, tone\"; this results in the third, sixth, and seventh pitches being one semitone lower compared to the major scale.. On a piano, a major scale beginning from C and a minor scale beginning from A each contain only natural pitches and use exclusively white keys; the two scales are considered distinct \"modes\" of the same group of pitches. In contrast, a major scale beginning from A uses the pitches \"A, B, C\u266f, D, E, F\u266f, G\u266f, A\". The pitch which begins and ends a given scale is called its \"tonic\". \nDefinition.\nA key is a way to classify a piece of music. It represents that the piece is oriented around a specific Major or Minor scale. The name of a key, such as \"A Major\", contains both a Tonic pitch and a Mode (either Major or Minor). Because there are 12 pitches to use as a tonic, there are 24 distinct keys. If the mode is not specified, the simplified term \"key of C\" usually implies the key is C Major.\nIf a piece of music is in a key, it mostly uses pitches from the corresponding scale. The seven pitches that belong to the scale are called \"diatonic\" pitches, while the remaining five are called \"chromatic\" pitches. A key does not prohibit the use of chromatic pitches, but they will be rarer than diatonic pitches. The key's tonic represents a pitch of \"stability\" for the music to orient around. In particular, a composition almost always ends on the tonic.\nNot all music has a well defined key. Some classical compositions, such as Chopin's \"Prelude op. 28 no. 2\" and Wagner's Tristan und Isolde, do not clearly follow these patterns. Modern atonal music, including the works of Arnold Schoenberg, has no tonal stability and freely interweaves all twelve pitches.\nNotation.\nMusic is written using a staff (music) with five or more parallel lines. Pitches are represented by notes placed either on a line or in the space between lines. The relationship between pitch and position is defined by a symbol called a clef. In a standard staff with a treble clef, the bottom line represents the pitch E, the line above represents G, and the space between the two lines is F. The pitch between F and G cannot be represented solely by position, so it is represented by marking either an F or G note with an accidental (\u266f or \u266d).\nIn the keys of C Major and A Minor, the common diatonic pitches do not use accidentals. When writing in other keys, the positions themselves can be marked with accidentals as a shorthand. For example, a \u266f accidental on a line or space representing F means that, unless otherwise specified, all F pitches should be raised one semitone.. Another accidental, \u266e (natural), overrides this general rule and represents the natural pitch. When writing this shorthand notation, known as a key signature, Sharps are always arranged in the order F, C, G, D, A, E, B, while Flats use the opposite order.\nA key signature allows the corresponding major or minor scale to be written without accidentals. Any remaining accidentals represent chromatic pitches which are less closely associated with the key. However, a key signature does not uniquely specify a key, since it does not identify the tonic. Any key signature could represent either a major or minor key with the same pitches but different tonics.\nModulation.\nShort pieces may stay in a single key throughout. A typical pattern for a simple song might be as follows: a phrase ends with a cadence on the tonic, a second phrase ends with a half cadence, then a final, longer, phrase ends with an authentic cadence on the tonic.\nMore elaborate pieces may establish the main key, then modulate to another key, or a series of keys, then back to the original key. In the Baroque it was common to repeat an entire phrase of music, called a ritornello, in each key once it was established. In Classical sonata form, the second key was typically marked with a contrasting theme. Another key may be treated as a temporary tonic, called tonicization.\nIn common practice period compositions, and most of the Western popular music of the 20th century, pieces always begin and end in the same key, even if (as in some Romantic-era music) the key is deliberately left ambiguous at first. Some arrangements of popular songs, however, modulate sometime during the song (often in a repeat of the final chorus) and thus end in a different key. This is an example of modulation.\nIn rock and popular music some pieces change back and forth, or modulate, between two keys. Examples of this include Fleetwood Mac's \"Dreams\" and The Rolling Stones' \"Under My Thumb\". \"This phenomenon occurs when a feature that allows multiple interpretations of key (usually a diatonic set as pitch source) is accompanied by other, more precise evidence in support of each possible interpretation (such as the use of one note as the root of the initiating harmony and persistent use of another note as pitch of melodic resolution and root of the final harmony of each phrase).\"\nInstruments in a key.\nCertain musical instruments play in a certain key, or have their music written in a certain key. Instruments that do not play in the key of C are known as transposing instruments. The most common kind of clarinet, for example, is said to play in the key of B\u266d. This means that a scale written in C major in sheet music actually sounds as a B\u266d major scale when played on the B-flat clarinet\u2014that is, notes sound a whole tone lower than written. Likewise, the horn, normally in the key of F, sounds notes a perfect fifth lower than written.\nSimilarly, some instruments are \"built\" in a certain key. For example, a brass instrument built in B\u266d plays a fundamental note of B\u266d, and can play notes in the harmonic series starting on B\u266d without using valves, fingerholes, or slides to alter the length of the vibrating column of air. An instrument built in a certain key often, but not always, uses music written in the same key (see trombone for an exception). However, some instruments, such as the diatonic harmonica and the harp, are in fact designed to play in only one key at a time: accidentals are difficult or impossible to play.\nThe highland bagpipes are built in B\u266d major, though the music is written in D major with implied accidentals.\nIn Western musical composition, the key of a piece has important ramifications for its composition:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70642", "revid": "46764924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70642", "title": "Alfonso XI of Castile", "text": "King of Castile, Le\u00f3n and Galicia from 1312 to 1350\nAlfonso XI (11 August 1311\u00a0\u2013 26 March 1350), called the Avenger (\"el Justiciero\"), was King of Castile and Le\u00f3n. He was the son of Ferdinand IV of Castile and his wife Constance of Portugal. Upon his father's death in 1312, several disputes ensued over who would hold regency, which were resolved in 1313.\nOnce Alfonso was declared an adult in 1325, he began a reign that would serve to strengthen royal power and became known for his victory in the Battle of Rio Salado. While leading a siege against Yusuf I of Granada, he died of the plague in Gibraltar.\nLife.\nMinority.\nBorn on 13 August 1311 in Salamanca, he was the son of King Ferdinand IV of Castile and Constance of Portugal. His father died when Alfonso was one year old. His grandmother, Mar\u00eda de Molina, his mother Constance, his granduncle Infante John of Castile, son of King Alfonso X of Castile and uncle Infante Peter of Castile, son of King Sancho IV assumed the regency. His mother died first on 18 November 1313, followed by Infantes John and Peter during a military campaign against Granada in 1319 at the Disaster of the Vega, which left Dowager Queen Mar\u00eda as the only regent until her death on 1 July 1321.\nAlfonso inherited the throne at a time of instability within the region, decline in populations, reductions in the royal treasury and increasingly ambitious regents caused numerous problems during his young reign.\nAfter the death of the Infantes John and Peter in 1319, Philip (son of Sancho IV and Mar\u00eda de Molina, thus brother of Infante Peter), Juan Manuel (the king's second-degree uncle by virtue of being Ferdinand III's grandson) and Juan the One-eyed (his second-degree uncle, son of John of Castile who died in 1319) split the kingdom among themselves according to their aspirations for regency, even as it was being looted by Moors and the rebellious nobility.\nA 14th century chronicle mentioned his appearance as \"...King Alfonso was not very tall but well proportioned, and he was rather strong and had fair skin and hair.\"\nMajority.\nHis effective reign began in August 1325 when he was sworn in as king as he was proclaimed to have reached the age of majority in the Cortes of Valladolid. Following a ritual that took him to Santiago de Compostela and to the monastery of Las Huelgas in Burgos, his self-crowning took place in 1332.\nAs soon as he took the throne, he began working hard to strengthen royal power by dividing his enemies. His early display of ruthless rulership skills included the unhesitant execution of possible opponents. Alfonso XI ordered the assassination of Juan the One-eyed in Toro in the 1326 feast of All Saints, along with two of the latter's knights, luring the former with promises of reconciliation.\nHe managed to extend the limits of his kingdom to the Strait of Gibraltar after the important victory at the Battle of R\u00edo Salado against the Marinid dynasty in 1340 and the conquest of Algeciras in 1344. Once that conflict was resolved, he redirected all his Reconquista efforts to fighting the Moorish king of Granada.\nDuring his reign a political reform in the municipal government took place, with the substitution of the \"concejos abiertos\" by the \"regimientos\". He fostered the issuance of \"cartas pueblas\" as strategy for the demographic strengthening in the borderland areas.\nHe is variously known among Castilian kings as the Avenger or the Implacable, and as \"He of R\u00edo Salado.\" The first two names he earned by the ferocity with which he repressed the disorders caused by the nobles during his long minority; the third by his victory in the Battle of R\u00edo Salado over the last formidable Marinid invasion of the Iberian Peninsula in 1340.\nAlfonso XI never went to the extreme lengths of his son Peter of Castile, but he could be bloody in his methods. He killed for reasons of state without any form of trial. He openly neglected his wife, Maria of Portugal, and indulged a scandalous passion for Eleanor of Guzman, who bore him ten children.\nStricken with plague during the 1349\u20131350 siege of Gibraltar, Alfonso died in the night of 25\u201326 March 1350 (some sources put the date wrongfully at 27 March) becoming one of the most prominent victims of the Black Death. The Castilian forces withdrew from Gibraltar, with some of the defenders coming out to watch. Out of respect, Alfonso's rival Yusuf I of Granada ordered his army and his commanders in the border regions not to attack the Castilian procession as it traveled with the king's body to Seville.\nMarriage and issue.\nAlfonso XI first married Constanza Manuel in 1325, but had the union annulled two years later. His second marriage, in 1328, was to his double first cousin Maria of Portugal, daughter of Alfonso IV of Portugal. They had:\nBy his mistress, Eleanor of Guzm\u00e1n, he had ten children:\nAfter Alfonso's death, his widow Maria had Eleanor arrested and later killed.\nPopular culture.\nHe was depicted in the 1802 play \"Alfonso, King of Castile\" by the British writer Matthew Lewis. It was first staged at London's Covent Garden Theatre with Charles Murray in the title role.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70643", "revid": "48151616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70643", "title": "Alfonso II of Aragon", "text": "King of Aragon from 1164 to 1196\nAlfonso II (1\u201325 March 1157 \u2013 25 April 1196), called the Chaste or the Troubadour, was the King of Aragon and, as Alfons I, the Count of Barcelona from 1164 until his death. The eldest son of Count Ramon Berenguer IV of Barcelona and Queen Petronilla of Aragon, he was the first King of Aragon who was also Count of Barcelona. He was also Count of Provence, which he secured from Douce II and her would-be father-in-law Raymond V, Count of Toulouse, from 1166 until 1173, when he ceded it to his brother, Ramon Berenguer III. His reign has been characterised by nationalistic and nostalgic Catalan historians as \"l'engrandiment occit\u00e0nic\" or \"the Pyrenean unity\": a great scheme to unite various lands on both sides of the Pyrenees under the rule of the House of Barcelona.\nReign.\nBorn at Huesca, Alfonso, called indistinctly from birth Alfonso and Ramon, ascended the united throne of Aragon and Barcelona as Alfonso, in deference to the Aragonese, to honour Alfonso the Battler.\nFor most of his reign he was allied with Alfonso VIII of Castile, both against\nNavarre and against the Moorish taifas of the south. In his\nReconquista effort Alfonso pushed as far as Teruel, conquering this important\nstronghold on the road to Valencia in 1171. The same year saw him capturing Caspe.\nApart from common interests, kings of Aragon and Castile were united by a formal bond of vassalage the former owed to the latter. Besides, on January 18, 1174, in Zaragoza Alfonso married Sancha, sister of the Castilian king. Another milestone in this alliance was the Treaty of Cazorla between the two kings in 1179, delineating zones of conquest in the south along the watershed of the rivers J\u00facar and Segura. Southern areas of Valencia including Denia were thus secured to Aragon. Alfonso also reached an agreement, the Treaty of Sang\u00fcesa (1168), with Sancho VI of Navarre dividing the territory of the Taifa of Murcia between them.\nDuring his reign Aragonese influence north of the Pyrenees reached its zenith, a natural tendency given the affinity between the Occitan, Catalan and Aragonese dominions of the Crown of Aragon. His realms incorporated not only Provence (from 1166 or just before), but also the counties of Cerdanya (1168) and Roussillon (inherited in 1172). B\u00e9arn and Bigorre paid homage to him in 1187. Alfonso's involvement in the affairs of Languedoc, which would cost the life of his successor, Peter II of Aragon, for the moment proved highly beneficial, strengthening Aragonese trade and stimulating emigration from the north to colonise the newly reconquered lands in Aragon.\nIn 1186, he helped establish Aragonese influence in Sardinia when he supported his cousin Agalbursa, the widow of the deceased Judge of Arborea, Barison II, in placing her grandson, the child of her eldest daughter Ispella, Hugh, on the throne of Arborea in opposition to Peter of Serra.\nAlfonso II provided the first land grant to the Cistercian monks on the banks of the Ebro River in the Aragon region, which would become the site of the first Cistercian monastery in this region. The Monasterio de Piedra was founded in 1194 with thirteen monks from Poblet Monastery, in an old castle next to the Piedra river, the Real Monasterio de Nuestra Senora de Rueda was founded in 1202 and utilized some of the first hydrological technology in the region for harnessing water power and river diversion for the purpose of building central heating. He also became a patron to the Carthusians and founded the first chapterhouse of Scala Dei in 1196.\nHe died at Perpignan in 1196.\nLiterary patronage and poetry.\nHe was a noted poet of his time and a close friend of King Richard the Lionheart. One tens\u00f3, \"Be\u00b7m plairia, Seingner En Reis\", apparently composed by him and Giraut de Bornelh, forms part of the poetical debate as to whether a lady is dishonoured by taking a lover who is richer than herself. The debate had been begun by Guilhem de Saint-Leidier and was taken up by Azalais de Porcairagues and Raimbaut of Orange; there was also a \"partimen\" on the topic between Dalfi d'Alvernha and Perdigon.\nAlfonso and his love affairs are mentioned in poems by many troubadours, including Guillem de Bergued\u00e0 (who criticized his dealings with Azalais of Toulouse) and Peire Vidal, who commended Alfonso's decision to marry Sancha rather than Eudokia Komnene that he had preferred a poor Castilian maid to the emperor Manuel's golden camel.\nMarriage and descendants.\nAlfonso married Sancha of Castile, daughter of king Alfonso VII of Castile. They had:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70644", "revid": "196153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70644", "title": "Mithras", "text": ""}
{"id": "70645", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70645", "title": "Ferdinand III of Castile and Leon", "text": ""}
{"id": "70646", "revid": "48886350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70646", "title": "Ferdinand III of Castile", "text": "King of Castile (1217\u20131252) and Le\u00f3n (1230\u20131252)\nFerdinand III (; 1199/1201\u00a0\u2013 30 May 1252), called the Saint (\"el Santo\"), was King of Castile from 1217 and King of Le\u00f3n from 1230 as well as King of Galicia from 1231. He was the son of Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n and Berengaria of Castile. Through his second marriage he was also Count of Aumale. Ferdinand III was one of the most successful kings of Castile, securing not only the permanent union of the crowns of Castile and Le\u00f3n, but also masterminding the most expansive southward territorial expansion campaign yet in the Guadalquivir Valley, in which Islamic rule was in disarray in the wake of the defeat of the Almohad caliphate at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa. His repeated and decisive victories against the Islamic Caliphate earned him the title Athleta Christi, meaning 'Champion of Christ', which was conferred upon him by Pope Gregory IX.\nBy military and diplomatic efforts, Ferdinand greatly expanded the dominions of Castile by annexing the crown of Guadalquivir river valley in the south of the Iberian Peninsula, establishing the boundaries of the Castilian state for the next two centuries. New territories included important cities such as Baeza, \u00dabeda, Ja\u00e9n, C\u00f3rdoba and Seville, that were subject of Repartimiento, given a new general charter and repopulated in the following years.\nFerdinand was canonized in 1671 by Pope Clement X. Places such as the cities of San Fernando, Pampanga and San Fernando, La Union; the Diocese of Ilagan and the San Fernando de Dilao Church in Paco, Manila in the Philippines; and in the United States, in California the City of San Fernando, the San Fernando Valley, and in Texas the Cathedral of San Fernando in San Antonio were named in his honor.\nEarly life.\nThe exact date of Ferdinand's birth is unclear. It has been proposed to have been as early as 1199 or even 1198, although more recent researchers commonly date Ferdinand's birth in the summer of 1201. Ferdinand was born at the Monastery of Valpara\u00edso (Peleas de Arriba, in what is now the Province of Zamora).\nAs the son of Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n and his second wife Berengaria of Castile, Ferdinand descended from Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n and Castile on both sides; his paternal grandfather Ferdinand II of Le\u00f3n and maternal great grandfather Sancho III of Castile were the sons of Alfonso VII between whom his kingdom was divided. Ferdinand had other royal ancestors from his paternal grandmother Urraca of Portugal and his maternal grandmother Eleanor of England a daughter of Henry II of England and Eleanor of Aquitaine.\nThe marriage of Ferdinand's parents was annulled by order of Pope Innocent III in 1204, due to consanguinity, but the legitimacy of the children was recognized. Berengaria then took their children, including Ferdinand, to the court of her father, King Alfonso VIII of Castile. In 1217, her younger brother, Henry I, died and she succeeded him on the Castilian throne with Ferdinand as her heir, but she quickly surrendered it to her son.\nAlfonso of Le\u00f3n considered himself tricked, and the young king had to begin his reign by a war against his father and a faction of the Castilian nobles. His and his mother's abilities proved too much for the king of Leon and his Castilian allies. Berengaria continued to be a key influence on Ferdinand, who followed her advice in prosecuting wars and even in the choice of a wife, Elisabeth of Swabia.\nUnification of Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nWhen Ferdinand's father died in 1230, his will delivered the kingdom to his older daughters Sancha and Dulce, from his first marriage to Teresa of Portugal. But Ferdinand contested the will, and claimed the inheritance for himself. At length, an agreement was reached, negotiated primarily between their mothers, Berengaria and Teresa. The resulting treaty of Benavente was signed on 11 December 1230, by which Ferdinand received the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n, in return for a substantial compensation in cash and lands for his half-sisters, Sancha and Dulce. Ferdinand thus became the first sovereign of both kingdoms since the death of Alfonso VII in 1157.\nEarly in his reign, Ferdinand had to deal with a rebellion of the House of Lara.\nReconquest of al-Andalus.\nSince the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 halted the advance of the Almohads in Spain, a series of truces had kept Castile and the Almohad dominions of al-Andalus more-or-less at peace. However, a crisis of succession in the Almohad Caliphate after the death of Yusuf II in 1224 gave Ferdinand III an opportunity for intervention. The Andalusian-based claimant, Abdallah al-Adil, began to ship the bulk of Almohad arms and men across the straits to Morocco to contest the succession with his rival there, leaving al-Andalus relatively undefended. Al-Adil's rebellious cousin, Abdullah al-Bayyasi (the Baezan), appealed to Ferdinand III for military assistance against the usurper. In 1225, a Castilian army accompanied al-Bayyasi in a campaign, ravaging the regions of Ja\u00e9n, vega de Granada and, before the end of the year, had successfully installed al-Bayyasi in C\u00f3rdoba. In payment, al-Bayyasi gave Ferdinand the strategic frontier strongholds of Ba\u00f1os de la Encina, Salvatierra (the old Order of Calatrava fortress near Ciudad Real) and Capilla (the last of which had to be taken by siege). When al-Bayyasi was rejected and killed by a popular uprising in C\u00f3rdoba shortly after, the Castilians remained in occupation of al-Bayyasi's holdings in And\u00fajar, Baeza and Martos.\nThe crisis in the Almohad Caliphate, however, remained unresolved. In 1228, a new Almohad pretender, Idris al-Ma'mun, decided to abandon Spain, and left with the last remnant of the Almohad forces for Morocco. Al-Andalus was left fragmented in the hands of local strongmen, only loosely led by Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Hud al-Judhami. Seeing the opportunity, the Christian kings of the north \u2013 Ferdinand III of Castile, Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n, James I of Aragon and Sancho II of Portugal \u2013 immediately launched a series of raids on al-Andalus, renewed almost every year. There were no great battle encounters \u2013 Ibn Hud's makeshift Andalusian army was destroyed early on, while attempting to stop the Leonese at Alange in 1230. The Christian armies romped through the south virtually unopposed in the field. Individual Andalusian cities were left to resist or negotiate their capitulation by themselves, with little or no prospect of rescue from Morocco or anywhere else.\nThe twenty years from 1228 to 1248 saw the most massive advance in the reconquista yet. In this great sweep, most of the great old citadels of al-Andalus fell one by one. Ferdinand III took the lion's share of the spoils \u2013 Badajoz and M\u00e9rida (which had fallen to the Leonese), were promptly inherited by Ferdinand in 1230; then by his own effort, Cazorla in 1231, \u00dabeda in 1233, the old Umayyad capital of C\u00f3rdoba in 1236, Niebla and Huelva in 1238, \u00c9cija and Lucena in 1240, Orihuela and Murcia in 1243 (by the famous 'pact of Alcaraz'), Arjona, Mula and Lorca in 1244, Cartagena in 1245, Ja\u00e9n in 1246, Alicante in 1248 and finally, on 22 December 1248, Ferdinand III entered as a conqueror in Seville, the greatest of Andalusian cities. At the end of this twenty-year onslaught, only a rump Andalusian state, the Emirate of Granada, remained unconquered (and even so, Ferdinand III managed to extract a tributary arrangement from Granada in 1238).\nFerdinand annexed some of his conquests directly into the Crown of Castile, and others were initially received and organized as vassal states under Muslim governors (e.g. Alicante, Niebla, Murcia), although they too were eventually permanently occupied and absorbed into Castile before the end of the century (Niebla in 1262, Murcia in 1264, Alicante in 1266). Outside of these vassal states, Christian rule could be heavy-handed on the new Muslim subjects. The range of Castilian conquests also sometimes transgressed into the spheres of interest of other conquerors. Thus, along the way, Ferdinand III took care to carefully negotiate with the other Christian kings to avoid conflict, e.g. the treaty of Almizra (26 March 1244) which delineated the Murcian boundary with James I of Aragon.\nFerdinand divided the conquered territories between the Knights, the Church, and the nobility, whom he endowed with great latifundia. When he took C\u00f3rdoba, he ordered the \"Liber Iudiciorum\" to be adopted and observed by its citizens, and caused it to be rendered, albeit inaccurately, into Castilian.\nThe capture of C\u00f3rdoba was the result of a well-planned and executed process whereby parts of the city (the Ajarqu\u00eda) first fell to the independent almogavars of the Sierra Morena to the north, which Ferdinand had not at the time subjugated. Only in 1236 did Ferdinand arrive with a royal army to take the Medina, the religious and administrative centre of the city. Ferdinand set up a council of \"partidores\" to divide the conquests and between 1237 and 1244 a great deal of land was parcelled out to private individuals and members of the royal family as well as to the Church. On 10 March 1241, Ferdinand established seven outposts to define the boundary of the province of C\u00f3rdoba. Following his conquest of Cordoba, Pope Gregory IX hailed Ferdinand as an \"athleta Christi\"(champion of Christ) and ordered bishops in Castile and Leon to provide him with 20,000 gold pieces a year, for three years.\nDomestic policy.\nOn the domestic front, Ferdinand strengthened the University of Salamanca and erected the current Cathedral of Burgos. He was a patron of the newest movement in the Church, that of the mendicant Orders. Whereas the Benedictine monks, and then the Cistercians and Cluniacs, had taken a major part in the \"Reconquista\" up until then, Ferdinand founded houses for friars of the Dominican, Franciscan, Trinitarian, and Mercedarian Orders throughout Andalusia, thus determining the future religious character of that region. Ferdinand has also been credited with sustaining the \"convivencia\" in Andalusia. He himself joined the Third Order of St. Francis, and is honored in that Order.\nHe took care not to overburden his subjects with taxation, fearing, as he said, the curse of one poor woman more than a whole army of Saracens.\nDeath.\nFerdinand III had started out as a contested king of Castile. By the time of his death he had delivered to his son and heir, Alfonso X, a massively expanded kingdom. The boundaries of the new Castilian state established by Ferdinand III remained nearly unchanged until the late 15th century. His biographer, Sister Mar\u00eda del Carmen Fern\u00e1ndez de Castro Cabeza, A.C.J., asserts that, on his deathbed, Ferdinand said to his son \"you will be rich in land and in many good vassals, more than any other king in Christendom.\"\nFerdinand's death was attributed to a dropsy he contracted in the winter of 1251. His death took place on 30 May 1252, and he was buried in the Cathedral of Seville by his son, Alfonso X. The funeral took place on 1 June 1252 and was officiated by Remondo, Bishop of Segovia, in the cathedral. In the city there were royal vassals, bishops, abbots and wealthy men of the kingdom, who had come to show their lament. His tomb was inscribed in four languages: Arabic, Hebrew, Latin, and an early version of Castilian.\nHe was canonized as Saint Ferdinand by Pope Clement X in 1671. Today, the incorrupt body of Saint Ferdinand can still be seen in the Cathedral of Seville, for he rests enclosed in a gold and crystal casket worthy of the king. His golden crown still encircles his head as he reclines beneath the statue of the Virgin of the Kings. Several places named San Fernando were founded across the Spanish Empire in his honor. His supposed likeliness, enthronement, sword and orb are depicted on the crest of Sevilla F\u00fatbol Club.\nThe symbol of his power as a king was his sword Lobera.\nPatronage.\nSaint Ferdinand is the patron saint of Seville, Aranjuez, San Fernando de Henares, Maspalomas, Pivijay, and of several other localities. He is also the patron of the Spanish Army's Corps of Engineers, and engineers generally.\nSince the establishment in 1819 of the Diocese of San Crist\u00f3bal de La Laguna, also called \"Diocese of Tenerife\" (Canary Islands), Saint Ferdinand is the co-patron of the diocese and of its Cathedral pursuant to the papal bull issued by Pope Pius VII. This is because La Laguna is a suffragan diocese of the Archdiocese of Seville whose capital city has Saint Ferdinand as one of its co-patrons, together with the \"Virgen de los Reyes\". Saint Ferdinand is also the patron of the University of La Laguna, since this institution was founded under the name of \"Universidad Literaria de San Fernando\" (Literary University of Saint Ferdinand).\nFamily.\nFirst marriage.\nIn 1219, Ferdinand married Elisabeth of Swabia (1203\u20131235). She was the fourth daughter of Philip, Duke of Swabia, and Irene Angelina. Their children were:\nSecond marriage.\nAfter he was widowed, he married Joan, Countess of Ponthieu, before August 1237. They had four sons and one daughter:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70647", "revid": "2059168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70647", "title": "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner", "text": "1967 film by Stanley Kramer\nGuess Who's Coming to Dinner is a 1967 American romantic comedy drama film produced and directed by Stanley Kramer, and written by William Rose. It stars Spencer Tracy (in his final role), Sidney Poitier, and Katharine Hepburn, and features Hepburn's niece Katharine Houghton.\nThe film was one of the first of the time to depict an interracial marriage in a positive light, as interracial marriage historically had been illegal in many states of the United States. It was still illegal in 17 states, until June 12, 1967, six months before the film was released, and scenes were filmed just before anti-miscegenation laws were struck down by the Supreme Court in \"Loving v. Virginia\".\nThe film was the ninth and final on-screen pairing of Tracy and Hepburn. Tracy was very ill during filming but insisted on continuing. Filming of his role was completed just 17 days before his death in June 1967. Hepburn never saw the completed film, saying it would be too painful for her. The film was released in December 1967, six months after Tracy's death.\nIn 2017, on its 50th anniversary, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film's Oscar-nominated score was composed by Frank De Vol.\nPlot.\nIn 1967, Joanna Drayton, a 23-year-old white woman, returns from her Hawaiian vacation to her parents' home in San Francisco with Dr. John Prentice, a 37-year-old black widower. The couple became engaged after a 10-day romance. Joanna's parents are Matt Drayton, a newspaper editor, and his wife, Christina, who owns an art gallery. Though the Draytons are liberal-minded, they are shocked that their daughter is engaged to a man of a different race. Christina gradually accepts the situation, but Matt objects because of the likely unhappiness and seemingly insurmountable problems the couple will face.\nUnbeknownst to Joanna, John tells the Drayton parents he will withdraw from the engagement unless both Draytons give the couple their blessing. To complicate matters, John is soon scheduled to Geneva, Switzerland, for three months in his work with the World Health Organization. His answer from the Draytons will determine whether Joanna follows him. Joanna invites John's parents to fly up from Los Angeles to join them for dinner that evening. John has not told them his fianc\u00e9e is white. Monsignor Mike Ryan, Matt's golf buddy, arrives and tells Matt and the couple that he is supportive of the engagement. Ryan is amused by his old liberal friend's principles fetching up against reality. Christina tells Matt she, too, is supportive of Joanna, even if it means fighting Matt. Christina fires her bigoted art gallery manager, Hilary St. George, who nosily intrudes and voices her sympathy for Christina's situation.\nJohn's parents, the Prentices, arrive and are shocked to discover that Joanna is white. The two mothers agree that this was an unexpected event but support their children. The two fathers meet, expressing disapproval at this unhappy occasion. The Monsignor advises John not to withdraw, despite Matt's objections. John and his father discuss their generational differences. John's mother tells Matt that he and her husband have forgotten what it was like to fall in love, and their failure to remember true romance has clouded their thinking. John chides Matt for not having the \"guts\" to tell him he disapproved of the marriage. Finally, Matt reveals his decision about the engagement to the entire group. He concludes that he does remember what true romance is. He says although the pair face enormous problems, they must find a way to overcome them, and he will approve the marriage, knowing all along he had no right to stop it. The families and the Monsignor then adjourn to the dining room for dinner.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInfluences.\nIt has been suggested that a pair of contemporary cases of interracial marriage influenced Rose when he was writing the film's script.\nPeggy Cripps, an aristocratic debutante whose father had been a British cabinet minister and whose grandfather had been leader of the House of Lords, married the African anti-colonialist Nana Joe Appiah. They established their home in Appiah's native Ghana, where he subsequently held office as a minister and ambassador.\nAt around the same time, Lloyd's underwriter Ruth Williams and her husband, African aristocrat Kgosi Seretse Khama, were engaged in a struggle of their own. Their union, which also occurred in the immediate aftermath of World War II, led to a storm of comment that snowballed into an international incident which saw them stripped of their chiefly titles in his homeland and exiled to Britain. They ultimately returned to Khama's native Botswana as its inaugural president and first lady.\nProduction.\nAccording to Kramer, he and Rose intentionally structured the film to debunk ethnic stereotypes. The young doctor, a typical role for the young Sidney Poitier, was created idealistically perfect, so that the only possible objections to his marrying Joanna would be his race, or the fact she had only known him for 10 days; the character has thus graduated from a top school, begun innovative medical initiatives in Africa, refused to have premarital sex with his fianc\u00e9e despite her willingness, and leaves money in an open container on his future father-in-law's desk in payment for a long-distance phone call he has made. Kramer and Rose completed the film script in five weeks.\nKramer stated later that the principal actors believed so strongly in the premise that they agreed to act in the project even before seeing the script. Production had been set for January 1967 and ended on May 24, 1967. At age 67, Tracy was in poor health with heart disease, diabetes, high-blood pressure, respiratory disease, and other ailments. Aware of Tracy's declining health, insurance companies refused to cover him for the period of filming. Kramer and Hepburn put their salaries in escrow so that if he should die during the production, filming could be completed with another actor. According to Kramer, \"You're never examined for insurance until a few weeks before a picture starts. [Even] with all his drinking and ailments, Tracy always qualified for insurance before, so nobody thought it would be a problem in this case. But it was. We couldn't get insurance for Spence. The situation looked desperate. So then we figured out a way of handling it. Kate and I put up our own salaries to compensate for the lack of an insurance company for Spence. And we were allowed to proceed.\"\nThe filming schedule was altered to accommodate Tracy's failing health. All of Tracy's scenes and shots were filmed between 9:00 am and noon of each day to give him adequate time to rest for the remainder of the day. For example, most of Tracy's dialogue scenes were filmed in such a way that during close-ups on other characters, a stand-in was substituted for him.\nTracy's failing health was more serious than most people working on the set were aware of. According to Poitier: \"The illness of Spencer dominated everything. I knew his health was very poor and many of the people who knew what the situation was didn't believe we'd finish the film, that is, that Tracy would be able to finish the film. Those of us who were close knew it was worse than they thought. Kate brought him to and from the set. She worked with him on his lines. She made sure with [Stanley] Kramer that his hours were right for what he could do, and what he couldn't do was different each day. There were days when he couldn't do anything. But also there were days when he was great, and I got the chance to know what it was like working with Tracy.\"\nA bust of Tracy sculpted by Hepburn herself was used as a prop, on the bookshelf behind the desk where Poitier makes his phone call.\nTracy died two weeks after he completed his work on the film.\nHepburn significantly helped cast her niece, Katharine Houghton, for the role of Joey Drayton. Concerning this, Hepburn stated: \"There was a lovely part for Kathy [Houghton], my niece [...] She would play Spencer's and my daughter. I loved that. She's beautiful and she definitely had a family resemblance. It was my idea.\"\nAccording to Hepburn, the role of Joey Drayton was one of Houghton's first major roles as a young actress. \"The part of my daughter,\" Kate said, \"was a difficult one. A young unknown actress needs more opportunity to win the sympathy of the audience. Otherwise, too much has to depend on her youth, innocence, and beauty. She had one good speech to win the audience, but it was cut. Instead she only talks with her father about the differences between the principles he taught her and the way he's behaving.\"\nPoitier frequently found himself starstruck, and as a result, a bit tongue-tied in the presence of Hepburn and Tracy, whom he considered to be \"giants\" as far as acting is concerned. However, Poitier reportedly found a way to overcome his nerves. \"When I went to play a scene with Tracy and Hepburn, I couldn't remember a word. Finally, Stanley Kramer said to me, 'What are we going to do?' I said, 'Stanley, send those two people home. I will play the scene against two empty chairs. I don't want them here because I can't handle that kind of company.' He sent them home. I played the scene in close-up against two empty chairs as the dialogue coach read Mr. Tracy's and Miss Hepburn's lines from off camera.\"\nAgainst the backdrop of racial tensions in the United States at the time of the film's production, Poitier felt he was \"under close observation\" by both Tracy and Hepburn during their first dinner meetings prior to production. However, he managed to swiftly win them over. Due to Tracy and Hepburn's close history with Kramer, Poitier later wrote that Hepburn and Tracy came to regard him with \"the kind of respect they had for Kramer, and they had to say to themselves (and I'm sure they did), this kid has to be pretty okay, because Stanley is nuts about working with him\".\nVariant versions.\nThe original version of the film contained a moment in which Tillie responds to the question \"Guess who's coming to dinner now?\" with the sarcastic one-liner: \"The Reverend Martin Luther King?\" After King's assassination on April 4, 1968, this line was removed from the film, so by August 1968, almost all theaters' showings of this film had this line omitted. As early as 1969, the line was restored to many but not all prints, and the line was preserved in the VHS and DVD versions of the film, as well.\nRelease.\n\"Guess Who's Coming to Dinner\" opened in New York City on December 11, 1967, followed by a wide release in the United States the following day. The film was released on VHS in October 1986 and on DVD on May 22, 2001, with a 40th-anniversary DVD release on February 12, 2008. It was released on Blu-ray on February 7, 2017, to commemorate the film's 50th anniversary.\nThe film was first shown on U.S. television on CBS on September 19, 1971, and was the highest-rated film broadcast that year with a rating of 26.8 and an audience share of 44%.\nReception.\nUpon the film's release, \"New York Times\" critic Bosley Crowther praised the performances and called the film \"a most delightfully acted and gracefully entertaining film, fashioned much in the manner of a stage drawing-room comedy.\" Crowther wrote that the questions raised by the film should be set aside as they \"will only tend to disturb the euphoria and likely enjoyment of this witty and glistening film.\" In the \"New York Daily News\", critic Wanda Hale gave the film a full four-star rating, and said it \"must be counted as an important contribution to motion pictures. With fearless directness Stanley Kramer takes a fresh and risky topic, inter-racial marriage, deals with it boldly and lets the criticisms fall where they may. At the Victoria and Beekman Theaters, the Columbia picture evidences Kramer's uncanny ability in selecting the right cast to portray the characters created by William Rose, to speak the author's penetrating lines as they should, naturally, humorously, bitterly and in the case of Spencer Tracy, simply and eloquently. Tracy, Katharine Hepburn and Katharine Houghton appear as the white people in this problem. Negroes are played by Sidney Poitier, Beah Richards, Isabel Sanford and Roy E. Glenn Sr. But withal, 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner' is the late great actor's picture and he dominates it with his vitality and the clarity and logic of his presentation.\" Writing in the \"Los Angeles Times\", film critic Charles Champlin lauded the film as \"a deeply moving film, guaranteed to leave no eye undamp.\" Clifford Terry, film critic of the \"Chicago Tribune\" at the time, wrote that the film \"examines a theme of the 1960s thru a style of the 1930s. The subject of interracial marriage was probed four years ago in 'One Potato, Two Potato,' but Producer-Director Stanley Kramer has reached back long before that for his modus operandi, coming up with the antiseptic slickness and unabashed sentiment [not necessarily a bad thing] in the generic tradition of the Frank Capra social comedy-drama.\" Roger Ebert, his rival at the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", gave the film a full four-star rating. He said \"yes, there are serious faults in Stanley Kramer's 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner,' but they are overcome by the virtues of this delightfully old-fashioned film. It would be easy to tear the plot to shreds and catch Kramer in the act of copping out. But why? On its own terms, this film is a joy to see, an evening of superb entertainment.\"\nMartin Knelman of the \"Toronto Daily Star\" said that \"Stanley Kramer has bucked the trend in at least one respect: Instead of choosing to have a title song written specially for \"Guess Who\u2019s Coming to Dinner\", the film that arrives today at the Carlton, he has selected an old, familiar song as his theme. Kramer himself told me the other day that he is not wildly enthusiastic about the song, but as far as I\u2019m concerned, it\u2019s a perfect touch. \"The Glory of Love\" (performed by nightclub singer Jacqueline Fontaine) richly echoes the naive sentimentalism of the pop culture of the 1940s and 1950s and though it\u2019s a thoroughly modern picture in some respects, \"Guess Who\u2019s Coming to Dinner\" is at heart a nostalgic throwback to that era.\" Joan Irwin of the \"Montreal Star\" called it \"a strong honest and remarkably sensitive film dealing with the problem of interracial marriage. Every prejudice and argument for and against such a marriage is examined with candor and often with humor, not in a general, preachy context, but as it relates to the two particular people in question. This is no harangue on the subject of indiscriminate brotherly love, nor yet a sentimental treatment of a very real problem. It is a fine film, full of strength and tenderness, played with great subtlety and wit by an entirely superb cast.\" Jacob Siskind of the rival \"Gazette\" newspaper called it \"one film that no one should miss. It is unashamedly, unabashedly sentimental; it is designed to tug at your heart strings; it quite obviously makes a play for the largest possible audience. But it does so honestly.\"\n\"Guess Who's Coming to Dinner\" was a box-office success in 1968 throughout the United States, including in Southern states where it was traditionally assumed that few white filmgoers would want to see any film with black leads. The success of this film challenged that assumption in film marketing. Despite this success, which included numerous film award nominations, Frank Rich of \"The New York Times\" wrote in November 2008 that the film was frequently labeled as dated among liberals. Another main point of contention was the fact that Poitier's character, the golden future son-in-law, had no flaws and a r\u00e9sum\u00e9 of good deeds. Many people felt that the dynamic between the Draytons and Poitier's character would have inevitably resulted in a happily-ever-after film ending because Poitier's character was so perfect, respectable, likable, and proper. Some people went as far as saying Prentice was \"too white\" not to be accepted by the Draytons. It was also criticized by some for these reasons at the time, with African-American actor Stepin Fetchit saying that the film \"did more to stop intermarriage than to help it.\" Kramer's intention of the film was to de-bunk stereotypes placed against people of color, but some scholars argue that it created new stereotypes in its portrayal.\nIn a 1986 review of the film by \"The New York Times\", Lawrence Van Gelder wrote: \"the suspicion arises that were the film made today its makers would come to grips a good deal more bluntly with the problems of intermarriage. Still, this remains a deft comedy and \u2013 most of all \u2013 a paean to the power of love.\" In his 1967 review of the film, Champlin wrote \"questions do arise\" about the treatment of intermarriage, which he observed was \"made palatable to the greatest number\" by creating a \"comfortably old-fashioned picture.\" Champlin pointed to the extraordinary stature of the Poitier character, and said that he was left with a \"nagging uneasiness that the problem has not really been confronted or solved, but only patronized.\"\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 71% based on 38 reviews, with an average rating of 6.6/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"More well-intentioned than insightful in its approach to interracial marriage, \"Guess Who's Coming to Dinner\" succeeds thanks to the fizzy chemistry of its star-studded ensemble.\" On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 63 out of 100 based on 13 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\nAccolades.\nAmerican Film Institute lists\nRemakes and adaptations.\nOn May 28, 1975, ABC aired a 30-minute pilot for a proposed comedy television series based on \"Guess Who's Coming to Dinner\", produced and directed by Stanley Kramer and starring Leslie Charleson and Bill Overton.\nIn 2003, comedian Daniele Luttazzi published the screenplay \"Tabu\", an almost verbatim parody of the film. In the variation, the engaged lovers are aged 40 (him) and 12 (her), and are brother and sister.\nEpisodes of \"The Golden Girls\" and \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\" featured plots similar to the film.\nThe 2005 film \"Guess Who\" starring Ashton Kutcher and Bernie Mac is a loose remake, styled as a comedy rather than a drama, with the racial roles reversed: Black parents are caught off-guard when their daughter brings home the young white man she has chosen to marry. Talking about the film, Bernie Mac told \"USA Today\" in 2003: \"Interracial dating is not that significant any more.\" Mac said of the script: \"They want to make it a comedy, but I won't disrespect Spencer, Katharine or Sidney.\"\nA British radio play titled \"That Summer of '67\", written by actress Tracy-Ann Oberman and based on the story of the film's production, was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 31 December 2020.\nA 2011 episode of the American sitcom \"Last Man Standing\" features a similar theme, although the couple is lesbian instead of mixed-race.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70648", "revid": "1313399540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70648", "title": "Henry I of Castile", "text": "King of Castile and Toledo from 1214 to 1217\nHenry I of Castile (in Spanish, \"Enrique I\", 14 April 1204 \u2013 6 June 1217) was King of Castile. He was the son of Alfonso VIII of Castile and Eleanor of England, Queen of Castile (daughter of Henry II of England and Eleanor of Aquitaine). He was the brother of Berenguela and Mafalda of Castile.\nIn 1211, Henry became heir to the throne when his older brother Ferdinand suddenly died.\nWhen his father died in 1214, Henry was just 10 years old, so the regency was assumed by Henry's older sister Berengaria of Castile, wife of Alfonso IX of Leon.\nIn 1215, Henry married Mafalda of Portugal, daughter of Sancho I of Portugal. As he was very young, the marriage was not consummated, and it was dissolved in 1216 by Pope Innocent III on grounds of consanguinity. In the same year, Henry became betrothed to his second cousin Sancha, heiress of Le\u00f3n.\nHenry died in Palencia in 1217 at the age of 13, killed by a tile coming off a roof. His sister Berengaria succeeded him, before renouncing the throne in favour of her son Ferdinand III. His body was buried at Las Huelgas monastery in Burgos.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70649", "revid": "48886350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70649", "title": "Hummingbird", "text": "Family of birds\nHummingbirds are birds native to the Americas and comprise the biological family Trochilidae. With approximately 375 species and 113 genera, they occur from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego, but most species are found in Central and South America. As of 2025, 21 hummingbird species are listed as endangered or critically endangered, with about 191 species declining in population.\nHummingbirds have varied specialized characteristics to enable rapid, maneuverable flight: exceptional metabolic capacity, adaptations to high altitude, sensitive visual and communication abilities, and long-distance migration in some species. Among all birds, male hummingbirds have the widest diversity of plumage color, particularly in blues, greens, and purples. Hummingbirds are the smallest mature birds, measuring in length. The smallest is the bee hummingbird, which weighs less than , and the largest is the giant hummingbird, weighing . Noted for long beaks, hummingbirds are specialized for feeding on flower nectar, but all species also consume small insects.\nHummingbirds are known by that name because of the humming sound created by their beating wings, which flap at high frequencies audible to other birds and humans. They hover at rapid wing-flapping rates, which vary from around 12 beats per second in the largest species to 99 per second in small hummingbirds.\nHummingbirds have the highest mass-specific metabolic rate of any homeothermic animal. To conserve energy when food is scarce and at night when not foraging, they can enter torpor, a state similar to hibernation, and slow their metabolic rate to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204415 of its normal rate. While most hummingbirds do not migrate, the rufous hummingbird has one of the longest migrations among birds, traveling twice per year between Alaska and Mexico, a distance of about .\nHummingbirds split from their sister group, the swifts and treeswifts, around 42 million years ago. The oldest known fossil hummingbird is \"Eurotrochilus\", from the Rupelian Stage of Early Oligocene Europe.\nDescription.\nHummingbirds are the smallest known and smallest living avian theropod dinosaurs. The iridescent colors and highly specialized feathers of many species (mainly in males) give some hummingbirds exotic common names, such as sun gem, fairy, woodstar, sapphire or sylph.\nMorphology.\nAcross the estimated 375 species, hummingbird weights range from as small as to as large as . They have characteristic long, narrow beaks (bills) which may be straight (of varying lengths) or highly curved. The bee hummingbird \u2013 only long and weighing about \u2013 is the world's smallest bird and smallest warm-blooded vertebrate. The giant hummingbird is the largest, having a mass of \u2013 approximately twice as heavy as the next largest hummingbird \u2013 with a wingspan of and body length of .\nHummingbirds have compact bodies with relatively long, bladelike wings having anatomical structure enabling helicopter-like flight in any direction, including the ability to hover. Particularly while hovering, the wing beats produce the humming sounds, which function to alert other birds. In some species, the tail feathers produce sounds used by males during courtship flying. One species of hummingbird \u2013 the little woodstar (\"Chaetocercus bombus\") \u2013 has a wing-beat frequency of 99 per second during hovering. Such extreme flight demands are supported by a high metabolic rate dependent on foraging for sugars from flower nectar.\nHummingbird legs are short with feet having three toes pointing forward and one backward \u2013 the hallux. The toes of hummingbirds are formed as claws with ridged inner surfaces to aid gripping onto flower stems or petals. Hummingbirds do not walk on the ground or hop like most birds, but rather shuffle laterally and use their feet to grip while perching, preening feathers, or nest-building (by females), and during fights to grab feathers of opponents.\nHummingbirds apply their legs as pistons for generating thrust upon taking flight, although the shortness of their legs provides about 20% less propulsion than assessed in other birds. During flight, hummingbird feet are tucked up under the body, enabling optimal aerodynamics and maneuverability.\nOf those species that have been measured during flight, the top flight speeds of hummingbirds exceed . During courtship, some male species dive from of height above a female at speeds around .\nThe sexes differ in feather coloration, with males having distinct brilliance and ornamentation of head, neck, wing, and breast feathers. The most typical feather ornament in males is the gorget \u2013 a bib-like iridescent neck-feather patch that changes brilliance with the viewing angle to attract females and warn male competitors away from territory.\nLife cycle.\nHummingbirds begin mating when they are a year old. Sex occurs over 3\u20135 seconds when the male joins its cloaca with the female's, passing sperm to fertilize the female's eggs.\nHummingbird females build a nest resembling a small cup about in diameter, commonly attached to a tree branch using spider webs, lichens, moss, and loose strings of plant fibers (image). Typically, two pea-sized white eggs (image) \u2013 the smallest of any bird \u2013 are incubated over 2\u20133 weeks in breeding season. Fed by regurgitation only from the mother, the chicks fledge about 3 weeks after hatching.\nThe average lifespan of a ruby-throated hummingbird is estimated to be 3\u20135 years, with most deaths occurring in yearlings, although one banded ruby-throated hummingbird lived for 9 years and 2 months. Bee hummingbirds live 7\u201310 years.\nPopulation estimates and threatened species.\nAlthough most hummingbird species live in remote habitats where their population numbers are difficult to assess, population studies in the United States and Canada indicate that the ruby-throated hummingbird numbers are around 34 million, rufous hummingbirds are around 19 million, black-chinned, Anna's, and broad-tailed hummingbirds are about 8 million each, calliopes at 4 million, and Costa's and Allen's hummingbirds are around 2 million each. Several species exist only in the thousands or hundreds.\nAccording to the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List of Threatened Species in 2025, 8 hummingbird species are classified as critically endangered, 13 are endangered, 13 are vulnerable, and 21 species are near-threatened. Two species \u2013 the Brace's emerald (\"Riccordia bracei\") and Caribbean emerald (\"Riccordia elegans\") \u2013 have been declared extinct.\nOf the 15 species of North American hummingbirds that inhabit the United States and Canada, several have changed their range of distribution, while others showed declines in numbers since the 1970s, including in 2023 with dozens of hummingbird species in decline. As of the 21st century, rufous, Costa's, calliope, broad-tailed, and Allen's hummingbirds are in significant decline, some losing as much as 67% of their numbers since 1970 at nearly double the rate of population loss over the previous 50 years. The ruby-throated hummingbird population \u2013 the most populous North American hummingbird \u2013 decreased by 17% over the early 21st century. Habitat loss, glass collisions, cat predation, pesticides, and possibly climate change affecting food availability, migration signals, and breeding are factors that may contribute to declining hummingbird numbers. By contrast, Anna's hummingbirds had large population growth at an accelerating rate since 2010, and expanded their range northward to reside year-round in cold winter climates.\nSuperficially similar species.\nSome species of sunbirds \u2014 an Old World group restricted in distribution to Eurasia, Africa, and Australia \u2014 resemble hummingbirds in appearance and behavior, but are not related to hummingbirds, as their resemblance is due to convergent evolution.\nThe hummingbird moth has flying and feeding characteristics similar to those of a hummingbird. Hummingbirds may be mistaken for hummingbird hawk-moths, which are large, flying insects with hovering capabilities, and exist only in Eurasia.\nRange.\nHummingbirds are restricted to the Americas from south central Alaska to Tierra del Fuego, including the Caribbean. The majority of species occur in tropical and subtropical Central and South America, but several species also breed in temperate climates and some hillstars occur even in alpine Andean highlands at altitudes up to .\nThe greatest species richness is in humid tropical and subtropical forests of the northern Andes and adjacent foothills, but the number of species found in the Atlantic Forest, Central America or southern Mexico also far exceeds the number found in southern South America, the Caribbean islands, the United States, and Canada. While fewer than 25 different species of hummingbirds have been recorded from the United States and fewer than 10 from Canada and Chile each, Colombia alone has more than 160 and the comparably small Ecuador has about 130 species.\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nThe family Trochilidae was introduced in 1825 by Irish zoologist Nicholas Aylward Vigors with \"Trochilus\" as the type genus. In traditional taxonomy, hummingbirds are placed in the order Apodiformes, which also contains the swifts, but some taxonomists have separated them into their own order, the Trochiliformes. \nHummingbird wing bones are hollow and fragile, making fossilization difficult and leaving their evolutionary history poorly documented. Though scientists theorize that hummingbirds originated in South America, where species diversity is greatest, possible ancestors of extant hummingbirds may have lived in parts of Europe and what is southern Russia today.\nAs of 2025, 375 hummingbird species have been identified. They have been traditionally divided into two subfamilies: the hermits (Phaethornithinae) and the typical hummingbirds (Trochilinae, including all the other species). Molecular phylogenetic studies have shown, though, that the hermits are sister to the topazes and jacobins, making the former definition of Trochilinae not monophyletic. The hummingbirds form nine major clades: the topazes and jacobins, the hermits, the mangoes, the coquettes, the brilliants, the giant hummingbird (\"Patagona gigas\"), the mountaingems, the bees, and the emeralds. The topazes and jacobins combined have the oldest split with the rest of the hummingbirds. The hummingbird family has the third-greatest number of species of any bird family (after the tyrant flycatchers and the tanagers).\nFossil hummingbirds are known from the Pleistocene of Brazil and the Bahamas, but neither has yet been scientifically described, and fossils and subfossils of a few extant species are known. Until recently, older fossils had not been securely identifiable as those of hummingbirds.\nIn 2004, Gerald Mayr identified two 30-million-year-old hummingbird fossils. The fossils of this primitive hummingbird species, named \"Eurotrochilus inexpectatus\" (\"unexpected European hummingbird\"), had been sitting in a museum drawer in Stuttgart; they had been unearthed in a clay pit at Wiesloch\u2013Frauenweiler, south of Heidelberg, Germany, and, because hummingbirds were assumed to have never occurred outside the Americas, were not recognized to be hummingbirds until Mayr took a closer look at them.\nFossils of birds not clearly assignable to either hummingbirds or a related extinct family, the Jungornithidae, have been found at the Messel pit and in the Caucasus, dating from 35 to 40 million years ago; this indicates that the split between these two lineages indeed occurred around that time. The areas where these early fossils have been found had a climate quite similar to that of the northern Caribbean or southernmost China during that time. The biggest remaining mystery at present is what happened to hummingbirds in the roughly 25 million years between the primitive \"Eurotrochilus\" and the modern fossils. The astounding morphological adaptations, the decrease in size, and the dispersal to the Americas and extinction in Eurasia all occurred during this timespan. DNA\u2013DNA hybridization results suggest that the main radiation of South American hummingbirds took place at least partly in the Miocene, some 12 to 13 million years ago, during the uplifting of the northern Andes.\nIn 2013, a 50-million-year-old bird fossil unearthed in Wyoming was found to be a predecessor to hummingbirds and swifts before the groups diverged.\nEvolution.\nHummingbirds split from other members of Apodiformes, the insectivorous swifts (family Apodidae) and treeswifts (family Hemiprocnidae), about 42 million years ago, probably in Eurasia. Despite their current New World distribution, the earliest species of hummingbird occurred in the early Oligocene (Rupelian about 34\u201328 million years ago) of Europe, belonging to the genus \"Eurotrochilus,\" having similar morphology to modern hummingbirds.\nPhylogeny.\nA phylogenetic tree unequivocally indicates that modern hummingbirds originated in South America, with the last common ancestor of all living hummingbirds living around 22 million years ago.\nA map of the hummingbird family tree \u2013 reconstructed from analysis of 284 species \u2013 shows rapid diversification from 22 million years ago. Molecular phylogenetic studies of the hummingbirds have shown that the family is composed of nine major clades. \u2013 the topazes, hermits, mangoes, brilliants, coquettes, the giant hummingbird, mountaingems, bees, and emeralds \u2013 defining their relationship to nectar-bearing flowering plants which attract hummingbirds into new geographic areas. When Edward Dickinson and James Van Remsen Jr. updated the \"Howard and Moore Complete Checklist of the Birds of the World\" for the 4th edition in 2013, they divided the hummingbirds into six subfamilies.\nMolecular phylogenetic studies determined the relationships between the major groups of hummingbirds. In the cladogram below, the English names are those introduced in 1997. The scientific names are those introduced in 2013.\nWhile all hummingbirds depend on flower nectar to fuel their high metabolisms and hovering flight, coordinated changes in flower and bill shape stimulated the formation of new species of hummingbirds and plants. Due to this exceptional evolutionary pattern, as many as 140 hummingbird species can coexist in a specific region, such as the Andes range.\nThe hummingbird evolutionary tree shows that one key evolutionary factor appears to have been an altered taste receptor that enabled hummingbirds to seek nectar.\nUpon maturity, males of a particular species, \"Phaethornis longirostris,\" the long-billed hermit, appear to be evolving a dagger-like weapon on the beak tip as a secondary sexual trait to defend mating areas.\nGeographic diversification.\nThe Andes Mountains appear to be a particularly rich environment for hummingbird evolution because diversification occurred simultaneously with mountain uplift over the past 10 million years. Hummingbirds remain in dynamic diversification inhabiting ecological regions across South America, North America, and the Caribbean, indicating an enlarging evolutionary radiation.\nWithin the same geographic region, hummingbird clades coevolved with nectar-bearing plant clades, affecting mechanisms of pollination. The same is true for the sword-billed hummingbird (\"Ensifera ensifera\"), one of the morphologically most extreme species, and one of its main food plant clades (\"Passiflora\" section \"Tacsonia\").\nCoevolution with ornithophilous flowers.\nThe 375 hummingbird species are specialized nectarivores coevolved with some 7,000 plant species and ornithophilous flowers. The first plant clade to coevolve with hummingbirds in the Americas is likely Heliconia, estimated to have occurred over 16 to 23 million years ago.\nThis coevolution implies that morphological traits of hummingbirds, such as bill length, bill curvature, and body mass, are correlated with morphological traits of plants, such as corolla length, curvature, and volume. Some species, especially those with unusual bill shapes, such as the sword-billed hummingbird and the sicklebills, are coevolved with a small number of flower species. \nEven in the most specialized hummingbird\u2013plant mutualisms, the number of food plant lineages of the individual hummingbird species increases with time. The bee hummingbird (\"Mellisuga helenae\") \u2013 the world's smallest bird \u2013 evolved to dwarfism likely because it had to compete with long-billed hummingbirds having an advantage for nectar foraging from specialized flowers, consequently leading the bee hummingbird to more successfully compete for flower foraging against insects.\nCoevolution \"syndrome\".\nHummingbirds and the plants they visit for nectar have a tight coevolutionary association, generally called a plant\u2013bird syndrome or mutualistic network. By collecting pollen on their beaks while foraging from flowers, hummingbirds contribute to flower species diversification and morphology adaptations \u2013 hummingbirds prefer bright red, yellow or purple flowers having no scent or landing platform, and with long corolla tubes containing copious nectar, characteristics unfavorable to insect pollinators.\nHummingbirds can see wavelengths into the near-ultraviolet, but hummingbird-pollinated flowers do not reflect these wavelengths as many insect-pollinated flowers do. This narrow color spectrum may render hummingbird-pollinated flowers relatively inconspicuous to most insects, thereby reducing nectar robbing. Hummingbird-pollinated flowers also produce relatively weak nectar (averaging 25% sugars) containing a high proportion of sucrose, whereas insect-pollinated flowers typically produce more concentrated nectars dominated by fructose and glucose.\nHummingbirds show high specialization and modularity, especially in communities with high species richness. These associations are also observed when closely related hummingbirds, such as two species of the same genus, visit distinct sets of flowering species.\nSexual dimorphisms.\nHummingbirds exhibit sexual size dimorphism according to Rensch's rule, in which males are smaller than females in small-bodied species, and males are larger than females in large-bodied species. The extent of this sexual size difference varies among clades of hummingbirds. For example, the Mellisugini clade (bees) exhibits a large size dimorphism, with females being larger than males. Conversely, the Lesbiini clade (coquettes) displays very little size dimorphism; males and females are similar in size. Sexual dimorphisms in bill size and shape are also present between male and female hummingbirds, where in many clades, females have longer, more curved bills favored for accessing nectar from tall flowers. For males and females of the same size, females tend to have larger bills.\nSexual size and bill differences likely evolved due to constraints imposed by courtship, because mating displays of male hummingbirds require complex aerial maneuvers. Males tend to be smaller than females, allowing conservation of energy to forage competitively and participate more frequently in courtship. Thus, sexual selection favors smaller male hummingbirds.\nFemale hummingbirds tend to be larger, requiring more energy, with longer beaks that allow for more effective reach into crevices of tall flowers for nectar. Thus, females are better at foraging, acquiring flower nectar, and supporting the energy demands of their larger body size. Directional selection thus favors the larger hummingbirds in terms of acquiring food.\nAnother evolutionary cause of this sexual bill dimorphism is that the selective forces from competition for nectar between the sexes of each species drives sexual dimorphism. Depending on which sex holds territory in the species, the other sex having a longer bill and being able to feed on a wide variety of flowers is advantageous, decreasing intraspecific competition. For example, in species of hummingbirds where males have longer bills, males do not hold a specific territory and have a lek mating system. In species where males have shorter bills than females, males defend their resources, so females benefit from a longer bill to feed from a broader range of flowers.\nFeather colors.\nThe hummingbird plumage coloration gamut, particularly for blue, green, and purple colors in the gorget and crown of males, occupies 34% of the total color space for bird feathers. White (unpigmented) feathers have the lowest incidence in the hummingbird color gamut. Hummingbird plumage color diversity evolved from sexual and social selection on plumage coloration, which correlates with the rate of hummingbird species development over millions of years. Bright plumage colors in males are part of aggressive competition for flower resources and mating. The bright colors result from pigmentation in the feathers and from prismal cells within the top layers of feathers of the head, gorget, breast, back and wings. When sunlight hits these cells, it is split into wavelengths that reflect to the observer in varying degrees of intensity, with the feather structure acting as a diffraction grating. Iridescent hummingbird colors result from a combination of refraction and pigmentation, since the diffraction structures themselves are made of melanin, a pigment, and may also be colored by carotenoid pigmentation and more subdued black, brown or gray colors dependent on melanin.\nBy merely shifting position, feather regions of a muted-looking bird can instantly become fiery red or vivid green. In courtship displays for one example, males of the colorful Anna's hummingbird orient their bodies and feathers toward the sun to enhance the display value of iridescent plumage toward a female of interest.\nOne study of Anna's hummingbirds found that dietary protein was an influential factor in feather color, as birds receiving more protein grew significantly more colorful crown feathers than those fed a low-protein diet. Additionally, birds on a high-protein diet grew yellower (higher hue) green tail feathers than birds on a low-protein diet.\nSpecialized characteristics and metabolism.\nHumming.\nHummingbirds are named for the prominent humming sound their wingbeats make while flying and hovering to feed or interact with other hummingbirds. Humming serves communication purposes by alerting other birds of the arrival of a fellow forager or potential mate. The humming sound derives from aerodynamic forces generated by the downstrokes and upstrokes of the rapid wingbeats, causing oscillations and harmonics that evoke an acoustic quality likened to that of a musical instrument. The humming sound of hummingbirds is unique among flying animals, compared to the whine of mosquitoes, buzz of bees, and \"whoosh\" of larger birds.\nThe wingbeats causing the hum of hummingbirds during hovering are achieved by elastic recoil of wing strokes produced by the main flight muscles: the pectoralis major (the main downstroke muscle) and supracoracoideus (the main upstroke muscle).\nVision.\nAlthough hummingbird eyes are small in diameter (5\u20136\u00a0mm), they are accommodated in the skull by reduced skull ossification, and occupy a larger proportion of the skull compared to other birds and animals.\nFurther, hummingbird eyes have large corneas, which comprise about 50% of the total transverse eye diameter, combined with an extraordinary density of retinal ganglion cells responsible for visual processing, containing some 45,000 neurons per mm2. The enlarged cornea relative to total eye diameter serves to increase the amount of light perception by the eye when the pupil is dilated maximally, enabling nocturnal flight.\nDuring evolution, hummingbirds adapted to the navigational needs of visual processing while in rapid flight or hovering by development of the exceptionally dense array of retinal neurons, allowing for increased spatial resolution in the lateral and frontal visual fields. Morphological studies of the hummingbird brain showed that neuronal hypertrophy \u2013 relatively the largest in any bird \u2013 exists in a region called the \"pretectal nucleus lentiformis mesencephali\" (called the \"nucleus of the optic tract\" in mammals) responsible for refining dynamic visual processing while hovering and during rapid flight.\nThe enlargement of the brain region responsible for visual processing indicates an enhanced ability for perception and processing of fast-moving visual stimuli encountered during rapid forward flight, insect foraging, competitive interactions, and high-speed courtship. A study of broad-tailed hummingbirds indicated that hummingbirds have a fourth color-sensitive visual cone (humans have three) that detects ultraviolet light and enables discrimination of non-spectral colors, possibly having a role in flower identity, courtship displays, territorial defense, and predator evasion. The fourth color cone would extend the range of visible colors for hummingbirds to perceive ultraviolet light and color combinations of feathers and gorgets, colorful plants, and other objects in their environment, enabling detection of as many as five non-spectral colors, including purple, ultraviolet-red, ultraviolet-green, ultraviolet-yellow, and ultraviolet-purple.\nHummingbirds are highly sensitive to stimuli in their visual fields, responding to even minimal motion in any direction by reorienting themselves in midflight. Their visual sensitivity allows them to precisely hover in place while in complex and dynamic natural environments, functions enabled by the lentiform nucleus which is tuned to fast-pattern velocities, enabling highly tuned control and collision avoidance during forward flight.\nSong, vocal learning, and hearing.\nMany hummingbird species exhibit a diverse vocal repertoire of chirps, squeaks, whistles and buzzes. Vocalizations vary in complexity and spectral content during social interactions, foraging, territorial defense, courtship, and mother-nestling communication. Territorial vocal signals may be produced in rapid succession to discourage aggressive encounters, with the chirping rate and loudness increasing when intruders persist. During the breeding season, male and female hummingbirds vocalize as part of courtship.\nHummingbirds exhibit vocal production learning to enable song variation \u2013 \"dialects\" that exist across the same species. For example, the blue-throated hummingbird's song differs from typical oscine songs in its wide frequency range, extending from 1.8\u00a0kHz to about 30\u00a0kHz. It also produces ultrasonic vocalizations which do not function in communication. As blue-throated hummingbirds often alternate singing with catching small flying insects, it is possible the ultrasonic clicks produced during singing disrupt insect flight patterns, making insects more vulnerable to predation. Anna's, Costa's, long-billed hermits, and Andean hummingbirds have song dialects that vary across habitat locations and phylogenetic clades.\nThe avian vocal organ, the syrinx, plays an important role in understanding hummingbird song production. What makes the hummingbird's syrinx different from that of other birds in the Apodiformes order is the presence of internal muscle structure, accessory cartilages, and a large tympanum that serves as an attachment point for external muscles, all of which are adaptations thought to be responsible for the hummingbird's increased ability in pitch control and large frequency range.\nHummingbird songs originate from at least seven specialized nuclei in the forebrain. A genetic expression study showed that these nuclei enable vocal learning (ability to acquire vocalizations through imitation), a rare trait known to occur in only two other groups of birds (parrots and songbirds) and a few groups of mammals (including humans, whales and dolphins, and bats). Within the past 66 million years, only hummingbirds, parrots, and songbirds out of 23 bird orders may have independently evolved seven similar forebrain structures for singing and vocal learning, indicating that evolution of these structures is under strong epigenetic constraints possibly derived from a common ancestor.\nGenerally, birds have been assessed to vocalize and hear in the range of 2\u20135\u00a0kHz, with hearing sensitivity falling with higher frequencies. In the Ecuadorian hillstar (\"Oreotrochilus chimborazo\"), vocalizations were recorded in the wild to be at a frequency above 10\u00a0kHz, well outside of the known hearing ability of most birds. Song system nuclei in the hummingbird brain are similar to those songbird brains, but the hummingbird brain has specialized regions involved for song processing.\nMetabolism.\nHummingbirds have the highest metabolism of all vertebrate animals \u2013 a necessity to support the rapid beating of their wings during hovering and fast forward flight. During flight and hovering, oxygen consumption per gram of muscle tissue in a hummingbird is about 10 times higher than that measured in elite human athletes. Hummingbirds achieve this extraordinary capacity for oxygen consumption by an exceptional density and proximity of capillaries and mitochondria in their flight muscles.\nHummingbirds are rare among vertebrates in their ability to rapidly make use of ingested sugars to fuel energetically expensive hovering flight, powering up to 100% of their metabolic needs with the sugars they drink. Hummingbird flight muscles have extremely high capacities for oxidizing carbohydrates and fatty acids via hexokinase, carnitine palmitoyltransferase, and citrate synthase enzymes at rates that are the highest known for vertebrate skeletal muscle. To sustain rapid wingbeats during flight and hovering, hummingbirds expend the human equivalent of 150,000 calories per day, an amount estimated to be 10 times the energy consumption by a marathon runner in competition.\nHummingbirds can use newly ingested sugars to fuel hovering flight within 30\u201345 minutes of consumption. These data suggest that hummingbirds are able to oxidize sugar in flight muscles at rates rapid enough to satisfy their extreme metabolic demands \u2013 as indicated by a 2017 review showing that hummingbirds have in their flight muscles a mechanism for \"direct oxidation\" of sugars into maximal ATP yield to support a high metabolic rate for hovering, foraging at altitude, and migrating. This adaptation occurred through the evolutionary loss of a key gene, fructose-bisphosphatase 2 (\"FBP2\"), coinciding with the onset of hovering by hummingbirds estimated by fossil evidence to be some 35 million years ago. Without \"FBP2\", glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration in flight muscles are enhanced, enabling hummingbirds to metabolize sugar more efficiently for energy.\nBy relying on newly ingested sugars to fuel flight, hummingbirds reserve their limited fat stores to sustain their overnight fasting during torpor or to power migratory flights. Studies of hummingbird metabolism address how a migrating ruby-throated hummingbird can cross of the Gulf of Mexico on a nonstop flight. This hummingbird, like other long-distance migrating birds, stores fat as a fuel reserve, augmenting its weight by as much as 100%, then enabling metabolic fuel for flying over open water. The amount of fat (1\u20132 g) used by a migrating hummingbird to cross the Gulf of Mexico in a single flight is similar to that used by a human climbing about .\nThe heart rate of hummingbirds can reach as high as 1,260 beats per minute, a rate measured in a blue-throated hummingbird with a breathing rate of 250 breaths per minute at rest.\nHeat dissipation.\nThe high metabolic rate of hummingbirds \u2013 especially during rapid forward flight and hovering \u2013 produces increased body heat that requires specialized mechanisms of thermoregulation for heat dissipation, which becomes an even greater challenge in hot, humid climates. Hummingbirds dissipate heat partially by evaporation through exhaled air, and from body structures with thin or no feather covering, such as around the eyes, shoulders, under the wings (patagia), and feet.\nWhile hovering, hummingbirds do not benefit from the heat loss by air convection during forward flight, except for air movement generated by their rapid wing-beat, possibly aiding convective heat loss from the extended feet. Smaller hummingbird species, such as the calliope, appear to adapt their relatively higher surface-to-volume ratio to improve convective cooling from air movement by the wings. When air temperatures rise above , thermal gradients driving heat passively by convective dissipation from around the eyes, shoulders, and feet are reduced or eliminated, requiring heat dissipation mainly by evaporation and exhalation. In cold climates, hummingbirds retract their feet into breast feathers to eliminate skin exposure and minimize heat dissipation.\nKidney function.\nThe dynamic range of metabolic rates in hummingbirds requires a parallel dynamic range in kidney function. During a day of nectar consumption with a corresponding high water intake that may total five times the body weight per day, hummingbird kidneys process water via glomerular filtration rates (GFR) in amounts proportional to water consumption, thereby avoiding overhydration. During brief periods of water deprivation, however, such as in nighttime torpor, GFR drops to zero, preserving body water.\nHummingbird kidneys also have a unique ability to control the levels of electrolytes after consuming nectars with high amounts of sodium and chloride or none, indicating that kidney and glomerular structures must be highly specialized for variations in nectar mineral quality. Morphological studies on Anna's hummingbird kidneys showed adaptations of high capillary density in close proximity to nephrons, allowing for precise regulation of water and electrolytes.\nHemoglobin adaptation to altitude.\nDozens of hummingbird species live year-round in tropical mountain habitats at high altitudes, such as in the Andes over ranges of to where the partial pressure of oxygen in the air is reduced, a condition of hypoxic challenge for the high metabolic demands of hummingbirds. In Andean hummingbirds living at high elevations, researchers found that the oxygen-carrying protein in blood \u2013 hemoglobin \u2013 had increased oxygen-binding affinity, and that this adaptive effect likely resulted from evolutionary mutations within the hemoglobin molecule via specific amino acid changes due to natural selection.\nAdaptation to winter.\nAnna's hummingbirds are the northernmost year-round residents of any hummingbird. Anna's hummingbirds were recorded in Alaska as early as 1971, and resident in the Pacific Northwest since the 1960s, particularly increasing as a year-round population during the early 21st century. Scientists estimate that some Anna's hummingbirds overwinter and presumably breed at northern latitudes where food and shelter are available throughout winter, tolerating moderately cold winter temperatures.\nDuring cold temperatures, Anna's hummingbirds gradually gain weight during the day as they convert sugar to fat. In addition, hummingbirds with inadequate stores of body fat or insufficient plumage are able to survive periods of subfreezing weather by lowering their metabolic rate and entering a state of torpor.\nWhile their range was originally limited to the chaparral of California and Baja California, it expanded northward to Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, and east to Arizona over the 1960s to 1970s. This rapid expansion is attributed to the widespread planting of non-native species, such as eucalyptus, as well as the use of urban bird feeders, in combination with the species' natural tendency for extensive postbreeding dispersal. In the Pacific Northwest, the fastest growing populations occur in regions with breeding-season cold temperatures similar to those of its native range. Northward expansion of the Anna's hummingbird represents an ecological release associated with introduced plants, year-round nectar availability from feeders supplied by humans, milder winter temperatures associated with climate change, and acclimation of the species to a winter climate cooler than its native region. Although quantitative data are absent, it is likely that a sizable percentage of Anna's hummingbirds in the Pacific Northwest still do migrate south for winter, as of 2017.\nAnna's hummingbird is the official city bird of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, and is a non-migrating resident of Seattle where it lives year-round through winter enduring extended periods of subfreezing temperatures, snow, and high winds.\nTorpor.\nThe metabolism of hummingbirds can slow at night or at any time when food is not readily available; the birds enter a deep-sleep state (known as torpor) to prevent energy reserves from falling to a critical level. One study of broad-tailed hummingbirds found that body weight decreased linearly throughout torpor at a rate of 0.04 g per hour.\nDuring nighttime torpor, body temperature in a Caribbean hummingbird was shown to fall from 40 to 18\u00a0\u00b0C, with heart and breathing rates slowing dramatically (heart rate of roughly 50 to 180 bpm from its daytime rate of higher than 1000 bpm). Recordings from a \"Metallura phoebe\" hummingbird in noctural torpor at around in the Andes mountains showed that body temperature fell to 3.3\u00a0\u00b0C (38\u00a0\u00b0F), the lowest known level for a bird or non-hibernating mammal. During cold nights at altitude, hummingbirds were in torpor for 2\u201313 hours depending on species, with cooling occurring at the rate of 0.6\u00a0\u00b0C per minute and rewarming at 1\u20131.5\u00a0\u00b0C per minute. High-altitude Andean hummingbirds also lost body weight in negative proportion to how long the birds were in torpor, losing about 6% of weight each night.\nDuring torpor, to prevent dehydration, the kidney function declines, preserving needed compounds, such as glucose, water, and nutrients. The circulating hormone, corticosterone, is one signal that arouses a hummingbird from torpor.\nUse and duration of torpor vary among hummingbird species and are affected by whether a dominant bird defends territory, with nonterritorial subordinate birds having longer periods of torpor. A hummingbird with a higher fat percentage will be less likely to enter a state of torpor compared to one with less fat, as a bird can use the energy from its fat stores. Torpor in hummingbirds appears to be unrelated to nighttime temperature, as it occurs across a wide temperature range, with energy savings of such deep sleep being more related to the photoperiod and duration of torpor.\nLifespan.\nHummingbirds have unusually long lifespans for organisms with such rapid metabolisms. Though many die during their first year of life, especially in the vulnerable period between hatching and fledging, those that survive may occasionally live a decade or more. Among the better-known North American species, the typical lifespan is probably 3 to 5 years. For comparison, the smaller shrews, among the smallest of all mammals, seldom live longer than 2 years. The longest recorded lifespan in the wild relates to a female broad-tailed hummingbird that was banded as an adult at least one year old, then recaptured 11 years later, making her at least 12 years old. Other longevity records for banded hummingbirds include an estimated minimum age of 10 years 1 month for a female black-chinned hummingbird similar in size to the broad-tailed hummingbird, and at least 11 years 2 months for a much larger buff-bellied hummingbird.\nNatural enemies.\nPredators.\nPraying mantises have been observed as predators of hummingbirds. Other predators include domestic cats, dragonflies, frogs, orb-weaver spiders, and other birds, such as the roadrunner.\nParasites.\nHummingbirds host a highly specialized lice fauna. Two genera of Ricinid lice, Trochiloecetes and Trochiliphagus, are specialized on them, often infesting 5\u201315% of their populations. In contrast, two genera of Menoponid lice, Myrsidea and Leremenopon, are extremely rare on them.\nReproduction.\nMale hummingbirds do not take part in nesting. Most species build a cup-shaped nest on the branch of a tree or shrub. The nest varies in size relative to the particular species\u00a0\u2013 from smaller than half a walnut shell to several centimeters in diameter.\nMany hummingbird species use spider silk and lichen to bind the nest material together and secure the structure. The unique properties of the silk allow the nest to expand as the young hummingbirds grow. Two white eggs are laid, which despite being the smallest of all bird eggs, are large relative to the adult hummingbird's size. Incubation lasts 14 to 23 days, depending on the species, ambient temperature, and female attentiveness to the nest. The mother feeds her nestlings on small arthropods and nectar by inserting her bill into the open mouth of a nestling, and then regurgitating the food into its crop. Hummingbirds stay in the nest for 18\u201322 days, after which they leave the nest to forage on their own, although the mother bird may continue feeding them for another 25 days.\nFlight.\nHummingbird flight has been studied intensively from an aerodynamic perspective using wind tunnels and high-speed video cameras. Two studies of rufous or Anna's hummingbirds in a wind tunnel used particle image velocimetry techniques to investigate the lift generated on the bird's upstroke and downstroke. The birds produced 75% of their weight support during the downstroke and 25% during the upstroke, with the wings making a \"figure 8\" motion.\nMany earlier studies had assumed that lift was generated equally during the two phases of the wingbeat cycle, as is the case of insects of a similar size. This finding shows that hummingbird hovering is similar to, but distinct from, that of hovering insects such as the hawk moth. Further studies using electromyography in hovering rufous hummingbirds showed that muscle strain in the pectoralis major (principal downstroke muscle) was the lowest yet recorded in a flying bird, and the primary upstroke muscle (supracoracoideus) is proportionately larger than in other bird species. Presumably due to rapid wingbeats for flight and hovering, hummingbird wings have adapted to perform without an alula.\nThe giant hummingbird's wings beat as few as 12 times per second, and the wings of typical hummingbirds beat up to 80 times per second. As air density decreases, for example, at higher altitudes, the amount of power a hummingbird must use to hover increases. Hummingbird species adapted for life at higher altitudes, therefore, have larger wings to help offset these negative effects of low air density on lift generation.\nA slow-motion video has shown how the hummingbirds deal with rain when they are flying. To remove the water from their heads, they shake their heads and bodies, similar to a dog shaking, to shed water. Further, when raindrops collectively may weigh as much as 38% of the bird's body weight, hummingbirds shift their bodies and tails horizontally, beat their wings faster, and reduce their wings' angle of motion when flying in heavy rain.\nWingbeats and flight stability.\nThe highest recorded wingbeat rate for hummingbirds during hovering is 99.1 per second, as measured for male woodstars (\"Chaetocercus\" sp.). Males in the genus \"Chaetocercus\" have been recorded above 100 beats per second during courtship displays. The number of beats per second increases above \"normal\" hovering while flying during courtship displays (up to 90 per second for the calliope hummingbird, \"Selasphorus calliope\"); a wingbeat rate 40% higher than its typical hovering rate.\nDuring turbulent airflow conditions created experimentally in a wind tunnel, hummingbirds exhibit stable head positions and orientation when they hover at a feeder. When wind gusts from the side, hummingbirds compensate by increasing wing-stroke amplitude and stroke plane angle and by varying these parameters asymmetrically between the wings and from one stroke to the next. They also vary the orientation and enlarge the collective surface area of their tail feathers into the shape of a fan. While hovering, the visual system of a hummingbird is able to separate apparent motion caused by the movement of the hummingbird itself from motions caused by external sources, such as an approaching predator. In natural settings full of highly complex background motion, hummingbirds are able to precisely hover in place by rapid coordination of vision with body position.\nFeather sounds.\nCourtship dives.\nWhen courting, the male Anna's hummingbird ascends some above a female, before diving at a speed of , equal to 385 body lengths/sec \u2013 producing a high-pitched sound near the female at the nadir of the dive. This downward acceleration during a dive is the highest reported for any vertebrate undergoing a voluntary aerial maneuver; in addition to acceleration, the speed relative to body length is the highest known for any vertebrate. For instance, it is about twice the diving speed of peregrine falcons in pursuit of prey. At maximum descent speed, about 10\u00a0g of gravitational force occur in the courting hummingbird during a dive (Note: G-force is generated as the bird pulls out of the dive).\nThe outer tail feathers of male Anna's (\"Calypte anna\") and \"Selasphorus\" hummingbirds (e.g., Allen's, calliope) vibrate during courtship display dives and produce an audible chirp caused by aeroelastic flutter. Hummingbirds cannot make the courtship dive sound when missing their outer tail feathers, and those same feathers could produce the dive sound in a wind tunnel. The bird can sing at the same frequency as the tail-feather chirp, but its small syrinx is not capable of the same volume. The sound is caused by the aerodynamics of rapid air flow past tail feathers, causing them to flutter in a vibration, which produces the high-pitched sound of a courtship dive.\nMany other species of hummingbirds also produce sounds with their wings or tails while flying, hovering, or diving, including the wings of the calliope hummingbird, broad-tailed hummingbird, rufous hummingbird, Allen's hummingbird, and the streamertail species, as well as the tail of the Costa's hummingbird and the black-chinned hummingbird, and a number of related species. The harmonics of sounds during courtship dives vary across species of hummingbirds.\nWing feather trill.\nMale rufous and broad-tailed hummingbirds (genus \"Selasphorus\") have a distinctive wing feature during normal flight that sounds like jingling or a buzzing shrill whistle \u2013 a trill. The trill arises from air rushing through slots created by the tapered tips of the ninth and tenth primary wing feathers, creating a sound loud enough to be detected by female or competitive male hummingbirds and researchers up to 100\u00a0m away.\nBehaviorally, the trill serves several purposes: It announces the sex and presence of a male bird; it provides audible aggressive defense of a feeding territory and an intrusion tactic; it enhances communication of a threat; and it favors mate attraction and courtship.\nMigration.\nRelatively few hummingbirds migrate as a percentage of the total number of species; of the roughly 375 known hummingbird species, only 12\u201315 species migrate annually, particularly those in North America. Most hummingbirds live in the Amazonia-Central America tropical rainforest belt, where seasonal temperature changes and food sources are relatively constant, obviating the need to migrate. As the smallest living birds, hummingbirds are relatively limited at conserving heat energy, and are generally unable to maintain a presence in higher latitudes during winter months, unless the specific location has a large food supply throughout the year, particularly access to flower nectar. Other migration factors are seasonal fluctuation of food, climate, competition for resources, predators, and inherent signals.\nSouth America.\nThe two species of giant hummingbird \u2013 the southern giant hummingbird (\"Patagona gigas\", Gray, 1840), and northern giant hummingbird (\"Patagonia peruviana\", Boucard, 1893) \u2013 have diverged into migrants undergoing adaptation from sea level to extreme mountain elevations, and others residing at exceptional elevations ( in Peru), possibly representing a new species, \"Patagona chaski\" sp. nov. (named in 2024). The range of the southern species crosses the Central Andean Plateau, moving from sea level up to altitude in the Andes. Tracked by satellite transmitters and geolocators, their seasonal migration courses in a loop over of total distance traveled between Chile and Ecuador. In 1834, Charles Darwin recorded their arrival in spring from the \"parched deserts of the north\", apparently referring to the Atacama Desert of northern Chile.\nNorth America.\nMost North American hummingbirds migrate southward in fall to spend winter in Mexico, the Caribbean Islands, or Central America. A few species are year-round residents of Florida, California, and the southwestern desert regions of the US. Among these are Anna's hummingbird, a common resident from southern Arizona and inland California, and the buff-bellied hummingbird, a winter resident from Florida across the Gulf Coast to South Texas. Ruby-throated hummingbirds are common along the Atlantic flyway, and migrate in summer from as far north as Atlantic Canada, returning to Mexico, South America, southern Texas, and Florida to winter. During winter in southern Louisiana, black-chinned, buff-bellied, calliope, Allen's, Anna's, ruby-throated, rufous, broad-tailed, and broad-billed hummingbirds are present.\nThe rufous hummingbird breeds farther north than any other species of hummingbird, spending summers along coastal British Columbia and Alaska, and wintering in the southwestern United States and Mexico, with some distributed along the coasts of the subtropical Gulf of Mexico and Florida. By migrating in spring as far north as the Yukon or southern Alaska, the rufous hummingbird migrates more extensively and nests farther north than any other hummingbird species, and must tolerate occasional temperatures below freezing in its breeding territory. This cold hardiness enables it to survive temperatures below freezing, provided that adequate shelter and food are available.\nAs calculated by displacement of body size, the rufous hummingbird makes perhaps the longest migratory journey of any bird in the world. At just over long, rufous hummingbirds travel one-way from Alaska to Mexico in late summer, a distance equal to 78,470,000 body lengths, then make the return journey in the following spring. By comparison, the -long Arctic tern makes a one-way flight of about , or 51,430,000 body lengths, just 65% of the body displacement during migration by rufous hummingbirds.\nThe northward migration of rufous hummingbirds occurs along the Pacific flyway, and may be time-coordinated with flower and tree-leaf emergence in early spring, and also with availability of insects as food. Arrival at breeding grounds before nectar availability from mature flowers may jeopardize breeding opportunities.\nFeeding.\nAll hummingbirds are overwhelmingly nectarivorous, being by far the most specialized such feeders among birds, as well as the only birds for whom nectar typically comprises the vast majority of energy intake. Hummingbirds exhibit numerous and extensive adaptations to nectarivory, including long, probing bills and tongues which rapidly take up fluids. Hummingbirds also possess the most sophisticated flight of all birds \u2013 hovering, a necessity for rapidly visiting many flowers without perching. Their intestines are capable of extracting over 99% of the glucose from nectar feedings within minutes, owing to high densities of glucose transporters (the highest known among vertebrates).\nAs among the most important vertebrate pollinators, hummingbirds have coevolved in complex ways with flowering plants; thousands of New World species have evolved to be pollinated exclusively by hummingbirds, even barring access to insect pollinators. In some plants these mechanisms, which include highly modified corollas, even render their nectaries inaccessible to all but certain hummingbirds, i.e., those possessing appropriate beak morphologies (although some hummingbirds rob nectar to overcome this). Bird-pollinated plants (also termed \"ornithophilous\") were formerly thought to exemplify very close mutualisms, with specific flowering plants coevolving alongside specific hummingbirds in mutualistic pairings. Both ornithophilous plants and hummingbirds are now known to not be nearly selective enough for this to be true. Less accessible ornithophiles (for example, those requiring long bills) still rely on multiple hummingbird species for pollination. More importantly, hummingbirds tend not to be especially selective nectar-feeders, even regularly visiting non-ornithophilous plants, as well as ornithophiles which appear poorly suited for feeding by their species. Feeding efficiency is optimized, however, when birds feed on flowers better suited to their bill morphologies.\nAlthough they may not be one-to-one, there are still marked overall preferences for certain genera, families, and orders of flowering plants by hummingbirds in general, as well as by certain species of hummingbird. Flowers which are attractive to hummingbirds are often colorful (particularly red), open diurnally, and produce nectar with a high sucrose content; in ornithophilous plants, the corollas are often elongated and tubular, and they may be scentless (several of these are adaptations discouraging insect visitation). Some common genera consumed by many species include \"Castilleja\", \"Centropogon\", \"Costus\", \"Delphinium\", \"Heliconia\", \"Hibiscus\", \"Inga\", and \"Mimulus\"; some of these are primarily insect-pollinated. Three Californian species were found to feed from 62 plant families in 30 orders, with the most frequently occurring orders being Apiales, Fabales, Lamiales, and Rosales. A hummingbird may have to visit one or two thousand flowers daily to meet energy demands.\nAlthough a high-quality source of energy, nectar is deficient in many macro- and micronutrients; it tends to be low in lipids, and although it may contain trace quantities of amino acids, some essential acids are severely or entirely lacking. Though hummingbird protein requirements appear to be quite small, at 1.5% of the diet, nectar is still an inadequate source; most if not all hummingbirds therefore supplement their diet with the consumption of invertebrates. Insectivory is not thought to be calorically important; nonetheless, regular consumption of arthropods is considered crucial for birds to thrive. In fact, it has been suggested that the majority of non-caloric nutritional needs of hummingbirds are met by insectivory, but nectars do contain appreciable quantities of certain vitamins and minerals. (Here, \"insectivory\" refers to the consumption of any arthropod, not exclusively insects).\nThough not as insectivorous as once believed, and far less so than most of their relatives and ancestors among the Strisores (e.g., swifts), insectivory is probably of regular importance to most hummingbirds. About 95% of individuals from 140 species in one study showed evidence of arthropod consumption, while another study found arthropod remains in 79% of over 1600 birds from sites across South and Central America. Some species have even been recorded to be largely or entirely insectivorous for periods of time, particularly when nectar sources are scarce, and possibly, for some species, with seasonal regularity in areas with a wet season. Observations of seasonal, near-exclusive insectivory have been made for blue-throated hummingbirds, as well as swallow-tailed hummingbirds in an urban park in Brazil. In Arizona, when nearby nectar sources were seemingly absent, a nesting female broad-tailed hummingbird was recorded feeding only on arthropods for two weeks. Other studies report 70\u2013100% of feeding time devoted to arthropods; these accounts suggest a degree of adaptability, particularly when appropriate nectar sources are unavailable, although nectarivory always predominates when flowers are abundant (e.g., in non-seasonal tropical habitats). In addition, the aforementioned Arizona study only surveyed a small portion of the study area, and mostly did not observe the bird while she was off the nest. Similar concerns have been raised for other reports, leading to skepticism over whether hummingbirds can in fact subsist without nectar for extended periods at all.\nHummingbirds exhibit various feeding strategies and some morphological adaptations for insectivory. Typically, they hawk for small flying insects, but also glean spiders from their webs. Bill shape may play a role, as hummingbirds with longer or more curved bills may be unable to hawk efficiently, and so rely more heavily on gleaning spiders. Regardless of bill shape, spiders are a common prey item; other very common prey items include flies, especially those of the family Chironomidae, as well as various Hymenopterans (such as wasps and ants) and Hemipterans. The aforementioned California study found three species to consume invertebrates from 72 families in 15 orders, with flies alone occurring in over 90% of samples; the three species exhibited high dietary overlap, with little evidence for niche partitioning. This suggests that prey availability is not a limiting resource for hummingbirds.\nEstimates of overall dietary makeup for hummingbirds vary, but insectivory is often cited as comprising 5\u201315% of feeding time budgets, typically; 2\u201312% is a figure that is also cited. In one study, 84% of feeding time was allotted to nectar feeding if breeding females are included, and 89% otherwise; 86% of total feeding records were on nectar. It has been estimated, based on time budgets and other data, that the hummingbird diet is generally about 90% nectar and 10% arthropods by mass. As their nestlings consume only arthropods, and possibly because their own requirements increase, breeding females spend 3\u20134 times as long as males foraging for arthropods, although 65\u201370% of their feeding time is still devoted to nectar. Estimates for overall insectivory can be as low as &lt;5%. Such low numbers have been documented for some species; insects comprised 3% of foraging attempts for Peruvian shining sunbeams in one study, while the purple-throated carib has been reported to spend &lt;1% of time consuming insects in Dominica. Both species also have more typical numbers recorded elsewhere, however. Overall, for most hummingbirds, insectivory is an essential and regular, albeit minor, component of the diet, while nectar is the primary feeding focus when conditions allow. It has been shown that floral abundance (but not floral diversity) influences hummingbird diversity, but that arthropod abundance does not (i.e., that it is non-limiting).\nHummingbirds do not spend all day flying, as the energy cost would be prohibitive; the majority of their activity consists simply of sitting or perching. Hummingbirds eat many small meals and consume around half their weight in nectar (twice their weight in nectar, if the nectar is 25% sugar) each day. Hummingbirds digest their food rapidly due to their small size and high metabolism; a mean retention time less than an hour has been reported. Hummingbirds spend an average of 20% of their time feeding and 75\u201380% sitting and digesting.\nBecause their high metabolism makes them vulnerable to starvation, hummingbirds are highly attuned to food sources. Some species, including many found in North America, are territorial and try to guard food sources (such as a feeder) against other hummingbirds, attempting to ensure a future food supply. Additionally, hummingbirds have an enlarged hippocampus, a brain region facilitating spatial memory used to map flowers previously visited during nectar foraging.\nBeak specializations.\nThe shapes of hummingbird beaks (also called bills) vary widely as an adaptation for specialized feeding, with some 7000 flowering plants pollinated by hummingbird nectar feeding. Hummingbird beak lengths range from about to as long as . When catching insects in flight, a hummingbird's jaw flexes downward to widen the beak for successful capture.\nThe extreme curved beaks of sicklebills are adapted for extracting nectar from the curved corolla tubes of \"Centropogon\" flowers. Some species, such as hermits (\"Phaethornis\" spp.), have long beaks that enable insertion deeply into flowers with long corolla tubes. Thornbills have short, sharp beaks adapted for feeding from flowers with short corolla tubes and piercing the bases of longer ones. The beak of the fiery-tailed awlbill has an upturned tip adapted for feeding on nectar from tubular flowers while hovering.\nPerception of sweet nectar.\nPerception of sweetness in nectar evolved in hummingbirds during their genetic divergence from insectivorous swifts, their closest bird relatives. Although the only known sweet sensory receptor, called T1R2, is absent in birds, receptor expression studies showed that hummingbirds adapted a carbohydrate receptor from the T1R1-T1R3 receptor, identical to the one perceived as umami in humans, essentially repurposing it to function as a nectar sweetness receptor. This adaptation for taste enabled hummingbirds to detect and exploit sweet nectar as an energy source, facilitating their distribution across geographical regions where nectar-bearing flowers are available.\nTongue as a micropump.\nHummingbirds drink with their long tongues by rapidly lapping nectar. Their tongues have semicircular tubes which run down their lengths to facilitate nectar consumption via rapid pumping in and out of the nectar. While capillary action was believed to be what drew nectar into these tubes, high-speed photography revealed that the tubes open down their sides as the tongue goes into the nectar, and then close around the nectar, trapping it so it can be pulled back into the beak over a period of 14 milliseconds per lick at a rate of up to 20 licks per second. The tongue, which is forked, is compressed until it reaches nectar, then the tongue springs open, the rapid action traps the nectar which moves up the grooves, like a pump action, with capillary action not involved. Consequently, tongue flexibility enables accessing, transporting and unloading nectar via pump action, not by a capillary syphon as once believed.\nFeeders and artificial nectar.\nIn the wild, hummingbirds visit flowers for food, extracting nectar, which is 55% sucrose, 24% glucose, and 21% fructose on a dry-matter basis. Hummingbirds also take sugar-water from bird feeders, which allow people to observe and enjoy hummingbirds up close while providing the birds with a reliable source of energy, especially when flower blossoms are less abundant. A negative aspect of artificial feeders, however, is that the birds may seek less flower nectar for food, and so may reduce the amount of pollination their feeding naturally provides.\nWhite granulated sugar is used in hummingbird feeders in a 20% concentration as a common recipe, although hummingbirds will defend feeders more aggressively when sugar content is at 35%, indicating preference for nectar with higher sugar content. Organic and \"raw\" sugars contain iron, which can be harmful, and brown sugar, agave syrup, molasses, and artificial sweeteners also should not be used. Honey is made by bees from the nectar of flowers, but it is not good to use in feeders because when it is diluted with water, microorganisms easily grow in it, causing it to spoil rapidly.\nRed food dye was once thought to be a favorable ingredient for the nectar in home feeders, but it is unnecessary. Commercial products sold as \"instant nectar\" or \"hummingbird food\" may also contain preservatives or artificial flavors, as well as dyes, which are unnecessary and potentially harmful. Although some commercial products contain small amounts of nutritional additives, hummingbirds obtain all necessary nutrients from the insects they eat, rendering added nutrients unnecessary.\nVisual cues of foraging.\nHummingbirds have exceptional visual acuity providing them with discrimination of food sources while foraging. Although hummingbirds are thought to be attracted to color while seeking food, such as red flowers or artificial feeders, experiments indicate that location and flower nectar quality are the most important \"beacons\" for foraging. Hummingbirds depend little on visual cues of flower color to beacon to nectar-rich locations, but rather they use surrounding landmarks to find the nectar reward.\nIn at least one hummingbird species \u2013 the green-backed firecrown (\"Sephanoides sephaniodes\") \u2013 flower colors preferred are in the red-green wavelength for the bird's visual system, providing a higher contrast than for other flower colors. Further, the crown plumage of firecrown males is highly iridescent in the red wavelength range (peak at 650 nanometers), possibly providing a competitive advantage of dominance when foraging among other hummingbird species with less colorful plumage. The ability to discriminate colors of flowers and plumage is enabled by a visual system having four single cone cells and a double cone screened by photoreceptor oil droplets which enhance color discrimination.\nOlfaction.\nWhile hummingbirds rely primarily on vision and hearing to assess competition from bird and insect foragers near food sources, they may also be able to detect by smell the presence in nectar of insect defensive chemicals (such as formic acid) and aggregation pheromones of foraging ants, which discourage feeding.\nIn myth and culture.\nAztecs wore hummingbird talismans, artistic representations of hummingbirds and fetishes made from actual hummingbird parts as emblematic for vigor, energy, and propensity to do work along with their sharp beaks that symbolically mimic instruments of weaponry, bloodletting, penetration, and intimacy. Hummingbird talismans were prized as drawing sexual potency, energy, vigor, and skill at arms and warfare to the wearer. The Aztec god of war Huitzilopochtli is often depicted in art as a hummingbird. Aztecs believed that fallen warriors would be reincarnated as hummingbirds. The Nahuatl word \"huitzil\" translates to \"hummingbird\". \nOne of the Nazca Lines depicts a hummingbird.\nTrinidad and Tobago, known as \"The land of the hummingbird\", displays a hummingbird on its coat of arms, 1-cent coin, and livery on its national airline, Caribbean Airlines. The Hummingbird Medal is awarded to individuals for significant contributions to Trinidad and Tobago.\nMt. Umunhum in the Santa Cruz Mountains of Northern California is Ohlone for \"resting place of the hummingbird\".\nThe Gibson Hummingbird is an acoustic guitar model that incorporates a pickguard in the shape of a hummingbird by Gibson Brands, a major guitar manufacturer.\nDuring the costume competition of the Miss Universe 2016 beauty pageant, Miss Ecuador, Connie Jim\u00e9nez, wore a costume inspired by hummingbird wing feathers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70650", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70650", "title": "Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n and Castile", "text": "King of Le\u00f3n, Castile, and Galicia from 1126 to 1157\nAlfonso VII (1 March 1105\u00a0\u2013 21 August 1157), called the Emperor (\"el Emperador\"), became the King of Galicia in 1111 and King of Le\u00f3n and Castile in 1126. Alfonso, born Alfonso Raim\u00fandez, first used the title Emperor of All Spain, alongside his mother Urraca, once she vested him with the direct rule of Toledo in 1116. Alfonso later held another investiture in 1135 in a grand ceremony reasserting his claims to the imperial title. He was the son of Urraca of Le\u00f3n and Raymond of Burgundy, the first of the House of Ivrea to rule in the Iberian Peninsula.\nAlfonso was a dignified and somewhat enigmatic figure. His rule was characterised by the renewed supremacy of the western kingdoms of Christian Iberia over the eastern (Navarre and Arag\u00f3n) after the reign of Alfonso the Battler. Though he sought to make the imperial title meaningful in practice to both Christian and Muslim populations, his hegemonic intentions never saw fruition. During his tenure, Portugal became \"de facto\" independent in 1128 and was recognized as independent \"de jure\" in 1143. He was a patron of poets, including, probably, the troubadour Marcabru.\nSuccession to three kingdoms.\nIn 1111, Diego Gelm\u00edrez, Bishop of Compostela and the count of Traba, crowned and anointed Alfonso King of Galicia in the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela. He was a child, but his mother had (1109) succeeded to the united throne of Le\u00f3n-Castile-Galicia and wished to retain sole rulership of the kingdom. By 1119 he had inherited the formerly Muslim Kingdom of Toledo, where he had become the prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of its Cluniac archbishop, Bernard of S\u00e9dirac. On 10 March 1126, after the death of his mother, he was crowned in Le\u00f3n and immediately began the recovery of the Kingdom of Castile, which was then under the domination of Alfonso the Battler. By the Peace of T\u00e1mara of 1127, the Battler recognised Alfonso VII of Castile. The territory in the far east of his dominion, however, had gained much independence during the rule of his mother and experienced many rebellions. After his recognition in Castile, Alfonso fought to curb the autonomy of the local barons.\nWhen Alfonso the Battler, King of Navarre and Arag\u00f3n, died without descendants in 1134, he willed his kingdom to the Knights Templar and the Knights Hospitaller. The aristocracy of both kingdoms rejected this. Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez, Count of Monz\u00f3n was elected in Navarre while Alfonso pretended to the throne of Arag\u00f3n. The nobles chose another candidate in the dead king's brother, Ramiro II. Alfonso responded by reclaiming La Rioja and \"attempted to annex the district around Zaragoza and Tarazona\".\nIn several skirmishes, he defeated the joint Navarro-Aragonese army and put the kingdoms to vassalage. He had the strong support of the lords north of the Pyrenees, who held lands as far as the River Rh\u00f4ne. In the end, however, the combined forces of the Navarre and Arag\u00f3n were too much for his control. At this time, he helped Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Barcelona, in his wars with the other Catalan counties to unite the old \"Marca Hispanica\".\nImperial rule.\nA vague tradition had always assigned the title of emperor to the sovereign who held Le\u00f3n. Sancho the Great considered the city the \"imperiale culmen\" and minted coins with the inscription after being crowned in it. Such a sovereign was considered the most direct representative of the Visigothic kings, who had been themselves the representatives of the Roman Empire. But though appearing in charters, and claimed by Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Alfonso the Battler, the title had been little more than a flourish of rhetoric.\nOn 26 May 1135, Alfonso was crowned \"Emperor of Spain\" in the Cathedral of Le\u00f3n. By this, he probably wished to assert his authority over the entire peninsula and his absolute leadership of the Reconquista. He appears to have striven for the formation of a national unity which Spain had never possessed since the fall of the Visigothic kingdom. The elements he had to deal with could not be welded together. The weakness of Aragon enabled him to make his superiority effective. After Afonso Henriques recognised him as liege in 1137, Alfonso VII lost the Battle of Valdevez in 1141 thereby affirming Portugal's independence in the Treaty of Zamora (1143). In 1143, he himself recognised this \"status quo\" and consented to the marriage of Petronila of Aragon with Ramon Berenguer IV, a union which combined Aragon and Catalonia into the Crown of Aragon.\nWar against Al-Andalus.\nAlfonso was a pious prince. He introduced the Cistercians to Iberia by founding a monastery at Fitero. He adopted a militant attitude towards the Moors of Al-Andalus, especially the Almoravids. From 1138, when he besieged Coria, Alfonso led a series of crusades subjugating the Almoravids. After a seven-month siege, he took the fortress of Oreja near Toledo and, as the \"Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris\" tells it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026 early in the morning the castle was surrendered and the towers were filled with Christian knights, and the royal standards were raised above a high tower. Those who held the standards shouted out loud and proclaimed \"Long live Alfonso, emperor of Le\u00f3n and Toledo!\"\nIn 1142, Alfonso besieged Coria a second time and took it. In 1144, he advanced as far as C\u00f3rdoba. Two years later, the Almohads invaded and he was forced to refortify his southern frontier and come to an agreement with the Almoravid Yahya ibn Ghaniya for their mutual defence. When Pope Eugene III preached the Second Crusade, Alfonso VII, with Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez of Navarre and Ramon Berenguer IV, led a mixed army of Catalans and Franks, with a Genoese\u2013Pisan navy, in a crusade against the rich port city of Almer\u00eda, which was occupied in October 1147. A third of the city was granted to Genoa and subsequently leased out to Otto de Bonvillano, a Genoese citizen. It was Castile's first Mediterranean seaport. In 1151, Alfonso signed the Treaty of Tudil\u00e9n with Ramon Berenguer. The treaty defined the zones of conquest in Andalusia in order to prevent the two rulers from coming into conflict. Six years later, Almer\u00eda entered into Almohad possession. Alfonso was returning from an expedition against them when he died on 21 August 1157 in Las Fresnedas, north of the Sierra Morena.\nLegacy.\nAlfonso was at once a patron of the church and a protector, though not a supporter of, the Muslims, who were a minority of his subjects. His reign ended in an unsuccessful campaign against the rising power of the Almohads. Though he was not actually defeated, his death in the pass, while on his way back to Toledo, occurred in circumstances which showed that no man could be what he claimed to be \u2013 \"king of the men of the two religions.\" Furthermore, by dividing his realm between his sons, he ensured that Christendom would not present the new Almohad threat with a united front.\nFamily.\nIn November 1128, he married Berenguela, daughter of Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Barcelona. She died in 1149. Their children were:\nIn 1152, Alfonso married Richeza of Poland, the daughter of Ladislaus II the Exile. They had:\nAlfonso also had two mistresses, having children by both. By an Asturian noblewoman named Gontrodo P\u00e9rez, he had an illegitimate daughter, Urraca (1132\u20131164), who married Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez of Navarre, the mother retiring to a convent in 1133.\nLater in his reign, he formed a liaison with Urraca Fern\u00e1ndez, widow of count Rodrigo Mart\u00ednez and daughter of Fernando Garc\u00eda de Hita, having a daughter, Stephanie the Unfortunate (1148\u20131180), who was killed by her jealous husband, Fern\u00e1n Ruiz de Castro.\nIn fiction.\nA parody version of king Alfonso and queen Berengaria is presented in the tragicomedy \"La venganza de Don Mendo\" by Pedro Mu\u00f1oz Seca.\nIn its film version, Antonio Garisa played Alfonso.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70651", "revid": "760688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70651", "title": "Van der Waals radius", "text": "Size of an atom's imaginary sphere representing how close other atoms can get\nThe van der Waals radius, \"r\"w, of an atom is the radius of an imaginary hard sphere representing the distance of closest approach for another atom. \nIt is named after Johannes Diderik van der Waals, winner of the 1910 Nobel Prize in Physics, as he was the first to recognise that atoms were not simply points and to demonstrate the physical consequences of their size through the van der Waals equation of state.\nvan der Waals volume.\nThe van der Waals volume, \"Vw\", also called the atomic volume or molecular volume, is the atomic property most directly related to the van der Waals radius. It is the volume \"occupied\" by an individual atom (or molecule). The van der Waals volume may be calculated if the van der Waals radii (and, for molecules, the inter-atomic distances, and angles) are known. For a single atom, it is the volume of a sphere whose radius is the van der Waals radius of the atom:formula_1\nFor a molecule, it is the volume enclosed by the van der Waals surface. \nThe van der Waals volume of a molecule is always smaller than the sum of the van der Waals volumes of the constituent atoms: the atoms can be said to \"overlap\" when they form chemical bonds.\nThe van der Waals volume of an atom or molecule may also be determined by experimental measurements on gases, notably from the van der Waals constant \"b\", the polarizability \"\u03b1\", or the molar refractivity \"A\". \nIn all three cases, measurements are made on macroscopic samples and it is normal to express the results as molar quantities. \nTo find the van der Waals volume of a single atom or molecule, it is necessary to divide by the Avogadro constant \"N\"A.\nThe molar van der Waals volume should not be confused with the molar volume of the substance. \nIn general, at normal laboratory temperatures and pressures, the atoms or molecules of gas only occupy about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2044 of the volume of the gas, the rest is empty space. \nHence the molar van der Waals volume, which only counts the volume occupied by the atoms or molecules, is usually about times smaller than the molar volume for a gas at standard temperature and pressure.\nMethods of determination.\nVan der Waals radii may be determined from the mechanical properties of gases (the original method), from the critical point, from measurements of atomic spacing between pairs of unbonded atoms in crystals or from measurements of electrical or optical properties (the polarizability and the molar refractivity). \nThese various methods give values for the van der Waals radius which are similar (1\u20132\u00a0\u00c5, 100\u2013200\u00a0pm) but not identical. \nTabulated values of van der Waals radii are obtained by taking a weighted mean of a number of different experimental values, and, for this reason, different tables will often have different values for the van der Waals radius of the same atom. \nIndeed, there is no reason to assume that the van der Waals radius is a fixed property of the atom in all circumstances: rather, it tends to vary with the particular chemical environment of the atom in any given case.\nVan der Waals equation of state.\nThe van der Waals equation of state is the simplest and best-known modification of the ideal gas law to account for the behaviour of real gases:\nformula_2\nwhere p is pressure, n is the number of moles of the gas in question and a and b depend on the particular gas, formula_3 is the volume, R is the specific gas constant on a unit mole basis and T the absolute temperature; a is a correction for intermolecular forces and b corrects for finite atomic or molecular sizes; the value of b equals the van der Waals volume per mole of the gas. \nTheir values vary from gas to gas.\nThe van der Waals equation also has a microscopic interpretation: molecules interact with one another. \nThe interaction is strongly repulsive at a very short distance, becomes mildly attractive at the intermediate range, and vanishes at a long distance. \nThe ideal gas law must be corrected when attractive and repulsive forces are considered. \nFor example, the mutual repulsion between molecules has the effect of excluding neighbors from a certain amount of space around each molecule. \nThus, a fraction of the total space becomes unavailable to each molecule as it executes random motion. \nIn the equation of state, this volume of exclusion (\"nb\") should be subtracted from the volume of the container (V), thus: (\"V\" - \"nb\"). \nThe other term that is introduced in the van der Waals equation, formula_4, describes a weak attractive force among molecules (known as the van der Waals force), which increases when n increases or V decreases and molecules become more crowded together.\nThe van der Waals constant \"b\" volume can be used to calculate the van der Waals volume of an atom or molecule with experimental data derived from measurements on gases.\nFor helium, \"b\"\u00a0= 23.7\u00a0cm3/mol. Helium is a monatomic gas, and each mole of helium contains atoms (the Avogadro constant, \"N\"A):\nformula_5\nTherefore, the van der Waals volume of a single atom \"V\"w\u00a0= 39.36\u00a0\u00c53, which corresponds to \"r\"w\u00a0= 2.11\u00a0\u00c5 (\u2248 200 picometers). \nThis method may be extended to diatomic gases by approximating the molecule as a rod with rounded ends where the diameter is 2\"r\"w and the internuclear distance is d. \nThe algebra is more complicated, but the relation\nformula_6\ncan be solved by the normal methods for cubic functions.\nCrystallographic measurements.\nThe molecules in a molecular crystal are held together by van der Waals forces rather than chemical bonds. \nIn principle, the closest that two atoms belonging to \"different\" molecules can approach one another is given by the sum of their van der Waals radii. \nBy examining a large number of structures of molecular crystals, it is possible to find a minimum radius for each type of atom such that other non-bonded atoms do not encroach any closer. \nThis approach was first used by Linus Pauling in his seminal work \"The Nature of the Chemical Bond\". \nArnold Bondi also conducted a study of this type, published in 1964, although he also considered other methods of determining the van der Waals radius in coming to his final estimates. \nSome of Bondi's figures are given in the table at the top of this article, and they remain the most widely used \"consensus\" values for the van der Waals radii of the elements. \nScott Rowland and Robin Taylor re-examined these 1964 figures in the light of more recent crystallographic data: on the whole, the agreement was very good, although they recommend a value of 1.09\u00a0\u00c5 for the van der Waals radius of hydrogen as opposed to Bondi's 1.20\u00a0\u00c5. A more recent analysis of the Cambridge Structural Database, carried out by Santiago Alvarez, provided a new set of values for 93 naturally occurring elements. The values of different authors are sometimes very different, so that one has to choose the ones which are closest in their physical meaning to those one wants to compare with. Here is a table with entries of four different authors. The values of Bondi from 1966 are those mostly used in crystallography:\nA simple example of the use of crystallographic data (here neutron diffraction) is to consider the case of solid helium, where the atoms are held together only by van der Waals forces (rather than by covalent or metallic bonds) and so the distance between the nuclei can be considered to be equal to twice the van der Waals radius. \nThe density of solid helium at 1.1\u00a0K and 66\u00a0atm is , corresponding to a molar volume \"V\"m\u00a0= . \nThe van der Waals volume is given by\nformula_7\nwhere the factor of \u03c0/\u221a18 arises from the packing of spheres: \"V\"w\u00a0= \u00a0= 23.0\u00a0\u00c53, corresponding to a van der Waals radius \"r\"w\u00a0= 1.76\u00a0\u00c5.\nMolar refractivity.\nThe molar refractivity A of a gas is related to its refractive index n by the Lorentz\u2013Lorenz equation:\nformula_8\nThe refractive index of helium \"n\"\u00a0= at 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 101.325\u00a0kPa, which corresponds to a molar refractivity \"A\"\u00a0= . \nDividing by the Avogadro constant gives \"V\"w\u00a0= \u00a0= 0.8685\u00a0\u00c53, corresponding to \"r\"w\u00a0= 0.59\u00a0\u00c5.\nPolarizability.\nThe polarizability \"\u03b1\" of a gas is related to its electric susceptibility \"\u03c7\"e by the relation\nformula_9\nand the electric susceptibility may be calculated from tabulated values of the relative permittivity \"\u03b5\"r using the relation \"\u03c7\"e\u00a0= \"\u03b5\"r\u00a0\u2212\u00a01. \nThe electric susceptibility of helium \"\u03c7\"e\u00a0= at 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 101.325\u00a0kPa, which corresponds to a polarizability \"\u03b1\"\u00a0= . \nThe polarizability is related the van der Waals volume by the relation\nformula_10\nso the van der Waals volume of helium \"V\"w\u00a0= \u00a0= 0.2073\u00a0\u00c53 by this method, corresponding to \"r\"w\u00a0= 0.37\u00a0\u00c5.\nWhen the atomic polarizability is quoted in units of volume such as \u00c53, as is often the case, it is equal to the van der Waals volume. \nHowever, the term \"atomic polarizability\" is preferred as polarizability is a precisely defined (and measurable) physical quantity, whereas \"van der Waals volume\" can have any number of definitions depending on the method of measurement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70653", "revid": "1121468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70653", "title": "The Lost Vikings (series)", "text": ""}
{"id": "70655", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70655", "title": "Alfred Binet", "text": "French psychologist, IQ test developer (1857\u20131911)\nAlfred Binet (; ; 8 July 1857\u00a0\u2013 18 October 1911), born Alfredo Binetti, was a French psychologist who together with Th\u00e9odore Simon invented the first practical intelligence test, the Binet\u2013Simon test. In 1904, Binet took part in a commission set up by the French Ministry of Education to decide whether school children with learning difficulties should be sent to a special boarding school attached to a lunatic asylum, as advocated by the French psychiatrist and politician D\u00e9sir\u00e9-Magloire Bourneville, or whether they should be educated in classes attached to regular schools as advocated by the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 libre pour l'\u00e9tude psychologique de l'enfant (SLEPE) of which Binet was a member. There was also debate over who should decide whether a child was capable enough for regular education. Bourneville argued that a psychiatrist should do this based on a medical examination. Binet and Simon wanted this to be based on objective evidence. This was the beginning of the IQ test. A preliminary version was published in 1905. The full version was published in 1908, and slightly revised in 1911, just before Binet's death.\nBiography.\nEducation and early career.\nBinet was born as Alfredo Binetti in Nice, which was then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia until its annexation by the Second French Empire in 1860, and the ensuing policy of Francization.\nBinet attended law school in Paris, and received his degree in 1878. He also studied physiology at the Sorbonne. His first formal position was as a researcher at a neurological clinic, Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re Hospital, in Paris from 1883 to 1889. From there, Binet went on to being a researcher and associate director of the Laboratory of Experimental Psychology at the Sorbonne from 1891 to 1894. In 1894, he was promoted to being the director of the laboratory until 1911 (his death). Binet also educated himself by reading psychology texts at the National Library in Paris. He soon became fascinated with the ideas of John Stuart Mill, who believed that the operations of intelligence could be explained by the laws of associationism. Binet eventually realized the limitations of this theory, but Mill's ideas continued to influence his work.\nIn 1883, years of unaccompanied study ended when Binet was introduced to Charles F\u00e9r\u00e9 who introduced him to Jean-Martin Charcot, the director of a clinic called La Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re, Paris. Charcot became his mentor and in turn, Binet accepted a position at the clinic, working in the neurological laboratory.\nAt the time of Binet's tenure, Charcot was experimenting with hypnotism and Binet, influenced by Charcot, published four articles about his work in this area. Binet aggressively supported Charcot's position which included the belief that people with weakened, unstable nervous systems were susceptible to hypnosis.\nBinet and F\u00e9r\u00e9 discovered what they called transfer and they also recognized perceptual and emotional polarization. Binet and F\u00e9r\u00e9 thought their findings were a phenomenon and of utmost importance.\nUnfortunately, the conclusions of Charcot, Binet and F\u00e9r\u00e9 did not stand up to the professional scrutiny of Joseph Delboeuf, who concluded that the findings were due to the fact that the patients knew what was expected, what should happen, and they just agreed. Binet felt obliged to make an embarrassing public admission that he had been wrong in supporting his teacher. Nevertheless, he had established his name internationally in the field, Morton Prince for example stating in 1904 that, \"certain problems in subconscious automatism will always be associated with the names of Breuer and Freud in Germany, Janet and Alfred Binet in France.\"\nStill, this failure took a toll on Binet. In 1890, he resigned from La Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re and never mentioned the place or its director again. He turned to the study of child development spurred on by the birth of his two daughters, Marguerite and Alice, born in 1885 and 1887. Binet called Alice a subjectivist and Marguerite an objectivist, and developing the concepts of \"introspection\" and \"externospection\" in an anticipation of Carl Jung's psychological types. In the 21-year period following his shift in career interests, Binet \"published more than 200 books, articles, and reviews in what now would be called experimental, developmental, educational, social, and differential psychology.\" Bergin and Cizek (2001) suggest that this work may have influenced Jean Piaget, who later studied with Binet's collaborator Th\u00e9odore Simon in 1920. Binet's research with his daughters helped him to further refine his developing conception of intelligence, especially the importance of attention span and suggestibility in intellectual development.\nA job presented itself for Binet in 1891 at the Laboratory of Physiological Psychology at the Sorbonne. He worked for a year without pay and by 1894, he took over as the director. This was a position that Binet held until his death, and it enabled him to pursue his studies on mental processes.\nDespite Binet's extensive research interests and wide breadth of publications, today he is most widely known for his contributions to intelligence in collaboration with Simon. Wolf postulates that this is the result of his not being affiliated with a major university. Because Binet did not have any formalized graduate study in psychology, he did not hold a professorship with a prestigious institution where students and funds would be sure to perpetuate his work. Additionally, his more progressive theories did not provide the practical utility that his intelligence scale would evoke.\nDuring this time Binet also co-founded the French journal of psychology, \"L'Ann\u00e9e Psychologique\", serving as the director and editor-in-chief of the journal that was the first scientific journal in this domain. During this period he worked with Victor Henri, nowadays more famous for his work in physical chemistry and the origins of enzymology, on the effects of intellectual fatigue on the composition of faeces.\nLater career and the Binet\u2013Simon test.\nIn 1899, Binet was asked to be a member of the Free Society for the Psychological Study of the Child. French education changed greatly at the end of the nineteenth century, because of a law that passed which made it mandatory for children ages six to thirteen to attend school. The Society had been established partly to counter pressure from Bourneville to establish boarding schools attached to asylums for children who were not good enough for regular education. There were already such schools for children with clear intellectual impairment and Bourneville wanted to expand them to all children 'unfit' for regular education, also those with less visible intellectual problems.\nTwo questions became important. First, who should educate children with learning problems: schools or asylums? Second, who was to decide whether a child had a learning problem? Bourneville argued this was the task of psychiatrists, based on medical examination. Binet and the society argued that objective criteria should be used, so that no child would get the label erroneously. The question became \"What should be the test given to children thought to possibly have learning disabilities?\" Binet made it his problem to establish the differences that separated the normal child from the abnormal, and to measure such differences.\nIn this endeavor, Binet was helped greatly by Th\u00e9odore Simon, who was a young psychiatrist working in an asylum for children with intellectual deficiency. Simon not only had access to hundreds of children, but he had begun designing tests that would indicate the degree of disability, under the guidance of his PhD advisor Emmery Blin, who had devised a set of 20 questions to determine what the children referred to him were capable of.\nBinet and Simon worked closely to develop more tests and questions that would distinguish between children who did and did not need help in attending regular education. In 1905 they published a preliminary version of their test for measuring intelligence (chased by a committee set up at Bourneville's instigation to decide on this). The full version of the test with age-appropriate standards was published in 1908 and was known as the Binet-Simon scale. In 1911, shortly before Binet's early death, Binet and Simon published a modest revision, which consisted mainly of a regrouping of some tests.\nBinet and Simon collected and designed a variety of tasks they thought were representative of typical children's abilities at various ages. This task-selection process was based on their many years of observing children in natural settings and in schools for children with severe deficits and previously published research by Binet and others. They then tested their measurements on children of different ages, for whom they also had an assessment of the school teachers.\nThe scale consisted of thirty tasks of increasing difficulty. The easier ones could be done by everyone. Some of the simplest test items assessed whether or not a child could follow a beam of light or talk back to the examiner. Slightly harder tasks required children to point to various named body parts, repeat back a series of 2 digits, repeat simple sentences, and define words like house, fork or mama. More difficult test items required children to state the difference between pairs of things, reproduce drawings from memory or to construct sentences from three given words such as \"Paris, river and fortune.\" The hardest test items included asking children to repeat back 7 random digits, find three rhymes for the French word \"ob\u00e9issance\" and to answer questions such as \"My neighbor has been receiving strange visitors. He has received in turn a doctor, a lawyer, and then a priest. What is taking place?\" (Fancher, 1985).\nFor the practical use of determining educational placement, the score on the Binet-Simon scale would reveal the child's mental age. For example, a 6-year-old child who passed all the tasks usually passed by 6 year-olds\u2014but nothing beyond\u2014would have a mental age that exactly matched his chronological age, 6.0. (Fancher, 1985).\nBinet and Simon were forthright about the limitations of their Binet-Simon Intelligence Test. They stressed the remarkable diversity of intelligence and the subsequent need to study it using qualitative, as opposed to quantitative, measures. They also stressed that intellectual development progressed at variable rates and could be influenced by the environment; therefore, intelligence was not based solely on genetics, was malleable rather than fixed, and could only be found in children with comparable backgrounds. Given Binet and Simon's stance that intelligence testing was subject to variability and was not generalizable, it is important to look at the metamorphosis that mental testing took on as it made its way to the U.S.\nWhile Binet and Simon were developing their mental scale, the business, civic, and educational leaders in the U.S. were facing issues of how to accommodate the needs of a diversifying population, while continuing to meet the demands of society. There arose the call to form a society based on meritocracy while continuing to underline the ideals of the upper class. In 1908, H.H. Goddard, a champion of the eugenics movement, found utility in mental testing as a way to evidence the superiority of the white race. After studying abroad, Goddard brought the Binet-Simon Scale to the United States and translated it into English.\nFollowing Goddard in the U.S. mental testing movement was Lewis Terman, who took the Simon-Binet Scale and standardized it using a large American sample. The first test was published in 1916 and called \u201cThe Stanford revision of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale\u201d. A revision was published in 1937 and now called the Stanford-Binet scale. The name of Simon was all but erased from the record and this has been the reason why Simon's contribution to the development of the test has been overlooked in much of the 20th century and early 21st century.\nThe Stanford revision of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale was no longer used solely for advocating education for all children, as was the original objective. The new objective of intelligence testing was ultimately \"curtailing the reproduction of feeble-mindedness and in the elimination of an enormous amount of crime, pauperism, and industrial inefficiency\".\nSince his death, many people in many ways have honored Binet, but two of these stand out. In 1917, the Free Society for the Psychological Study of the Child, of which Binet became a member in 1899 and which prompted his development of the intelligence tests, changed their name to La Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Alfred Binet, in memory of the renowned psychologist (the name was later changed again into the Binet-Simon Society https:// to credit Simon's contributions). The second honor was not until 1984, when the journal \"Science\" 84 picked the Binet-Simon scale as one of twenty of the century's most significant developments or discoveries.\nBinet also studied sexual behavior, coining the term erotic fetishism to describe individuals whose sexual interests in nonhuman objects, such as articles of clothing, and linking this to the after-effects of early impressions in an anticipation of Freud.\nBetween 1904 and 1909, Binet co-wrote several plays for the Grand Guignol theatre with the playwright Andr\u00e9 de Lorde.\nHe also studied the abilities of Valentine Dencausse, the most famous chiromancer in Paris in those days.\nBinet and chess.\nBinet had done a series of experiments to see how well chess players played when blindfolded. He found that only some of the master chess players could play from memory and a few could play multiple games simultaneously without looking at the boards. To remember the positions of the pieces on the boards, some players envisioned exact replicas of specific chess sets, while others envisioned an abstract schema of the game. Binet concluded that extraordinary feats of memory such as blind chess playing could take a variety of mnemonic forms. He recounted his experiments in a book entitled \"Psychologie des grands calculateurs et joueurs d'\u00e9checs\" (Paris: Hachette, 1894).\nPublications.\nAlfred Binet was one of the founding editors of \"L'ann\u00e9e psychologique\", a yearly volume comprising original articles and reviews of the progress of psychology still in print.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70656", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70656", "title": "T\u00f6di", "text": "Mountain in Switzerland\nThe T\u00f6di (), is a mountain massif and with the mountain peak the highest mountain in the Glarus Alps and the highest summit in the canton of Glarus, Switzerland. It is located on the border between the cantons of Grisons () to the south, and Glarus to the north, close to the point where those two cantons meet the canton of Uri, to the west. Although not the culminating point of Grisons, it is its highest peak outside the Bernina range.\nGeography.\nThe T\u00f6di lies in the west part of the Glarus Alps, between Linthal on the north and Disentis on the south. The T\u00f6di is a vast mountain massif projecting as a promontory to the north from the range that divides the basin of the Linth from that of the Rhine.\nThere are three principal peaks. The lowest, and northernmost, which is that seen from the Ober Sand Alp, is called \"Sandgipfel\" (). The \"Glarner T\u00f6di\" (), long supposed to be the highest, and most conspicuous from Stachelberg and other points of view to the north, is actually the second in height. The highest summit () lies west of the Glarner T\u00f6di, and is distinguished by the Romansh name \"Piz Russein\". Politically, the T\u00f6di is split between the municipalities of Disentis and Sumvitg (Grisons), and Glarus S\u00fcd (Glarus).\nThe central mass of the mountain is enclosed between two glaciers, of which the most considerable is the Biferten Glacier. This glacier originates in a vast snow-basin south-east of the T\u00f6di, bounded to the south by the peaks of Stoc Grond, Piz Urlaun and Bifertenstock, forming the boundary of the two cantons. The last-named peak is connected with the Selbsanft by a massive wall of precipitous rocks enclosing the glacier on the east side, and forcing it, after descending at first nearly due east, to bend round first to north-east, and then due north. On the opposite side a ridge of rocks called , descending north-east from the T\u00f6di, forms the boundary of the Biferten Glacier. The end of this nearest the T\u00f6di is the Gr\u00fcnhorn, whereon stood the first hut of the Swiss Alpine Club. The Biferten Glacier is difficult to access, owing to its steepness. It includes some ice-falls, with intermediate steeps, and is much crevassed. On the west side of the T\u00f6di lies the Sand Glacier or \"Sandfirn\", which descends towards the Sand Alp from the dividing ridge forming the pass to the south. This does not extend so far south as the head of the Biferten Glacier. The ridge running due north from the Stoc Grond to the summit of the T\u00f6di overlooks the head of the Val Russein on the Grisons side of the chain, but it appears that the main mass of the T\u00f6di lies altogether on the north side of the watershed.\nThe 1,570-metre prominence is particularly visible from the Glarus side, where the difference of altitude between the summit and the Linth Valley is almost . The difference is smaller on the south side as the Vorderrhein Valley is above .\nGeology.\nOn the south side, the massif of the T\u00f6di is mainly composed of gneiss, which, according to Escher von der Linth, overlies a pioritic granite with large felspar crystals. The summit and the northern flank are mainly composed of metamorphic slate, in which talc predominates, but is sometimes replaced by felspar, so that the rock sometimes approaches the condition of gneiss and sometimes that of mica slate. There are manifest traces of anthracite, especially at the Bifertengr\u00e4tli, where the rock in some places assumes the appearance of a quartzite mixed with fragment of talc, which has elsewhere in this region been referred to the Verrucano. To these strata succeed dolomite and Jurassic limestone, similar in character to those developed on a large scale in the canton of Glarus.\nClimbing and skiing.\nThe first recorded attempts to reach the summit were made by Placidus a Spescha, one of the founders of mountaineering. He was born in 1752 and entered the monastery of Disentis. It was not until 1824 that the peak was climbed, when Placidus a Spescha, accompanied by a servant and two chamois-hunters, made his sixth and final assault from the south side. On the way up they spent a night at the Russein huts and the next day, on 1 September, they climbed to the gap called where Placidus and the servant watched the two hunters complete the climb to the top. They were Augustin Bisquolm and Placi Curschellas\nOn April 19, 1863, the Swiss Alpine Club is founded. Rudolf Theodor Simler became central president, and designated the T\u00f6di and Clariden region as the first area of exploration. A simple shelter was made at the foot of the mountain near the Biferten Glacier, the \"Gr\u00fcnhorn Hut\", which was the first mountain hut of the Swiss Alpine Club.\nEurope contains some of the world's largest vertical relief available to mountaineers, including lines that exceed the scale of Himalayan routes. According to Reudi Beglinger, mountain guide and founder of Selkirk Mountain Experience, ski-mountaineering options on the T\u00f6di include what is \"generally considered one of the most technically difficult lines in the Alps, almost a 10,000-foot descent\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70657", "revid": "3867343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70657", "title": "Van der Waals force", "text": "Interactions between groups of atoms that do not arise from chemical bonds\nIn molecular physics and chemistry, the van der Waals force (sometimes van der Waals' force) is a distance-dependent interaction between atoms or molecules. Unlike ionic or covalent bonds, these attractions do not result from a chemical electronic bond; they are comparatively weak and therefore more susceptible to disturbance. The van der Waals force quickly vanishes at longer distances between interacting molecules.\nNamed after Dutch physicist Johannes Diderik van der Waals, the van der Waals force plays a fundamental role in fields as diverse as supramolecular chemistry, structural biology, polymer science, nanotechnology, surface science, and condensed matter physics. It also underlies many properties of organic compounds and molecular solids, including their solubility in polar and non-polar media.\nIf no other force is present, the distance between atoms at which the force becomes repulsive rather than attractive as the atoms approach one another is called the van der Waals contact distance; this phenomenon results from the mutual repulsion between the atoms' electron clouds.\nThe van der Waals forces are usually described as a combination of the London dispersion forces between \"instantaneously induced dipoles\", Debye forces between permanent dipoles and induced dipoles, and the Keesom force between permanent molecular dipoles whose rotational orientations are dynamically averaged over time.\nDefinition.\nVan der Waals forces include attraction and repulsions between atoms, molecules, as well as other intermolecular forces. They differ from covalent and ionic bonding in that they are caused by correlations in the fluctuating polarizations of nearby particles (a consequence of quantum dynamics).\nThe force results from a transient shift in electron density. Specifically, the electron density may temporarily shift to be greater on one side of the nucleus. This shift generates a transient charge which a nearby atom can be attracted to or repelled by. The force is repulsive at very short distances, reaches zero at an equilibrium distance characteristic for each atom, or molecule, and becomes attractive for distances larger than the equilibrium distance. For individual atoms, the equilibrium distance is between 0.3\u00a0nm and 0.5\u00a0nm, depending on the atomic-specific diameter. When the interatomic distance is greater than 1.0\u00a0nm the force is not strong enough to be easily observed as it decreases as a function of distance \"r\" approximately with the 7th power (~\"r\"\u22127).\nVan der Waals forces are often among the weakest chemical forces. For example, the pairwise attractive van der Waals interaction energy between H (hydrogen) atoms in different H2 molecules equals 0.06 kJ/mol (0.6 meV) and the pairwise attractive interaction energy between O (oxygen) atoms in different O2 molecules equals 0.44 kJ/mol (4.6 meV). The corresponding vaporization energies of H2 and O2 molecular liquids, which result as a sum of all van der Waals interactions per molecule in the molecular liquids, amount to 0.90 kJ/mol (9.3 meV) and 6.82 kJ/mol (70.7 meV), respectively, and thus approximately 15 times the value of the individual pairwise interatomic interactions (excluding covalent bonds).\nThe strength of van der Waals bonds increases with higher polarizability of the participating atoms. For example, the pairwise van der Waals interaction energy for more polarizable atoms such as S (sulfur) atoms in H2S and sulfides exceeds 1 kJ/mol (10 meV), and the pairwise interaction energy between even larger, more polarizable Xe (xenon) atoms is 2.35 kJ/mol (24.3 meV). These van der Waals interactions are up to 40 times stronger than in H2, which has only one valence electron, and they are still not strong enough to achieve an aggregate state other than gas for Xe (noble gas) under standard conditions. The interactions between atoms in metals can also be effectively described as van der Waals interactions and account for the observed solid aggregate state with bonding strengths comparable to covalent and ionic interactions. The strength of pairwise van der Waals type interactions is on the order of 12 kJ/mol (120 meV) for low-melting Pb (lead) and on the order of 32 kJ/mol (330 meV) for high-melting Pt (platinum), which is about one order of magnitude stronger than in Xe due to the presence of a highly polarizable free electron gas. Accordingly, van der Waals forces can range from weak to strong interactions, and support integral structural loads when multitudes of such interactions are present.\nForce contributions.\nMore broadly, intermolecular forces have several possible contributions. They are ordered from strongest to weakest:\nWhen to apply the term \"van der Waals\" force depends on the text. The broadest definitions include all intermolecular forces which are electrostatic in origin, namely (2), (3) and (4). Some authors, whether or not they consider other forces to be of van der Waals type, focus on (3) and (4) as these are the components which act over the longest range.\nAll intermolecular/van der Waals forces are anisotropic (except those between two noble gas atoms), which means that they depend on the relative orientation of the molecules. The induction and dispersion interactions are always attractive, irrespective of orientation, but the electrostatic interaction changes sign upon rotation of the molecules. That is, the electrostatic force can be attractive or repulsive, depending on the mutual orientation of the molecules. When molecules are in thermal motion, as they are in the gas and liquid phase, the electrostatic force is averaged out to a large extent because the molecules thermally rotate and thus probe both repulsive and attractive parts of the electrostatic force.\nRandom thermal motion can disrupt or overcome the electrostatic component of the van der Waals force but the averaging effect is much less pronounced for the attractive induction and dispersion forces.\nThe Lennard-Jones potential is often used as an approximate model for the isotropic part of a total (repulsion plus attraction) van der Waals force as a function of distance.\nVan der Waals forces are responsible for certain cases of pressure broadening (van der Waals broadening) of spectral lines and the formation of van der Waals molecules. The London\u2013van der Waals forces are related to the Casimir effect for dielectric media, the former being the microscopic description of the latter bulk property. The first detailed calculations of this were done in 1955 by E. M. Lifshitz. A more general theory of van der Waals forces has also been developed.\nThe main characteristics of van der Waals forces are:\nIn low molecular weight alcohols, the hydrogen-bonding properties of their polar hydroxyl group dominate other weaker van der Waals interactions. In higher molecular weight alcohols, the properties of the nonpolar hydrocarbon chain(s) dominate and determine their solubility.\nVan der Waals forces are also responsible for the weak hydrogen bond interactions between unpolarized dipoles particularly in acid-base aqueous solution and between biological molecules.\nLondon dispersion force.\nLondon dispersion forces, named after the German-American physicist Fritz London, are weak intermolecular forces that arise from the interactive forces between instantaneous multipoles in molecules without permanent multipole moments. In and between organic molecules the multitude of contacts can lead to larger contribution of dispersive attraction, particularly in the presence of heteroatoms. London dispersion forces are also known as 'dispersion forces', 'London forces', or 'instantaneous dipole\u2013induced dipole forces'. The strength of London dispersion forces is proportional to the polarizability of the molecule, which in turn depends on the total number of electrons and the area over which they are spread. Hydrocarbons display small dispersive contributions, the presence of heteroatoms lead to increased LD forces as function of their polarizability, e.g. in the sequence RI&gt;RBr&gt;RCl&gt;RF. In absence of solvents weakly polarizable hydrocarbons form crystals due to dispersive forces; their sublimation heat is a measure of the dispersive interaction.\nVan der Waals forces between macroscopic objects.\nFor macroscopic bodies with known volumes and numbers of atoms or molecules per unit volume, the total van der Waals force is often computed based on the \"microscopic theory\" as the sum over all interacting pairs. It is necessary to integrate over the total volume of the object, which makes the calculation dependent on the objects' shapes. For example, the van der Waals interaction energy between spherical bodies of radii R1 and R2 and with smooth surfaces was approximated in 1937 by Hamaker (using London's famous 1937 equation for the dispersion interaction energy between atoms/molecules as the starting point) by:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;{z^2 - (R_{1} + R_{2})^2} + \\frac{2R_{1}R_{2}}{z^2 - (R_{1} - R_{2})^2} + \\ln\\left[\\frac{z^2-(R_{1}+ R_{2})^2}{z^2-(R_{1}- R_{2})^2}\\right]\\right)\nwhere A is the Hamaker coefficient, which is a constant (~10\u221219 \u2212 10\u221220 J) that depends on the material properties (it can be positive or negative in sign depending on the intervening medium), and \"z\" is the center-to-center distance; i.e., the sum of \"R\"1, \"R\"2, and \"r\" (the distance between the surfaces): formula_1.\nThe van der Waals \"force\" between two spheres of constant radii (\"R\"1 and \"R\"2 are treated as parameters) is then a function of separation since the force on an object is the negative of the derivative of the potential energy function,formula_2. This yields:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the limit of close-approach, the spheres are sufficiently large compared to the distance between them; i.e., formula_3 or formula_4, so that equation (1) for the potential energy function simplifies to:\nwith the force:\nThe van der Waals forces between objects with other geometries using the Hamaker model have been published in the literature.\nFrom the expression above, it is seen that the van der Waals force decreases with decreasing size of bodies (R). Nevertheless, the strength of inertial forces, such as gravity and drag/lift, decrease to a greater extent. Consequently, the van der Waals forces become dominant for collections of very small particles such as very fine-grained dry powders (where there are no capillary forces present) even though the force of attraction is smaller in magnitude than it is for larger particles of the same substance. Such powders are said to be cohesive, meaning they are not as easily fluidized or pneumatically conveyed as their more coarse-grained counterparts. Generally, free-flow occurs with particles greater than about 250 \u03bcm.\nThe van der Waals force of adhesion is also dependent on the surface topography. If there are surface asperities, or protuberances, that result in a greater total area of contact between two particles or between a particle and a wall, this increases the van der Waals force of attraction as well as the tendency for mechanical interlocking.\nThe microscopic theory assumes pairwise additivity. It neglects many-body interactions and retardation. A more rigorous approach accounting for these effects, called the \"macroscopic theory\", was developed by Lifshitz in 1956. Langbein derived a much more cumbersome \"exact\" expression in 1970 for spherical bodies within the framework of the Lifshitz theory while a simpler macroscopic model approximation had been made by Derjaguin as early as 1934. Expressions for the van der Waals forces for many different geometries using the Lifshitz theory have likewise been published.\nUse by geckos and arthropods.\nThe ability of geckos \u2013 which can hang on a glass surface using only one toe \u2013 to climb on sheer surfaces has been for many years mainly attributed to the van der Waals forces between these surfaces and the spatulae, or microscopic projections, which cover the hair-like setae found on their footpads. \nThere were efforts in 2008 to create a dry glue that exploits the effect, and success was achieved in 2011 to create an adhesive tape on similar grounds (i.e. based on van der Waals forces). In 2011, a paper was published relating the effect to both velcro-like hairs and the presence of lipids in gecko footprints.\nA later study suggested that capillary adhesion might play a role, but that hypothesis has been rejected by more recent studies.\nA 2014 study has shown that gecko adhesion to smooth Teflon and polydimethylsiloxane surfaces is mainly determined by electrostatic interaction (caused by contact electrification), not van der Waals or capillary forces.\nAmong the arthropods, some spiders have similar setae on their scopulae or scopula pads, enabling them to climb or hang upside-down from extremely smooth surfaces such as glass or porcelain.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70659", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70659", "title": "Lukas Moodysson", "text": "Swedish writer and film director\nKarl Fredrik Lukas Moodysson (; born 17 January 1969) is a Swedish filmmaker, novelist, and short story writer. First coming to prominence as an ambitious poet in the 1980s, he had his big domestic and international breakthrough directing the 1998 romantic film \"Show Me Love\". He has since directed a string of films with different styles and public appeal, as well as continued to write both poetry and novels. In 2007, \"The Guardian\" ranked Moodysson eleventh in its list of the world\u2019s best directors, describing his directorial style as \u201cheartfelt and uncompromising.\u201d\nEarly life.\nBorn in Lund, Moodysson grew up in \u00c5karp, Sk\u00e5ne County as an outcast, expressing himself through poetry. By the time he was 23 he had written five poetry collections and a novel published by Wahlstr\u00f6m &amp; Widstrand. He decided to move to film to produce works that were less introverted and could be enjoyed by a wider audience than poetry. After studying at what was then Sweden's only film school, the Dramatiska Institutet, he directed three short films before moving to features.\nFilmmaking.\nMoodysson's directorial breakthrough came with \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\" (retitled \"Show Me Love\" in English-speaking countries). A classical love story, filmed in a highly naturalistic, almost documentary style, it is set in the small and boring Swedish town of \u00c5m\u00e5l, and follows two girls who awkwardly fall in love. The film was a huge success with the Swedish public and critics. It won four Guldbagge Awards, including best film, best actress (shared by the two girls Rebecka Liljeberg and Alexandra Dahlstr\u00f6m), best direction and best script. It was a colossal hit in Sweden.\nHis next film, 2000's \"Together\" (Tillsammans), followed the antics of life in a commune in suburban Stockholm in the 1970s. It achieved a sense of the era through extensive use of period Swedish progg and pop songs, including ABBA's hit \"SOS.\"\nMoodysson followed up these two sunny, cheerfully optimistic films with the brutal \"Lilya 4-ever\" in 2002, included in many American critics' top ten lists the following year. The mainly Russian language film follows a girl living in an unspecified country in the former Soviet Union (filmed in Estonia) as she is abandoned by her mother, drops out of school, is forced into prostitution, and then is kidnapped into sex slavery. Moodysson has said he could not have made the film without his strong Christian beliefs. The frequent religious fantasies that Lilja has are the only tender spots in the bleak world Moodysson presents. At the time of its release, critic Dave Kehr of \"The New York Times\" declared Moodysson to be \"Sweden's most praised filmmaker since Ingmar Bergman\".\nHis 2004 film, the controversial \"A Hole in My Heart\" (Ett h\u00e5l i mitt hj\u00e4rta) is more an experimental film than a traditional narrative. He has said it is intentionally designed to be off-putting to the audience. It intersperses frequent screeching noises, close-ups of female genital surgery, and other jarring elements into a vague plot about two pornographers shooting their latest video in a filthy apartment, with an attention-craving porn starlet, while the webbed-handed son of one of the men stays holed up in his bedroom. It received a special certificate for shocking images in Sweden and received terrible reviews from the vast majority of critics.\nHe followed this with another even more experimental film, 2006's \"Container\", featuring narration by actress Jena Malone. The only sound in the movie is a stream of consciousness narrative, which is only loosely related to the visual content.\nMoodysson's work took a new turn with \"Mammoth\", released 23 January 2009. Unlike his previous two efforts, it is a narrative film and his first English-language piece, about a successful New York couple, their daughter and her Filipino nanny.\nHis 2013 film \"We are the Best!\" (Vi \u00e4r b\u00e4st!), based on the comic book \"Aldrig Godnatt\" by his wife Coco Moodysson, returns to the themes and style of \"Show Me Love\" and \"Together\", set in 1982 and following the exploits of a teenage three-piece girl punk-band.\nAll of Moodysson's feature films have been produced, or co-produced, by Memfis Film, a small Swedish production company based in Stockholm. Memfis' CEO and producer Lars J\u00f6nsson seeks to establish long-term working relationships with directors and support even less commercially oriented projects such as Moodysson's \"A Hole in My Heart\" and \"Container\".\n2019 saw the premiere of the TV series \"G\u00f6sta\", Moodysson's first foray into television and HBO's first commissioned drama series out of Scandinavia.\nMoodysson's\"Together 99\", a sequel \"Together\", was released in 2023. Set in 1999, it follows G\u00f6ran and Klas as they establish a new commune. Most of the actors returned, with the exception of the children, Michael Nyqvist (who died in 2017), and Ola Rapace, whose role of Lasse was recast with actor Jonas Karlsson.\nPersonal life.\nMoodysson is an outspoken advocate of left-wing and feminist politics, and a deeply committed Christian. He lives in Malm\u00f6 with his wife, artist Coco Moodysson. They have three children.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70660", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70660", "title": "Show me love", "text": ""}
{"id": "70661", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70661", "title": "Fanny Blankers-Koen", "text": "Dutch athlete (1918\u20132004)\nFrancina Elsje \"Fanny\" Blankers-Koen (; 26 April 1918\u00a0\u2013 25 January 2004) was a Dutch track and field athlete, best known for winning four gold medals at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. She competed there as a 30-year-old mother of two, earning her the nickname \"the Flying Housewife\", and was the most successful athlete at the event.\nHaving started competing in athletics in 1935, she took part in the 1936 Summer Olympics a year later. Although international competition was stopped by World War II, Blankers-Koen set several world records during that period, in events as diverse as the long jump, the high jump, and sprint and hurdling events.\nApart from her four Olympic titles, she won five European titles and 58 Dutch championships, and set or tied 12 world records \u2013 the last, in the pentathlon, in 1951 aged 33. She retired from athletics in 1955, after which she became captain of the Dutch female track and field team. In 1999, she was voted \"Female Athlete of the Century\" by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF). Her Olympic victories are credited with helping to eliminate the belief that age and motherhood were barriers to success in women's sport.\nEarly life.\nFanny Koen was born on 26 April 1918 in Lage Vuursche (near Baarn) to Arnoldus and Helena Koen. Her father was a government official who competed in the shot put and discus. She had five brothers. As a teenager, she enjoyed tennis, swimming, gymnastics, ice skating, fencing and running. Standing , she was a natural athlete. It soon became clear she had a talent for sports, but she could not decide which sport to pick. A swimming coach advised her to concentrate on running because there were already several top swimmers in the Netherlands at that time (such as Rie Mastenbroek), and she would have a better chance to qualify for the Olympics in a track event.\nHer first appearance in the sport was in 1935, aged 17. Her first competition was a disappointment, but in her third race, she set a national record in the 800\u00a0m. Fanny Koen soon made the Dutch team, although as a sprinter, not a middle-distance runner. At that time, 800\u00a0m was generally considered too physically demanding for female contestants and had been removed from the Olympic programme after 1928. The following year, her coach and future husband, Jan Blankers, a former Olympic triple-jumper who had participated in the 1928 Olympics, encouraged her to enter the trials for the 1936 Olympics in Berlin. At eighteen years old, she was selected to compete in the high jump and the 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay.\nAt the Berlin Olympics, the high jump and the 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay competitions were held on the same day. In the high jump, she took fifth place (shared with two other jumpers), while the Dutch relay team came in fifth in the final (the sixth team in the final, Germany, was disqualified). She also obtained the autograph of American athlete Jesse Owens; it became her most treasured possession.\nSlowly, Koen rose to the top. In 1938, she ran her first world record (11.0\u00a0seconds in the 100\u00a0yards), and she also won her first international medals. At the European Championships in Vienna, she won the bronze in both the 100 and 200\u00a0m, which were both won by Stanis\u0142awa Walasiewicz. Many observers, and Koen herself, expected her to do well at the upcoming Olympics, which were due to be held in Helsinki in July 1940.\nHowever, the outbreak of World War II put a stop to the preparations. The Olympics were formally cancelled on 2 May 1940, a week before the Netherlands was invaded.\nWorld War II.\nJust prior to the invasion, Koen had become engaged, and on 29 August 1940, she married Jan Blankers (who was fifteen years her senior), thereupon changing her name to Blankers-Koen. Blankers was then a sports journalist and the coach of the Dutch women's athletics team, even though he originally thought women should not compete in sports \u2013 not an unusual opinion at the time. However, his attitude toward female athletes changed after he fell in love with Koen.\nWhen Blankers-Koen gave birth to her first child, Jan Junior, in 1942, Dutch media automatically assumed her career would be over. Top female athletes who were married were rare at the time, and it was considered inconceivable that a mother would be an athlete. Blankers-Koen resumed training only weeks after their son's birth.\nDuring the war, domestic competition in sports continued in the German-occupied Netherlands, and Blankers-Koen set six new world records between 1942 and 1944. The first came in 1942, when she improved the world mark in the 80\u00a0m hurdles. The following year, she did even better. First, she improved the high jump record by an unequalled 5\u00a0cm from 1.66\u00a0m to 1.71\u00a0m in a specially arranged competition in Amsterdam on 30 May. Then, she tied the 100\u00a0m world record, but this was never recognised officially, as she competed against men when setting the record. She closed out the season with a new world record in the long jump, 6.25\u00a0m on 19 September 1943. The latter record would stand until 1954.\nCircumstances were not easy, and it became harder to get enough food, especially for an athlete in training. Despite this, Blankers-Koen managed to break the world record in May 1944. At the same meet, she ran with the relay team that broke the 4 \u00d7 world record. The German press was excited, as the previous record had been set by an English team. Months later, she helped break the 4 \u00d7 200\u00a0m record, which was held by Germany. In an act of defiance, the women wore outfits with national symbols while setting the record.\nThe winter of 1944\u201345, known as the \"Hongerwinter\" (hunger winter), was severe, and there was a serious lack of food, especially in the big cities. She gave birth to a daughter, Fanneke, in 1945 and in contrast to her previous post-birth activities, took seven months off from sport and only undertook limited training.\n\"The flying housewife\".\nThe first major international event after the war was the 1946 European Championships, held in Oslo, Norway. The championships were a slight disappointment. In the 100\u00a0m semi-finals, held during the high jump final, she fell and failed to qualify for the final. Competing with bruises from the fall, she ended the high jump competition in fourth. The second day was more successful, as she won the 80\u00a0m hurdles event, and led the Dutch relay team to victory in the 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m.\nAs the leading female athlete in the Netherlands \u2013 in 1947 she won national titles in six women's events \u2013 Blankers-Koen was assured of a place on the Dutch team for the first post-war Olympics, held in London. After her experience in Oslo, she decided not to take part in all events, but limit herself to four: she dropped the high jump and long jump to concentrate on the 100\u00a0m, the 200\u00a0m, the 80\u00a0m hurdles, and the 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay (competition rules also prevented an athlete from competing in more than three individual track and field events).\nAlthough she displayed her form two months before the Games by beating her own 80\u00a0m hurdles world record \u2013 one of the six world records that she held at that time \u2013 some journalists questioned her, suggesting 30 years was too old for a woman to be an athlete. The British athletics team's manager, Jack Crump, opined that she was \"too old to make the grade\". Many in the Netherlands were concerned for the welfare of the family, saying that she should stay at home to look after her children, not compete in athletics events.\nHer first competition was the 100\u00a0m, and she qualified easily for the semi-finals, in which she set the fastest time. The final (2 August) was held on a muddy track and in rainy conditions. Blankers-Koen sped to the finish line in 11.9, easily beating her opponents Dorothy Manley and Shirley Strickland, who took second and third.\nFanny Blankers-Koen thereby became the first Dutch athlete to win an Olympic title in athletics, but she was more concerned with her next event, the 80\u00a0m hurdles. Her chief opponent was Maureen Gardner, also coached by Blankers-Koen's husband and who had equalled Blankers-Koen's world record prior to the Games, and would be running for her home crowd. Both athletes made the final, in which Blankers-Koen got off to a bad start (she would later claim she thought there had been a false start).\nShe picked up the pace quickly, but was unable to shake off Gardner, who kept close until the finish line, and the two finished almost simultaneously. When the British national anthem was played, the crowd in Wembley Stadium cheered, and Blankers-Koen briefly thought she had been beaten. However, the anthem was played in honour of the British royal family, which entered the stadium at that time. Examination of the finish photo clearly showed that not Gardner, but Blankers-Koen had won, although both received the same time (11.2\u00a0seconds).\nIn spite of her successes, Blankers-Koen nearly failed to start in the semi-finals of the 200\u00a0m, held the day after the hurdles final. Shortly before the semi-final, she broke down because of homesickness. After a long talk with her husband, she decided to run anyway, and qualified for the final with great ease. The final, on 6 August, was again held in the pouring rain, but Blankers-Koen completed the inaugural Olympic 200\u00a0m for women in 24.4, seven-tenths of a second ahead of runner-up Audrey Williamson \u2013 still the largest margin of victory in an Olympic 200\u00a0m final. Audrey Patterson placed in third, thereby becoming the first African American woman to win an Olympic medal.\nThe 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m final was held on the final day of the track and field competitions. The Dutch team, consisting of Xenia Stad-de Jong, Netti Witziers-Timmer, Gerda van der Kade-Koudijs and Blankers-Koen, qualified for the final, but just before the final, Blankers-Koen was missing. She had gone out to shop for a raincoat, and arrived just in time for the race. As the last runner, she took over the baton in third place, some five meters behind the Australian and Canadian runners. In spite of a careful and slow exchange, she caught up with the leaders, crossing the line a tenth of a second before the Australian woman. In hindsight, the Dutch team should have been disqualified because the third runner crossed the line on the inside.\nFanny Blankers-Koen won four of the nine women's events at the 1948 Olympics, competing in eleven heats and finals in eight days. She was the first woman to win four Olympic gold medals, and achieved the feat in a single Olympics. Dubbed \"the flying housewife\", \"the flying Dutchmam\", and \"amazing Fanny\" by the international press, she was welcomed back home in Amsterdam by an immense crowd. After a ride through the city, pulled by four white horses, she received a lot of praise and gifts. From the city of Amsterdam, she received a new bicycle: \"to go through life at a slower pace\" and \"so she need not run so much\". Queen Juliana made her a knight of the Order of Orange Nassau.\nAfter London.\nNow known all over the world, Blankers-Koen received many offers for endorsements, advertisements, publicity stunts, and the like. Because of the strict amateurism rules in force at the time, she had to turn most offers down. However, a fortnight after the 1948 Olympics, she entertained 35,000 spectators by equalling her 100 m world record of 10.8 seconds on Lansdowne Road's \"heavy grass track\".\nAlso, in 1949, she travelled abroad to promote women's athletics, flying to Australia and the United States.\nBlankers-Koen had been chosen the 1948 Helms Athletic Foundation World Trophy Winner for Europe, and in 1949 she travelled to Los Angeles to compete in the Los Angeles Coliseum Relays.\nIn 1950, a controversial episode involving one of Blankers-Koen's competitors occurred. A year earlier, a new Dutch sprint talent, Foekje Dillema had made her breakthrough. In 1950, she broke the national record in the 200\u00a0m, and some journalists already dubbed her as the \"new Fanny\". That year, Dillema was the first subject of the International Association of Athletics Federations's mandatory sex verification policy and was subjected to a \"sex test\", the details of which were never revealed. As a result, she was expelled by the Royal Dutch Athletics Federation from athletics for the rest of her life and the 200\u00a0m record she took from Blankers-Koen was erased. Dillema, who never spoke publicly on the subject, died in December 2007.\nAfter the death of Dillema, a forensic test on body cells obtained from her clothing found that there was a Y-chromosome in Dillema's DNA, which indicated she was possibly a genetic mosaic or a true hermaphrodite. Most of the other women on the team at the time suspect it was an attempt by Blankers and Blankers-Koen to eliminate an opponent, although this has never been confirmed.\nThe same year, Blankers-Koen almost repeated her Olympic performance at the European Championships in Brussels. She won the titles in the 100\u00a0m, 200\u00a0m and 80\u00a0m hurdles, all with large margins of victory (four-tenths of a second or more), but narrowly missed out on a fourth win in the relay, which was won by the British team.\nAt age 34, she took part in her third Olympics, which were held in Helsinki. Although she was in good physical condition, she was severely hampered by a skin boil. She qualified for the 100\u00a0m semi-finals, but forfeited a start to save herself for the hurdles race. She reached the final in that event, but after knocking over the second hurdle, she abandoned the race. It was her last major competition. On 7 August 1955, Fanny Blankers-Koen was victorious for the last time, winning the national title in the shot put, her 58th Dutch title.\nLater life.\nAfter her athletic career, Blankers-Koen served as the team leader of the Dutch athletics team, from the 1958 European Championships to the 1968 Summer Olympics.\nIn 1977, Blankers-Koen's husband Jan died. Some years after his death, she moved back to her old hometown of Hoofddorp. In 1981, the Fanny Blankers-Koen Games, an international athletics event, were established. They are still held annually in Hengelo.\nBlankers-Koen's last moment of glory came in 1999. At a gala in Monaco, organized by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), she was declared the \"Female Athlete of the Century\". She was very surprised to have won, audibly asking \"You mean it is me who has won?\"\nIn the years prior to her death, Blankers-Koen suffered from Alzheimer's disease and lived in a psychiatric nursing home. She was also deaf. She died at age 85 in Hoofddorp on 25 January 2004.\nA year before her death, the first biography of Blankers-Koen was published, \"Een koningin met mannenbenen\" (\"A Queen with Men's Legs\") by journalist Kees Kooman. Through many interviews with relatives, friends and contemporary athletes, it paints a previously unknown picture of her. During her successful years, Dutch and international media portrayed her as the perfect mother (hence her nickname \"the flying housewife\"), who was modest about her own achievements. Kooman's book portrays Blankers-Koen in a different light, as a woman who found it difficult to show affection and who was driven by a desire to win. Blankers-Koen had previously written an autobiography in 1949 with help from her husband.\nHer personal record on the 100\u00a0m of 11.5 remained the Amsterdam club record of Phanos for 62 years. It was finally broken in May 2010 by Jamile Samuel.\nAwards and tributes.\nBlankers-Koen received the following recognition:\nThe Fanny Blankers-Koen Carri\u00e8reprijs was created by NOC*NSF to honour the achievements of Dutch sportspeople and was first given on 9 December 2005. For its inauguration, five people were awarded the prize. Since then, the award has been given to an individual annually.\nShe was among the women included in the \"1001 Vrouwen uit de Nederlandse geschiedenis\", a dictionary of biography covering 1001 important Dutchwomen. In a 2004 national poll, Blankers-Koen ranked 29th for De Grootste Nederlander (The Greatest Netherlander); she was the third highest sportsperson (after footballers Johan Cruyff and Marco van Basten) and the seventh highest woman in the poll.\nTwo public statues of her have been erected in the Netherlands: the first was made by Han Rehm and placed in Rotterdam in 1954 and the second, made by Antoinette Ruiter, was placed on 9 May 2007 in Hengelo. Also in 2007, a text was installed on the fence of the sportspark at Olympiaplein in Amsterdam declaring \"Hier trainde Fanny Blankers-Koen\" (\"Fanny Blankers-Koen trained here\").\nSeveral locations have been named in her honour, including Blankers-Koen Park in Newington, New South Wales, the location of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Village, a fire station in Amsterdam (Fanny Blankers-Koenkazerne), a multisport stadium in Hengelo (Fanny Blankers-Koen Stadium), a sports park in Almere (FBK-sportpark), and a sports hall in Hoofddorp where she lived (Fanny Blankers-Koen hal).\nBlankers-Koen was honoured with a Google Doodle on 26 April 2018, on her 100th birthday.\nCompetition results.\nInternational competitions.\nInformation from her World Athletics profile unless noted otherwise.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70662", "revid": "1003004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70662", "title": "Chaffing and winnowing", "text": "Cryptographic technique\nChaffing and winnowing is a cryptographic technique to achieve confidentiality without using encryption when sending data over an insecure channel. The name is derived from agriculture: after grain has been harvested and threshed, it remains mixed together with inedible fibrous chaff. The chaff and grain are then separated by winnowing, and the chaff is discarded. The cryptographic technique was conceived by Ron Rivest and published in an on-line article on 18 March 1998. Although it bears similarities to both traditional encryption and steganography, it cannot be classified under either category.\nThis technique allows the sender to deny responsibility for encrypting their message. When using chaffing and winnowing, the sender transmits the message unencrypted, in clear text. Although the sender and the receiver share a secret key, they use it only for authentication. However, a third party can make their communication confidential by simultaneously sending specially crafted messages through the same channel.\nHow it works.\nThe sender (Alice) wants to send a message to the receiver (Bob). In the simplest setup, Alice enumerates the symbols in her message and sends out each in a separate packet. If the symbols are complex enough, such as natural language text, an attacker may be able to distinguish the real symbols from poorly faked chaff symbols, posing a similar problem as steganography in needing to generate highly realistic fakes; to avoid this, the symbols can be reduced to just single 0/1 bits, and realistic fakes can then be simply randomly generated 50:50 and are indistinguishable from real symbols. In general the method requires each symbol to arrive in-order and to be authenticated by the receiver. When implemented over networks that may change the order of packets, the sender places the symbol's serial number in the packet, the symbol itself (both unencrypted), and a message authentication code (MAC). Many MACs use a secret key Alice shares with Bob, but it is sufficient that the receiver has a method to authenticate the packets.\nRivest notes an interesting property of chaffing-and-winnowing is that third parties (such as an ISP) can opportunistically add it to communications without needing permission or coordination with the sender/recipient. A third-party (dubbed \"Charles\") who transmits Alice's packets to Bob, interleaves the packets with corresponding bogus packets (called \"chaff\") with corresponding serial numbers, arbitrary symbols, and a random number in place of the MAC. Charles does not need to know the key to do that (real MACs are large enough that it is extremely unlikely to generate a valid one by chance, unlike in the example). Bob uses the MAC to find the authentic messages and drops the \"chaff\" messages. This process is called \"winnowing\".\nAn eavesdropper located between Alice and Charles can easily read Alice's message. But an eavesdropper between Charles and Bob would have to tell which packets are bogus and which are real (i.e. to winnow, or \"separate the wheat from the chaff\"). That is infeasible if the MAC used is secure and Charles does not leak any information on packet authenticity (e.g. via timing).\nIf a fourth party joins the example (named Darth) who wants to send counterfeit messages to impersonate Alice, it would require Alice to disclose her secret key. If Darth cannot force Alice to disclose an authentication key (the knowledge of which would enable him to forge messages from Alice), then her messages will remain confidential. Charles, on the other hand, is no target of Darth's at all, since Charles does not even possess any secret keys that could be disclosed.\nVariations.\nThe simple variant of the chaffing and winnowing technique described above adds many bits of overhead per bit of original message. To make the transmission more efficient, Alice can process her message with an all-or-nothing transform and then send it out in much larger chunks. The chaff packets will have to be modified accordingly. Because the original message can be reconstructed only by knowing all of its chunks, Charles needs to send only enough chaff packets to make finding the correct combination of packets computationally infeasible.\nChaffing and winnowing lends itself especially well to use in packet-switched network environments such as the Internet, where each message (whose payload is typically small) is sent in a separate network packet. In another variant of the technique, Charles carefully interleaves packets coming from multiple senders. That eliminates the need for Charles to generate and inject bogus packets in the communication. However, the text of Alice's message cannot be well protected from other parties who are communicating via Charles at the same time. This variant also helps protect against information leakage and traffic analysis.\nImplications for law enforcement.\nRon Rivest suggests that laws related to cryptography, including export controls, would not apply to \"chaffing and winnowing\" because it does not employ any encryption at all.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The power to authenticate is in many cases the power to control, and handing all authentication power to the government is beyond all reason\nThe author of the paper proposes that the security implications of handing everyone's authentication keys to the government for law-enforcement purposes would be far too risky, since possession of the key would enable someone to masquerade and communicate as another entity, such as an airline controller. Furthermore, Ron Rivest contemplates the possibility of rogue law enforcement officials framing up innocent parties by introducing the chaff into their communications, concluding that drafting a law restricting \"chaffing and winnowing\" would be far too difficult.\nTrivia.\nThe term \"winnowing\" was suggested by Ronald Rivest's father. Before the publication of Rivest's paper in 1998 other people brought to his attention a 1965 novel, Rex Stout's \"The Doorbell Rang\", which describes the same concept and was thus included in the paper's references.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70663", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70663", "title": "Brine", "text": "Concentrated solution of salt in water\nBrine (or briny water) is a high-concentration solution of salt (typically sodium chloride or calcium chloride) in water. In diverse contexts, \"brine\" may refer to the salt solutions ranging from about 3.5% (a typical concentration of seawater, on the lower end of that of solutions used for brining foods) up to about 26% (a typical saturated solution, depending on temperature). Brine forms naturally due to evaporation of ground saline water but it is also generated in the mining of sodium chloride. Brine is used for food processing and cooking (pickling and brining), for de-icing of roads and other structures, and in a number of technological processes. It is also a by-product of many industrial processes, such as desalination, so it requires wastewater treatment for proper disposal or further utilization (fresh water recovery).\nIn nature.\nBrines are produced in multiple ways in nature. Modification of seawater via evaporation results in the concentration of salts in the residual fluid, a characteristic geologic deposit called an evaporite is formed as different dissolved ions reach the saturation states of minerals, typically gypsum and halite. Dissolution of such salt deposits into water can produce brines as well. As seawater freezes, dissolved ions tend to remain in solution resulting in a fluid termed a cryogenic brine. At the time of formation, these cryogenic brines are by definition cooler than the freezing temperature of seawater and can produce a feature called a brinicle where cool brines descend, freezing the surrounding seawater.\nThe brine cropping out at the surface as saltwater springs are known as \"licks\" or \"salines\". The contents of dissolved solids in groundwater vary highly from one location to another on Earth, both in terms of specific constituents (e.g. halite, anhydrite, carbonates, gypsum, fluoride-salts, organic halides, and sulfate-salts) and regarding the concentration level. Using one of several classification of groundwater based on total dissolved solids (TDS), brine is water containing more than 100,000\u00a0mg/L TDS. Brine is commonly produced during well completion operations, particularly after the hydraulic fracturing of a well.\nUses.\nIodine and bromine mining.\nIodine, essential for human health, is obtained on a commercial scale from iodide-rich brines. The purification begins by converting iodide to hydroiodic acid, which is then oxidized to iodine using chlorine. The iodine is then separated by evaporation or adsorption. Bromine is also obtained from brines. Akin to the production of iodine, the process exploits the easy oxidation of bromide into bromine, again using chlorine as the oxidant. The product bromine can be selectively collected by exploiting its volatility.\nLithium and magnesium mining.\nMajor deposits of lithium are in the form of brines. Magnesium is also produced in part from waste brine from various sources, such as potash production. Crude magnesium oxides and chlorides mixtures are converted into magnesium metal by electrolysis.\nChlorine production.\nElemental chlorine can be produced by electrolysis of brine (NaCl solution). This process also produces sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrogen gas (H2). The reaction equations are as follows:\nRefrigerating fluid.\nBrine (primarily cheap brines based on calcium chloride and sodium chloride) is used as a secondary fluid in large refrigeration installations to transport thermal energy. It is used because the addition of salt to water lowers the freezing temperature of the solution, significantly enhancing its heat transport efficiency at low cost. The lowest freezing point obtainable for NaCl brine (called its eutectic point) is at the concentration of 23.3% NaCl by weight.\nBecause of their corrosive properties, salt-based brines have been replaced by organic liquids such as ethylene glycol.\nSodium chloride brine spray is used on some fishing vessels to freeze fish. The brine temperature is generally . Air blast freezing temperatures are or lower. Given the higher temperature of brine, the system efficiency over air blast freezing can be higher. High-value fish usually are frozen at much lower temperatures, below the practical temperature limit for brine.\nWater softening and purification.\nBrine is used for regeneration of ion-exchange resins. After treatment, ion-exchange resin beads saturated with calcium and magnesium ions from the treated water, are regenerated by soaking in brine containing 6\u201312% NaCl. The sodium ions from brine replace the calcium and magnesium ions on the beads.\nCulinary.\nBrine is a common agent in food processing and cooking. Brining is used to preserve or season the food. Brining can be applied to vegetables, cheeses, fruit and some fish in a process known as pickling. Meat and fish are typically steeped in brine for shorter periods of time, as a form of marination, enhancing its tenderness and flavor, or to enhance shelf period.\nDe-icing.\nIn lower temperatures, a brine solution can be used to de-ice or reduce freezing temperatures on roads.\nQuenching.\nQuenching is a heat-treatment process when forging metals such as steel. A brine solution, along with oil and other substances, is commonly used to harden steel. When brine is used, there is an enhanced uniformity of the cooling process and heat transfer.\nDesalination.\nThe desalination process consists of the separation of salts from an aqueous solution to obtain fresh water from a source of seawater or brackish water; and in turn, a discharge is generated, commonly called brine.\nCharacteristics.\nThe characteristics of the discharge depend on different factors, such as the desalination technology used, salinity and quality of the water used, environmental and oceanographic characteristics, desalination process carried out, among others. The discharge of desalination plants by seawater reverse osmosis (SWRO), are mainly characterized by presenting a salinity concentration that can, in the worst case, double the salinity of the seawater used, and unlike of thermal desalination plants, have practically the same temperature and dissolved oxygen as the seawater used.\nDissolved chemicals.\nThe discharge could contain trace chemical products used during the industrial treatments applies, such as antiscalants, coagulants, flocculants which are discarded together with the discharge, and which could affect the physical-chemical quality of the effluent. However, these are practically consumed during the process and the concentrations in the discharge are very low, which are practically diluted during the discharge, without affecting marine ecosystems.\nHeavy metals.\nThe materials used in SWRO plants are dominated by non-metallic components and stainless steels, since lower operating temperatures allow the construction of desalination plants with more corrosion-resistant coatings. Therefore, the concentration values of heavy metals in the discharge of SWRO plants are much lower than the acute toxicity levels to generate environmental impacts on marine ecosystems.\nDischarge.\nThe discharge is generally dumped back into the sea, through an underwater outfall or coastal release, due to its lower energy and economic cost compared to other discharge methods. Due to its increase in salinity, the discharge has a greater density compared to the surrounding seawater. Therefore, when the discharge reaches the sea, it can form a saline plume that can tends to follow the bathymetric line of the bottom until it is completely diluted. The distribution of the salt plume may depend on different factors, such as the production capacity of the plant, the discharge method, the oceanographic and environmental conditions of the discharge point, among others.\nMarine environment.\nBrine discharge might lead to an increase in salinity above certain threshold levels that has the potential to affect benthic communities, especially those more sensitive to osmotic pressure, finally having an effect on their abundance and diversity.\nHowever, if appropriate mitigation measures are applied, the potential environmental impacts of discharges from SWRO plants can be correctly minimized. Some examples can be found in countries such as Spain, Israel, Chile or Australia, in which the mitigation measures adopted reduce the area affected by the discharge, guaranteeing a sustainable development of the desalination process without significant impacts on marine ecosystems. When noticeable effects have been detected on the environment surrounding discharge areas, it generally corresponds to old desalination plants in which the correct mitigation measures were not implemented. Some examples can be found in Spain, Australia or Chile, where it has been shown that saline plumes do not exceed values of 5% with respect to the natural salinity of the sea in a radius less than 100 m from the point of discharge when proper measures are adopted.\nMitigation measures.\nThe mitigation measures that are typically employed to prevent negatively impacting sensitive marine environments are listed below:\nRegulation.\nCurrently, in many countries, such as Spain, Israel, Chile and Australia, the development of a rigorous environmental impact assessment process is required, both for the construction and operational phases. During its development, the most important legal management tools are established within the local environmental regulation, to prevent and adopt mitigation measures that guarantee the sustainable development of desalination projects. This includes a series of administrative tools and periodic environmental monitoring, to adopt preventive, corrective and further monitoring measures of the state of the surrounding marine environment.\nUnder the context of this environmental assessment process, numerous countries require compliance with an Environmental Monitoring Program (PVA), in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the preventive and corrective measures established during the environmental assessment process, and thus guarantee the operation of desalination plants without producing significant environmental impacts. The PVAs establishes a series of mandatory requirements that are mainly related to the monitoring of discharge, using a series of measurements and characterizations based on physical-chemical and biological information. In addition, the PVAs could also include different requirements related to monitoring the effects of seawater intake and those that may potentially be related to effects on the terrestrial environment.\nWastewater.\nBrine is a byproduct of many industrial processes, such as desalination, power plant cooling towers, produced water from oil and natural gas extraction, acid mine or acid rock drainage, reverse osmosis reject, chlor-alkali wastewater treatment, pulp and paper mill effluent, and waste streams from food and beverage processing. Along with diluted salts, it can contain residues of pretreatment and cleaning chemicals, their reaction byproducts and heavy metals due to corrosion.\nWastewater brine can pose a significant environmental hazard, both due to corrosive and sediment-forming effects of salts and toxicity of other chemicals diluted in it.\nUnpolluted brine from desalination plants and cooling towers can be returned to the ocean. From the desalination process, reject brine is produced, which proposes potential damages to the marine life and habitats. To limit the environmental impact, it can be diluted with another stream of water, such as the outfall of a wastewater treatment or power plant. Since brine is heavier than seawater and would accumulate on the ocean bottom, it requires methods to ensure proper diffusion, such as installing underwater diffusers in the sewerage. Other methods include drying in evaporation ponds, injecting to deep wells, and storing and reusing the brine for irrigation, de-icing or dust control purposes.\nTechnologies for treatment of polluted brine include: membrane filtration processes, such as reverse osmosis and forward osmosis; ion exchange processes such as electrodialysis or weak acid cation exchange; or evaporation processes, such as thermal brine concentrators and crystallizers employing mechanical vapour recompression and steam. New methods for membrane brine concentration, employing osmotically assisted reverse osmosis and related processes, are beginning to gain ground as part of zero liquid discharge systems (ZLD).\nComposition and purification.\nBrine consists of concentrated solution of Na+ and Cl\u2212 ions. Other cations found in various brines include K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and Sr2+. The latter three are problematic because they form scale and they react with soaps. Aside from chloride, brines sometimes contain Br\u2212 and I\u2212 and, most problematically, sulfate SO42\u2212. Purification steps often include the addition of calcium oxide to precipitate solid magnesium hydroxide together with gypsum (CaSO4), which can be removed by filtration. Further purification is achieved by fractional crystallization. The resulting purified salt is called evaporated salt or vacuum salt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70664", "revid": "406423272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70664", "title": "London force", "text": ""}
{"id": "70665", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70665", "title": "Church of Sweden", "text": "Evangelical Lutheran church\nThe Church of Sweden () is an Evangelical Lutheran national church in Sweden. A former state church, headquartered in Uppsala, with around 5.4 million members at year end 2024, it is the largest Christian denomination in Sweden.\nA member of the Porvoo Communion, the church professes Lutheranism. It is composed of thirteen dioceses, divided into parishes. It is a national church which covers the whole nation. The Primate of the Church of Sweden, as well as the Metropolitan of all Sweden, is the Archbishop of Uppsala.\nIt is liturgically and theologically \"high church\", having retained priests, vestments, and the Mass during the Swedish Reformation. In common with other Evangelical Lutheran churches (particularly in the Nordic and Baltic states), the Church of Sweden maintains the historical episcopate and claims apostolic succession. Some Lutheran churches have congregational polity or modified episcopal polity without apostolic succession, but the historic episcopate was maintained in Sweden and some of the other Lutheran churches of the Porvoo Communion. The canons of the Church of Sweden states that the faith, confession and teachings of the Church of Sweden are understood as an expression of the catholic Christian faith. It further states that this does not serve to create a new, confessionally peculiar interpretation, but concerns the apostolic faith as carried down through the traditions of the church, as the Lutheran Reformation aimed at conserving the faith and traditions of the Church while removing what it saw as medieval innovations.\nIts membership of 5,426,205 people accounts for 51.4% (per the end of 2024) of the Swedish population. Until 2000 it held the position of state church. The high membership numbers arise because, until 1996, all newborn children were made members, unless their parents had actively cancelled their membership. Approximately 2% of the church's members are regular attenders.\nTheology.\nKing Gustav Vasa instigated the Church of Sweden in 1536 during his reign as King of Sweden. This act separated the church from the Roman Catholic Church and its canon law. In 1571, the Swedish Church Ordinance became the first Swedish church order following the Reformation.\nThe Church of Sweden became Lutheran at the Uppsala Synod in 1593 when it adopted the Augsburg Confession to which most Lutherans adhere. At this synod, it was decided that the church would retain the three original Christian creeds: the Apostolic, the Athanasian, and the Nicene.\nIn 1686, the Riksdag of the Estates adopted the Book of Concord, although only certain parts, labelled , were considered binding, and the other texts merely explanatory. \"\" included the three aforementioned Creeds, the Augsburg Confession and two Uppsala Synod decisions from 1572 and 1593.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, a variety of teachings were officially approved, mostly directed towards ecumenism:\nIn practice, however, Lutheran creed texts play a minor role, and parishes instead rely on Lutheran tradition in conjunction with influences from other Christian denominations and diverse ecclesial movements, such as Low Church, High Church, Pietism (\"Old Church\"), and Laestadianism, which locally might be strongly established, but have little nationwide influence.\nDuring the 20th century, the Church of Sweden oriented itself strongly towards liberal Christianity and human rights. In 1957, the General Synod rejected a proposal for the ordination of women, but a revised Church Ordinance bill proposal from the Riksdag in the spring of 1958, along with the fact that, at the time, clergy of the Church of Sweden were legally considered government employees, put pressure on the General Synod and the College of Bishops to accept the proposal, which passed by a synod vote of 69 to 29 and a collegiate vote of 6 to 5 respectively in the autumn of 1958. Since 1960, women have been ordained as priests, and in 1982, lawmakers removed a \"conscience clause\" allowing clergy members to refuse to cooperate with female colleagues. A proposal to perform same-sex weddings was approved on 22 October 2009 by 176 of 249 voting members of the Church of Sweden Synod. In response to the rise of theological liberalism in the denomination, traditionalist clergy and laity from the Church of Sweden established, in 2003, the Mission Province of the Church of Sweden, a nonterritorial ecclesiastical province that only ordains men to holy orders and does not perform same-sex marriages. The Mission Province (Missionsprovinsen) is a member of the International Lutheran Council, which represents Confessional Lutheran bodies around the globe.\nIn 2000, the Church of Sweden ceased to be the state church, but it maintains strong ties with communities, particularly in relation to rites of passage. There are many infants baptized and teenagers confirmed (currently 40% of all 14 year olds) for families even without formal church membership.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhile some Swedish areas had Christian minorities in the 9th century, Sweden was, because of its geographical location in northernmost Europe, not Christianized until around AD 1000, around the same time as the other Nordic countries, when the Swedish King Olof was baptized. This left only a modest gap between the Christianization of Scandinavia and the Great Schism, however there are some Scandinavian/Swedish saints who are venerated eagerly by many Orthodox Christians, such as St. Olaf. However, Norse paganism and other pre-Christian religious systems survived in the territory of what is now Sweden later than that; for instance the important religious center known as the Temple at Uppsala at Gamla Uppsala was evidently still in use in the late 11th century, while there was little effort to introduce the S\u00e1mi of Lapland to Christianity until considerably after that.\nThe Christian church in Scandinavia was originally governed by the archdiocese of Bremen. In 1104, an archbishop for all Scandinavia was installed in Lund. Uppsala was made Sweden's archdiocese in 1164, and remains so today. The papal diplomat William of Modena attended a church meeting in Sk\u00e4nninge in March 1248, where the ties to the Catholic Church were strengthened.\nThe most cherished national Catholic saints were the 12th-century King Eric the Saint and the 14th-century visionary Bridget, but other regional heroes also had a local cult following, including Saint Botvid and Saint Eskil in S\u00f6dermanland, Saint Helena of Sk\u00f6vde, and Saint Sigfrid in Sm\u00e5land. In their names, miracles were performed and churches were named.\nReformation.\nShortly after seizing power in 1523, Gustav Vasa addressed the Pope in Rome with a request for the confirmation of Johannes Magnus as Archbishop of Sweden, in the place of Gustav Trolle who had been formally deposed and exiled by the Riksdag of the Estates.\nGustav promised to be an obedient son of the Church, if the pope would confirm the elections of his bishops. But the pope requested Trolle to be re-instated. King Gustav protested by promoting the Swedish reformers, the brothers Olaus and Laurentius Petri, and Laurentius Andreae. The king supported the printing of reformation texts, with the Petri brothers as the major instructors on the texts. In 1526, all Catholic printing presses were suppressed, and two-thirds of the Church's tithes were appropriated for the payment of the national debt. A final breach was made with the traditions of the old religion at the Riksdag called by the king at V\u00e4ster\u00e5s in 1544.\nOther changes of the Reformation included the abolition of some Catholic rituals. However, the changes were not as drastic as in Germany; as in Germany, Swedish churches kept not only crosses and crucifixes, but also icons and the traditional liturgical vestments which in Germany were usually discarded in favor of the black preaching gown and stole used until recent times. Many holy days, based on saints' days, were not removed from the calendar until the late 18th century due to strong resistance from the population.\nAfter the death of Gustav Vasa, Sweden was ruled by John III, who had Catholicizing tendencies, and then by his more openly Catholic son, Sigismund, who was also ruler of Catholic Poland. The latter was eventually deposed from the Swedish throne by his uncle, who acceded to the throne as Charles IX, and used the Lutheran church as an instrument in his power struggle against his nephew. He is known to have had Calvinist leanings.\nThe New Testament was translated into Swedish in 1526 and the entire Bible in 1541. Revised translations were published in 1618 and 1703. New official translations were adopted in 1917 and 2000. Many hymns were written by Swedish church reformers and several by Martin Luther were translated. A semi-official hymnal appeared in the 1640s. Official hymnals of the Church of Sweden () were adopted in 1695, 1819, 1937 and 1986. The last of these is ecumenical, and combines traditional hymns with songs from other Christian denominations, including Seventh-day Adventist, Baptist, Catholic, Mission Covenant, Methodist, Pentecostal, and the Salvation Army. In October 2013, the Church of Sweden elected Antje Jackel\u00e9n as Sweden's first female archbishop.\nEmigration aspects.\nIn the 1800s\u20131900s, the Church of Sweden supported the Swedish government by opposing both emigration and preachers' efforts recommending sobriety (alcoholic beverages are sold in Sweden by a government monopoly). This escalated to a point where its ministers were even persecuted by the church for preaching sobriety, and the reactions of many congregation members to that contributed to the desire to leave the country (which, however, was against the law until 1840).\nCoat of arms.\nThe 19th century coat of arms is based on that of the Archdiocese of Uppsala. It is blazoned \"Or on a cross Gules an open crown of the field\" and thus features a gold/yellow field with a red cross on which there is a gold/yellow crown. The crown is called the victory crown of Christ, based on the royal crowns used in medieval times and corresponds in form to the crowns in the Swedish coat of arms and to that resting on the head of Saint Eric in the coat of arms of Stockholm.\nSynodical structure.\nThe Church adopted, at the time that it was still a state church, an administrative structure largely modelled after the state. Direct elections are held to the General Synod (, The Church Assembly), and the diocesan and parish () assemblies (and in some cases, confederation of parishes (, 'church association') assemblies and directly elected parish councils). The electoral system is the same as used in the Swedish parliamentary or municipal elections (see Elections in Sweden). To vote in the Church general elections, one must be member of the Church of Sweden, at minimum 16 years of age, and nationally registered as living in Sweden.\nThe groups that take part in the elections are called nominating groups (). In some cases the nationwide political parties take part in the elections, such as the Social Democrats and the Centre Party. After the formal separation of Church of Sweden from the State of Sweden, the growing tendency in the elections is towards independent parties forming for candidature, either based on a political conviction, for example Folkpartister i Svenska kyrkan founded by Liberal People's Party members, or a pure church party such as the political independents' Partipolitiskt obundna i Svenska kyrkan (POSK) and Frimodig kyrka.\nOrdained ministry.\nThe Church of Sweden maintains the historic threefold ministry of bishops, priests, and deacons, and has approximately 5,000 ordained clergy in total.\nIt practices direct ordination, also called ordination (literally, ordination by a leap), in which candidates are directly ordained to the specific order of ministry for which they have trained. This is an alternative approach to the sequential ordination of other historic churches (including the Anglican, Orthodox, and Catholic churches) in which candidates must be ordained in the strict sequence of deacon, then priest, then bishop. A Church of Sweden priest can be ordained directly to that office, without any previous ordination as a deacon. All deacons of the Church of Sweden are, therefore, permanent deacons. The order of bishop is not entered through direct ordination, however, and a Church of Sweden bishop is required to be a validly ordained priest prior to their consecration; if a deacon or lay person were to be selected for the position, they would first be ordained as a priest.\nAfter the Reformation, the Swedish Church seems to have practiced variously both direct ordination and sequential ordination. Although direct ordination was more widespread, and became normative, the practice of sequential ordination is attested in the seventeenth century Swedish Church. Bishop Johannes Rudbeckius (1619\u20131646) habitually ordained men to the diaconate in advance of ordaining them to the priesthood, and this was said by Archbishop Johannes Lenaeus of Uppsala (in 1653) to be usual Church of Sweden practice.\nIn the Evangelical Lutheran churches, including the Church of Sweden, ministerial function is indicated by the usual vestments of western tradition, including the stole, worn straight by bishops, crossed by priests (wearing the stole straight by priests is only permitted when in choir dress, i.e., a surplice rather than an alb, as no cincture is then used that would permit crossing the stole), and diagonally across the left shoulder by deacons. However, whereas in Roman Catholic or Anglican ordinations the candidates for priesthood will already be wearing the diagonal deacon's stole, in the Church of Sweden candidates for both diaconate and priesthood are unordained at the start of the service. Tiit P\u00e4dam of Uppsala University and a Swedish-based priest of the Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church writes: \"At the beginning of the [Evangelical Lutheran] ordination service, the candidates are dressed in white albs and no one wears a stole at the beginning of the rite. In this way the churches express a significant aspect of their understanding of ordination. The white alb, used both by the ordinands to the diaconate as well as to the priesthood, is a sign that the ordination is a new beginning, rooted in the priesthood of all the baptised.\"\nThe Church of Sweden employs full-time deacons to staff its extensive outreach and social welfare \"diakonia\" programme. Whilst deacons have the traditional liturgical role (and vesture) in the Swedish Church, their principal focus of work is outside the parish community, working in welfare roles. Nonetheless, deacons are attached to local parishes to be connected with church communities, and with a parish priest.\nDioceses and bishops.\nThe Church of Sweden is divided into thirteen dioceses (), each with a bishop and cathedral chapter (Swedish: \"domkapitel\"). A bishop is elected by priests, deacons, and some laity in the diocese and is the chairman of the cathedral chapter. Priest and deacon members of a cathedral chapter are elected by priests and deacons in the diocese, while its lay members are selected by the , a body elected by church members.\nA diocese is divided into \"contracts\" \"kontrakt\" (deaneries), each with a \"kontraktsprost\" (provost), as the leader. Deaneries with a diocesan cathedral are called . Titular provosts can also sometimes be appointed, in Swedish called \"prost\" or . The dean and head minister of a cathedral is called \"domprost\", \"cathedral dean\" or \"cathedral provost\", and is a member of the cathedral chapter as its vice chairman.\nAt the parish level, a parish is called a \"f\u00f6rsamling\". A more archaic term for a parish in Swedish is \"socken\", which was used both in the registry and in the church administration. After the municipal reforms in 1862, the latter usage officially was replaced with , a term somewhat meaning 'congregation', originally and still used for the Lutheran territorial and nonterritorial congregations in cities and also for other religious congregations. One or several parishes are included in a with a head minister or vicar called a \"kyrkoherde\" (literally 'church shepherd') and sometimes other assistant priests called \"komminister\" (minister). At a cathedral an assistant minister is called a .\nIn addition to the 13 dioceses, the Church of Sweden Abroad ( \u2013 SKUT) maintains more than 40 overseas parishes. Originally a collection of overseas churches under the direction of a committee of the General Synod, SKUT was reorganised on 1 January 2012 with a quasi-diocesan structure. Under this reorganisation it gained a governing council, constituent seats on the General Synod of the Church of Sweden (like the 13 mainland dioceses), and for the first time, full-time deacons to provide a programme of social welfare alongside the work of priests and lay workers. However, SKUT does not have its own bishop, and is placed under the episcopal oversight of the Bishop of Visby.\nThe Diocese of Kalmar existed as a \"superintendentia\" from 1603 to 1678 and as a diocese between 1678 and 1915, at which time it was merged with the Diocese of V\u00e4xj\u00f6. Another diocese which no longer exists is the Diocese of Mariestad, which existed as between 1580 and 1646 and was replaced by the Diocese of Karlstad.\nThe dioceses of Uppsala, Str\u00e4ngn\u00e4s, V\u00e4ster\u00e5s, Skara, Link\u00f6ping, V\u00e4xj\u00f6, and the now-Finnish Diocese of Turku, are the original seven Swedish dioceses, dating from the Middle Ages. The rest have come into existence after that time and the Swedish reformation in the 16th century. The Diocese of Lund was founded in 1060, became an archdiocese in 1104, and lay in Denmark. The Province of Lund consisted of Denmark, Sweden, and Finland throughout the Middle Ages (originally also Norway and Iceland), although Uppsala had their own subordinate ecclesiastical province and archbishop from 1164.\nWhen Eva Brunne was consecrated as Bishop of Stockholm in 2009, she became the first openly lesbian bishop in the world.\nMonasteries and convents.\nThe Church of Sweden has several monastic communities.\nPartner churches.\nThe Church of Sweden is a founding member of the Lutheran World Federation, formed in Lund, Sweden in 1947. Anders Nygren, later the Bishop of Lund, served as the first President of the Lutheran World Federation.\nSince 1994, the Church of Sweden has been part of the Porvoo Communion, bringing it into full Communion with the Anglican churches of the British Isles and the Iberian Peninsula, together with the other Lutheran churches of the Nordic nations and the Baltic states. In 1995, full communion was achieved with the Philippine Independent Church. Since 2015, the Church of Sweden has also been in full communion with the Episcopal Church of the United States.\nIn 2016, the Church of Sweden reached full communion with the Old Catholic churches within the Union of Utrecht.\nS\u00e1mi relations.\nIn 2021, the Church of Sweden apologized for its abuse of S\u00e1mi over several centuries, including forcible Christianization, the mistreatment of children in S\u00e1mi schools, and collecting the remains of S\u00e1mi people for research on scientific racism and eugenics. The Church of Sweden described their \"dark actions\" against the S\u00e1mi as \"colonial\" and \"legitimized repression\". Prior to apologizing, the Church of Sweden had produced a 1,100 page long document in 2019 compiling the church's history of oppressing S\u00e1mi people and erasing S\u00e1mi culture.\nSee also.\n%5B%5BWP%3ACSD%23G6%7CG6%5D%5D%3A%20%5B%5BWikipedia%3ATemplates%20for%20discussion/Log/none%20%7D%7D%23Template%3AChurch%20of%20Sweden%5D%5D\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70666", "revid": "1315254851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70666", "title": "Yves Montand", "text": "French-Italian actor and singer (1921\u20131991)\nIvo Livi (; 13 October 1921 \u2013 9 November 1991), better known as Yves Montand (), was an Italian-born French actor and singer. He is said to be one of France's greatest 20th-century artists.\nEarly life.\nMontand was born Ivo Livi in Stignano, a small village in the hills of Monsummano Terme, Tuscany, Italy, to Giovanni Livi, a broom manufacturer. Montand's mother Giuseppina Simoni was a devout Catholic. The family left Italy for France in 1923 following fascist Benito Mussolini's rise to power. He grew up in Marseille, where, as a young man, he worked in his sister's beauty salon (Salon de Coiffure), as well as later on the docks. He began a career in show business as a music-hall singer. In 1944, he was discovered by \u00c9dith Piaf in Paris; she made him part of her act.\nCareer.\nMontand achieved international recognition as a singer and actor, starring in many films. He is recognised for crooner style songs, with those about Paris becoming instant classics. He was one of the best known performers at Bruno Coquatrix's Paris Olympia music hall, and toured with musicians including Didi Duprat. In October 1947, he sang \"Mais qu'est-ce que j'ai ?\" (music by Henri Betti and lyrics by \u00c9dith Piaf) at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u00c9toile. Betti also asked him to sing \"C'est si bon\" but Montand refused. Following the success of the recording of this song by the S\u0153urs \u00c9tienne in 1948, he decided to record it. Montand was also very popular in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, where he did a concert tour in 1956-57.\nDuring his career, Montand acted in American motion pictures as well as on Broadway. He was nominated for a C\u00e9sar Award for Best Actor in 1980 for \"I comme Icare\" and again in 1984 for \"Gar\u00e7on!\" In 1986, after his international box-office draw power had fallen off considerably, the 65-year-old Montand gave one of his best remembered performances, as the scheming uncle in \"Jean de Florette\", co-starring G\u00e9rard Depardieu, and \"Manon des Sources\" (both 1986), co-starring Emmanuelle B\u00e9art. The film was a worldwide critical hit and revived Montand's profile in the United States, where he made an appearance on \"Late Night with David Letterman\".\nPersonal life.\nIn 1951, he married Simone Signoret, and they co-starred in several films throughout their careers. The marriage was, by all accounts, fairly harmonious, lasting until her death in 1985, although Montand had a number of well-publicised affairs, notably with American actress Marilyn Monroe, with whom he starred in one of her final films, \"Let's Make Love\". He was the stepfather to Signoret's daughter from her previous marriage, Catherine All\u00e9gret.\nMontand's only child, a son named Valentine by his second wife, Carole Amiel (b. 1960), was born in 1988. In a paternity suit that caused commotion across France, another woman accused Montand of being the father of her daughter and went to court to obtain a DNA sample from him. Montand refused, but the woman persisted even after his death. In a court ruling that made international headlines, the woman won the right to have Montand exhumed and a sample taken. The results indicated that he was not the girl's biological father.\nHe supported left-wing causes during the 1950s and 1960s, and attended Communist festivals and meetings. By the mid-1980s his views had shifted to the right, and he became a spokesman for many rightist causes.\nSignoret and Montand had a home in Autheuil-Authouillet, Normandy, where the main village street is named after him.\nIn his later years, he maintained a home in Saint-Paul-de-Vence, Provence, until his death from a heart attack in November 1991. In an interview, Jean-Jacques Beineix said, \"[H]e died on the set [of \"IP5: The Island of Pachyderms\"]... On the very last day, after his very last shot. It was the very last night and we were doing retakes. He finished what he was doing and then he just died. And the film tells the story of an old man who dies from a heart attack, which is the same thing that happened!\" Montand is interred next to his first wife, Simone Signoret, in P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.\nIn 2004, Catherine All\u00e9gret, Signoret's daughter from her first marriage to director Yves All\u00e9gret, alleged in her autobiography \"Un monde a l'envers\" (\"A World Upside Down\") that she had been sexually abused by her stepfather from the age of five; his behaviour apparently continued for many years and he had a \"more than equivocal attitude to her\" as she got older. However, she also claimed to have reconciled with him in the latter years of his life.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70667", "revid": "51065926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70667", "title": "National Archives and Records Administration", "text": "United States government agency\nThe National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is an independent agency of the United States federal government within the executive branch, charged with the preservation and documentation of government and historical records. It is also tasked with increasing public access to those documents that make up the National Archives. NARA is officially responsible for maintaining and publishing the legally authentic and authoritative copies of acts of Congress, presidential directives, and federal regulations. NARA also transmits votes of the Electoral College to Congress. It also examines Electoral College and constitutional amendment ratification documents for prima facie legal sufficiency and an authenticating signature.\nThe National Archives was established in 1934, headed by the archivist of the United States, and took its present form as NARA in 1985. The neoclassical National Archives Building in Washington, D.C. publicly exhibits the Charters of Freedom, which include the original United States Declaration of Independence, Constitution of the United States, United States Bill of Rights, Emancipation Proclamation (starting in 2026), and many other historical documents.\nOrganization.\nThe mission of the National Archives is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We drive openness, cultivate public participation, and strengthen our nation's democracy through equitable public access to high-value government records.\nThe work of the National Archives is dedicated to two main functions: public engagement and federal records and information management. The National Archives administers fifteen Presidential Libraries and Museums, a museum in Washington, D.C., that displays the Charters of Freedom, and fifteen research facilities across the country. The agency's online catalog makes available over 160 million records ranging from before the start of the republic to the modern government. However, the digitized records represent only a small fraction of the over 13 billion pages in the holdings of the National Archives.\nThe National Archives governs federal records and information policy for the executive branch and preserves and makes available the records of the judicial and legislative branches. Agencies in the executive branch are required by the Federal Records Act to follow approved records schedules. All records maintained by the executive branch must be properly identified by NARA and authorized for eventual destruction or appraised to be of permanent historical or legal value to be preserved and made available to the public. Only two to three percent of records created by the federal government are deemed to be of permanent value. The Presidential Records Act mandates that all records created by the Executive Office of the President are to be preserved and transferred to the National Archives at the end of a president's administration.\nThe Archivist of the United States is the chief official overseeing the operation of the National Archives and Records Administration. The Archivist not only maintains the official documentation of the passage of amendments to the U.S. Constitution by state legislatures, but has the authority to declare when the constitutional threshold for passage has been reached, and therefore when an act has become an amendment.\nThe Office of the Federal Register publishes the \"Federal Register\", \"Code of Federal Regulations\", and \"United States Statutes at Large\", among others. It also administers the Electoral College.\nThe National Historical Publications and Records Commission (NHPRC)\u2014the agency's grant-making arm\u2014awards funds to state and local governments, public and private archives, colleges and universities, and other nonprofit organizations to preserve and publish historical records. Since 1964, the NHPRC has awarded some 4,500 grants.\nThe Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) is a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) resource for the public and the government. Congress has charged NARA with reviewing FOIA policies, procedures, and compliance of federal agencies and to recommend changes to FOIA. NARA's mission also includes resolving FOIA disputes between federal agencies and requesters.\nHistory.\nJ. Franklin Jameson and the American Historical Association campaigned for the creation of the National Archives.\nOriginally, each branch and agency of the U.S. government was responsible for maintaining its own documents, which often resulted in the loss and destruction of records. Congress created the National Archives Establishment in 1934 to centralize federal record-keeping, with the Archivist of the United States serving as chief administrator. R. D. W. Connor was chosen to be the first leader of the organization.\nAfter a recommendation by the first Hoover Commission in 1949, the National Archives was placed within the newly formed General Services Administration (GSA). NARA was officially given its independence from the GSA with the passing of the Records Administration Act of 1984, thus giving birth to the institution that exists today.\nOn December 7, 1978, more than 12.6 million feet of newsreels were destroyed in a fire at an offsite location in Suitland, Maryland. The reels, made of exceptionally flammable nitrate material, had been donated previously by Universal Pictures and were stored in special vaults intended to protect against fires.\nIn March 2006, it was revealed by the Archivist of the United States in a public hearing that a memorandum of understanding between NARA and various government agencies existed to \"reclassify,\" i.e., withdraw from public access, certain documents in the name of national security, and to do so in a manner such that researchers would not be likely to discover the process (the U.S. reclassification program). An audit indicated that more than one third withdrawn since 1999 did not contain sensitive information. The program was originally scheduled to end in 2007.\nIn 2008 the NARA announced that they would not be archiving government websites during transition, after carrying out such crawls in 2000 and 2004. The End of Term Web Archive was established in response to this.\nIn 2010, Executive Order 13526 created the National Declassification Center to coordinate declassification practices across agencies, provide secure document services to other agencies, and review records in NARA custody for declassification.\nA 2022 report by the National Security Archive revealed that the National Archives budget (when adjusted for inflation) has not increased since 1991 despite the exponential growth of electronic records created by the federal government.\nFirst Trump Administration.\nUnder the first Trump Administration, the National Archives had significant difficulty maintaining historical records as the President would often rip, flush, and otherwise discard records, which would then have to be reconstructed and reclaimed by White House and NARA archivists. Additionally, according to multiple former staff, the President would ask to keep certain records that otherwise would be returned.\nAs part of its role in receiving and authenticating Electoral College votes, the agency intercepted and rejected forged certificates of ascertainment from Trump allies in seven states who were strategizing to overturn the 2020 presidential election.\nUpon leaving office in 2021, Donald Trump delayed providing material to the National Archives in accordance with the Presidential Records Act. In February 2022, U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland announced that the National Archives had notified the Justice Department that it found classified documents within boxes provided to them from the former-president Donald Trump's residence at Mar-a-Lago. After further investigation, the Federal Bureau of Investigation executed a warrant for a search of the residence in August 2022.\nSecond Trump Administration.\nIn February 2025, early in his second administration, Trump fired archivist Colleen Shogan. Deputy archivist William J. Bosanko then became acting archivist, but he and several other NARA staff members announced they would be resigning. On February 16, Trump announced that Jim Byron would be serving as senior advisor to acting archivist, Secretary of State Marco Rubio. In an email sent to National Archives staff in February 2025, Byron stated that NARA \"is strategically examining its operations agency-wide to ensure that it makes the best use of the funds it has been given by the American taxpayers and that all of its operations closely track with its mission and Congressional statutes.\" \nRecords.\nNARA's holdings are classed into \"record groups\" reflecting the governmental department or agency from which they originated. Records include paper documents, microfilm, still pictures, motion pictures, and electronic media.\nArchival descriptions of the permanent holdings of the federal government in the custody of NARA are stored in the National Archives Catalog. The archival descriptions include information on traditional paper holdings, electronic records, and artifacts. As of December 2012,[ [update]] the catalog consisted of about 10 billion logical data records describing 527,000 artifacts and encompassing 81% of NARA's records. There are also 922,000 digital copies of already digitized materials.\nMost records at NARA are in the public domain, as works of the federal government are excluded from copyright protection. However, records from other sources may still be protected by copyright or donor agreements. Executive Order 13526 directs originating agencies to declassify documents if possible before shipment to NARA for long-term storage, but NARA also stores some classified documents until they can be declassified. Its Information Security Oversight Office monitors and sets policy for the U.S. government's security classification system.\nGenealogical requests.\nMost people who access records at NARA are genealogists or family historians. While many records are available online through the National Archives Catalog, individuals can also request paper copies and microfilm scans. When applicable, the catalog will indicate a document's physical location in a National Archives facility.\nCensus records are among the most frequently requested at NARA, with the oldest entries from 1790. These records often contain information such as addresses and names of family members. However, all pieces of personal data are restricted for 72 years after collection; prior to then, federal agencies can only access statistical data. The newest unrestricted census is from 1950 and was released to the general public in April 2022. The subsequent census from 1960 will be released in April 2032.\nNARA has also collaborated with Ancestry.com, Fold3.com, and Familysearch.org to scan microfilms and documents of genealogical interest. These digitization partners have expanded the number of genealogical sources on their respective websites, such as ship passenger lists and military records. NARA will eventually offer free access to all digitized sources through the National Archives Catalog. However, many file collections are not available for public viewing either through NARA or affiliate websites. This includes naturalization records and vital records that reveal extensive personal data. Depending on a requestor's verifiable relation to a subject of interest, restricted files may be obtainable under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).\nSince 2005, NARA has held annual Genealogy Fairs with guest speakers and research workshops. These events are free of charge and are designed for interested individuals of any skill level. Materials from past Genealogy Fairs are available on the National Archives website.\nFounders Online.\nIn 2010, the Archives, in a cooperative agreement with the University of Virginia Press, created Founders Online, a website for providing free public access to the papers and letters of seven of the nation's most influential founders: John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and George Washington. Launched three years later, in 2013, the website currently provides access to a database of 185,000 digitized documents that have been annotated through founding fathers papers projects at five university presses over the past 50 years. In addition to the University of Virginia's, the presses include those at Columbia, Harvard, Princeton, and Yale.\nArchival Recovery Team.\nIn 2006, the NARA's Office of the Inspector General created the Archival Recovery Team to investigate thefts and recover records stolen from the archive's collections. Responsibility for non-law enforcement recovery activities has since been transferred to the NARA Office of the Chief Operating Officer.\nNational Archives and Records Administration UAP Collection.\nIn 2023, the 118th United States Congress and President of the United States Joe Biden passed into law the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2024, which included provisions of the Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena Disclosure Act. With enactment of the 2023 NDAA, NARA had been given a legal deadline of 60 days, for the Archivist to \"commence establishment of a collection of unidentified anomalous phenomena.\" According to NARA, the \"Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena (UAP) Records Collection will consist of 'copies of all Government, Government-provided, or Government-funded records relating to unidentified anomalous phenomena, technologies of unknown origin, and non-human intelligence (or equivalent subjects by any other name with the specific and sole exclusion of temporarily non-attributed objects).'\" NARA specified that the only allowed reasons for non-compliance by any party in the Federal government was per section 1843 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2024 or Executive Order 13526, signed by President Barack Obama in 2009. The law continued in its mandate for the Archivist and NARA, of the detailed records and materials of non-human intelligence origins, \"which shall be transmitted to the National Archives in accordance with section 2107 of title 44, United States Code.\"\nFacilities and exhibition spaces.\nThe most well-known facility of the National Archives and Records Administration is the National Archives Building (informally known as \"Archives I\"), located north of the National Mall on Constitution Avenue in Washington, D.C. A sister facility, known as the National Archives at College Park (\"Archives II\") was opened in 1994 near the University of Maryland, College Park. The Washington National Records Center (WNRC), also located in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area, is a large warehouse facility where federal records that are still under the control of the creating agency are stored. Federal government agencies pay a yearly fee for storage at the facility. In accordance with federal records schedules, documents at WNRC are transferred to the legal custody of the National Archives after a certain time; this usually involves a relocation of the records to College Park. Temporary records at WNRC are either retained for a fee or destroyed after retention times have elapsed. WNRC also offers research services and maintains a small research room.\nAcross the United States, the National Archives maintains both research facilities and additional federal records centers (FRCs). In many cases, the research rooms of regional archives are located at the same site as the federal records center, which is inaccessible to the public.\nIn April 2019 an unknown person set fire to an exterior wall of the archives building using a homemade incendiary device before firefighters were able to extinguish the flames.\nPublic Relations.\nPublic\u2013private partnerships.\nIn an effort to make its holdings more widely available and more easily accessible, the National Archives began entering into public\u2013private partnerships in 2006. A joint venture with Google will digitize and offer NARA video online. When announcing the agreement, Archivist Allen Weinstein said that this pilot program is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0an important step for the National Archives to achieve its goal of becoming an archive without walls. Our new strategic plan emphasizes the importance of providing access to records anytime, anywhere. This is one of many initiatives that we are launching to make our goal a reality. For the first time, the public will be able to view this collection of rare and unusual films on the Internet.\nOn January 10, 2007, the National Archives and Fold3.com (formerly Footnote) launched a pilot project to digitize historic documents from the National Archives holdings. Allen Weinstein explained that this partnership would \"allow much greater access to approximately 4.5\u00a0million pages of important documents that are currently available only in their original format or on microfilm\" and \"would also enhance NARA's efforts to preserve its original records.\"\nIn July 2007, the National Archives announced it would make copies of its collection of Universal Newsreels from 1929 to 1967 available for purchase through CreateSpace, an Amazon.com subsidiary. During the announcement, Weinstein noted that the agreement would \"...reap major benefits for the public-at-large and for the National Archives,\" adding, \"While the public can come to our College Park, Maryland, research room to view films and even copy them at no charge, this new program will make our holdings much more accessible to millions of people who cannot travel to the Washington, D.C. area.\" The agreement also calls for CreateSpace partnership to provide the National Archives with digital reference and preservation copies of the films as part of NARA's preservation program.\nSocial media.\nThe National Archives currently utilizes social media and Web 2.0 technologies in an attempt to communicate better with the public.\nOn June 18, 2009, the National Archives announced the launching of a YouTube channel \"to showcase popular archived films, inform the public about upcoming events around the country, and bring National Archives exhibits to the people.\" Also in 2009, the National Archives launched a Flickr photostream to share portions of its photographic holdings with the general public. A new teaching-with-documents Web site premiered in 2010 and was developed by the education team. The site features 3,000 documents, images, and recordings from the holdings of the Archives. It also features lesson plans and tools for creating new classroom activities and lessons.\nIn 2011, the National Archives initiated a WikiProject on the English Wikipedia to expand collaboration in making its holdings widely available through Wikimedia.\nCitizen Archivist Project.\nIn 2011, the Citizen Archivist Project was launched by former Archivist of the United States David Ferriero. It is an online crowdsourced transcription project hosted by the National Archives and Records Administration that aims to make digitized records more accessible. The online dashboard provides a space for volunteer \"archivists\" to transcribe and tag any of the millions of digitized records in the NARA database. Transcription and tagging of digitized records increases the amount of descriptive data available, to be used by researchers and the public when searching in the NARA Catalog. Thousands of volunteers have contributed to the project since its start, many of which through the Citizen Archivist Missions. Missions are curated sets of digitized records on a certain topic that haven't been transcribed or tagged. \nControversies.\nIn December 2019, the National Archives approved record schedules for federal records created by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) which documented detainee sexual abuse and assault, death review files, detention monitoring reports, detainee escape reports, detainee segregation files, and Detention Information Reporting Line records. The schedules permitted ICE to destroy the records when they were no longer needed for business use. The schedules were approved without changes despite public outcry when they were first proposed in the \"Federal Register\". A lawsuit was brought against the National Archives by several plaintiffs, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, the American Historical Association, and the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations. In March 2021, a federal judge for the District Court for the District of Columbia ruled against the National Archives that the records must be preserved stating, \"NARA's approval of the schedule was arbitrary and capricious on the grounds that NARA failed to evaluate the research value of the ICE records and that NARA failed to address significant and relevant public comments.\"\nIn January 2020, a \"Washington Post\" reporter noticed blurred protest signs in an image of the 2017 Women's March at the Archives' public exhibit. Some of the edited signs contained potentially offensive language, and some mentioned president Donald Trump. Besides censoring language, the changes altered the meaning of some protest signs. The agency defended the edits and said they were made \"so as not to engage in current political controversy ,\" but admitted it \"made a mistake... we were wrong to alter the image.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates https:// from \nExternal links.\nMiscellaneous"}
{"id": "70668", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70668", "title": "Elysian fields", "text": ""}
{"id": "70669", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70669", "title": "OTEC", "text": ""}
{"id": "70670", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70670", "title": "Dead sea", "text": ""}
{"id": "70671", "revid": "50825567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70671", "title": "Stress\u2013energy tensor", "text": "Tensor describing energy momentum density in spacetime\nThe stress\u2013energy tensor, sometimes called the stress\u2013energy\u2013momentum tensor or the energy\u2013momentum tensor, is a tensor field quantity that describes the density and flux of energy and momentum at each point in spacetime, generalizing the stress tensor of Newtonian physics. It is an attribute of matter, radiation, and non-gravitational force fields. This density and flux of energy and momentum are the sources of the gravitational field in the Einstein field equations of general relativity, just as mass density is the source of such a field in Newtonian gravity.\nDefinition.\nThe stress\u2013energy tensor involves the use of superscripted variables (not exponents; see \"Tensor index notation\" and \"Einstein summation notation\"). The four coordinates of an event of spacetime x are given by \"x\"0, \"x\"1, \"x\"2, \"x\"3. These are customarily set as \"t\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\", where \"t\" is the time coordinate, and \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" are spatial coordinates.\nThe stress\u2013energy tensor is defined as the tensor \"T\"\"\u03b1\u03b2\" of order two that gives the flux of the \u03b1th component of the momentum vector across a surface with constant coordinate \"x\"\"\u03b2\". In the theory of relativity, this momentum vector is taken as the four-momentum. In general relativity, the stress\u2013energy tensor is symmetric,\nformula_1\nIn some alternative theories like Einstein\u2013Cartan theory, the stress\u2013energy tensor may not be perfectly symmetric because of a nonzero spin tensor, which geometrically corresponds to a nonzero torsion tensor.\nComponents.\nBecause the stress\u2013energy tensor is of order 2, its components can be displayed in 4 \u00d7 4 matrix form:\nformula_2\nwhere the indices \u03bc and \u03bd take on the values 0, 1, 2, 3. Each component of the stress\u2013energy tensor has a direct physical interpretation.\nIn the following, k and \u2113 range from 1 through 3.\nIn solid state physics and fluid mechanics, the stress tensor is defined to be the spatial components of the stress\u2013energy tensor in the proper frame of reference. In other words, the stress\u2013energy tensor in engineering \"differs\" from the relativistic stress\u2013energy tensor by a momentum-convective term.\nCovariant and mixed forms.\nMost of this article works with the contravariant form, \"T\"\"\u03bc\u03bd\" of the stress\u2013energy tensor. However, it is often convenient to work with the covariant form,\nformula_3\nor the mixed form,\nformula_4\nThis article uses the spacelike sign convention (\u2212 + + +) for the metric signature.\nConservation law.\nIn special relativity.\nThe stress\u2013energy tensor is the conserved Noether current associated with spacetime translations.\nThe divergence of the non-gravitational stress\u2013energy is zero. In other words, non-gravitational energy and momentum are conserved,\nformula_5\nThe integral form of the non-covariant formulation is\nformula_6\nwhere N is any compact four-dimensional region of spacetime; formula_7 is its boundary, a three-dimensional hypersurface; and formula_8 is an element of the boundary regarded as the outward pointing normal.\nIn flat spacetime and using linear coordinates, if one combines this with the symmetry of the stress\u2013energy tensor, one can show that angular momentum is also conserved:\nformula_9\nIn general relativity.\nWhen gravity is non-negligible or when using arbitrary coordinate systems, the divergence of the stress\u2013energy still vanishes. But in this case, a coordinate-free definition of the divergence is used which incorporates the covariant derivative\nformula_10\nwhere formula_11 is the Christoffel symbol, which is the gravitational force field.\nConsequently, if formula_12 is any Killing vector field, then the conservation law associated with the symmetry generated by the Killing vector field may be expressed as\nformula_13\nThe integral form of this is\nformula_14\nIn special relativity.\nIn special relativity, the stress\u2013energy tensor contains information about the energy and momentum densities of a given system, in addition to the momentum and energy flux densities.\nGiven a Lagrangian density formula_15 that is a function of a set of fields formula_16 and their derivatives, but explicitly not of any of the spacetime coordinates, we can construct the canonical stress\u2013energy tensor by looking at the total derivative with respect to one of the generalized coordinates of the system. So, with our condition\nformula_17\nBy using the chain rule, we then have\nformula_18\nWritten in useful shorthand,\nformula_19\nThen, we can use the Euler\u2013Lagrange Equation:\nformula_20\nAnd then use the fact that partial derivatives commute so that we now have\nformula_21\nWe can recognize the right hand side as a product rule. Writing it as the derivative of a product of functions tells us that\nformula_22\nNow, in flat space, one can write formula_23. Doing this and moving it to the other side of the equation tells us that\nformula_24\nAnd upon regrouping terms,\nformula_25\nThis is to say that the divergence of the tensor in the brackets is 0. Indeed, with this, we define the stress\u2013energy tensor:\nformula_26\nBy construction it has the property that\nformula_27\nNote that this divergenceless property of this tensor is equivalent to four continuity equations. That is, fields have at least four sets of quantities that obey the continuity equation. As an example, it can be seen that formula_28 is the energy density of the system and that it is thus possible to obtain the Hamiltonian density from the stress\u2013energy tensor.\nIndeed, since this is the case, observing that formula_29, we then have\nformula_30\nWe can then conclude that the terms of formula_31 represent the energy flux density of the system.\nTrace.\nThe trace of the stress\u2013energy tensor is defined to be &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, so\nformula_32\nSince &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_33\nIn general relativity.\nIn general relativity, the symmetric stress\u2013energy tensor acts as the source of spacetime curvature, and is the current density associated with gauge transformations of gravity which are general curvilinear coordinate transformations. (If there is torsion, then the tensor is no longer symmetric. This corresponds to the case with a nonzero spin tensor in Einstein\u2013Cartan gravity theory.)\nIn general relativity, the partial derivatives used in special relativity are replaced by covariant derivatives. What this means is that the continuity equation no longer implies that the non-gravitational energy and momentum expressed by the tensor are absolutely conserved, i.e. the gravitational field can do work on matter and vice versa. In the classical limit of Newtonian gravity, this has a simple interpretation: kinetic energy is being exchanged with gravitational potential energy, which is not included in the tensor, and momentum is being transferred through the field to other bodies. In general relativity the Landau\u2013Lifshitz pseudotensor is a unique way to define the \"gravitational\" field energy and momentum densities. Any such stress\u2013energy pseudotensor can be made to vanish locally by a coordinate transformation.\nIn curved spacetime, the spacelike integral now depends on the spacelike slice, in general. There is in fact no way to define a global energy\u2013momentum vector in a general curved spacetime.\nEinstein field equations.\nIn general relativity, the stress\u2013energy tensor is studied in the context of the Einstein field equations which are often written as\nformula_34\nwhere formula_35 is the Einstein tensor, formula_36 is the Ricci tensor, formula_37 is the scalar curvature, formula_38 is the metric tensor, \u039b is the cosmological constant (negligible at the scale of a galaxy or smaller), and formula_39 is the Einstein gravitational constant.\nStress\u2013energy in special situations.\nIsolated particle.\nIn special relativity, the stress\u2013energy of a non-interacting particle with rest mass m and trajectory formula_40 is:\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 is the velocity vector (which should not be confused with four-velocity, since it is missing a formula_43)\nformula_44\nformula_45 is the Dirac delta function and formula_46 is the energy of the particle.\nWritten in the language of classical physics, the stress\u2013energy tensor would be (relativistic mass, momentum, the dyadic product of momentum and velocity) \nformula_47\nStress\u2013energy of a fluid in equilibrium.\nFor a perfect fluid, the stress\u2013energy tensor takes on the form \nformula_48\nwhere formula_49 is the mass density and formula_50 is the isotropic pressure in the rest frame, formula_51 is the fluid's four-velocity, and formula_52 is the matrix inverse of the metric tensor. Therefore, the trace is given by\nformula_53\nThe four-velocity satisfies\nformula_54\nIn the fluid's proper frame of reference, the four-velocity is \nformula_55\nthe matrix inverse of the metric tensor is simply\nformula_56\nand the stress\u2013energy tensor is a diagonal matrix\nformula_57\nElectromagnetic stress\u2013energy tensor.\nThe Hilbert stress\u2013energy tensor of a source-free electromagnetic field is\nformula_58\nwhere formula_59 is the electromagnetic field tensor.\nScalar field.\nThe stress\u2013energy tensor for a complex scalar field formula_60 that satisfies the Klein\u2013Gordon equation is\nformula_61\nand when the metric is flat (Minkowski in Cartesian coordinates) its components work out to be:\nformula_62\nVariant definitions of stress\u2013energy.\nThere are a number of inequivalent definitions of non-gravitational stress\u2013energy:\nHilbert stress\u2013energy tensor.\nThe Hilbert stress\u2013energy tensor is defined as the functional derivative\nformula_63\nwhere formula_64 is the nongravitational part of the action, formula_65 is the nongravitational part of the Lagrangian density, and the Euler\u2013Lagrange equation has been used. This is symmetric and gauge-invariant. See Einstein\u2013Hilbert action for more information.\nCanonical stress\u2013energy tensor.\nNoether's theorem implies that there is a conserved current associated with translations through space and time; for details see the section above on the stress\u2013energy tensor in special relativity. This is called the canonical stress\u2013energy tensor. Generally, this is not symmetric and if we have some gauge theory, it may not be gauge invariant because space-dependent gauge transformations do not commute with spatial translations.\nIn general relativity, the translations are with respect to the coordinate system and as such, do not transform covariantly. See the section below on the gravitational stress\u2013energy pseudotensor.\nBelinfante\u2013Rosenfeld stress\u2013energy tensor.\nIn the presence of spin or other intrinsic angular momentum, the canonical Noether stress\u2013energy tensor fails to be symmetric. The Belinfante\u2013Rosenfeld stress\u2013energy tensor is constructed from the canonical stress\u2013energy tensor and the spin current in such a way as to be symmetric and still conserved. In general relativity, this modified tensor agrees with the Hilbert stress\u2013energy tensor.\nGravitational stress\u2013energy.\nSince by the equivalence principle, gravitational stress\u2013energy will always vanish locally at any chosen point in some chosen frame, gravitational stress\u2013energy cannot be expressed as a non-zero tensor; instead, we have to use a pseudotensor.\nIn general relativity, there are many possible distinct definitions of the gravitational stress\u2013energy\u2013momentum pseudotensor. These include the Einstein pseudotensor and the Landau\u2013Lifshitz pseudotensor. The Landau\u2013Lifshitz pseudotensor can be reduced to zero at any event in spacetime by choosing an appropriate coordinate system.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70673", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70673", "title": "Dominican Republic/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "70674", "revid": "1130897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70674", "title": "Opossum", "text": "Family of mammals\nOpossums () are members of the marsupial order Didelphimorphia () endemic to the Americas. The largest order of marsupials in the Western Hemisphere, it comprises 126 species in 18 genera. Opossums originated in South America and entered North America in the Great American Interchange following the connection of North and South America in the late Cenozoic.\nThe Virginia opossum is the only species found in the United States and Canada. It is often simply referred to as an opossum; in North America, it is commonly referred to as a possum (; sometimes rendered as \"'possum\" in written form to indicate the dropped \"o\"). The Australasian arboreal marsupials of suborder Phalangeriformes are also called possums because of their resemblance to opossums, but they belong to a different order. The opossum is typically a nonaggressive animal and almost never carries the virus that causes rabies.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"opossum\" is derived from the Powhatan language and was first recorded between 1607 and 1611 by John Smith (as \"opassom\") and William Strachey (as \"aposoum\"). \"Possum\" was first recorded in 1613. Both men encountered the language at the English settlement of Jamestown, Virginia, which Smith helped to found and where Strachey later served as its first secretary. Strachey's notes describe the opossum as a \"beast in bigness of a pig and in taste alike,\" while Smith recorded it \"hath an head like a swine ... tail like a rat ... of the bigness of a cat.\" The Powhatan word ultimately derives from a Proto-Algonquian word (\"*wa\u00b7p-a\u0294\u03b8emwa\") meaning \"white dog or dog-like beast.\"\nFollowing the arrival of Europeans in Australia, the term \"possum\" was borrowed to describe distantly related Australian marsupials of the suborder Phalangeriformes, which are more closely related to other Australian marsupials such as kangaroos.\nDidelphimorphia comes from Ancient Greek \u03b4\u03b9- (\"di-\"), meaning \"two\", \u03b4\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03cd\u03c2 (\"delph\u00fas\"), meaning \"womb\", and \u03bc\u03bf\u03c1\u03c6\u03ae (\"morph\u1e17\"), meaning \"form\".\nEvolution.\nOpossums are often considered to be \"living fossils\", and as a result they are often used to approximate the ancestral therian condition in comparative studies. But the oldest opossum fossils are from a more recent epoch, the early Miocene (roughly 20\u00a0million years ago). The last common ancestor of all living opossums dates approximately to the Oligocene\u2013Miocene boundary (23\u00a0million years ago) and is at most no older than Oligocene in age. Many extinct metatherians, such as \"Alphadon\", \"Peradectes\", \"Herpetotherium\", and \"Pucadelphys\", were once considered to be early opossums, but it has since been recognized that this was solely on the basis of plesiomorphies; they are now considered to belong to older branches of Metatheria that are only distantly related to modern opossums.\nOpossums probably originated in the Amazonia region of northern South America, where they began their initial diversification. They were minor components of South American mammal faunas until the late Miocene, when they began to diversify rapidly. Before that time, the ecological niches presently occupied by opossums were occupied by other groups of metatherians such as paucituberculatans and sparassodonts.\nLarge opossums like \"Didelphis\" show a pattern of gradually increasing in size over geologic time as sparassodont diversity declined. Several groups of opossums, including \"Thylophorops\", \"Thylatheridium\", \"Hyperdidelphys\", and sparassocynids developed carnivorous adaptations during the late Miocene-Pliocene, before the arrival of carnivorans in South America. Most of these groups, with the exception of \"Lutreolina\", are now extinct. It has been suggested that the size and shape of the ancestral didelphid's jaw would most closely match that of the modern \"Marmosa\" genus.\nCharacteristics.\nDidelphimorphs are small to medium-sized marsupials that grow to the size of a house cat. They tend to be semi-arboreal omnivores, although there are many exceptions. Most members of this order have long snouts, a narrow braincase, and a prominent sagittal crest. The dental formula is: 5.1.3.44.1.3.4\u00d7\u20092 = 50 teeth. By mammalian standards, this is an unusually full jaw. The incisors are very small, the canines large, and the molars are tricuspid.\nDidelphimorphs have a plantigrade stance (feet flat on the ground) and the hind feet have an opposable digit with no claw. Like some New World monkeys, some opossums have prehensile tails. Like most marsupials, many females have a pouch. The tail and parts of the feet bear scutes. The stomach is simple, with a small cecum. Like most marsupials, the male opossum has a forked penis bearing twin glandes.\nAlthough all living opossums are essentially opportunistic omnivores, different species vary in the amount of meat and vegetation they include in their diet. Members of the Caluromyinae are essentially frugivorous; whereas the lutrine opossum and Patagonian opossum primarily feed on other animals. The water opossum or yapok (\"Chironectes minimus\") is particularly unusual, as it is the only living semi-aquatic marsupial, using its webbed hindlimbs to dive in search of freshwater mollusks and crayfish. The extinct \"Thylophorops\", the largest known opossum at , was a macropredator. Most opossums are scansorial, well-adapted to life in the trees or on the ground, but members of the Caluromyinae and Glironiinae are primarily arboreal, whereas species of \"Metachirus\", \"Monodelphis\", and to a lesser degree \"Didelphis\" show adaptations for life on the ground. \"Metachirus nudicaudatus\", found in the upper Amazon basin, consumes fruit seeds, small vertebrate creatures like birds and reptiles and invertebrates like crayfish and snails, but seems to be mainly insectivorous.\nReproduction and life cycle.\nAs marsupials, female opossums have a reproductive system that includes a bifurcated vagina and a divided uterus; many have a pouch. The average estrous cycle of the Virginia opossum is about 28 days. Opossums do possess a placenta, but it is short-lived, simple in structure, and, unlike that of placental mammals, not fully functional. The young are therefore born at a very early stage, although the gestation period is similar to that of many other small marsupials, at only 12 to 14 days. They give birth to litters of up to 20 young. Once born, the offspring must find their way into the marsupium, if present, to hold on to and nurse from a teat. Baby opossums, like their Australian cousins, are called joeys. Female opossums often give birth to very large numbers of young, most of which fail to attach to a teat, although as many as 13 young can attach, and therefore survive, depending on species. The young are weaned between 70 and 125 days, when they detach from the teat and leave the pouch. The opossum lifespan is unusually short for a mammal of its size, usually only one to two years in the wild and as long as four or more years in captivity. Senescence is rapid.\nOpossums are moderately sexually dimorphic with males usually being larger, heavier, and having larger canines than females. The largest difference between the opossum and non-marsupial mammals is the bifurcated penis of the male and bifurcated vagina of the female (the source of the term \"didelphimorph\", from the Greek \"didelphys\", meaning \"double-wombed\"). Opossum spermatozoa exhibit sperm-pairing, forming conjugate pairs in the epididymis. This may ensure that flagella movement can be accurately coordinated for maximal motility. Conjugate pairs dissociate into separate spermatozoa before fertilization.\nBehavior.\nOpossums are usually solitary and nomadic, staying in one area as long as food and water are easily available. Some families will group together in ready-made burrows or even under houses. Though they will temporarily occupy abandoned burrows, they do not dig or put much effort into building their own. As nocturnal animals, they favor dark, secure areas. These areas may be below ground or above.\nWhen threatened or harmed, they will \"play possum\", mimicking the appearance and smell of a sick or dead animal. This physiological response is involuntary (like fainting), rather than a conscious act. In the case of baby opossums, however, the brain does not always react this way at the appropriate moment, and therefore they often fail to \"play dead\" when threatened. When an opossum is \"playing possum\", the animal's lips are drawn back, the teeth are bared, saliva foams around the mouth, the eyes close or half-close, and a foul-smelling fluid is secreted from the anal glands. The stiff, curled form can be prodded, turned over, and even carried away without reaction. The animal will typically regain consciousness after a period of a few minutes to four hours, a process that begins with a slight twitching of the ears.\nSome species of opossums have prehensile tails, although dangling by the tail is more common among juveniles. An opossum may also use its tail as a brace and a fifth limb when climbing. The tail is occasionally used as a grip to carry bunches of leaves or bedding materials to the nest. A mother will sometimes carry her young upon her back, where they will cling tightly even when she is climbing or running.\nThreatened opossums (especially males) will growl deeply, raising their pitch as the threat becomes more urgent. Males make a clicking \"smack\" noise out of the side of their mouths as they wander in search of a mate, and females will sometimes repeat the sound in return. When separated or distressed, baby opossums will make a sneezing noise to signal their mother. The mother in return makes a clicking sound and waits for the baby to find her. If threatened, the baby will open its mouth and quietly hiss until the threat is gone.\nDiet.\nOpossums eat insects, rodents, birds, eggs, frogs, plants, fruits and grain. Some species may eat the skeletal remains of rodents and roadkill animals to fulfill their calcium requirements. In captivity, opossums will eat practically anything including dog and cat food, livestock fodder and discarded human food scraps and waste.\nMany large opossums (Didelphini) are immune to the venom of rattlesnakes and pit vipers (Crotalinae) and regularly prey upon these snakes. This adaptation seems to be unique to the Didelphini, as their closest relative, the brown four-eyed opossum, is not immune to snake venom. Similar adaptations are seen in other small predatory mammals such as mongooses and hedgehogs. Didelphin opossums and crotaline vipers have been suggested to be in an evolutionary arms race. Some authors have suggested that this adaptation originally arose as a defense mechanism, allowing a rare reversal of an evolutionary arms race where the former prey has become the predator, whereas others have suggested it arose as a predatory adaptation given that it also occurs in other predatory mammals and does not occur in opossums that do not regularly eat other vertebrates. The fer-de-lance, one of the most venomous snakes in the New World, may have developed its highly potent venom as a means to prey on or a defense mechanism against large opossums.\nRange and habitat.\nOpossums are found in North, Central, and South America. The Virginia opossum lives in regions as far north as Canada and as far south as Central America, while other types of opossums only inhabit countries south of the United States. The Virginia opossum can often be found in wooded areas, though its habitat may vary widely. Opossums are generally found in areas like forests, shrubland, mangrove swamps, rainforests and eucalyptus forests. Opossums have been found moving northward.\nHunting and foodways.\nUntil the early 20th century, the Virginia opossum was widely hunted and consumed in the United States. Opossum farms have been operated in the United States in the past. Sweet potatoes were eaten together with the opossum in the American South. In 1909, a \"Possum and 'Taters\" banquet was held in Atlanta to honor President-elect William Howard Taft. South Carolina cuisine includes opossum, and President Jimmy Carter hunted opossums in addition to other small game.\nIn Dominica, Grenada, Trinidad, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the common opossum or \"manicou\" is popular and can only be hunted during certain times of the year owing to overhunting. The meat is traditionally prepared by smoking, then stewing. It is light and fine-grained, but the musk glands must be removed as part of preparation. The meat can be used in place of rabbit and chicken in recipes. Historically, hunters in the Caribbean would place a barrel with fresh or rotten fruit to attract opossums that would feed on the fruit or insects.\nIn northern/central Mexico, opossums are known as \"tlacuache\" or \"tlacuatzin\". Their tails are eaten as a folk remedy to improve fertility. In the Yucat\u00e1n peninsula they are known in the Yucatec Mayan language as \"och\" and they are not considered part of the regular diet by Mayan people, but still considered edible in times of famine.\nOpossum oil (possum grease) is high in essential fatty acids and has been used as a chest rub and a carrier for arthritis remedies given as salves.\nOpossum pelts have long been part of the fur trade.\nClassification.\nClassification based on Voss (2022), species based on the American Society of Mammalogists (2023)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70675", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70675", "title": "Henri Phillippe Petain", "text": ""}
{"id": "70679", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70679", "title": "Marjorie Jackson-Nelson", "text": "Australian athlete and Governor of South Australia\nMarjorie Jackson-Nelson (born 13 September 1931) is an Australian former athlete and politician. She was the Governor of South Australia between 2001 and 2007. She finished her sporting career with two Olympic and seven Commonwealth Games Gold Medals, six individual world records and every Australian state and national title she contested from 1950 to 1954.\nEarly life.\nJackson was born Marjorie Jackson on 13 September 1931 in Coffs Harbour, New South Wales. Her parents are William Alfred and Mary (n\u00e9e Robinson) Jackson. Her father was a toolmaker and after the commencement of World War II, he moved to Lithgow to work at a factory manufacturing rifles. The family initially planned to remain in Coffs Harbour but as the war continued, they moved to Lithgow. Her mother was hospitalised when Jackson was thirteen and she became responsible for running the household.\nWhile in school, Jackson began to win local races and was nicknamed Bernborough after the race horse. She travelled to Sydney for the national championships when she was fifteen, where she won every race that she entered. After joining the South Sydney Athletics Club, she was invited to compete in the 1947\u201348 Athletics Championships, which served as trials for the 1948 Summer Olympics. During the race, she stayed in the starting blocks while the rest of the runners began the race, believing that they had started before the gun; as a result, she missed selection for the Olympics.\nShe began to work as a typist but she continued to train as an athlete. She ran on the Lithgow Oval until the town built her a cinder track and her father bought her track spikes and built her a set of starting blocks. Jackson trained at night, and her coach, Jim Monaghan, would use his car headlights to light the track.\nAthletic career.\nIn 1949, the famous Dutch athlete Fanny Blankers-Koen visited Australia on the assumption that she would compete in a series of races as an exhibition. In each of their three races, Jackson won. In their final encounter, the officials mowed the track lane for Blankers-Koen at the Sydney Sports Grounds but left the turf long in the other lanes; despite this, Jackson won the race and beat the Olympic record that had been set by Blankers-Koen at the 1948 Olympics. Jackson set her first world record in January 1950, running 100 yards in 10.8 seconds in Adelaide. In the years between 1950 and 1954, she won every state and national title that she contested in the 100 yards and the 220 yards. She was nicknamed \"The Lithgow Flash\" after the town where she grew up.\n1950 British Empire Games.\nShe competed in the 1950 British Empire and Commonwealth Games which was held in Auckland, New Zealand, where she received four gold medals in the 100 yards, the 200 yards, and two medley relays, the 3 \u00d7 110/220 yards (with Shirley Strickland and Verna Johnston) and the 4 \u00d7 110/220 yards (with Strickland, Johnston and Ann Shanley).\n1952 Summer Olympics.\nFollowing the 1950 Games, Jackson came to the 1952 Summer Olympics as a favourite. On the plane to Helsinki, she won fellow Australian Olympian Peter Nelson. She won gold in the 100 m, in a then-world-record-equalling time of 11.5, with a margin of almost four metres, then the greatest winning margin in the history of the Olympics women's 100 m. Second place was won by Daphne Robb-Hasenjager, of South Africa, and third place was Shirley Strickland, also from Australia. In the 200 m, Jackson set world records of 23.6 seconds in the third heat and of 23.4 seconds in the semi-finals, before ultimately winning the gold medal with a time of 23.7 seconds. Second and third place went to Bertha Brouwer of the Netherlands and Nadezhda Khnykina of the Soviet Union respectively. \nJackson was the anchor in the Australian 4 \u00d7 100 m relay, with a team made up of Strickland, Johnston, and Winsome Cripps. The team won the first heat of the relay with a world record beating time of 46.1 seconds. The team were expected to win but during the final handoff of the relay baton, Jackson's hand hit Cripp's knee and she dropped the baton. The American team, anchored by Catherine Hardy Lavender, won in an upset, setting a new world record time of 45.9 seconds. The team ultimately placed fifth.\nJackson was the first Australian woman to win an Olympic gold medal in athletics and the first person to win an Olympic gold medal in athletics for Australia since Edwin Flack in 1896. After the Olympics, the song \"Our Marjorie\" by Jack O'Hagan appeared in the charts. Upon her return from Helsinki, she rode from Sydney Airport to Lithgow, a journey of more than 150\u00a0km, in an open-topped car. At a meet on October 4, 1952, at Gifu, Japan, Jackson broke the 100 m world record with a time of 11.4 seconds. She was awarded the title of The Outstanding Athlete of 1952 by the Helms Foundation.\n1954 Commonwealth Games.\nJackson-Nelson competed at the 1954 Commonwealth Games in Vancouver, Canada, where she won three gold medals in the 100 yards, the 200 yards and the 4 \u00d7 110 yards relay. She decided to retire from athletics after the Games at the age of 23, in order to focus on her marriage.\nLater career.\nJackson-Nelson became involved in sports administration. She became the first female manager of a multi-disciplined team for her role in managing the Australian team at the 1994 Commonwealth Games. She also helped the team with the 1996 Olympic Games and the 1998 Commonwealth Games. She was a board member for the Sydney Organizing Committee for the 2000 Summer Olympics and one of the eight-flag bearers of the Olympic Flag at the opening ceremony. For her role, a road was named after her at the Sydney Olympic Park, beside the Sydney Superdome.\nGovernor of South Australia.\nIn late 2001, Jackson-Nelson was appointed Governor of South Australia; she held the post until 31 July 2007.\nOn 15 March 2006, Jackson-Nelson was one of the final four runners who carried the Queen's Baton around the MCG stadium during the 2006 Commonwealth Games Opening Ceremony in Melbourne. On 6 June 2007, shortly before the end of her tenure, it was announced that the planned replacement for the Royal Adelaide Hospital would be named the \"Marjorie Jackson-Nelson Hospital\". On 18 February 2009, amidst criticism of the new hospital development, Jackson-Nelson asked that her name not be used.\nPersonal life.\nJackson married Nelson on 7 November 1953, and the couple moved to Adelaide. They had three children. Her husband continued to pursue his cycling career but was diagnosed with leukemia at the age of 45. Jackson-Nelson served as his nurse for 22 months, until he died on 2 February 1977. That year, she created the Peter Nelson Leukemia Research Fellowship Fund, with the goal of curing leukemia.\nHonours and legacy.\nJackson-Nelson was awarded the Olympic Order, the highest order bestowed by the International Olympic Committee, which she was presented in Beijing in 2008. She is also a Dame of the Order of St John of Jerusalem and a Freeman of the City of London. In 1993, the State Transit Authority of New South Wales named a Sydney RiverCat ferry after Jackson-Nelson. On 3 June 2025 the Rivercat ferry \"MV Marjorie Jackson\" was retired from service and was scrapped in July 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "70680", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70680", "title": "Marjorie Jackson Nelson", "text": ""}
{"id": "70681", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70681", "title": "Fanny Koen", "text": ""}
{"id": "70682", "revid": "49891978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70682", "title": "Maxime Weygand", "text": "French general (1867\u20131965)\nMaxime Weygand (; 21 January 1867 \u2013 28 January 1965) was a French military commander in World War I and World War II, as well as a high ranking member of the Vichy regime.\nBorn in Belgium, Weygand was raised in France and educated at the Saint-Cyr military academy in Paris. After graduating in 1887, he went on to become an instructor at the Saumur Cavalry School. During World War I, Weygand served as a staff officer to General (later Marshal) Ferdinand Foch. He then served as an advisor to Poland in the Polish\u2013Soviet War and later High Commissioner of the Levant. In 1931, Weygand was appointed Chief of Staff of the French Army, a position he served until his retirement in 1935 at the age of 68.\nIn May 1940, Weygand was recalled for active duty and assumed command of the French Army during the German invasion. Following a series of military setbacks, Weygand advised armistice and France subsequently capitulated. He joined Philippe P\u00e9tain's Vichy regime as Minister for Defence and served until September 1940, when he was appointed Delegate-General in French North Africa. He was noted for exceptionally harsh implementation of German anti-Semitic policies while in this position. Despite this, Weygand favoured only limited collaboration with Germany and was dismissed from his post in November 1941 on Adolf Hitler's demand. Following the Allied invasion of North Africa in November 1942, Weygand was arrested by the Germans and imprisoned at Itter Castle in Austria until May 1945. After returning to France, he was held as a collaborator at the Val-de-Gr\u00e2ce but was released in 1946 and cleared of charges in 1948. He died in January 1965 in Paris at the age of 98.\nEarly years.\nWeygand was born on 21 January 1867, allegedly at 39 Boulevard de Waterloo in Brussels, of unknown parents. The biographer Bernard Destremau gave five possible sets of parents: Leopold II with either the wife of the Austrian diplomat Count Zichy or an anonymous Mexican woman (dismissed as doubtful); Charlotte, wife of then-Archduke Maximilian of Austria, and the Belgian officer Alfred van der Smissen (widely supported); a tutor named David Cohen and a French woman named Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Denimal (\"lacks credibility\"); Charlotte and a Mexican Colonel Lopez (\"difficult to hide\"); and Maximilian of Austria and a Mexican dancer called Lupe. The various theories of Mexican extraction, however, require some kind of record forgery; regardless, Weygand's short stature and appearance may suggest a partially-European antecedence with a connection to the Austrian court suggested by the funds provided for his education in youth. In 2003, the French journalist Dominique Paoli claimed to have found evidence that Weygand's father was indeed van der Smissen, but the mother was Melanie Metternich-Zichy, lady-in-waiting to Charlotte (and daughter of Prince Klemens von Metternich, Austrian Chancellor). Paoli further claimed that Weygand had been born in mid-1865, not January 1867 as is generally claimed. This theory is rejected by historians as most accounts place Metternich-Zichy in European circles, not Mexico, at the time Weygand was conceived.\nRegardless, throughout his life, Weygand maintained he did not know his true parentage. While an infant he was sent to Marseille to be raised by a widow named Virginie Saget, whom he originally took to be his mother. At the age of seven, he was transferred to the household of David Cohen, an Italo-Belgian leather merchant in Marseille, with partner Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Denimal (later de Nimal). Then-called Maxime de Nimal, he attended schools in Cannes and then Asni\u00e9res, fees likely paid by the Belgian royal household or government, where his scholastic accomplishment were recognised. He was transferred to a boarding school in Paris and thence to the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand where Maxime was baptised Catholic. After a disciplinary issue he was expelled and barred from Parisian schools, ending up at schools in Toulon and then Aix-en-Provence. Returning to Paris some years later, he was rejected from the French Navy and decided to seek admission to the \u00c9cole sp\u00e9ciale militaire de Saint-Cyr. Admitted in the top half of the class, he was denied a full French uniform due to his unclear heritage, but the slight ignored he graduated in the top ten of his class. Highly competent at fencing and horsemanship, he was accepted as a junior cavalry officer at Saumur \u2013 connecting him to a network of upper-class officers \u2013 but again rejected as a non-citizen. After some payments by David Cohen, Maxime was adopted by an accountant in Arras called Francis-Joseph Weygand. Taking the name Maxime Weygand, he was posted to a French cavalry regiment in October 1888.\nHe says little about his youth in his memoirs, devoting to it only four pages out of 651. He mentions the \"gouvernante\" and the \"aum\u00f4nier\" of his college, who instilled in him a strong Catholic faith. His memoirs essentially begin with his entry into the preparatory class of Saint-Cyr Military School in Paris.\nMilitary career.\nDuring the Dreyfus affair, Weygand was one of the most anti-Dreyfusard officers of his regiment, supporting the widow of Colonel Hubert-Joseph Henry, who had committed suicide after the discovery of the falsification of the charges against Captain Alfred Dreyfus.\nHe was promoted to captain in 1896. Weygand chose not to attempt the difficult preparation to the \"\u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure de Guerre\" (the French staff college) because of his desire, he said, to keep contact with the troops. This did not prevent him from later becoming an instructor at the cavalry school at Saumur. Along with Joseph Joffre and Ferdinand Foch, Weygand attended the Imperial Russian Army manoeuvres in 1910; his account mentions a great deal of pomp and many gala dinners, but also records Russian reluctance to discuss military details. Promoted with unusual rapidity to lieutenant colonel in 1912, he attended in 1913 the \"Centre des Hautes Etudes Militaires\", set up in January 1911 to teach combined arms operations and staff work, despite not having been \"brevet\u00e9\" (passed staff college). During his studies, he was noticed for his brilliance in staff work by Joffre and Foch. Weygand attended the last pre-war French grand manoeuvres in 1913 and commented that it had revealed \"intolerable insufficiencies\" such as two divisions becoming mixed up.\nFirst World War.\nEarly war.\nAt the outbreak of the war, he was posted as a staff officer with the 5\u00e8me Hussars. His regiment was deployed to the Franco-German border on 28 July 1914 and later fought at the Battle of Morhange. On 17 August, he became chief of staff to Ferdinand Foch, the commander of the new Ninth Army. Weygand served under Foch for much of the rest of the war.\nThe professional partnership between Foch and Weygand was close and fruitful, with Weygand operating as a highly competent subordinate able to translate Foch's instructions into clearer orders, analyse ideas, and collate information. Foch referred to Weygand with praise, believing that their views were practically identical. Weygand finalised the plans for the 9th Army's attack at the First Battle of the Marne and, in doing so, became one of the first staff officers to reconnoitre the battlefield from the air. Weygand supported Foch, who was appointed to coordinate the Belgian, British, and French forces in the northern sector, during the Race to the Sea and First Ypres. Weygand was promoted to full colonel in early 1915.\nThe mounting French casualties over the course of 1915 were reflected in Weygand's campaign notes; the need for further cooperation between French and British armies utilised Weygand's communicative skills and he developed a working relationship with some British counterparts. Weygand was promoted to g\u00e9n\u00e9ral de brigade in 1916. He later wrote of the Anglo-French Somme Offensive in 1916, at which Foch commanded French Army Group North, that it had seen \"constant mix-ups with an ally [the British] learning how to run a large operation and whose doctrines and methods were not yet in accordance with ours\". At a meeting on 3 July 1916 where Joffre and Haig came to non-speaking terms, Weygand, Foch, and Henry Wilson were able to restore a working relationship between the armies. He also took effective command of the army group as alternate when Foch was in ill health; during tensions between Foch and subordinates, Weygand helped to mediate disputes.\nAfter Joffre was replaced by Robert Nivelle in late 1916, criticism of Foch also intensified, leading to Foch being relieved of his northern command; Weygand saw the politician's treatment of Foch as intolerable. At Foch's suggestion, Weygand's name was submitted for command of an infantry brigade, but after Foch was assigned out of inactivity to instead create a contingency plan for a German invasion of France via Switzerland, Weygand decided to stay with Foch. As part of this planning, Weygand served as head of a mission to Switzerland to discuss Anglo-French support if Switzerland were breached by German troops. Weygand later accompanied the British Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Sir William Robertson, on an inspection of the Italian front in early 1917 to discuss Anglo-French support for Italy's Isonzo campaign. When Weygand and Foch were briefed on the Nivelle offensive, the two men expressed misgivings. After its failure, Nivelle was removed as French commander-in-chief and replaced with Philippe P\u00e9tain. Foch was appointed chief of the army general staff in 19 May 1917; writing to his wife, Weygand expressed his loyalty to Foch and gave up his applications for a field command.\nSupreme War Council.\nBritish prime minister David Lloyd George pushed for the creation of a Supreme War Council, which was formally established on 7 November 1917. Keen to sideline the British Chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Sir William Robertson, he insisted that, as French Army chief of the General Staff, Foch could not also be French permanent military representative (PMR) on the SWC. Paul Painlev\u00e9, French prime minister until 13 November, believed that Lloyd George was already pushing for Foch to be Supreme Allied Commander so wanted him as PMR not French Chief of Staff.\nThe new prime minister, Georges Clemenceau, wanted Foch as PMR to increase French control over the Western Front, but was persuaded to appoint Weygand, seen very much as Foch's sidekick, instead. Clemenceau told US President Woodrow Wilson's envoy, Colonel Edward M. House that he would put in a \"second- or third-rate man\" as PMR and \"let the thing drift where it will\".\nWeygand was the most junior of the PMRs (the others being the Italian Luigi Cadorna, the American Tasker H. Bliss, and the British Henry Wilson, later replaced by Henry Rawlinson). He was promoted g\u00e9n\u00e9ral de division (equivalent to the Anglophone rank of major general) in 1918. This promotion was specifically because of his appointment as a PMR.\nHowever, Clemenceau only agreed to set up an Allied General Reserve if Foch rather than Weygand were earmarked to command it. The Reserve was shelved for the time being at a SWC Meeting in London (14\u201315 March 1918) as the national commanders in chief, Philippe P\u00e9tain and Sir Douglas Haig, were reluctant to release divisions.\nSupreme Allied Command Staff.\nWeygand was in charge of Foch's staff when his patron was appointed Supreme Allied Commander in the spring of 1918, and was Foch's right-hand man throughout his victories in the late summer and until the end of the war.\nWeygand initially headed a small staff of 25\u201330 officers, with Brigadier General Pierre Desticker as his deputy. There was a separate head for each of the departments, e.g. Operations, Intelligence, Q (Quartermaster). From June 1918 onwards, under British pressure, Foch and Weygand poached staff officers from the French Commander-in-Chief Philippe P\u00e9tain (Lloyd George's tentative suggestion of a multinational Allied staff was vetoed by President Wilson). By early August Colonel Payot (responsible for supply and transport) had moved to Foch's HQ, as had the Military Missions from the other Allied HQs; in Greenhalgh's words this \"put real as opposed to nominal power into Foch's hands\". From early July onwards, British military and political leaders came to regret Foch's increased power, but Weygand later recorded that they had only themselves to blame as they had pushed for the change.\nLike Foch and most French leaders of his era (Clemenceau, who had lived in the US as a young man, was a rare exception), Weygand could not speak enough English to \"sustain a conversation\" (German, not English, was the most common second language in which French officers were qualified). Competent interpreters were therefore vital.\nWeygand drew up the memorandum for the meeting of Foch with the national commanders-in-chief (Haig, P\u00e9tain and John J. Pershing) on 24 July 1918, the only such meeting before the autumn, in which Foch urged (successfully) the liberation of the Marne salient captured by the Germans in May (this offensive would become the Second Battle of the Marne, for which Foch was promoted Marshal of France), along with further offensives by the British and by the Americans at St Mihiel. Weygand personally delivered the directive for the Amiens attack to Haig. Foch and Weygand were shown around the liberated St. Mihiel sector by Pershing on 20 September.\nWeygand later (in 1922) questioned whether P\u00e9tain's planned offensive by twenty-five divisions in Lorraine in November 1918 could have been supplied through a \"zone of destruction\" through which the Germans were retreating; his own and Foch's doubts about the feasibility of the plans were another factor in the seeking of an armistice. In 1918 Weygand served on the armistice negotiations, and it was Weygand who read out the armistice conditions to the Germans at Compi\u00e8gne, in the railway carriage. He can be spotted in photographs of the armistice delegates, and also standing behind Foch's shoulder at P\u00e9tain's investiture as Marshal of France at the end of 1918.\nParis Peace Conference.\nWeygand agreed with Foch that French security \u2013 the consequences of which were impressed during a tour of the liberated German-occupied zones in late 1918 \u2013 required territorial expansion to the River Rhine as a buffer zone. Their dislike of politicians, who they viewed as having little understanding of war realities or military issues, intensified when the French political class ruled out creating a French client state in the Rhineland. They similarly agreed that the then-proposed League of Nations would do little to ensure peace and that the planned alliances between France, Britain, and the United States would be insufficient to guarantee French security.\nFoch's untactful expression of his views unnerved the Big Four civilian leaders at the peace conference: American president Woodrow Wilson, British prime minister David Lloyd George, French president Georges Clemenceau, and Italian prime minister Vittorio Emanuele Orlando. Weygand harboured similar disdain, calling them in a diary \"the four old men\". Because of Foch's popularity as victor of the war, he could not be easily criticised. Attacks therefore fell on Weygand who was conspiratorially accused, by among others Woodrow Wilson and Lloyd George, as driving Foch's radical positions.\nInterwar.\nPoland.\nDuring the Polish\u2013Soviet War, Weygand was a member of the Interallied Mission to Poland of July and August 1920, supporting the infant Second Polish Republic against the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic. (He had not been on the 1919 French Military Mission to Poland headed by General Paul Prosper Henrys.) The Interallied Mission, which also included French diplomat Jean Jules Jusserand and the British diplomat Lord Edgar Vincent D'Abernon, achieved little: its report was submitted after the Polish Armed Forces had won the crucial Battle of Warsaw. Nonetheless, the presence of the Allied missions in Poland gave rise to a myth that the timely arrival of Allied forces saved Poland.\nWeygand travelled to Warsaw expecting to assume command of the Polish army, yet those expectations were quickly dashed. He had no good reply for J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, who on 24 July during their first meeting asked \"How many divisions do you bring?\" Weygand had none to offer. From 27 July Weygand was an adviser to the Polish Chief of Staff, Tadeusz Rozwadowski. It was a difficult position; most Polish officers regarded him as an interloper, and spoke only Polish, which he did not understand. At the end of July he proposed that the Poles hold the length of the Bug River; a week later he proposed a purely defensive posture along the Vistula river; both plans were rejected. One of his few lasting contributions was to insist on replacing the existing system of spoken orders by written documents; he also provided advice on logistics and construction of modern entrenchments. Norman Davies writes: \"on the whole he was quite out of his element, a man trained to give orders yet placed among people without the inclination to obey, a proponent of defence in the company of enthusiasts for the attack\". During another meeting with Pi\u0142sudski on 18 August, Weygand became offended and threatened to leave, depressed by his failure and dismayed by Poland's disregard for the Allied powers.\nAt the station at Warsaw on 25 August he was consoled by the award of the Virtuti Militari, 2nd class; at Paris on the 28th he was cheered by crowds lining the platform of the Gare de l'Est, kissed on both cheeks by the premier, Alexandre Millerand. Promoted to \"g\u00e9n\u00e9ral corps d'arm\u00e9e\" and advanced to \"Commandeur\" in the Legion of Honour, Weygand could not understand what had happened and admitted in his memoirs what he said to a French journalist already on 21 August 1920: \"the victory was Polish, the plan was Polish, the army was Polish\". As Norman Davies notes: \"He was the first uncomprehending victim, as well as the chief beneficiary, of a legend already in circulation that he, Weygand, was the victor of Warsaw. This legend persisted for more than forty years even in academic circles\".\nLevant and \"CHEM\" directorship.\nWeygand returned from Poland to his duties with the interallied council overseeing the implementation of the Versailles treaty and the renegotiation of peace with Turkey after they rejected the Treaty of S\u00e8vres. Weygand declined to serve on a proposed French occupation force to occupy the Ruhr valley after Germany refused to meet reparation payments; he similarly refused appointment to Poland.\nIn 1922, the Poincar\u00e9 ministry appointed Weygand High Commissioner of the Levant to govern the French mandate in Lebanon and Syria, replacing Henri Gouraud. Putting an end of Gouraud's coercive pacification campaigns, Weygand was largely conciliatory and devolved most policing responsibilities to local gendarmes. He also supervised infrastructure projects to support export of cotton and silk, reformed the school system, and established Damascus University in June 1923. Administration in the mandate was also reformed and the basis for the modern borders of Syria and Lebanon established. Weygand's wife Ren\u00e9e joined him there and they enjoyed their time in Beirut. However, with the left-wing victory in the May 1924 elections, Weygand was recalled in place of Maurice Sarrail that December.\nWeygand returned to France in 1925 embittered, seeing his recall as the product of political machinations and intra-army rivalries. Regardless, he was awarded the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor. Denied command in Morocco against the Rif War out of fear for his success, command in Syria since it would embarrass the government, and command in Germany due to his closeness with Foch, he was made director of the \"Centre de Hautes Etudes Militaries\" (Center for Higher Military Studies) from 1925 to 1930. While Weygand supported development of a doctrine of rapid armoured assault with close air support, the government's view \u2013 which feared professionalisation of the army as a threat to regime stability and saw investment in tanks as financially ruinous \u2013 prevailed. The further programme to shorten conscripts' service was voted through in the late 1920s to Weygand's disapproval: he feared that the left was intending to replace the professional army with a purely defensive national guard while drowning units in basic training, making it impossible to train for large unit operations. Settling at Morlaix in Brittany near Foch, the five years at the \"Centre\" also gave him time to write two books, biographies of French marshals Foch and Turenne.\nHead of the army.\nThe opening of the question of succession as chief of the general staff from 1927 placed Weygand again in the spotlight: Foch, for his part, supported his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 and made his views clear before his death in 1929. The left-wing war minister Paul Painlev\u00e9 supported Louis Maurin. But after P\u00e9tain's announced his support for Weygand and buttressed it with the recommendation that Weygand should be further appointed inspector-general on P\u00e9tain's retirement (designating Weygand as commander-in-chief on mobilisation), the topic of the appointment became thoroughly politicised. The end of Briand's government in November 1929 led to a right-wing government under Andr\u00e9 Tardieu until February 1930 that made Andr\u00e9 Maginot war minister. Attacked as a right-wing Catholic cavalry officer with aristocratic haughtiness and designs against the Third Republic with profligate plans for military expenditure in a time of austerity, Weygand was forced to disavow in a statement to Parliament any political activities and affirm his loyalty to the republican regime. The eventual compromise saw Weygand made chief of staff with the more politically-safe Maurice Gamelin as deputy; Weygand was appointed chief of staff on 3 January 1930 at the age of 63. On P\u00e9tain's retirement to the post of air defence inspector on 10 February 1931, Weygand took up the vice presidency of the \"Conseil sup\u00e9rieur de la guerre\" as well as inspector-general of the army; Gamelin was appointed chief of staff in his place.\nWeygand remained as vice president of the \"Conseil\" until his mandatory retirement at the age of 68 in February 1935. During his years in charge of the military, he attempted to push for military modernisation and increased service requirements to match the threat posed by Germany. However, the Great Depression came with substantial political instability, including street violence, and fourteen prime ministers between January 1930 and 1935. Attempts to broker international disarmament agreements were collapsed and the politicians were unwilling in depressed economic conditions to invest in new equipment or expand military pay. Amid the breakdown in French civil-military relations in the 1930s, Weygand was neutral and \"never indicated any support for any such projects\" to replace the republican system with a military dictatorship. He was, however, able to successfully lobby for creation of a light mechanised division as well as creation of a seven motorised infantry division in the early 1930s; he was also able to lobby for extension of conscripts' service to two years in 1934.\nRetirement and return to the Levant.\nFrom 1931 he had been admitted to the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise as Seat 35 in place of Joffre, deceased. On his retirement he was retained on the active list at full pay but was unassigned. This allowed him leave to travel: as an administrator of the Suez Canal Company he visited Egypt and the court of Fuad I; he travelled also to eastern Europe and Britain on military matters. He spent some of this time writing articles in military journals on the state of the army, arguing that the now-superior German army could be held back by a well-equipped defence before motorised units would be eventually able to start a counteroffensive. However, he disagreed with Charles de Gaulle's arguments for a centralised armour force on the grounds that it would undermine troop cohesion and greatly stress French industrial capacity. While he never criticised his successor Gamelin, he published a short book \"La france, est-elle d\u00e9fendue?\" [\"France, is it defended?\"] in 1937 warning of German military superiority and the possibility of a sudden attack. His thoughts in the years before Hitler's invasion of Poland saw him again press for further material rearmament even as his views on the need for a fully-professional army softened; he also wrote a book called \"Histoire de l'arm\u00e9e fran\u00e7aise\" in 1938 arguing against the prevailing defensive strategy and expressing fear over the reliability of colonial troops in metropolitan France.\nWeygand was recalled for active service in August 1939 by \u00c9douard Daladier's government and appointed again to the Levant, resigning his position in the Suez Canal Company. The government may have sought to keep him away from Gamelin's command. Regardless, he was officially dispatched to negotiate with Turkey, Greece, and Romania for French security interests. He also was tasked with inspecting and training the colonial garrisons.\nSecond World War.\n Immediately after the German army arrived in France, Weygand feared a Paris Commune-like event might happen.\nWeygand's service during the Second World War is controversial and debated. His reputation came under substantial criticism from Charles de Gaulle and his allies after the war. Much of this criticism related to claims that Weygand was negligent in rearming France while head of the army, was defeatist or incompetent during the Battle of France thereby leading to France's defeat in 1940, and was a German collaborator in the Vichy regime.\nRecall to service.\nBy late May 1940 the military disaster in France after the German invasion was such that the Supreme Commander\u2014and political neutral\u2014Maurice Gamelin, was dismissed, and Weygand\u2014a figurehead of the right\u2014was recalled from Syria to replace him.\nWeygand arrived on 17 May and started by cancelling the flank counter-offensive ordered by Gamelin, to cut off the enemy armoured columns which had punched through the French front at the Ardennes. Thus he lost two crucial days before finally adopting the solution, however obvious, of his predecessor. But it was by then a failed manoeuvre, because during the 48 lost hours, the German Army infantry had caught up behind their tanks in the breakthrough and had consolidated their gains.\nWeygand then oversaw the creation of the Weygand Line, an early application of the hedgehog tactic; however, by this point the situation was untenable, with most of the Allied forces trapped in Belgium. Weygand complained that he had been summoned two weeks too late to halt the invasion.\nArmistice.\nOn 5 June the German second offensive (\"Fall Rot\") began. On 8 June Weygand was visited by de Gaulle, newly appointed to the government as Under-Secretary for War. According to de Gaulle's memoirs Weygand believed it was \"the end\" and gave a \"despairing laugh\" when de Gaulle suggested fighting on. He believed that after France was defeated Britain would also soon sue for peace, and hoped that after an armistice the Germans would allow him to retain enough of a French Army to \"maintain order\" in France. Weygand later disputed the accuracy of de Gaulle's account of this conversation, and remarked on its similarity to a dialogue by Pierre Corneille. De Gaulle's biographer Jean Lacouture suggests that de Gaulle's account is consistent with other evidence of Weygand's beliefs at the time and is therefore, allowing perhaps for a little literary embellishment, broadly plausible.\nFascist Italy entered the war and invaded France on 10 June. That day Weygand barged into the office of Prime Minister Paul Reynaud and demanded an armistice. Weygand was present at the Anglo-French Conference at the Ch\u00e2teau du Muguet at Briare on 11 June, at which the option was discussed of continuing the French war effort from Brittany or French North Africa. The transcript shows Weygand to have been somewhat less defeatist than de Gaulle's memoirs would suggest. At the Cabinet meeting on the evening of 13 June, after another Anglo-French conference at Tours, Marshal P\u00e9tain, Deputy Prime Minister, strongly supported Weygand's demand for an armistice. On June 14 Weygand warned General Alan Brooke, the new commander-in-chief of the British forces in France, that the French Army was collapsing and incapable of fighting further, leading him to evacuate the final British Expeditionary Force contingents remaining on the Western Front.\nThe French government moved to Bordeaux on 14 June. At Cabinet on 15 June Reynaud urged that they should follow the Dutch example, that the Army should lay down its arms so that the fight could be continued from abroad. P\u00e9tain was sympathetic, but he was sent to speak to Weygand (who was waiting outside, as he was not a member of the Cabinet). After no more than fifteen minutes Weygand persuaded him that this would be a shameful surrender. Camille Chautemps then proposed a compromise proposal, that the Germans be approached about possible armistice terms. The Cabinet voted 13\u20136 for the Chautemps proposal.\nAfter Reynaud's resignation as Prime Minister on 16 June, President Albert Lebrun felt he had little choice but to appoint P\u00e9tain, who already had a ministerial team ready, as prime minister. Weygand joined the new government as Minister for Defence, and was briefly able to veto the appointment of Pierre Laval as minister of foreign affairs.\nVichy regime.\nThe Vichy regime was set up in July 1940. Weygand continued to serve in P\u00e9tain's cabinet as Minister for National Defence until September 1940. He was then appointed Delegate-General in French North Africa.\nIn North Africa, he persuaded young officers, tempted to join the French Resistance against the German occupation, to go along with the armistice for the present, by letting them hope for a later resumption of combat. With the complicity of Admiral Jean-Marie Charles Abrial, he deported opponents of Vichy to concentration camps in Southern Algeria and Morocco. Those imprisoned included Gaullists, Freemasons, and Jews, and also communists, despite their obedience at the time to the Soviet Union's orders not to support the resistance. He also arrested the foreign volunteers of the \"L\u00e9gion Etrang\u00e8re\", foreign refugees who were in France legally but were without employment, and others. He applied Vichy anti-Jewish legislation very harshly. With the complicity of the \"Recteur\" (University chancellor) , Weygand instituted, on his own authority, by a mere \"note de service\" (n\u00b0343QJ of 30 September 1941), a school \"numerus clausus\" (quota). This drove out most Jewish students from the colleges and the primary schools, including children aged 5 to 11. Weygand did this without any order from P\u00e9tain, \"by analogy\", he said, \"to the law about Higher Education\".\nWeygand acquired a reputation as an opponent of collaboration when he protested in Vichy against the Paris Protocols of 28 May 1941, signed by Admiral Fran\u00e7ois Darlan. These agreements authorized the Axis powers to establish bases in French colonies: at Aleppo, Syria; Bizerte, Tunisia; and Dakar, Senegal. The Protocols also envisaged extensive French military collaboration with Axis forces in the event of Allied attacks against such bases. Weygand remained outspoken in his criticism of Germany.\nWeygand opposed Wehrmacht bases in French territory not to help the Allies or even to keep France neutral, but rather to preserve the integrity of the French Empire and maintain prestige in the eyes of the natives. Weygand apparently favoured limited collaboration with Germany. The Weygand General Delegation (4th Office) delivered military equipment to the Panzer Armee Afrika: 1,200 French trucks and other Armistice Army vehicles (Dankworth contract of 1941), and also heavy artillery with 1,000 shells per gun. However, Adolf Hitler demanded full unconditional collaboration and pressured the Vichy government to dismiss Weygand in November 1941 and recall him from North Africa. A year later, in November 1942, following the Allied invasion of North Africa, the Germans arrested Weygand. He remained in custody in Germany and then in the Itter Castle in North Tyrol with General Gamelin and a few other French Third Republic personalities until May 1945. He was liberated by United States Army troops after the Battle of Castle Itter.\nLast years.\nAfter returning to France, Weygand was held as a collaborator at the Val-de-Gr\u00e2ce but was released in May 1946 and cleared in 1948. He died on 28 January 1965 in Paris at the age of 98. He had married Marie-Ren\u00e9e-Jos\u00e9phine de Forsanz (1876-1961), the daughter of Brigadier General Raoul de Forsanz (1845-1914), on 12 November 1900. They had two sons, \u00c9douard (1901-1987) and Jacques (1905-1970).\nBeirut still holds his name on one of its major streets, Rue Weygand.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nMemoirs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolish period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecond World War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70684", "revid": "4550745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70684", "title": "Simon Petlyura", "text": ""}
{"id": "70685", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70685", "title": "Francois Mitterrand", "text": ""}
{"id": "70692", "revid": "12536756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70692", "title": "Zhiguli", "text": "Zhiguli may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70695", "revid": "1302362683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70695", "title": "Ammon (disambiguation)", "text": "Ammon was an ancient Canaanite nation.\nAmmon may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70700", "revid": "1319767601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70700", "title": "Francis II of France", "text": "King of France from 1559 to 1560\nFrancis II (; 19 January 1544\u00a0\u2013 5 December 1560) was King of France from 1559 to 1560. He was also King consort of Scotland as the husband of Mary, Queen of Scots, from 1558 until his death in 1560.\nHe ascended the throne of France at age 15 after the accidental death of his father, Henry II, in 1559. His short reign was dominated by the first stirrings of the French Wars of Religion.\nAlthough the royal age of majority was 14, his mother, Catherine de' Medici, entrusted the reins of government to his wife Mary's uncles from the House of Guise, staunch supporters of the Catholic cause. They were unable to help Catholics in Scotland against the progressing Scottish Reformation, however, and the Auld Alliance was dissolved.\nAfter dying of an ear infection, Francis was succeeded by two of his brothers in turn, both of whom were also unable to reduce tensions between Protestants and Catholics.\nChildhood and education (1544\u20131559).\nFrancis was born 11 years after his parents' wedding. The long delay in producing an heir may have been due to his father's repudiation of his mother in favour of his mistress Diane de Poitiers, but this repudiation was mitigated by Diane's insistence that Henry spend his nights with Catherine. Francis was at first raised at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. He was baptised on 10 February 1544 at the Chapelle des Trinitaires in Fontainebleau. His godparents were Francis I (who knighted him during the ceremony), Pope Paul III, and his great-aunt Marguerite de Navarre. He became governor of Languedoc in 1546 and Dauphin of France in 1547, when his grandfather Francis I died.\nFrancis's governor and governess were Jean d'Humi\u00e8res and Fran\u00e7oise d'Humi\u00e8res, and his tutor was Pierre Dan\u00e8s, a Greek scholar originally from Naples. He learned dancing from Virgilio Bracesco and fencing from Hector of Mantua.\nKing Henry II, his father, arranged a remarkable betrothal for his son to the five year old Mary, Queen of Scots, in the Ch\u00e2tillon agreement of 27 January 1548, when Francis was only four years old. Mary had been crowned Queen of Scotland in Stirling Castle on 9 September 1543 at the age of nine months, following the death of her father James V. Mary was a granddaughter of Claude, Duke of Guise, a very influential figure at the court of France. Once the marriage agreement was formally ratified, the five-year-old Mary was sent to France to be raised at court until the marriage. She was tall for her age and eloquent, and Francis was unusually short and stuttered. Henry II said, \"from the very first day they met, my son and she got on as well together as if they had known each other for a long time\".\nOn 24 April 1558, Francis and Mary married in Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris. It was a union that could have given the future kings of France the throne of Scotland and also a claim to the throne of England through Mary's great-grandfather, King Henry VII of England. As a result of the marriage, Francis became king consort in Scotland until his death. The marriage produced no children, and may never even have been consummated, possibly due to Francis's illnesses or undescended testicles.\nBecoming king.\nA little over a year after his marriage, on 10 July 1559, Francis became king at age 15 upon the death of Henry II, who had been killed in a jousting accident. On 21 September 1559, Francis II was crowned king in Reims by his wife's uncle Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine. The crown was so heavy that nobles had to hold it in place for him. The court then moved to the Loire Valley, where the Ch\u00e2teau de Blois and the surrounding forests were the new king's home. Francis II took the sun for his emblem and for his mottoes \"Spectanda fides\" (This is how faith should be respected) and \"Lumen rectis\" (Light for the righteous).\nAccording to French law, Francis was an adult who did not need a regent; but since he was young, inexperienced, and in fragile health, he delegated his power to his wife's uncles from the noble House of Guise: Francis, Duke of Guise, and Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine. His mother, Catherine de' Medici, agreed to this delegation. On the first day of his reign, Francis II instructed his four ministers to take orders from his mother, but since she was still in mourning for her husband, she directed them to the House of Guise.\nThe two eldest brothers of the House of Guise had already had major roles in the reign of Henry II. Francis, Duke of Guise, was one of the most famous military commanders in the royal army, and the Cardinal of Lorraine had participated in the most important negotiations and matters of the kingdom. After Francis II ascended the throne, the two brothers split the custody of the kingdom: Duke Francis became head of the army and Charles the head of finance, justice, and diplomacy.\nThe rise of the House of Guise worked to the detriment of its old rival, Anne de Montmorency, Constable of France. At the new king's suggestion, he left the court for his estates to get some rest. Diane de Poitiers, the mistress of the previous king, was asked not to appear at court. Her prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Jean Bertrand had to surrender his title Keeper of the Seals of France to chancellor Fran\u00e7ois Olivier, whom Diane had removed from this position a few years earlier. It was a palace revolution.\nThe transition has been described as brutal, but while it no doubt caused the Constable considerable frustration, there were no confrontations or reprisals. Montmorency remained tied to power. As soon as the day after the death of the king, he was present at the council meeting and was also at the coronation. Later he supported the repression of the Amboise conspiracy of 1560, notably by going to the Parlement to communicate to its members the measures taken by the king. In July 1560 he came back to court and to the council, although in a much less flamboyant manner than before. The Guises were now the new masters of the court. The king granted them numerous favours and privileges, one of the most significant being the title of Grand Master of France, a title until then held by the son of the Constable, Fran\u00e7ois de Montmorency.\nReign (1559\u20131560).\nDomestic policy.\nKingdom on the death of Henri II.\nWith the peace of Cateau Cambresis in 1559, the crown had been left on the cusp of bankruptcy. The public deficit stood at 40 million livres, of which 19 million was owed immediately. The interest rates on these loans were notable, as lenders had grown wary of the crown's inability to pay over the years and this lack of confidence would only be furthered with Henry II's death. Henri's religious policy had also proved ineffective, his persecutory edicts failing to stop the growth of Calvinism in France. Religious violence was increasing, with attacks in Paris, first in response to the loss at the Battle of Saint-Quentin (1557) and then around the trial of the heretic \"parlementaire\" Anne du Bourg.\nGuise administration.\nFrom the beginning of their assumption of government, the Guises faced opposition from several factions. Their rise to dominance had come at the expense of Anne de Montmorency and the House of Bourbon who resented their total ascendency to varying degrees.\nThe political decisions of the government were also contested. To try and set about fixing the realm's finances, they embarked upon an aggressive campaign of cost cutting, scaling down the size of the army from its height in the wars, and deferring payments to the troops, who angrily protested against the Guises. This would not however be enough, so they were moved to raise forced loans from the provinces, such as 800,000 livres from Normandy, to cover shortfalls. They further suppressed Venal office.\nForced loans would continue into 1560, with 100,000 crowns being demanded of the Parlement and merchants of Paris in October 1560, shortly after the convoking of the estates had taken place.\nIn religion, the Guises initially continued the repression of Protestantism started by King Henry II. From July 1559 to February 1560 they would pass four more persecutory edicts, including such provisions as the razing of any house which a Protestant meeting occurred in, and the prosecution of landlords who knowingly harboured heretics as tenants.\nAmboise conspiracy.\nOpposition to the Guise administration which had been bubbling under the surface during Francis II's reign, coalesced around two primary axes. Firstly there was religious opposition from Protestants such as La Roche Chandieu, secondly there was opposition from military men of the minor gentry, such as Castlenau; these groups came together under the leadership of the seigneur de la Renaudie to form a conspiracy to seize the king and arrest or kill the Cardinal de Lorraine and the Duke de Guise. The group planned to push for Antoine of Navarre to lead them, and become a 'regent' for Francis II. When he proved uninterested in their plot, they moved to the more dubious claim of his brother Cond\u00e9. He was more receptive to the plan.\nAs details of the conspiracy were finalised and arms raised for the day, rumours began to leak out to the court of what was happening. Finally on 12 February while the court was travelling to Amboise, the Duke's secretary arrived, bringing a lawyer who had got cold feet about the direction of the conspiracy. The secretary revealed all the details to the Guise and Francis, including the name of the leader, La Renaudie.\nWith this knowledge to hand, and suspecting the involvement of Cond\u00e9, the Guise summoned much of the high nobility to Amboise, and began fortifying the castle in preparation. In March the court struck, arresting a band of the conspirators who had assembled to discuss the delivery of money for the operation. Several days later a larger host of soldiers were bloodily repulsed from Amboise. On 17 March, Francis II made the duke of Guise the Lieutenant General of the kingdom, giving him final authority for all military matters. Realising the motley nature of the conspiracy, a mixture of fairly harmless heretics and hardened military men, an amnesty was declared on 17 March for those who laid down their arms and went home within 48 hours. Operations would continue as the court began to fan out troops into the countryside to mop up stragglers.\nThe court was left with a tricky situation as to how to deal with those captured alive. Interrogations began, attempting to prove a connection between Cond\u00e9 and the conspiracy. Cond\u00e9 denounced accusations thrown at him as the work of 'scum' and more pressingly for honour in aristocratic circles, propagated by 'liars.' The Queen Mother assured him that no one doubted his innocence. However, on 18 April his chambers were raided while he was attending the kings lev\u00e9e. Unable to find proof however, he was allowed to leave court. Cond\u00e9 hurried south, uniting with his brother Antoine in the south-west.\nFor the military conspirators who had remained under arms there would be little mercy, many would be executed in the following days, and hanged from the battlements as a warning. To the shock of members of the court, this included men of 'good birth' such as the Baron de Castlenau. Nevertheless, the court was conscious its religious policy had been a failure, and as early as 8 March, the Edict of Amboise was propagated, offering a retroactive amnesty for those convicted of heresy, on the condition they live as good Catholics. This began the distinction between the crimes of heresy and the crime of sedition, which had during the reign of Henri II been treated as a unified crime.\nAmboise in the provinces.\nWhilst the rebellion outside the castle of Amboise may have been crushed, the situation was deteriorating in the provinces. Troops raised for the conspiracy in Dauphine, Provence, and the Lyonnais were left without central direction, creating the nucleus of guerrilla armies that caused chaos in their localities. Beyond the planned regional elements of Amboise, many Protestants began seizing churches independently, and engaging in acts of unauthorised iconoclasm, as in Rouen and Provence. During the summer, this rebellious movement gained intensity; several cities in southern France were by now engulfed in revolt.\nThe climax of the regional disorder came in the early autumn, where on 4 September in Lyon, a large stockpile of weapons was discovered in the city of Lyon by the authorities, after a brief firefight with a group of Protestants the weapons were seized, narrowly foiling a planned coup in the city by several days. The narrow foiling of this conspiracy only further enraged the king and his administration who suspected the involvement of Cond\u00e9 in this affair. This was confirmed when an agent of his carrying papers that implicated him was intercepted.\nThe king's reaction was fierce and determined: he mobilised his troops, sent the army to the rebellious areas to quell the sedition, and ordered governors to return to their positions. To isolate the renegade princes of the blood further the administration created two super-governorships giving one to Charles, Prince of La Roche-sur-Yon and the other to Louis, Duke of Montpensier, thus divorcing their interests from those of their cousins. Heavily outnumbered Cond\u00e9 and Navarre decided making a stand and fighting would be pointless, and they departed their southern regional powerbase at the kings request to attend the forthcoming Estates General.\nRomorantin and the Estates General.\nThis distinction between heresy and sedition, represented a new religious policy for the monarchy of France. While there was to be no allowance for heretical worship, it was hoped this would avoid needless bloodshed, and reunify the kingdom around the crown. This changing of the political winds was furthered when in April the former Guise client Michel de l'H\u00f4pital became Lord Chancellor of France replacing the ailing Fran\u00e7ois Olivier. H\u00f4pital was a humanist Catholic, little interested in the persecution that had defined the administration in the 1550s. In conjunction with Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, Catherine de Medici and Admiral Coligny, he began pushing this new religious policy further.\nIn May 1560 a further edict was passed, the Edict of Romorantin. This edict denounced the spread of heresy in the kingdom, but also noted the failure of the policies on the 1550s. The edict proposed that going forth trial for heresy would be handled by the ecclesiastical courts instead of the Parlement. This was significant as the ecclesiastical courts lacked the ability to provide death sentences, and while they could technically still refer cases to the Parlements for sentencing, this acted as a de facto abolition of the death penalty for heresy. For more 'seditious' offences, such as heretical preaching, pamphlet producing and services, the \"Pr\u00e9sidaux\" courts would have jurisdiction.\nConscious that the financial and religious problems of the crown had not yet gone away, and desiring to create a more definitive solution, the Guise oversaw the calling of an Assembly of Notables. Conscious that they were liable to be arrested, Cond\u00e9 and Navarre were not among the leading nobility who attended. Lorraine intended to guide the assembly towards his proposed idea of a national religious council, to reunify the two faiths peacefully, this was however taken off course by Coligny, who presented a petition from the Norman church seeking the right to establish temples. The duke of Guise was infuriated by this proposal, suggesting if two religions were tolerated 'his sword would not remain sheathed for long.' The assembly drew up a reform package of tax ideas, and closed by convening the Estates General to whom this package would be presented. It was initially intended to host this at Meaux before a location change to Orl\u00e9ans due to religious troubles at the former city.\nAfraid the proposed council might be highly Gallican, the Pope decided to reopen the general council of Trent, but rejected the attendance of any Protestant, the demands of the French crown to scrap their proposed national council.\nThe calling of the Estates General presented an opportunity to bring Cond\u00e9 into line, and in October he was summoned to present himself at the Estates General. Upon arrival he and several associates were promptly arrested and put on trial. After filibustering the proceedings Cond\u00e9 would eventually be found guilty, and given an indeterminate sentence, likely imprisonment at Loches.\nForeign policy.\nIn foreign policy, Francis II continued peace efforts Henry II had begun with the signing of the Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis in April 1559, which ended 40 years of war between France and the Habsburg empire. At the expense of its influence in Europe, France continued to restore lands conquered over the previous 40 years. In this sense, Francis II's reign began the decline of French influence throughout Europe, to the benefit of Spain.\nWhen Henry II died, the restitution of these territories was well under way. Francis II, aware of the kingdom's weaknesses, reassured Spain of its intention to fulfill the treaty just signed. The Mar\u00e9chal de Brissac, who displayed some unwillingness to evacuate Piedmont, was asked to change his behaviour and accelerate the withdrawal. By the autumn of 1559, France had completely left Savoy, and Piedmont, except for the five locations agreed upon in the Peace of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis. If these were returned to the Duke of Savoy Emmanuel Philibert, Montferrat would be returned to Guglielmo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua. Both were allies of Spain. Finally, Valenza, which Brissac was grumbling about releasing, was to be returned to the Spanish Duchy of Milan. On the Spanish side, King Philip II showed some unwillingness to return four locations in the northeast of the kingdom as required by the treaty. Border disputes renewed tensions between the two nations, but after months of protests Francis II finally obtained these territories.\nAlong with restitution of territories, the government of Francis II had to negotiate, pay, or claim compensations for people whose properties were taken or destroyed during the war. It also had to reach an agreement with Spain about the prisoners of war held by both sides. Many noblemen were still prisoners and unable to pay their ransom. Common soldiers were consigned to use as rowers on the royal galleys. Even after a reciprocal release compromise was signed, Spain was not eager to lose its prisoners.\nWhen Francis II died, France withdrew from Scotland, Brazil, Corsica, Tuscany, Savoy and most of Piedmont.\nLoss of Scotland.\nWith the marriage of Francis II and Mary Stuart, the future of Scotland was linked to that of France. A secret clause signed by the queen provided that Scotland would become part of France if the royal couple did not have children. The queen's mother, Marie of Guise, was already regent for Scotland.\nBecause of French control over their country, a congregation of Scottish lords organised an uprising and made the regent and her French councils leave the capital, Edinburgh, in May 1559. Having taken refuge at the fortress of Dunbar, Marie of Guise asked France for help. Francis II and Mary Stuart sent troops right away. By the end of 1559, France had regained control of Scotland.\nNothing seemed to stand in the way of French control of Scotland apart from English support for the Scottish nobles. Queen Elizabeth I was still offended that Francis II and Mary Stuart had put on their coat of arms those of England, thus proclaiming Mary's claims on the throne of England. In January 1560, the English fleet blockaded the port of Leith, which French troops had turned into a military base. They were supported by the arrival in April of 6000 soldiers and 3000 horsemen, which began the siege of the city.\nJust as English troops were not particularly successful, the French troops found themselves in a better strategic position. But the French government's poor financial situation and internal turmoil in the French kingdom prevented any military reinforcements from being sent. When the Bishop of Valence and Charles de La Rochefoucault, sieur of Randan, sent by the king to negotiate, arrived in Scotland, they were treated almost like prisoners. With Marie of Guise shut up in Edinburgh Castle, the two men were forced to negotiate a peace that was disadvantageous to France. On 6 July 1560, they signed the Treaty of Edinburgh, which ended French occupation of Scotland. Francis II and Mary Stuart had to withdraw French troops and stop displaying England's arms.\nA few weeks later, the Parliament of Scotland established Protestantism as the state religion. When Francis II and Mary Stuart were presented with the Treaty of Edinburgh, they were outraged and refused to sign it; they also challenged the legitimacy of the Scottish parliament's decision.\nDeath.\nThe king's health deteriorated in November 1560. On 16 November he fainted. After only 17 months on the throne, Francis II died on 5 December 1560 in Orl\u00e9ans, Loiret, from an ear condition. Multiple diseases have been suggested, such as mastoiditis, meningitis, or otitis exacerbated into an abscess. Ambroise Par\u00e9, the royal surgeon, considered performing a trepanation. Some suspected Protestants of having poisoned the king, a view held by Catholics as the tensions between them and Protestants were on the rise, but this has not been proven.\nFrancis II died childless, so his younger brother Charles, then ten years old, succeeded him. On 21 December, the council named Catherine de' Medici, Regent of France. The Guises left the court, while Mary Stuart, Francis II's widow, returned to Scotland. Louis, Prince of Cond\u00e9, who was jailed and awaiting execution, was freed after some negotiations with Catherine de M\u00e9dici.\nOn 23 December 1560, Francis II's body was interred in the Basilica of St Denis by the Prince of La Roche-sur-Yon.\nPosterity.\nFrancis II had a brief reign. He became king as an inexperienced teenager, at a time when the kingdom was struggling with religious troubles. Historians agree that Francis II was fragile, both physically and psychologically, and his frail health led to his early death. The question of whether his marriage was consummated or not remains unanswered.\nPortrayals.\nFrancis is portrayed by Toby Regbo in the CW show \"Reign\", by Richard Denning in \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" (1971), by Sebastian Stragiotti-Axanciuc in \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" (2013), and by George Jaques in the TV drama \"The Serpent Queen\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70701", "revid": "507227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70701", "title": "Jack Chick", "text": "American cartoonist (1924\u20132016)\nJack Thomas Chick (April 13, 1924\u00a0\u2013 October 23, 2016) was an American cartoonist and publisher, best known for his fundamentalist Christian \"Chick tracts\". He expressed his perspective on a variety of issues through sequential-art morality plays.\nMany of his tracts accused Roman Catholics, Freemasons, Muslims, and many other groups of murder and conspiracies. His comics have been described by Robert Ito, in \"Los Angeles\" magazine, as \"equal parts hate literature and fire-and-brimstone sermonizing\".\nChick's views have been spread mostly through the tracts and, more recently, online. His company, Chick Publications, says it has sold over 750 million tracts, comic books, videos, books, and posters designed to promote Evangelical Protestantism from a Christian fundamentalist perspective. They have been translated into more than 100 languages.\nChick was an Independent Baptist who followed a dispensationalist view of the End Times. He was a believer in the King James Only movement, which posits that every English translation of the Bible other than the King James version is flawed and contains some inaccuracies compared to the original text.\nBiography.\nChick was born in the neighborhood of Boyle Heights in Los Angeles, and later moved with his family to Alhambra. There Chick was active in the high school drama club. According to Chick, he was not religious in high school. After graduation, he continued his drama education at the Pasadena Playhouse School of Theater on a two-year scholarship.\nIn February 1943, during World War II, Chick was drafted as a private into the U.S. Army. He served for three years in the Pacific theater, serving in New Guinea, Australia, the Philippines, and Japan working in cryptography. Although he did not see combat, \"almost all\" of the fellow servicemen he befriended were killed in action, and many of them engaged in activities such as visiting brothels. Chick credited his time overseas for inspiring him to translate his tracts into many different languages and said that he had \"a special burden for missions and missionaries\".\nAfter the war, he returned to the Pasadena Playhouse, where he met his future wife while working on a production there. Lola Lynn Priddle (1926\u20131998), a Canadian immigrant, came from a very religious family, and Chick said that she was \"instrumental in his salvation\". Priddle and her parents introduced Chick to the Charles E. Fuller radio show \"The Old-Fashioned Revival Hour\", and Chick said that he was converted while listening to an episode of this show.\nChick and Priddle married in 1948. They had one child, a daughter named Carol, who died in 1998 from surgery complications.\nIn February 1998, Priddle died. The widower Chick remarried to an Asian woman whose name has been variously reported as Susie and Susy.\nIn a 2005 issue of his company's newsletter, \"Battle Cry\", Chick reported that he had a life-threatening health emergency sometime between 2003 and 2005. He said, \"My flu turned into pneumonia, my blood sugar dropped to 20 (I am diabetic)... I was going into a coma. My wife called 911 and while they were on the way, I had a heart attack. A day or so later I had to undergo a triple bypass.\"\nChick had limited personal contact with the public; he gave only one known professional interview after 1975. The lack of available public information about him created some speculation that he was a pen name for unnamed authors. Chick died in his sleep at age 92. His body was discovered on the evening of October 23, 2016, in his home at Alhambra, California. The interment was private.\nIn the wake of Jack Chick's death, a biography, \"You Don't Know Jack: The Authorized Biography of Christian Cartoonist Jack T. Chick\" by David W. Daniels, was published by Chick Publications in 2017. The book contains a number of previously unpublished photographs of Chick.\nCareer.\nFrom 1953 to 1955, Chick drew a single-panel cartoon, whose text was written by P. S. Clayton, titled \"Times Have Changed?\" It thematically resembled the \"B.C.\" comic strip and \"The Flintstones\" animated cartoon, but predated both. These were syndicated by the Mirror Enterprises Co. in Los Angeles area newspapers.\nAfter converting to Christianity, Chick wanted to evangelize others, but he was too shy to talk to people directly about religion. Chick heard from missionary Bob Hammond, who had broadcast in Asia on the Voice of America, that the Chinese Communist Party had gained significant influence among ordinary Chinese in the 1950s through the distribution of small comic books. Chick also began working with a prison ministry and created a flip chart of illustrations to use with his presentation. He hit upon the idea of creating witnessing tracts, which could be given to people directly or indirectly.\nWhile working for the AstroScience Corporation (a maker of tape recorders and avionics for the U.S. government) in El Monte, California, he self-published his first tract, \"Why No Revival?\" in 1960. He paid for it with a loan from his credit union. He published his second tract, \"A Demon's Nightmare\", in 1962. He decided to create more tracts and began \"using his kitchen table as an office and art studio\". Christian bookstores were reluctant to accept the tracts, but they were popular among missionaries and churches.\nHe officially established Chick Publications in 1970 in Rancho Cucamonga, California. Initially, Chick wrote and illustrated all of the comics himself, but in 1972 he hired another artist to illustrate many of the tracts. Fred Carter illustrated tracts anonymously until 1980, when he was identified in an issue of Chick's newsletter \"Battle Cry\". Carter also painted the oil paintings seen in \"The Light of the World\", a film Chick produced that related the Christian gospel.\nChick Publications.\nChick Publications also distributes \"Chick tracts\", small comic tracts with religious messages. Those which are still in print, or which can be ordered (with a minimum 10,000 requirement) can be viewed in their entirety on the company's website. The most popular Chick tract is \"This Was Your Life!\". It has been translated into around 100 languages, and many other tracts are available in widely spoken languages such as Arabic, German, Spanish, and Tagalog. Several of Chick's tracts have been translated into less widely-spoken languages as Blue Hmong, Huichol, Ngiemboon, Tshiluba, and the constructed language of Esperanto.\nIn addition to tracts, Chick Publications released at least 24 full-size \"Chick comics\" since its founding. They are full-color comic books, and most were first published between 1974 and 1985. Unlike the tracts, only portions of the comics are available for viewing on the Chick Publications website. The first 22 form the \"Crusader comics\" series, which follows the stories of two fundamentalist Christians and addresses topics such as the occult, Bible prophecy, and the theory of evolution; six prominently feature the life story of Alberto Rivera, a purported \"former Jesuit priest\" whose story has been widely discredited, even by those who might otherwise agree with Chick's anti-Catholic views.\nThemes.\nChick is known for his conspiratorial views and his belief that secret groups, such as the Illuminati, exert influence on the world to advance evil. In \"The Broken Cross,\" Chick introduces John Todd, a former grand druid priest who claims that secret groups, including witches and the Illuminati, are working to advance evil. Chick's version of Christianity emphasizes the role of Satan and his minions, portraying them as the principal evils in his comic. He sees Satan as the one behind all major events, including biblical occurrences like Adam and Eve and the Great Flood, as part of his ongoing battle for control. In this worldview, God's actions are seen as reactions to the Devil's actions, creating a dynamic game between the two sides for the fate of humanity.\nSome scholars, such as Jason C. Bivins, have identified Chick with the new Christian right (NCR) due to areas of theological overlap with figures in the movement such as Tim LaHaye or Jerry Falwell: in particular, their views on eschatology and biblical inerrancy. Nathan Saunders, however, argues that Chick's beliefs about Roman Catholicism as a demonic, false gospel separate him from the group, which included a number of Catholics such as Phyllis Schlafly and Paul Weyrich. \"Chick consequently refused to follow his fellow fundamentalists when they compromised doctrinal purity by making a pact with the Devil. Doctrinal compromise rendered the NCR at best ineffective and at worst satanic.\"\n\"Catholic Answers\" has called Chick \"savagely anti-Catholic\", describes Chick's statements about the Catholic Church as \"bizarre\" and \"often grotesque in their arguments\", and calls for the tracts to be pulled from the market and corrected. In the early 1980s, Chick's stance on Catholicism led some Christian bookstores to stop stocking his tracts, and he withdrew from the Christian Booksellers Association after the association considered expelling him. \"Christianity Today\" described Chick as an example of \"the world of ordinary, nonlearned evangelicals\", for whom \"atavistic anti-Catholicism remains as colorful and unmistakable as ever\". Michael Ian Borer, a sociology professor of Furman University at the time, showed Chick's strong anti-Catholic themes in a 2007 American Sociological Association presentation and in a peer-reviewed article the next year in \"Religion and American Culture\". Chick responded to these accusations by saying that he was opposed to the Roman Catholic Church as a sociopolitical organization, but not to its individual members. On his \"Roman Catholicism FAQ\", Chick said he began publishing his theories about the Roman Catholic Church because \"he loves Catholics and wants them to be saved through faith in Jesus\". Six of Chick's full-size comics feature Alberto Rivera, specifically: \"Alberto\", \"Double Cross\", \"The Godfathers\", \"The Force\", \"Four Horsemen\", and \"The Prophet\". Rivera was an anti-Catholic religious activist who claimed to have been a Jesuit priest before becoming a fundamentalist Protestant. Rivera was the source of many of the conspiracy theories about the Vatican and the Jesuits espoused by Jack Chick.\nWiccan author Kerr Cuhulain has described Chick and his theories as being \"anti-feminist\" and \"anti-Pagan\", noted that a Chick Publications comic book was the source of a Rapid City, South Dakota police detective's presentation on the history of Satanism given in 1989, and describes him as \"easily the least reputable source of reliable information on religious groups\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70702", "revid": "42727488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70702", "title": "Dictators", "text": ""}
{"id": "70703", "revid": "483374", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70703", "title": "Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation", "text": "United States Department of Defense school at Fort Benning in Columbus, Georgia\nThe Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation (WHINSEC), formerly the School of the Americas, is a United States Department of Defense school located at Fort Benning (briefly known as Fort Moore) in Columbus, Georgia, the school being renamed in the 2001 National Defense Authorization Act.\nThe institute was founded in 1946; by the year 2000, more than 60,000 Latin American military, law enforcement, and security personnel had attended the school. The school was located in the Panama Canal Zone until its expulsion in 1984.\nWhen the institute was still known as the School of the Americas it had what it described as a 'Hall of Fame' honoring its most accomplished alumni. It included Bolivian dictator Gen. Hugo Banzer Su\u00e1rez, drug lord and dictator Manuel Noriega, and Guatemalan General Manuel Antonio Callejas y Callejas.\nHistory.\nLatin American Training Center-Ground Division.\nIn 1946, the United States Army founded the Latin American Training Center-Ground Division (\"Centro de Entrenamiento Latino Americano, Division Terrestre)\" at Fort Amador in the Panama Canal Zone to centralize the \"administrative tasks involved in training the increasing number of Latin Americans attending U.S. service schools in the canal zone.\" The school trained Latin American military personnel to use artillery and advanced weapons purchased from the United States and provided instruction in nation-building. The army soon renamed the division the Latin American Ground School (\"Escuela Latino Americana Terrestre\") and divided it into three departments: engineering, communications, and weapons and tactics. The school was affiliated with army training schools in Panama that included the Food Service School (Fort Clayton), the Motor Mechanics School (Fort Randolph), and the Medical School (Fort Clayton). Chronic under-enrollment occurred during the school's first few years, as Latin American officials preferred to have personnel trained within the continental United States. Cadets of varying degrees of education and military experience were placed in the same courses. In 1947, discussions of national castes and class divisions in Latin American countries among U.S. officials led to changes in course structure that created separate classes for officers and lower-ranks.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, the school sought to prove that the quality of training provided matched or exceeded training provided by institutions within the U.S. When a group of Argentine officers attended a three-month course in 1948, the school painstakingly structured the program to convince them that the U.S. was \"enterprising, efficient, and powerful.\" Administrators leveraged preconceived notions around Argentine racial superiority in Latin America to cultivate feelings of equality between the Argentine officers and their U.S. counterparts.\nScholar Lesley Gill has argued that the Ground School not only trained students, but incorporated them \"into the ideology of the 'American way of life' by steeping them in a vision of empire that identified their aspirations with those of the United States.\"\nU.S. Army Caribbean School.\nIn February 1949, the army consolidated the training schools in the Panama Canal Zone and transferred operations to Fort Gulick. The army changed the name of the Latin American Ground School to the U.S. Army Caribbean School. Some courses were taught in Spanish to accommodate requests from Latin American countries that the school served. The school graduated 743 U.S. military personnel and 251 Latin Americans representing ten countries in 1949.\nMutual defense assistance agreements bound the U.S. Army to the militaries of Latin America by the middle of the 1950s, with only Mexico and Argentina as exceptions. By 1954, the school's pupils were overwhelmingly from Latin American countries due to a decrease in U.S. military personnel in the region, an increased utilization of the school by governments in Latin America, and an agreement that the United States would pay \"transportation, per diem and course costs for military trainees from MDAP countries in Latin America.\" In 1956, English was eliminated as an instructional language and the school adopted Spanish as its official language. Accordingly, the majority of U.S. personnel the school trained between 1956 and 1964 were Puerto Rican.\nDuring this period, the army utilized the school for translation. In 1955, the Department of the Army established the Spanish Translation Review Board within the school to \"review new and old translations of U.S. Army Field Manuals prior to publishing to correct grammatical and technical errors and to assist in the standardization of military terms\" employed in Spanish-language curricula. In 1961, General Lyman Lemnitzer suggested that Latin American students could be utilized to \"review translations to insure conformance with individual country language and practical applicability.\"\nAfter the 1959 revolution in Cuba, the U.S. Military adopted a national security doctrine under the perceived threat of an \"international communist conspiracy.\" In 1961, President John F. Kennedy ordered the school to focus on teaching \"anti-communist\" counterinsurgency training to military personnel from Latin America. Broadly, the U.S. offered training to Latin Americans in riot and mob control, special warfare, jungle warfare, intelligence, and counterintelligence, civil affairs, and public information. According to anthropologist Lesley Gill, the label \"communist\" was a \u201chighly elastic category that could accommodate almost any critic of the status quo.\"\nNicaraguan Dictator Anastasio Somoza made occasional visits to the school.\nCurriculum.\nThe Department of Internal Defense dealt with \"national internal defense\", while the Counterinsurgency Committee provided counterinsurgency training in ten-week and two-week courses. According to the Department of Defense, the school provided intelligence and counter-intelligence training to \"foreign military personnel\" under the Mutual Assistance Program. It also trained military police and maintained a close relationship with the Inter-American Police Academy. As part of an effort to emphasize \"nation building and economic growth through military civic action,\" the school taught \"technical skills applicable to civic action programs.\"\nSchool of the Americas.\nIn 1963, officials renamed the facility the U.S. Army School of the Americas \"to better reflect its hemispheric orientation.\"\nBy its closure in 2000, The USARSA had graduated 60,428 officers, cadets, noncommissioned officers, police and civilian defense officials from 22 Latin American countries and the United States.\nDuring the mid-1960s, the school was one of several institutions through which the U.S. Army augmented \"training in jungle warfare\". The Department of Defense reported to President Lyndon B. Johnson that 180 students from the Continental U.S. Base had been trained in 1965, including 60 from the 1st Cavalry Division deployed in the Republic of Vietnam.\nThe Jungle Operations Course included in-field exercises. For example, in 1966a company of 103 students from Panama and 4 other Latin American countries enrolled in the Jungle Operations Course, U.S. Army School of the Americas, Fort Gulick, Canal Zone, recently completed a 9 day tactical exercise crossing the Isthmus of Panama, a ground distance of about 55 miles, through jungle, swamp and water. Symbolically following in the footsteps of Spanish explorers 300 years ago, the crossing began with an amphibious landing on the Pacific side of the Isthmus. The exercise ended with the last student completing the trek by emptying a container of Pacific Ocean Water into the Caribbean. The 9 day exercise emphasized jungle operations and tactics and techniques of combat in this environment. The U.S. Army School of the Americas' Jungle Operations Committee supervised and controlled the maneuver.Heightened tensions in Southeast Asia increased demand for \"jungle operations techniques\". In 1966, the army ordered the Commander, U.S. Army Forces Southern Command, to augment the school's Jungle Operations Course to accommodate more students. Specifically, these new students were to be soldiers \"enroute to assignments in units serving in the Republic of Vietnam.\" A feedback-loop created between the school and General Westmoreland's headquarters allowed the Army to ensure that \"lessons learned\" in Vietnam were incorporated into the curriculum. Scholar J. Patrice McSherry has argued that methods derived from Vietnam and incorporated into the curriculum included \"torture techniques and other dirty war methods\". Further, the school leveraged instructors returning from service in Vietnam to \"insure currency of the instruction\". As new techniques were developed and adopted, the military became increasingly protective of course content. According to one scholar, by the mid-to-late 1960s \"trainees required security clearances even to view the course descriptions of military intelligence courses.\"\nThe counterinsurgency manuals that the school used for instruction were produced during the Army's Project X, established under the Foreign Intelligence Assistance Program in 1965\u201366, which relied on knowledge produced during the Central Intelligence Agency's Phoenix Program. According to Major Joseph Blair, a former instructor at the school, \"the author of SOA and CIA torture manuals [...] drew from intelligence materials used during the Vietnam War that advocated assassination, torture, extortion, and other 'techniques'.\" McSherry argues that the authors of the manuals \"believed that oversight regulations and prohibitions applied only to U.S. personnel, not to foreign officers.\" Use of the manuals was suspended under President Jimmy Carter over concerns about their correlation to human rights abuses.\nDespite Carter's worries about the school's training materials, he believed that the international military education and training provided by the School of the Americas, among other institutions, was critical to furthering \"the national interests of the United States\". He considered the training conducted in Panama to be essential because it enhanced American \"access to the politically influential leadership\" of the Panamanian National Guard and instilled in its personnel \"attitudes favorable to the United States\". Further, he believed the training served to \"increase respect for United States foreign policy goals and the United States concept of military-civilian relationships at the national level\". To justify his decision to \"provision international military education and training\" to Panama in 1980, Carter argued that not doing so would \"endanger the future operation\" of the School of the Americas and the Inter-American Air Force Academy. Training manuals suspended under Carter were re-introduced into the school's curriculum under the Reagan Administration in 1982.\nDuring the 1970s, the quantity of trainees sent by Latin American dictatorships backed by the United States increased greatly. Between 1970 and 1979, cadets from Chile, Colombia, Bolivia, Panama, Peru, and Honduras made up sixty-three percent of the school's students. In the late 1970s, civil wars and communist revolutions intensified the Central American crisis. In 1980, the United States increased economic aid to Honduras, which remained relatively stable compared to other Central American countries. Journalist Ray Bonner reported that much of this aid would go toward training military officers at the School of the Americas and to training programs within the continental United States. Hundreds of Hondurans were trained at the school during the 1980s, when the country became increasingly critical to President Ronald Reagan's efforts to overthrow and defeat the Nicaraguan Sandinistas and other revolutionary guerrilla movements in the region. The surge in trainees during the 1980s marked the second wave of Hondurans to be trained by the school. The first wave took place between 1950 and 1969, when 1000 Honduran cadets were trained at the school or other facilities within the United States.\nDuring the 1980s, Mexico, El Salvador, and Colombia made-up seventy two percent of the school's cadets.\nOn September 21, 1984, the school was expelled from Panama under the terms of the Panama Canal Treaty. Prior to this expulsion, politicians and journalists in Panama had complained that civilian graduates from the school engaged in repressive and antidemocratic behavior. The army considered relocating the school to Fort Allen in Juana D\u00edaz, Puerto Rico, ultimately choosing Fort Benning (briefly known as Fort Moore), Georgia, where it re-opened in December 1984 as part of the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command.\nIn 1989, the school established a policy on human rights instruction and revised its curriculum to integrate human rights training. According to the school, cadets received between four and forty hours of human rights training depending on their length of attendance. Instructors received sixteen hours of human rights training before they began to teach.\nAs the Cold War drew to a close around 1991, the foreign policy of the United States shifted focus from anti-communism to the war on drugs, with narcoguerillas replacing communists. The focus later shifted again to terrorism. Now, all elements of the School of the Americas are located at Fort Benning with the exception of the Helicopter School Battalion which is located at Fort Rucker, Alabama.\nCongressional criticism and debate.\nIn 1993, a released list of 60,000 graduates confirmed that \"dictators, death squad operatives, and assassins\" had been educated at the SOA. Two bills to cut funding to the school were rejected by the House of Representatives in 1993 and 1994. These bills were introduced by Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II with the intent to close the school by eliminating the amount of funding dedicated to running the school. Despite the rejection of the 1994 bill, legislative action that year required a report on the school's promotion of respect for human rights and civilian authority. This request was included in the Foreign Operations Appropriations measure for fiscal year 1995. The report required explanation of how the \"School of the Americas IMET program\" would \"contribute to the promotion of human rights, respect for civilian authority and the rule of law, the establishment of legitimate judicial mechanisms for the military, and achieving the goal of right sizing military forces.\"\nIn 1995, the House Appropriations Committee urged the Department of Defense to continue its ongoing efforts to incorporate human rights training into the School of the Americas regular training curriculum, as well as to employ stringent screening processes to potential students to ensure that they had not carried out past human rights abuse. That same year, Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II introduced bill H.R. 2652, which sought \"to close the School of the Americas and establish a U.S. Academy for Democracy and Civil-Military Relations.\" The bill stalled in January 1996 while awaiting executive comment from the Department of Defense.\nAgain in 1996, the committee urged the Department of Defense to continue efforts to incorporate human rights training into the regular curriculum and to monitor the human rights performance of its graduates. A report regarding the school's selection process and monitoring of human rights practices of its graduates, as well as examples in which graduates made significant contributions to democracy-building and improved human rights practices, was requested by the House Appropriations Committee in 1996.\nIn September 1996, the Pentagon made training manuals used by the School of the Americas available to the public and confirmed publicly that tactics conveyed in the manuals \"violated American policy and principles.\" The Pentagon declared that all copies of the manuals had been destroyed apart from a single copy retained by its general counsel. An investigation was undertaken to ensure that the school's contemporary intelligence and counterintelligence materials were in \"complete compliance with law, regulations and policy.\" Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II stated that the manuals confirmed that \"taxpayer dollars have been used to train military officers in executions, extortion, beatings and other acts of intimidation \u2013 all clear civil rights abuses which have no place in civilized society.\" Rep. Nancy Pelosi addressed the issue in the congressional record:For years, some of us have had serious questions about the Army's School of the Americas and its connection to some of the worst human rights violators in our hemisphere. Last weekend, information released by the Pentagon confirmed our worst suspicions: U.S. Army intelligence manuals, distributed to thousands of military officers throughout Latin America, promoted the use of executions, torture, blackmail, and other forms of coercion. We now have concrete proof of what we had suspected. For almost 10 years, U.S. taxpayer dollars were used to promote an approach that advocates using, and I quote, \"fear, payment of bounties for enemy dead, beatings, false imprisonment, executions, and the use of truth serum\".Congress continued to debate whether or not to close the school throughout 1997. In February, Representative Kennedy introduced another bill, H.R. 611, that sought to close the school. Instead of pressing for the establishment of the U.S. Academy for Democracy and Civil-Military Relations, the bill urged the Department of Defense to create an Inter-American Center for Defense Studies in order to \"provide professional training and education relevant to defense management in a democratic constitutional context.\" Senator Dick Durbin introduced a similar bill, S.980, into the senate in June. That same month, the Department of Defense submitted the report previously requested to address screening and monitoring of the school's students. The House Appropriations Committee noted that the report was delivered six months beyond its deadline and criticized its content as \"woefully inadequate\". The report divulged that the screening and selection processes of school candidates differed between countries and that each country was responsible for screening and selecting candidates. According to the report, the names of selected candidates were sent to the \"appropriate [U.S.] mission offices and agencies\", who were expected to run their own background checks on the candidates. It also suggested that the resources required to monitor all 60,000 graduates were not available.\nIn July, the House Appropriations Commission reported that the House version of the foreign operations appropriation bill required major reforms before funding would be provided to the school.\nIn September, numerous senators entered statements in the congressional record to support or close the School of the Americas. Rep. Sanford Bishop, whose district includes the school, argued for keeping it open:I am proud of the school. All Americans should be. It has provided professional training to thousands of military and civilian police personnel from throughout Latin America, including extensive indoctrination in the principles of human rights and representative democracy. For less than $4 million a year, the school promotes democracy, builds stronger relationships with our neighbors, and combats narcotics trafficking. Some handful of the school's graduates have committed terrible crimes, but over 68,000 have been on the front lines of the move toward democracy in Latin America. The school has undergone a series of investigations and studies, and all confirm that it has been a force for good in our hemisphere. I urge all of my colleagues to visit the school, learn more about the job it is doing, and not to rush to judgment on the basis of false and unfounded accusations made by people who may have good intentions, but who have little regard for the facts. Mr. Speaker, I urge our colleagues to support the truth. Support the School of the Americas.Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II entered a counterargument into the congressional record:Mr. Speaker, in the next couple of hours, this House will have the opportunity of closing down the School of the Americas. This is one of the worst vestiges of this country's foreign policies over the course of the last couple of decades. While the cold war has ended, the association of this country in hundreds of villages throughout Latin America, in thousands of families where human rights abuses have taken place time and time and time again, those who perpetrated those human rights abuses have one thing in common. They were graduates of the School of the Americas. This is a school that is funded by U.S. taxpayers. It has trained the Latin American militaries how to come to this country and learn to kill, torture, and maim more efficiently. It is a school that should never have been associated with U.S. taxpayer funds. It is a school whose time has not only come and gone, but whose time should never have been associated with this country. It is time, I believe, for us to close down the School of the Americas. I ask Members on both sides of the aisle, save the taxpayers money. Close the School of the Americas.In July 1999, the House of Representatives voted 230\u2013197 to reduce funding for the school by two million dollars. A House-Senate committee voted 8\u20137 to overturn the vote in the weeks that followed.\nWHINSEC.\nBy 2000, the School of the Americas was under increasing criticism in the United States for training students who later participated in undemocratic governments and committed human rights abuses. In 2000, the US Congress, through the FY01 National Defense Act, withdrew the Secretary of the Army's authority to operate USARSA.\nThe next year, the institute was renamed to WHINSEC. U.S. Army Maj. Joseph Blair, a former director of instruction at the school, said in 2002 that \"there are no substantive changes besides the name. ...They teach the identical courses that I taught and changed the course names and use the same manuals.\"\nIn 2013, researcher Ruth Blakeley concluded after interviews with WHINSEC personnel and anti-SOA/WHINSEC protesters that \"there was considerable transparency ... established after the transition from SOA to WHINSEC\" and that \"a much more rigorous human rights training program was in place than in any other US military institution\".\nHowever, the first WHINSEC Director, Richard Downie, became the controversial director of the Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies (CHDS), the educational institution of both the U.S. Northern and U.S. Southern Commands (SOUTHCOM), at the National Defense University in Washington, DC. from March 2004\u2013March, 2013. During Downie's tenure at CHDS, the institution faced controversy over its continued employment of a former military officer from Chile, who was later indicted by a civilian court for his alleged participation in torture and murder and who was defended by Downie. In addition, \"The Intercept\" reported that Honduran plotters in the illegal 2009 military coup received \"behind-the-scenes assistance\" from CHDS officials working for Downie. The detailed August 2017 article noted that Cresencio Arcos, a former U.S. ambassador to Honduras who was working at the Center at the time the coup occurred, received an angry call from a Congressional staffer who had met with the Honduran colonels who were meeting with Members of Congress in Washington. The colonels purportedly told the staffer they had the center's support. Arcos confronted Downie and Center Deputy Director Ken LaPlante, telling them, \"We cannot have this sort of thing happening, where we're supporting coups.\" LaPlante was a former instructor at the notorious School of the Americas and an ardent defender of that institution while at what is now called the William J. Perry Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies.\nParticipation.\nSince its opening in 2001, WHINSEC has trained more than 19,000 students from 36 countries of the Western Hemisphere. In 2014\u20132015, the principal \"Command &amp; General Staff Officer\" course had 65 graduates (60 male and five female) representing 13 nations: Belize, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and the U.S.\nIn 2004, Venezuela ceased all training of its soldiers at WHINSEC after a long period of chilling relations between the United States and Venezuela. On March 28, 2006, the government of Argentina, headed by President N\u00e9stor Kirchner, decided to stop sending soldiers to train at WHINSEC, and the government of Uruguay affirmed that it would continue its current policy of not sending soldiers to WHINSEC.\nIn 2007, \u00d3scar Arias, president of Costa Rica, decided to stop sending Costa Rican police to the WHINSEC, although he later reneged, saying the training would be beneficial for counter-narcotics operations. Costa Rica has no military but has sent some 2,600 police officers to the school. Bolivian President Evo Morales formally announced on February 18, 2008, that he would not send Bolivian military or police officers to WHINSEC. In 2012, President Rafael Correa announced that Ecuador would withdraw all their troops from the military school at Ft. Benning, citing links to human rights violations.\nIn 2005, a bill to abolish the institute, with 134 cosponsors, was introduced to the House Armed Services Committee. In June 2007, the McGovern/Lewis Amendment to shut off funding for the Institute failed by six votes. This effort to close the institute was endorsed by the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, which described the Institute as a \"black eye\" for America.\nCommandants.\nUSCARIB School.\n\"(According to another source, Cecil Himes was commandant from 1958 to 1961.)\"\nCurrent organization.\nCharter.\nAuthorized by the United States Congress through \u00a0https:// in 2001, WHINSEC is responsible for providing professional education and training on the context of the democratic principles in the Charter of the Organization of American States (such charter being a treaty to which the United States is a party). According to William J. Lynn III, Deputy Secretary of Defense (March 18, 2010) WHINSEC fosters mutual knowledge, transparency, confidence, and cooperation among the participating nations and promotes democratic values, respect for human rights, and knowledge and understanding of United States customs and traditions. WHINSEC has provided training for more than 10,000 individuals since its existence and over 60,000 US and international students since its original establishment in 1946. Its educational format incorporates guest lecturers and experts from sectors of US and international government, non-government, human rights, law enforcement, academic institutions, and interagency departments to share best practices (as deemed by the USA) in pursuit of improved security cooperation between all nations of the Western Hemisphere.\nIndependent Review Board.\nWhen the National Defense Authorization Act for 2001 was signed into law, WHINSEC was created. The law called for a federal advisory committee \u2013 the Board of Visitors (BoV) \u2013 to maintain independent review, observation, and recommendations regarding operations of the institute. The 14-member BoV includes members of the Senate and House Armed Services Committees along with representatives from the State Department, U.S. Southern Command, U.S. Northern Command, the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, and six members designated by the Secretary of Defense. These six members include representatives from the human rights, religious, academic, and business communities. The board reviews and advises on areas such as curriculum, academic instruction, and fiscal affairs of the institute. Their reviews ensure relevance and consistency with US policy, laws, regulations, and doctrine.\nMembers of the Board are not compensated by reason of service on the Board.\nBoard of Visitors.\nAs of August 2018, board members include:\nCriticism.\nAccusations of human rights violations by alumni.\nThe School of the Americas has been blamed for human rights violations committed by former students. By the early 1980s, Latin American critics accused the school of teaching techniques of repression to be used toward civilians.\nAccording to the Center for International Policy, \"The School of the Americas had been questioned for years, as it trained many military personnel before and during the years of the 'national security doctrine' \u2013 the dirty war years in the Southern Cone and the civil war years in Central America \u2013 in which the armed forces within several Latin American countries ruled or had disproportionate government influence and committed serious human rights violations in those countries.\"\nThe institute itself explicitly denies accusations of teaching torture as of at least 1999: in that year the School of the Americas FAQ had several answers denying accusations of torture, such as \"Q: What about the accusations that the School teaches torture and murder? A: Absolutely false. The School teaches U.S. Army doctrine which is based on over 200 years of success, and includes a variety of military subjects, none of which include criminal misconduct.\" WHINSEC says that its curriculum includes human rights, and that \"no school should be held accountable for the actions of its graduates.\"\nHuman Rights Watch says that \"training alone, even when it includes human rights instruction, does not prevent human rights abuses.\"\nSOA Watch.\nSince 1990, Washington, DC\u2013based nonprofit human rights organization School of the Americas Watch has worked to monitor graduates of the institution and to close the former SOA, now WHINSEC, through legislative action, grassroots organizing and nonviolent direct action. It maintains a database with graduates of both the SOA and WHINSEC who have been accused of human rights violations and other criminal activity. In regard to the renaming of the institution, SOA Watch claims that the approach taken by the Department of Defense is not grounded in any critical assessment of the training, procedures, performance, or results (consequences) of the training programs of the SOA. According to critics of the SOA, the name change ignores congressional concern and public outcry over the SOA's past and present link to human rights atrocities.\nProtests and public demonstrations.\nSince 1990, SOA Watch has sponsored an annual public demonstration of protest of SOA/WHINSEC at Ft. Benning. In 2005, the demonstration drew 19,000 people. The protests are timed to coincide with the anniversary of the assassination of six Jesuit priests in El Salvador in November 1989 by graduates of the School of the Americas. On November 16, 1989, these six Jesuit priests (Ignacio Ellacur\u00eda, Segundo Montes, Ignacio Mart\u00edn-Bar\u00f3, Joaqu\u00edn L\u00f3pez y L\u00f3pez, Juan Ram\u00f3n Moreno, and Amado L\u00f3pez), along with their housekeeper Elba Ramos and her daughter Celia Marisela Ramos, were murdered by the Atl\u00e1catl Battalion on the campus of the University of Central America in San Salvador, El Salvador, because they had been labeled as subversives by the government. A United Nations panel concluded that nineteen of the 27 killers were SOA graduates.\nGraduates of the School of the Americas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The U.S. Army School of the Americas is a school that has run more dictators than any other school in the history of the world.\u2014\u200a\nA number of graduates of the SOA and WHINSEC have been accused and sentenced for human rights violations, genocide, crimes against humanity and other criminal activity in their home countries.\nIn response to Freedom of Information Act requests, records were released regarding graduates of the school. In August 2007, according to an Associated Press report, Colonel Alberto Quijano of the Colombian Army's Special Forces was arrested for providing security and mobilizing troops for Diego Le\u00f3n Montoya S\u00e1nchez (aka \"Don Diego\"), the leader of the Norte del Valle Cartel and one of the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives. School of the Americas Watch said in a statement that it matched the names of those in the scandal with its database of attendees at the institute. Alberto Quijano attended courses and was an instructor who taught classes on peacekeeping operations and democratic sustainment at the school from 2003 to 2004.\nOther former students include Salvadoran Colonel and Atl\u00e1catl Battalion leader Domingo Monterrosa and other members of his group who were responsible for the El Mozote massacre, and Franck Romain, former leader of the Tonton Macoute, which was alleged to be responsible for the St. Jean Bosco massacre. Honduran General Luis Alonso Discua was also a graduate of the school who later on commanded Battalion 3-16, a military death squad.\nAccording to an article in Human Rights Review, training statistics show that Argentina, a country that engaged in much anti-Communist sentiment and violence during the Dirty War during the Cold War era, had a relatively small number of military personnel educated at the school.\nIn 2018, two of the highest officers of the Venezuelan Army, Minister of Defense Vladimir Padrino L\u00f3pez and SEBIN director Gustavo Gonz\u00e1lez L\u00f3pez, were sanctioned by the United States for human rights abuses against opposition protesters and dissidents, corruption leading to the economic collapse of the country, and drug trafficking charges. They were found to have been students of psychological operations courses at SOA in 1995 and 1991 respectively.\nFor the Fiscal Year 2021 a total of 1,193 students trained at WHINSEC with the highest number of those students coming from Colombia (697).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70704", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70704", "title": "Plymouth Argyle F.C", "text": ""}
{"id": "70705", "revid": "41458237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70705", "title": "Aphrodisiac", "text": "Substance that arouses sexual desires\nAn aphrodisiac is a substance that increases libido, sexual desire, sexual attraction, sexual pleasure, or sexual behavior. These substances range from a variety of plants, spices, and foods to synthetic chemicals. Natural aphrodisiacs, such as cannabis or cocaine, are classified into plant-based and non-plant-based substances. Synthetic aphrodisiacs include MDMA and methamphetamine. Aphrodisiacs can be classified by their type of effects (psychological or physiological). Aphrodisiacs that contain hallucinogenic properties, such as bufotenin, have psychological effects that can increase sexual desire and sexual pleasure. Aphrodisiacs that have smooth muscle relaxing properties, such as yohimbine, have physiological effects that can affect hormone concentrations and increase blood flow. Substances that have the opposite effects on libido are called anaphrodisiacs. Aphrodisiac effects can also be due to the placebo effect. \nBoth males and females can potentially benefit from the use of aphrodisiacs, but they are more focused on males, as their properties tend to increase testosterone concentrations rather than estrogen concentrations. This is in part due to the historical context of aphrodisiacs, which focused solely on males. Only recently has attention been paid to understanding how aphrodisiacs can aid female sexual function. In addition, cultural influences on appropriate sexual behavior of males and females also play a part in the research gap.\nHistory.\nThe word comes from the Greek , 'sexual, aphrodisiac', from 'pertaining to Aphrodite', the Greek goddess of love. Throughout human history, food, drinks, and behaviors have had a reputation for making sex more attainable and/or pleasurable. However, from a historical and scientific standpoint, the alleged results may have been mainly due to mere belief on the part of their users that they would be effective (a placebo effect). Likewise, many medicines are reported to \"affect\" libido in inconsistent or idiopathic ways: enhancing or diminishing overall sexual desire, depending on the circumstances. For example, bupropion (Wellbutrin) is known as an antidepressant that can counteract other co-prescribed antidepressants with libido-diminishing effects. However, because bupropion increases libido only when it is already impaired by related medications, it is not generally classed as an aphrodisiac.\nAncient civilizations like Chinese, Indian, Egyptian, Roman, and Greek cultures believed that certain substances could provide the key to improving sexual desire, sexual pleasure, and/or sexual behavior. This was important, because some men suffered from erectile dysfunction and could not reproduce. Men who could not impregnate their wives and father large families were seen as failures, whereas those who could were respected. Hence, a stimulant was needed. Others who did not suffer from this also desired performance enhancers. Regardless of their usage, these substances gained popularity and began to be documented, information being passed down generations. There are Hindu poems dated back to around 2000 to 1000 BCE that spoke of performance enhancers, ingredients, and usage tips. Chinese texts date back to 2697 to 2595 BC. Roman and Chinese cultures documented their belief in aphrodisiac qualities in animal genitalia, while Egyptians wrote tips for treating erectile dysfunction. In post-classical West Africa, a volume titled \"Advising Men on Sexual Engagement with Their Women\" from the Timbuktu Manuscripts acted as a guide on aphrodisiacs and infertility remedies. It offered advice to men on \"winning back\" their wives. According to Hammer, \"At a time when women\u2019s sexuality was barely acknowledged in the West, the manuscript, a kind of Baedeker to orgasm, offered tips for maximizing sexual pleasure on both sides.\"\nAmbergris, toads from the genus Bufo, yohimbine, horny goat weed, ginseng, alcohol, and certain foods are recorded throughout these texts as possessing aphrodisiac qualities. While many plants, extracts, or manufactured hormones have been proposed as aphrodisiacs, there is little high-quality clinical evidence of their efficacy or long-term safety.\nThere has been increasing attention in recent years surrounding the use of aphrodisiac drugs. In 2020, Brian Earp and Julian Savulescu published a philosophy book entitled \"Love Drugs: The Chemical Future of Relationships\" (UK title \"Love Is the Drug: The Chemical Future of Our Relationships)\". They argued that certain forms of medications can be ethically consumed as a \"helpful complement\" in relationships, both to fall in love and to fall out of it.\nTypes.\nAmbergris.\nAmbergris is found in the gut of sperm whales. It is commonly used in Arab cultures as relief medication for headaches or as a performance enhancer. The derived chemical ambrein increases testosterone concentrations, triggering sexual desire and sexual behavior, but in animal studies only. Further research is needed to know the effects in humans.\nBufotenin.\nBufotenin is found in the skin and glands of toads belonging to the genus Bufo. It is commonly used in the Caribbean and China. In the Caribbean, it is used as an aphrodisiac called 'Love Stone'; in China, it is used as a heart medication called \"Chan su\". Research shows that the toad skin secretion containing this compound can reduce a toad\u2019s heart rate, but its effect on humans is unknown.\nYohimbine.\nYohimbine is a substance found in the bark of yohim trees in West Africa. It was traditionally used in West African cultures, in which the bark would be boiled and the resulting water drunk until it increased sexual desire. It is also found in over-the-counter health products. Yohimbine is an indole alkaloid and is an adrenoceptor antagonist. Known adverse effects include nausea, anxiety, irregular heartbeats, and restlessness.\nHorny goat weed.\nHorny goat weed (\"Epimedii herba\") is used in Chinese folk medicine. It was thought to be useful for treating medical conditions and improving sexual desire, sexual pleasure, and/or sexual behavior. Horny goat weed contains icariin, a flavanol glycoside. Its exotic name comes from the tendency of goats in the region to seek out this weed. Once farmers saw its effects on the goat population they began to use it to increase the number of workers on their farms.\nAlcohol.\nAlcohol has traditionally been viewed as possessing aphrodisiac-like qualities owing to its effect as a central nervous system depressant, as depressants can increase sexual desire and sexual behavior through disinhibition. Alcohol affects people both physiologically and psychologically, and it is therefore difficult to determine exactly how people experience its aphrodisiac effects (aphrodisiac qualities or the expectancy effect). Alcohol taken in moderate quantities can elicit a positive increase in sexual desire, whereas larger quantities are associated with difficulties in reaching sexual pleasure. As the porter in Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\" observes, \"it provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance\". Chronic alcohol consumption is related to sexual dysfunction.\nCannabis.\nMarijuana reports are mixed. Half of users claim an increase in sexual desire and sexual pleasure while the other half report no effect. Consumption, individual sensitivity, and possibly marijuana strain, are factors that affect outcomes.\nFood.\nMany cultures have turned to foods as sources of increasing sexual desire; however, significant research is lacking in the study of the aphrodisiac qualities of foods. Most claims can be linked to the placebo effect. Misconceptions revolve around the visual appearance of these foods in relation to male and female genitalia (carrots, bananas, oysters, and the like). Other beliefs arise from the thought of consuming animal genitalia and absorbing their properties (e.g. cow cod soup in Jamaica and balut in the Philippines). Korean bug is a popular aphrodisiac in China, Korea, and Southeast Asia, either eaten alive or in gelatin form. The caterpillar fungus (\"Ophiocordyceps sinensis\") is used as an aphrodisiac in China. The story of Aphrodite, who was born from the sea, is another reason why individuals believe seafood is another source of aphrodisiacs. Foods that contain volatile oils have gained little recognition in their ability to improve sexual desire, sexual pleasure, and/or sexual behavior, because they are irritants when released through the urinary tract. Chocolate has been reported to increase sexual desire in women who consume it over those who do not. Cloves and sage have been reported to demonstrate aphrodisiac qualities, but their effects have not been specified. Tropical fruits, such as Boroj\u00f3 and Chontaduro, are considered to be energizers in general and sexual energizers in particular.\nGinseng.\nGinseng is the root of any member of the genus \"Panax\". Ginseng's active ingredients are ginsenosides and saponin glycosides. There are three different ways of processing ginseng. Fresh ginseng is cut at four years of growth, white ginseng is cut at four to six years of growth, and red ginseng is cut, dried, and steamed at six years of growth. Red ginseng has been reported to be the most effective aphrodisiac of the three. Known adverse effects include mild gastrointestinal upsets.\nMaca is a Peruvian plant sometimes called \"Peruvian ginseng\", although it is not related to \"Panax\". It has been used as a tonic to improve sexual performance.\nSynthetic aphrodisiacs.\nPopular party substances have been reported by users to consist of aphrodisiac properties because of their enhancing effects with sexual pleasure. Ecstasy users have reported an increase in sexual desire and sexual pleasure; however, there have been reports of delayed orgasm in both sexes and erectile difficulties in men. Poppers, containing drugs for inhalation, have been linked to increased sexual pleasure. Known adverse effects are headaches, nausea, and temporary erectile difficulties.\nPhenethylamines.\nAmphetamine, methylphenidate, and methamphetamine are phenethylamine derivatives, which increase libido and cause frequent or prolonged erections as potential adverse effects, particularly in supratherapeutic doses, when sexual hyperexcitability and hypersexuality can occur; however, in some individuals who use these drugs, libido is reduced.\n2C-B was sold commercially in 5\u00a0mg pills as a purported aphrodisiac under the trade name \"Erox\", which was manufactured by the German pharmaceutical company Drittewelle.\nTestosterone.\nLibido in males is linked to concentrations of sex hormones, particularly testosterone. When there is reduced sex drive in individuals with relatively low concentrations of testosterone, particularly in postmenopausal women or men over the age of 60, dietary supplements that are purported to increase serum testosterone concentrations have been used, with the intention of increasing libido, although with limited benefits. Long-term therapy with synthetic oral testosterone is associated with increased risks of cardiovascular diseases.\nRisks.\nSolid evidence is hard to obtain, as these substances come from many different environments cross-culturally and therefore give variable results, because of variations in growth and extraction. The same is also true for unnatural substances, because variations in consumption and individual sensitivity can affect outcomes. Folk medicine and self-prescribed methods can be potentially harmful, as their adverse effects are not fully known and are therefore not made aware to the people searching this topic on the internet.\nIn popular culture.\nThe invention of an aphrodisiac is the basis of a number of films including , \"Spanish Fly\", \"She'll Follow You Anywhere\", \"Love Potion No. 9,\" and \"A Serbian Film\". \nThe first segment of Woody Allen's movie \"Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask)\" is called \"Do Aphrodisiacs Work?\", and casts Allen as a court jester trying to seduce the queen. \nThe \"Despair Arc\" of \"\" features a class being dosed with aphrodisiacs. \nIn episode 2 of the anime The Apothecary Diaries, Maomao makes aphrodisiacs and three of the ladies-in-waiting eat them unaware that they are aphrodisiacs. In the film \"Sexually Bewitched\", a witch creates consumables that bring out and enhance the lust of whomever eats them; resulting in hijinks as the magic liberates the libido repressed by those who eat her magic.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70706", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70706", "title": "Matilda", "text": "Matilda or Mathilda may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70707", "revid": "49353319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70707", "title": "Retreat (spiritual)", "text": "Period spent in reflection or solitude\nThe meaning of a spiritual retreat can be different for different religious communities. Spiritual retreats are an integral part of many Buddhist, Christian and Sufi communities. There are many different types of spiritual retreats such as wellness retreats, mindfulness retreats, spa retreats, adventure retreats, detox retreats, yoga retreats, and religious retreats.\nIn Buddhism, meditative retreats are seen by some as an intimate way of deepening powers of concentration and insight.\nRetreats are also popular in Christian churches, and were established in today's form by St. Ignatius of Loyola (1491\u20131556), in his \"Spiritual Exercises\". Ignatius was later to be made patron saint of spiritual retreats by Pope Pius XI in 1922. Many Protestants, Catholics and Orthodox Christians partake in and organize spiritual retreats each year.\nMeditative retreats are an important practice in Sufism, the mystical path of Islam. The Sufi teacher Ibn Arabi's book \"Journey to the Lord of Power (Ris\u0101lat al-Anw\u0101r)\" is a guide to the inner journey that was published over 700 years ago.\nBuddhism.\nA retreat can either be a time of solitude or a community experience. Some retreats are held in silence, and on others there may be a great deal of conversation, depending on the understanding and accepted practices of the host facility and/or the participant(s). Retreats are often conducted at rural or remote locations, either privately, or at a retreat centre such as a monastery. Some retreats for advanced practitioners may be undertaken in darkness, a form of retreat that is common as an advanced Dzogchen practice in the Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism.\nSpiritual retreats allow time for reflection, prayer, or meditation. They are considered essential in Buddhism, having been a common practice since the Vassa, or rainy season retreat, was established by the founder of Buddhism, Gautama Buddha. In Zen Buddhism retreats are known as sesshin.\nChristianity.\nCatholicism.\nThe Christian retreat can be defined most simply as a definite time (from a few hours in length to a month) spent away from one's normal life for the purpose of reconnecting, usually in prayer, with God. Although the practice of leaving one's everyday life to connect on a deeper level with God, be that in the desert (as with the Desert Fathers), or in a monastery, is nearly as old as Christianity itself, the practice of spending a specific time away with God is a more modern phenomenon, dating from the 1520s and St. Ignatius of Loyola's composition of the Spiritual Exercises. The fasting of Jesus in the desert for forty days is used as a biblical justification of retreats.\nThe retreat was popularised in Roman Catholicism by the Society of Jesus (Jesuits), whose founder, St. Ignatius of Loyola, as a layman began, in the 1520s, directing others in making (participating in) the exercises. Another form the Exercises came in, which became known as the nineteenth \"Observation\", 'allowed continuing one's ordinary occupations with the proviso of setting aside a few hours a day for this special purpose.' The spiritual exercises were intended for people wanting to live closer to God's will for their life. In the 17th century, retreats became much more widespread in the Catholic Church.\nRetreats were not originally seen as suitable for women, but in 1674 Catherine de Francheville (), supported by the Breton Jesuit Vincent Huby (), founded a retreat house for women in Vannes. This developed into a community of laywomen, who also founded a daughter house in Quimper, but were dispersed by the French Revolution. Some however came together to found schools, and additional communities were established in England, and later in Ireland, Belgium, the Netherlands and Italy. These developed in the course of the 19th century, under the name of \"La Retraite\" (), into a religious Congregation of nuns. The active involvement of the sisters in retreats was curtailed later in the 19th century, but blossomed again after the Second Vatican Council, involving among other activity an extension of the community into Chile, South Africa, Cameroon and Mali.\nFollowing the growth of the Cursillo movement in Spain in the 20th century, similar retreats have become popular, either using licensed Cursillo material or independent material loosely based on its concepts, leading to the development of the three day movement. \nThe Family Lenten Retreat is an annual three-day movement (held at the Araneta Coliseum) founded in 1983 by Msgr. Cesar B. Pagulayan and organized by Our Lady of Perpetual Help (OLPH) Parish under the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cubao.\nEvangelical Lutheranism.\nSpiritual retreats are common in the Evangelical Lutheran branch of Christianity, with several Evangelical Lutheran monasteries and convents offering them. \u00d6stanb\u00e4ck Monastery, an Evangelical Lutheran monastery in the Benedictine tradition, hosts retreat for worshippers and Mass is celebrated there daily, along with observance of the Daily Office. In the United States, The Congregation of the Servants of Christ at Saint Augustine's House offers opportunities for Christian pilgrimage, receiving a thousand visitors each year. \nAnglicanism.\nSpiritual retreats were introduced to the Church of England by priests of the Anglo-Catholic Society of the Holy Cross in 1856, first for clergy, and then also for laity. These retreats lasted five days. The Society of the Holy Cross's first retreats were held in secrecy. The practice was spread by Anglo-Catholic priests such as Francis Henry Murray, Alexander Forbes,73,127 and Thomas Thellusson Carter.186 The Oxford Movement further spread the practice of retreats to many devout men and women, borrowing upon Catholic practices. Their retreats were typically 3\u20134 days, and featured much silence and prayer.\nAt the end of the 19th century, and in the first years of the 20th century, retreats began to spread among the working classes and beyond those of notable devotion. These retreats were less ascetic in character, and included more conversation and leisure. They typically lasted 1\u20133 days.\nBaptists, Methodists and Pentecostals.\nIn Evangelical Christianity, times of spiritual retreat were encouraged by the development of camp meetings of the 19th century, in order to promote spiritual renewal, far from the city and in nature. These camps were an opportunity to pray, sing and listen to sermons for several days.\nVarious church associations have also established campgrounds or conference centers in isolated locations, which provide retreat times for children and adults.\nSufi retreats or spiritual khalwa.\nThe translation of \"khalwa\" (from Arabic \u0627\u0644\u062e\u0644\u0648\u0629) is seclusion or separation, but it has a different connotation in Sufi terminology in which it refers to the act of self-abandonment in desire for the Divine Presence.\n In complete seclusion, the Sufi continuously repeats the name of God as a highest form of remembrance of God meditation. In his book, Journey to the Lord of Power, Muhiyid-Did ibn Arabi (1165-1240 A.D.) discussed the stages through which the Sufi passes in his khalwa.\nIbn Arabi suggested: \"The Sufi should shut his door against the world for forty days and occupy himself with remembrance of Allah, that is to keep repeating, \"Allah, Allah...\" Then, \"Almighty God will spread before him the degrees of the kingdom as a test. First, He will discover the secrets of the mineral world. If he occupies himself with dthikr, He (God) will unveil to the secrets of the vegetable world, then the secrets of the animal world, then the infusion of the world of life-force into lives, then the \"surface sign\" (the light of the Divine Names, according to Abdul-Karim al-Jeeli, the book's translator), then the degrees of speculative sciences, then the world of formation and adornment and beauty, then the degrees of the qutb (the soul or pivot of the universe-see #16) Then he will be given the divine wisdom and the power of symbols and authority over the veil and the unveiling. The degree of the Divine Presence is made clear to him, the garden (of Eden) and Hell are revealed to him, then the original forms of the son of Adam, the Throne of Mercy. If it is appropriate, he will know his destination. Then he will reveal to him the Pen, the First Intellect (as it is called by Sufi philosophers), then the Mover of the Pen, the right hand of the Truth. (The \"Truth\" as defined by al-Jeeli is that by which everything is created, none other than God most High.)\nThe practice of khalwah is regularly followed by the Sufis, with the permission and the supervision of a Sufi authority.\nThe Sufis base the assigning of forty days of khalwa period on the forty days Allah had appointed for Musa (Moses) as a fasting period before speaking to him, as mentioned in different chapters in the Qur'an. One of them is from surat al-Baqarah.\nKhalwa is still practiced today amongst authorized Sheikhs, such as Mawlana Sheikh Nazim Al-Haqqani, Lefka, Cyprus.\nMeditation.\nMeditation courses or retreats, either in a group or solo, are a common part of many meditation traditions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "70708", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70708", "title": "Strait of Belle Isle", "text": "The Strait of Belle Isle ( ; ) is a waterway in eastern Canada, that separates Labrador from the island of Newfoundland, in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador.\nLocation.\nThe strait is located in the southeast of the Labrador peninsula, it is the northern outlet for the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the other two being the Cabot Strait and Strait of Canso. As such, it is also considered part of the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway system. The strait is approximately long and ranges from a maximum width of to just at its narrowest, the average width being .\nEtymology.\nThe name is derived from the island of Belle Isle (French for \"Beautiful Island\"), which is at the extreme eastern end of the strait and roughly equidistant from Table Head, Labrador, and Cape Bauld, Newfoundland.\nHistory.\nBoth the island of Newfoundland as well as the Labrador region which surrounds the Strait of Belle Isle have been inhabited by Indigenous Peoples for millennia. The surrounding land environment has historically been replete with caribou and other mammals. Harbour seals, grey seals, ringed seals and many other aquatic species are found in the strait itself.\nAn unnamed manuscript references Viking nomenclature for Labrador and Newfoundland, (Markland and Vinland, respectively), and appears to note the existence of the Strait of Belle Isle: \"And if such is the case, then an ocean flows into a strait between Markland and V\u00ednland.\"\nBasque whalers visited the area throughout the 17th century and into the first decade of the 18th century, with the wreckage site of the \"San Juan\" at Red Bay dating as early as 1565. Basque seafarers also came into contact with the Inuit, which either led to conflict or collaboration over sealing areas.\nNavigation and transport.\nNavigation in the strait can be extremely hazardous with strong tidal currents interacting with the Labrador Current, depths reaching several hundred metres in places, sea ice for 8 to 10 months of the year, and variable weather conditions including gales and fog. While sea ice prevents year-round shipping, the Canadian Coast Guard maintains a vessel traffic service (VTS) to ensure collisions do not occur. The VTS is voluntary currently.\nA ferry service operates at the western part of strait between St. Barbe, Newfoundland, and Blanc Sablon, Quebec. New road construction for the Trans-Labrador Highway resulted in the removal of ferry services to outports in the northeastern part of the strait in 2002.\nFixed link.\nThe idea of building a fixed link across the strait between Labrador and Newfoundland, known as the Newfoundland-Labrador fixed link, has been raised numerous times in recent decades following an unsuccessful attempt to build a tunnel carrying electrical wires in the mid-1970s. If such a link were built, it would likely be a submerged rail tunnel. The proposal is meant to reduce the province's reliance upon the Marine Atlantic ferry service to Nova Scotia, but the project's high costs and lack of suitable road network between Labrador and Quebec have been cited as major obstacles.\nIn 1975, the Progressive Conservative government led by Frank Moores committed to building a tunnel across the strait. A hole was dug on the Labrador side and the government spent $75-million before the project was abandoned.\nThe October 2003 provincial election resulted in the newly elected Progressive Conservative government announcing joint federal-provincial funding for a study of the concept. A pre-feasibility report was released in February 2005, which concluded that a tunnel bored using tunnel boring machines, with an electric train shuttle to transport vehicles is the most technically and economically attractive option. The estimated construction cost of the fixed link was $1.2 billion (2004$) and total development cost of about $1.7 billion.\nIn 2016, Premier Dwight Ball launched a new pre-feasibility study to determine the costs of a tunnel link between the island and Labrador. The study released its results in April 2018, and concluded that a undersea rail tunnel connecting L'Anse Amour in southern Labrador and Yankee Point near Flower's Cove on the Northern Peninsula of Newfoundland could be constructed at a cost of C$1.65 billion.\nIn their 2019 election platform, the Liberal Party of Canada indicated support for a National Infrastructure Fund, including the Newfoundland-Labrador fixed transportation link, likely linking Yankee Point, Newfoundland with Point Amour on the (Labrador) mainland.\nA submarine cable across the strait is under construction as part of the Lower Churchill Project.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70709", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70709", "title": "Cabot Strait", "text": "Cabot Strait (; , ) is in Atlantic Canada between Cape Ray, Newfoundland, and Cape North, Cape Breton Island. The strait, approximately 110 kilometres wide, is the widest of the three outlets for the Gulf of Saint Lawrence into the Atlantic Ocean, the others being the Strait of Belle Isle and Strait of Canso. It is named for the Italian explorer Giovanni Caboto.\nGeography and geology.\nBathymetry.\nThe strait's bathymetry is varied, with the Laurentian Channel creating a deep trench through its centre, and comparatively shallow coastal waters closer to Newfoundland and Cape Breton Island. These bathymetric conditions have been known by mariners to cause rogue waves.\nThe steep slope of the Laurentian Channel was the site of a disastrous submarine landslide at the southeastern end of the strait, triggered by the 1929 Grand Banks earthquake and leading to a tsunami that devastated communities along Newfoundland's south coast and parts of Cape Breton Island.\nSt. Paul Island.\nAn infamous location in the strait for shipwrecks during the age of sail, St. Paul Island came to be referred to as the \"Graveyard of the Gulf\" (of St. Lawrence).\nShipping.\nA strategically important waterway throughout Canadian and Newfoundland history, the strait is also an important international shipping route, being the primary waterway linking the Atlantic with inland ports on the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Seaway.\nIn October 1942, German U-boat \"U-69\" torpedoed and sank the unlit Newfoundland ferry , killing 137 people. Then on 25 November 1944 HMCS \"Shawinigan\" was torpedoed and sunk with all hands on board (91 crew) by .\nIn 1998, the Cypriot bulk carrier the split in half in the Cabot Strait while sailing from Rotterdam to Quebec with the loss of 21 lives on board.\nCommunications.\nThe strait is crossed daily by the Marine Atlantic ferry service linking Channel-Port aux Basques and North Sydney. Ferries have been operating across the strait since 1898, and a submarine telegraph cable was laid in 1856 as part of the transatlantic telegraph cable project.\nThe Trans Canada Microwave system was extended to Newfoundland in 1959. To get it to Newfoundland, it was fed from Sydney, Nova Scotia to a repeater in Cape North that was 427 metres above sea-level. That allowed it cross the 127 kilometres across the Cabot Strait to a repeater station perched 198 metres above sea-level in Red Rocks, Newfoundland and Labrador. From there, the signal was microwaved over land to St. John's.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70712", "revid": "50924744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70712", "title": "Henry the Lion", "text": "Duke of Saxony (r. 1142\u201380) and Bavaria (r. 1156\u201380)\nHenry the Lion (; 1129/1131 \u2013 6 August 1195), also known as Henry III, Duke of Saxony (ruled 1142\u20131180) and Henry XII, Duke of Bavaria (ruled 1156\u20131180), was a member of the Welf dynasty.\nHenry was one of the most powerful German princes of his time. As the Duke of Saxony, Henry had had a decisive part in 1152 in his cousin Frederick Barbarossa's campaign for the throne. Because of this, in the following years, he was intensely promoted by Barbarossa. So, in 1156, he received the Dukedom of Bavaria. In North Germany, Henry could now build a kingly presence. He achieved this in Brunswick by building a new collegiate church, St Blaise, and, in the neighbouring Dankwarderode Castle, he placed a statue of a lion, as a symbol of its place as the capital of his duchies. The aggressive building strategy of the Duke in Saxony and north of the Elbe supplanted the influence of the previous greats of Saxony. Next, Henry repaid Barbarossa's sponsorship by putting great effort into his service to the first Italian dynasty.\nThe agreement between Henry and Barbarossa encountered difficulties when Henry refused to send military assistance in 1176 for Barbarossa's invasion of Italy. With his expedition ending in defeat at the Battle of Legnano against the Lombard League, Barbarossa resented Henry for having failed to support him. In 1176, the rival Hohenstaufen dynasty succeeded in isolating him and eventually deprived him of his duchies of Bavaria and Saxony during the reign of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and of Frederick's son and successor Henry VI. After the death of Barbarossa, and the failure of the overall Italian political scene and the peace agreement of 1177 (due to campaigning by Pope Alexander III), Henry the Lion overthrew more Dukes, but had to go into exile in southern England.\nAt the height of his reign, Henry ruled over a vast territory stretching from the coast of the North and Baltic seas to the Alps, and from Westphalia to Pomerania. Alongside Frederick Barbarossa, he was an important protagonist in the Staufen-Welf conflict, which had served as the main political force in the twelfth century. Henry achieved this great power in part by his political and military acumen and in part through the legacies of his four grandparents. He is considered as one of the most important people of this early era.\nFamily background.\nHenry the Lion came from the Welf Dynasty. Since the 1120s, there arose more documents in the history of this family, where there were different spellings. This meant the Welfs were the first noble family in the kingdom that we know the history of. The household records in the Genealogia Welforum, in which the Saxon Welf Origins and the Historia Welforum are found, show a link before the Carolingians, and have a possible etymology of the name Welf, which may come from the Latin word catulus (Welpe in German).\nThe ancestors of the Welfs begin in the eighth century at the time of the Carolingians. The rise of the family came completely from advantageous marriages. The Welf Judith was the second wife of Emperor Louis the Pious, and brought the earliest influence of the Welfs to the history of the Frankish Kingdom. Her sister, Hemma, was married to Judith's stepson King Ludwig the German. This second marriage into the Carolingian royal family secured the rise of the Welfs in the Royal Circle. The fall of the Frankish Kingdom offered an opportunity for the family of the Kings of Burgundy in 1032. After the death of Welf III in 1055 without an heir, the dynasty was thrown into an existential crisis. His sister, Cuniza, married the Margrave Azzo II of Este, changing the future of the dynasty.\nThe grandfather of Henry the Lion, the Bavarian Duke Henry the Black, married Wulfhild, the eldest daughter of the Saxon Duke Magnus Billung and Sophia, the daughter of the Hungarian King. Large tracts of land around Luneberg the center of power and the burial place of the House of Billung, now went to the Welfs. In 1123 a relative of the family, Bishop Conrad of Constance, was put forward for canonisation, and raised the reputation of the family. The Welf Judith, daughter of Henry the Black, married the Hohenstaufen Duke Frederick II, the father of Frederick Barbarossa. The candidacy of Frederick II as the successor to the ore rich lands of the late, childless Henry V stayed unsponsored. Instead, the Saxon duke Lothar III was preferred. The usual sponsors of Henry the Black were split between him and Duke Lothar. Some of these sponsors were won over by Lothar marrying his only daughter Gertrude to Henry's son, Henry the Proud. Gertrude\u2019s mother was Richenza, heiress of the Saxon territories of Northeim and the properties of the Brunones, counts of Brunswick. From this union came Henry the Lion. He was born in Ravensburg. From the Steterburger Chronik, he must have been born around 1129/1130. His baptism was around 1135/36, but this seems a long time to wait for a baptism. It is possible that the copyist made a transcription error, so Henry's birth could have been in 1133/35.\nSoon after, Henry the Proud gained a conglomeration of duchies, close to the size of a kingdom. At the end of the reign of his father in law Lothar, he ruled over the duchies of Bavaria and Saxony, and over the March of Tuscany in the Mathilda Guter, specifically the extensive lands in Swabia, Bavaria, Saxony and Italy. Henry's father died in 1139, aged 32, when Henry was still a child. King Conrad III had dispossessed Henry the Proud of his duchies in 1138 and 1139, handing Saxony to Albert the Bear and Bavaria to Leopold of Austria. This was because Henry the Proud had been his rival for the Crown in 1138.\nRule.\nHenry the Lion did not relinquish his claims to his inheritance, and Conrad returned Saxony to him in 1142. A participant in the 1147 Wendish Crusade, Henry also reacquired Bavaria by a decision of the new emperor, Frederick Barbarossa, in 1156. However, the East Mark was not returned and became the Duchy of Austria.\nHenry was the founder of Munich (1157) and L\u00fcbeck (1159); he also founded and developed numerous other cities in Northern Germany and Bavaria, such as Augsburg, Hildesheim, Stade, Kassel, G\u00fcstrow, L\u00fcneburg, Salzwedel, Schwerin and Brunswick. In Brunswick, his capital, he had a bronze lion, his heraldic animal, erected in the courtyard of his castle Dankwarderode in 1166\u2014the first bronze statue north of the Alps. Later, he had Brunswick Cathedral built close to the statue.\nIn 1147, Henry married Clementia of Z\u00e4hringen, thereby gaining her hereditary territories in Swabia. He divorced her in 1162, apparently under pressure from Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who did not cherish Guelphish possessions in his home area and offered Henry several fortresses in Saxony in exchange. In 1168, Henry married Matilda (1156\u20131189), the daughter of King Henry II of England and Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine, and sister of King Richard I of England.\nHenry faithfully supported Emperor Frederick in his attempts to solidify his hold on the Imperial Crown and his repeated wars with the cities of Lombardy and the popes, several times turning the tide of battle in Frederick's favor with his Saxon knights. During Frederick's first invasion of northern Italy, Henry took part, among the others, in the victorious sieges of Crema and Milan.\nIn 1172, Henry took a pilgrimage to Jerusalem (June\u2013July), meeting with the Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller, and spending Easter of that year in Constantinople. By December 1172, he was back in Bavaria and, in 1174, he refused to aid Frederick in a renewed invasion of Lombardy because he was preoccupied with securing his own borders in the east. He did not consider these Italian adventures worth the effort, unless Barbarossa presented Henry with the Saxon imperial city Goslar: a request Barbarossa refused.\nFall.\nBarbarossa's expedition into Lombardy ultimately ended in failure. He bitterly resented Henry for failing to support him. Taking advantage of the hostility of other German princes to Henry, who had successfully established a powerful state comprising Saxony, Bavaria and substantial territories in the north and east of Germany, Frederick had Henry tried \"in absentia\" for insubordination by a court of bishops and princes in 1180.\nDeclaring that Imperial law overruled traditional German law, the court had Henry stripped of his lands and declared him an outlaw. Frederick then invaded Saxony with an Imperial army to bring Henry to his knees. Henry's allies deserted him, and he finally had to submit in November 1181 at an Imperial Diet in Erfurt. He was exiled from Germany in 1182 for three years, and stayed with his father-in-law in Normandy before being allowed back into Germany in 1185. At Whitsun 1184, he visited the Diet of Pentecost in Mainz, probably as a mediator for his father-in-law Henry II. He was exiled again in 1188. His wife Matilda died in 1189.\nWhen Frederick Barbarossa went on the Crusade of 1189, Henry returned to Saxony, mobilized an army of his faithful, and conquered the rich city of Bardowick as punishment for its disloyalty. Only the churches were left standing. Barbarossa's son, Emperor Henry VI, again defeated Duke Henry, but in 1194, with his end approaching, he made his peace with the Emperor, and returned to his much diminished lands around Brunswick, where he peacefully sponsored arts and architecture.\nChildren.\nBy his first wife, Clementia of Z\u00e4hringen (divorced 1162), daughter of Duke Conrad I of Z\u00e4hringen and Clemence of Namur, Henry had:\nBy his second wife, Matilda (married\u00a01168), daughter of King Henry II of England and Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine:\nThree other children are listed, by some sources, as having belonged to Henry and Matilda:\nBy his lover, Ida von Blieskastel, he had a daughter, Matilda, who married Lord Henry Borwin I of Mecklenburg.\nLegacy.\nThe Henry the Lion Bible is preserved in near-mint condition from the year 1170; it is located in the Herzog August Library in Wolfenb\u00fcttel, a town in Lower Saxony.\nHenry the Lion remains a popular figure to this day. During World War I, a nail man depicting Henry the Lion, called \"Eiserner Heinrich\", was used in Brunswick to raise funds for the German war effort.\nNazi propaganda later declared Henry an antecessor of the Nazi's \"Lebensraum\" policy and turned Brunswick Cathedral and Henry's tomb into a \"National Place of Consecration\".\nFolklore and fiction.\nShortly after his death, Henry the Lion became the subject of a folktale, the so-called \"Heinrichssage\". The tale was later also turned into the opera \"Enrico Leone\" by Italian composer Agostino Steffani. The \"Heinrichssage\" details a fictional account of Henry's pilgrimage to the Holy Land. A popular part of the tale deals with the Brunswick Lion. According to legend, Henry witnessed a fight between a lion and a dragon while on pilgrimage. He joins the lion in its fight and they slay the dragon. The faithful lion then accompanies Henry on his return home. After its master's death, the lion refuses all food and dies of grief on Henry's grave. The people of Brunswick then erect a statue in the lion's honour. The legend of Henry the Lion also inspired the Czech tale of the knight , which is depicted on a column on Charles Bridge in Prague.\nThe book \"The Pope's Rhinoceros\" (1996) by Lawrence Norfolk opens with an allegory of a planned ransack by Henry's army of the monastery at Usedom where purportedly a treasure was kept. However, the night before the attack the poorly maintained monastery and its treasures crumble into the sea as the result of a storm, and henceforth constituting a loss to the military expedition.\nIn the Barbarossa campaign of the video game \"Age of Empires II\", Henry the Lion is depicted as a traitor who betrays Barbarossa twice. At the end of the campaign, it is revealed that the campaign's narrator was Henry himself, now an old man.\nThe popular video game, \"s sequel, ' contains a DLC pack around this legend, where players can get unlock a recipe for a pollaxe and find supposedly his armour around the game.\nHenry the Lion is featured as a playable character in the grand strategy video game \"Crusader Kings III\". In the 1178 start date, he appears as the powerful Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, with historical rivalries and alliances reflecting his real-life conflicts within the Holy Roman Empire.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70713", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70713", "title": "Topographic map", "text": "Medium to large scale map that shows a precise map of the terrain\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn modern mapping, a topographic map or topographic sheet is a type of map characterized by large-scale detail and quantitative representation of relief features, usually using contour lines (connecting points of equal elevation), but historically using a variety of methods. Traditional definitions require a topographic map to show both natural and artificial features. A topographic survey is typically based upon a systematic observation and published as a map series, made up of two or more map sheets that combine to form the whole map. A topographic map series uses a common specification that includes the range of cartographic symbols employed, as well as a standard geodetic framework that defines the map projection, coordinate system, ellipsoid and geodetic datum. Official topographic maps also adopt a national grid referencing system.\nNatural Resources Canada provides this description of topographic maps:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These maps depict in detail ground relief (landforms and terrain), drainage (lakes and rivers), forest cover, administrative areas, populated areas, transportation routes and facilities (including roads and railways), and other man-made features.\nOther authors define topographic maps by contrasting them with another type of map; they are distinguished from smaller-scale \"chorographic maps\" that cover large regions, \"planimetric maps\" that do not show elevations, and \"thematic maps\" that focus on specific topics.\nHowever, in the vernacular and day to day world, the representation of relief (contours) is popularly held to define the genre, such that even small-scale maps showing relief are commonly (and erroneously, in the technical sense) called \"topographic\".\nThe study or discipline of topography is a much broader field of study, which takes into account all natural and human-made features of terrain. Maps were among the first artifacts to record observations about topography.\nHistory.\nTopographic maps are based on topographical surveys. Performed at large scales, these surveys are called topographical in the old sense of topography, showing a variety of elevations and landforms. This is in contrast to older cadastral surveys, which primarily show property and governmental boundaries. The first multi-sheet topographic map series of an entire country, the \"Carte g\u00e9om\u00e9trique de la France\", was completed in 1789. The Great Trigonometric Survey of India, started by the East India Company in 1802, then taken over by the British Raj after 1857 was notable as a successful effort on a larger scale and for accurately determining heights of Himalayan peaks from viewpoints over one hundred miles distant.\nTopographic surveys were prepared by the military to assist in planning for battle and for defensive emplacements (thus the name and history of the United Kingdom's Ordnance Survey). As such, elevation information was of vital importance.\nAs they evolved, topographic map series became a national resource in modern nations in planning infrastructure and resource exploitation. In the United States, the national map-making function which had been shared by both the Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of the Interior migrated to the newly created United States Geological Survey in 1879, where it has remained since.\n1913 saw the beginning of the International Map of the World initiative, which set out to map all of Earth's significant land areas at a scale of 1:1 million, on about one thousand sheets, each covering four degrees latitude by six or more degrees longitude. Excluding borders, each sheet was 44\u00a0cm high and (depending on latitude) up to 66\u00a0cm wide. Although the project eventually foundered, it left an indexing system that remains in use.\nBy the 1980s, centralized printing of standardized topographic maps began to be superseded by databases of coordinates that could be used on computers by moderately skilled end users to view or print maps with arbitrary contents, coverage and scale. For example, the federal government of the United States' \"TIGER\" initiative compiled interlinked databases of federal, state and local political borders and census enumeration areas, and of roadways, railroads, and water features with support for locating street addresses within street segments. TIGER was developed in the 1980s and used in the 1990 and subsequent decennial censuses. Digital elevation models (\"DEM\") were also compiled, initially from topographic maps and stereographic interpretation of aerial photographs and then from satellite photography and radar data. Since all these were government projects funded with taxes and not classified for national security reasons, the datasets were in the public domain and freely usable without fees or licensing.\nTIGER and DEM datasets greatly facilitated geographic information systems and made the Global Positioning System much more useful by providing context around locations given by the technology as coordinates. Initial applications were mostly professionalized forms such as innovative surveying instruments and agency-level GIS systems tended by experts. By the mid-1990s, increasingly user-friendly resources such as online mapping in two and three dimensions, integration of GPS with mobile phones and automotive navigation systems appeared. As of 2011, the future of standardized, centrally printed topographical maps is left somewhat in doubt.\nUses.\nTopographic maps have many multiple uses in the present day: any type of geographic planning or large-scale architecture; Earth sciences and many other geographic disciplines; mining and other Earth-based endeavours; civil engineering and recreational uses such as hiking and orienteering.\nIt takes practice and skill to read and interpret a topographic map. This includes not only how to identify map features, but also how to interpret contour lines to infer landforms like cliffs, ridges, draws, etc. Training in map reading is often given in orienteering, scouting, and the military.\nConventions.\nThe various features shown on the map are represented by conventional signs or symbols. For example, colors can be used to indicate a classification of roads. These signs are usually explained in the margin of the map, or on a separately published characteristic sheet.\nTopographic maps are also commonly called \"contour maps\" or \"topo maps\". In the United States, where the primary national series is organized by a strict 7.5-minute grid, they are often called or \"quads\" or quadrangles.\nTopographic maps conventionally show topography, or land contours, by means of contour lines. Contour lines are curves that connect contiguous points of the same altitude (isohypse). In other words, every point on the marked line of 100\u00a0m elevation is 100\u00a0m above mean sea level.\nThese maps usually show not only the contours, but also any significant streams or other bodies of water, forest cover, built-up areas or individual buildings (depending on scale), and other features and points of interest such as what direction those streams are flowing.\nMost topographic maps were prepared using photogrammetric interpretation of aerial photography using a stereoplotter. Modern mapping also employs lidar and other Remote sensing techniques. Older topographic maps were prepared using traditional surveying instruments.\nThe cartographic style (content and appearance) of topographic maps is highly variable between national mapping organizations. Aesthetic traditions and conventions persist in topographic map symbology, particularly amongst European countries at medium map scales.\nPublishers of national topographic map series.\nAlthough virtually the entire terrestrial surface of Earth has been mapped at scale 1:1,000,000, medium and large-scale mapping has been accomplished intensively in some countries and much less in others. Several commercial vendors supply international topographic map series.\nAccording to 2007/2/EC European directive, national mapping agencies of European Union countries must have publicly available services for searching, viewing and downloading their official map series. Topographic maps produced by some of them are available under a free license that allows re-use, such as a Creative Commons license.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70714", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70714", "title": "Relativistic", "text": ""}
{"id": "70715", "revid": "461300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70715", "title": "Odinism (disambiguation)", "text": "Odinism is a term for Heathenry, a modern pagan religion, typically used by those who hold to \"folkish\" or race-centric ideologies. \nOdinism or Odinist may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70716", "revid": "50534610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70716", "title": "Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1519 to 1556\nCharles V (24 February 1500\u00a0\u2013 21 September 1558) was Holy Roman Emperor and Archduke of Austria from 1519 to 1556, King of Spain (as Charles I) from 1516 to 1556, King of Sicily and Naples from 1516 to 1554, and also Lord of the Netherlands and titular Duke of Burgundy (as Charles II) from 1506 to 1555. He was heir to and then head of the rising House of Habsburg. His dominions in Europe included the Holy Roman Empire, extending from Germany to northern Italy with rule over the Austrian hereditary lands and Burgundian Low Countries, and Spain with its possessions of the southern Italian kingdoms of Sicily, Naples, and Sardinia. In the Americas, he oversaw the continuation of Spanish colonization and a short-lived German colonization. The personal union of the European and American territories he ruled was the first collection of realms labelled \"the empire on which the sun never sets\".\nCharles was born in Flanders to Habsburg Archduke Philip the Handsome, son of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor and Mary of Burgundy, and Joanna of Castile, younger child of Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon, the Catholic Monarchs of Spain. Heir of his grandparents, Charles inherited his family dominions at a young age. After his father's death in 1506, he inherited the Habsburg Netherlands in the Low Countries. In 1516 he became King of Spain as co-monarch of Castile and Aragon with his mother. Spain's possessions included the Castilian colonies of the West Indies and the Spanish Main, as well as Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia. At the death of his grandfather Maximilian in 1519, he inherited the Austrian hereditary lands and was elected as Holy Roman Emperor. He adopted the Imperial name of \"Charles V\" as his main title, and styled himself as a new Charlemagne.\nCharles revitalized the medieval concept of universal monarchy. With no fixed capital, he made 40 journeys through the different entities he ruled and spent a quarter of his reign travelling within his realms. Although his empire came to him peacefully, he spent most of his life waging war, exhausting his revenues and leaving debts in his attempt to defend the integrity of the Holy Roman Empire from the Protestant Reformation, the expansion of the Ottoman Empire, and in wars with France. Charles borrowed money from German and Italian bankers and, to repay them, relied on the wealth of the Low Countries and the flow of silver from New Spain and Peru, brought under his rule following the Spanish conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires, which caused widespread inflation.\nCrowned King of Germany in Aachen, Charles sided with Pope Leo X and declared Martin Luther an outlaw at the Diet of Worms in 1521. The same year, Francis I of France, surrounded by the Habsburg possessions, started a war in Italy that led to his capture in the Battle of Pavia (1525). In 1527, Rome was sacked by an army of Charles's mutinous soldiers. Charles then defended Vienna from the Turks and obtained coronations as King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor from Pope Clement VII. In 1535, he took possession of Milan and captured Tunis. However, the loss of Buda during the struggle for Hungary and the Algiers expedition in the early 1540s frustrated his anti-Ottoman policies. After years of negotiations, Charles came to an agreement with Pope Paul III for the organization of the Council of Trent (1545). The refusal of the Lutheran Schmalkaldic League to recognize the council's validity led to a war, won by Charles. However, Henry II of France offered new support to the Lutheran cause and strengthened the Franco-Ottoman alliance with Suleiman the Magnificent.\nUltimately, Charles conceded the Peace of Augsburg and abandoned his multi-national project with abdications in 1556 that divided his hereditary and imperial domains between the Spanish Habsburgs, headed by his son Philip II of Spain, and Austrian Habsburgs, headed by his brother Ferdinand. In 1557, Charles retired to the Monastery of Yuste in Extremadura and died there a year later.\nAncestry.\nCharles of Austria was born on 24 February 1500 in the Prinsenhof of Ghent, a Flemish city of the Habsburg Netherlands, to Philip of Austria and Joanna of Trast\u00e1mara. His father Philip, nicknamed \"Philip the Handsome\", was the firstborn son of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, Archduke of Austria, and Mary of Burgundy, heiress to the Burgundian Netherlands. Charles's mother Joanna was a younger daughter of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile, the Catholic Monarchs of Spain from the House of Trast\u00e1mara. The political marriage of Philip and Joanna was first conceived in a letter sent by Maximilian to Ferdinand, part of the establishment of an Austro-Spanish alliance opposed to the Kingdom of France in the context the Italian Wars.\nFrom the moment he became King of the Romans in 1486, Charles's paternal grandfather Maximilian had carried a very financially risky policy of maximum expansionism, relying mostly on the resources of the Austrian hereditary lands. Even though it is often implied, among others, by Erasmus of Rotterdam that Charles V and the Habsburgs gained their vast empire through peaceful policies (exemplified by the saying or \"Let others wage war, but thou, O happy Austria, marry; for those kingdoms which Mars gives to others, Venus gives to thee.\", reportedly spoken by Mathias Corvinus), Maximilian and his descendants fought wars aplenty. Maximilian fought 27 wars during his four decades of ruling. \nHis general strategy was to combine his intricate systems of alliance, wars, military threats and offers of marriage to realize his expansionist ambitions. Ultimately he succeeded in coercing Bohemia, Hungary and Poland into acquiescence in the Habsburgs' expansionist plan.\nThe fact that the marriages between the Habsburgs and the Trast\u00e1maras, originally conceived as a marital alliance against France, would bring the crowns of Castile and Aragon to Maximilian's male line, was unexpected.\nThe marriage contract between Philip and Joanna was signed in 1495, and celebrations were held in 1496. Philip was already Duke of Burgundy (although the Duchy of Burgundy itself had been lost to the French crown), given Mary's death in 1482, and also heir apparent of Austria as honorific archduke. Joanna, in contrast, was only third in the Spanish line of succession, preceded by her older brother John, Prince of Asturias and older sister Isabella of Aragon. Both heirs to the crowns of Castile and Aragon John and Isabella died in 1498. The Catholic Monarchs desired to keep the Spanish kingdoms in Iberian hands, so they designated their Portuguese grandson Miguel da Paz as heir presumptive of Spain by naming him Prince of Asturias; but he died as a baby in 1500.\nBirth and childhood.\nCharles's mother went into labour at a ball in February 1500. He was named in honour of Charles the Bold of Burgundy, who had tried to turn the Burgundian State into a continuous territory. When Charles was born, a poet at the court reported that the people of Ghent \"shouted Austria and Burgundy throughout the whole city for three hours\" to celebrate his birth.\nGiven the dynastic situation, the newborn was originally heir apparent only of the Habsburg Netherlands, being given the honorary title Duke of Luxembourg. He was also second in line to the Austrian duchies, becoming known in his early years simply as \"Charles of Ghent\". He was baptised at the Church of Saint John by the Bishop of Tournai. The Burgundian nobles Charles I de Cro\u00ff and John III of Glymes were his godfathers, and Margaret of York and Margaret of Austria, respectively his step-grandmother and aunt, his godmothers. Charles's baptism gifts were a sword and a helmet, objects of Burgundian chivalric tradition representing, respectively, the instrument of war and the symbol of peace. The death in July 1500 of the young heir presumptive Miguel de Paz to the Iberian realms of his maternal grandparents meant baby Charles's future inheritance potentially expanded to include Castile, Aragon, and the overseas possessions in the Americas.\nIn 1501, his parents Philip and Joanna left Charles in care of Philip's step-grandmother Margaret of York in Mechelen and went to Spain. The main goal of their Spanish mission was the recognition of Joanna as Princess of Asturias, given Prince Miguel's death a year earlier. They succeeded despite facing some opposition from the Castilian \"Cortes\", which were reluctant to create the premises for Habsburg succession. In 1504, when her mother Isabella died, Joanna became Queen of Castile. Charles only met his father again in 1503 while his mother returned in 1504 (after giving birth to Ferdinand in Spain). The Spanish Ambassador Gutierre G\u00f3mez de Fuensalida reported that Philip often visited and they had lots of fun. The couple's unhappy marriage and Joanna's unstable mental state however created many difficulties, making it unsafe for the children to stay with the parents.\nPhilip was recognized King of Castile in 1506. He died shortly after, an event that was said to drive the mentally unstable Joanna into complete insanity. She was retired in isolation to the Royal Palace of Tordesillas. Charles's grandfather Ferdinand took control of all the Spanish kingdoms, under the pretext of protecting Charles's rights, which in reality he wanted to elude. Ferdinand's new marriage with Germaine de Foix failed to produce a surviving Trast\u00e1mara heir to the throne, so Charles remained the heir presumptive to the Iberian realms. With his father dead and his mother confined, Charles became Duke of Burgundy and was recognised as Prince of Asturias (heir presumptive of Castile) and honorific Archduke (heir apparent of Austria).\nInheritances.\nThe Burgundian inheritance included the Habsburg Netherlands, which consisted of a large number of the lordships in the Low Countries and covered modern-day Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg. It also included the Free County of Burgundy (the region of Franche-Comt\u00e9) and the County of Charolais, but excluded the Duchy of Burgundy, annexed by France in 1477. At the death of Philip in 1506, Charles was recognized as Lord of the Netherlands and count of Burgundy and Charolais, also becoming the titular \"Duke of Burgundy\", and thus being styled as \"Duke Charles II of Burgundy\".\nDuring his childhood and teen years, Charles lived in Mechelen together with his sisters Mary, Eleanor, and Isabella at the court of his aunt Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy. William de Cro\u00ff (later prime minister) and Adrian of Utrecht (later Pope Adrian VI) served as his tutors. The culture and courtly life of the Low Countries played an important part in the development of Charles's beliefs. As a member of the Burgundian Order of the Golden Fleece in his infancy, and later its grandmaster, Charles was educated to the ideals of the medieval knights and the desire for Christian unity to fight the infidel. The Low Countries were very rich during his reign, both economically and culturally. Charles was very attached to his homeland and spent a large part of his life in Brussels and Flemish cities.\nThe Spanish inheritance, resulting from a dynastic union of the crowns of Castile and Aragon, included Spain and the Castilian possessions in the Americas (the Spanish West Indies and the Province of Tierra Firme) and the Aragonese kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia. Joanna inherited these territories in 1516 while confined, allegedly because she was mentally ill. Charles, therefore, claimed the crowns for himself \"jure matris\", thus becoming co-monarch with Joanna with the title of \"Charles I of Castile and Aragon\" or \"Charles I of Spain\".\nCastile and Aragon together formed the largest of Charles's personal possessions. They provided a great number of generals and \"tercios\", the formidable Spanish infantry of the time, while Joanna remained confined in Tordesillas until her death. \"Plus Ultra\", the rendition from French into Latin of Charles's personal motto \"Plus Oultre\" (\"Further Beyond\"), later became the national motto of Spain and features on the country's flag as part of the Spanish coat of arms since the 18th century. However, at his accession to the Iberian thrones, Charles was viewed as a foreign prince.\nTwo rebellions, the Revolt of the Germanies and the Revolt of the Comuneros, contested Charles's rule in the 1520s. Following these revolts, Charles placed Spanish counselors in a position of power and spent a significant part of his life in Castile, including his final years in a monastery. His son and heir, later Philip II of Spain, was born and raised in Castile. Nonetheless, many Spaniards believed that their resources, largely consisting of flows of silver from the Americas, were being used to sustain Imperial-Habsburg policies that were not in Spain's interest.\nCharles inherited the Austrian hereditary lands in 1519, as \"Charles I of Austria\", and obtained the election as Holy Roman Emperor against the candidacy of the French king. Since the Imperial election, he was known as \"Emperor Charles V\" even outside of Germany. The dynastic motto of the House of Habsburg used by Charles was \"A.E.I.O.U.\" (\"Austria Est Imperare Orbi Universo\" \u2014 \"it is Austria's destiny to rule the world\"; although its exact meaning remains disputed). Charles staunchly defended Catholicism as Lutheranism spread. Various German princes broke with him on religious grounds, fighting against him. Charles's presence in Germany was often marked by the organization of imperial diets to maintain religious and political unity.\nHe was frequently in Northern Italy, often taking part in complicated negotiations with the Popes to address the rise of Protestantism. It is important to note that the German Catholics supported the Emperor. Charles had a close relationship with important German families, like the House of Nassau, many of which were represented at his imperial court. Many German princes, noblemen and generals led his military campaigns against France and the Ottomans or accompanied him in his travels, and the bulk of his army was generally composed of German troops, especially the Imperial Landsknechte.\nReign.\nBurgundy and the Low Countries.\nIn 1506, Charles inherited all of his father's territories in the Low Countries, thus becoming the ruler of the Habsburg Netherlands. His inheritance also included the Free County of Burgundy (region of Franche-Comt\u00e9) within the Holy Roman Empire, and the County of Charolais in the Kingdom of France. and, most notably, the Low Countries. His territories in the Low Countries mostly lay within the Holy Roman Empire, and partially witin the French realm. Thus, Charles's birthplace, the city of Ghent, belonged to the County of Flanders, at that time still being the fief of the French crown. Since he was a minor, his aunt Margaret of Austria acted as regent, as appointed by Emperor Maximilian until 1515. She soon found herself at war with France over Charles's requirement to pay homage to the French king for Flanders, Artois and Charolais, as his father had done. The outcome was that France relinquished its ancient claim on Flanders and Artois in 1528.\nFrom 1515 to 1523, Charles's government in the Netherlands also had to contend with the rebellion of Frisian peasants (led by Pier Gerlofs Donia and Wijard Jelckama). The rebels were initially successful but after a series of defeats, the remaining leaders were captured and executed in 1523.\nCharles extended the Burgundian territory with the annexation of Tournai, Artois, Utrecht, Groningen, and Guelders. The Seventeen Provinces had been unified by Charles's Burgundian ancestors, but nominally were fiefs of either France or the Holy Roman Empire. Charles eventually won the Guelders Wars and united all provinces under his rule, the last one being the Duchy of Guelders. In 1549, Charles issued a Pragmatic Sanction, declaring the Habsburg Netherlands to be a unified entity of which his family would be the heirs.\nThe entire region of the Low Countries held an essential place in the Empire. For Charles V, they were his home, the region where he was born and spent his childhood. Because of trade and industry and the wealth of the region's cities, the Habsburg Netherlands also represented a significant income for the Charles' treasury.\nThe Burgundian territories were generally loyal to Charles throughout his reign. The important city of Ghent rebelled in 1539 due to heavy tax payments demanded by Charles. The rebellion did not last long, however, as Charles's military response, with reinforcement from Fernando \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba, was swift and humiliating to the rebels of Ghent.\nSpanish kingdoms.\nIn the Castilian \"Cortes\" of Valladolid in 1506 and of Madrid in 1510, Charles was sworn as the Prince of Asturias, heir-apparent to his mother Queen Joanna. On the other hand, in 1502, the Aragonese \"Corts\" gathered in Zaragoza and pledged an oath to Joanna as heiress-presumptive, but Alonso de Arag\u00f3n, Archbishop of Zaragoza, (an illegitimate son of King Ferdinand) expressed firmly that this oath could not establish jurisprudence, that is to say, modify the right of the succession, except by virtue of a formal agreement between the \"Corts\" and the King. So, upon the death of King Ferdinand II of Aragon, on 23 January 1516, Joanna inherited the Crown of Aragon, which consisted of Aragon, Mallorca, Catalonia, Valencia, Naples, Sicily and Sardinia, while Charles became governor general (regent). Nevertheless, the Flemish wished Charles to assume the royal title, and this was supported by Emperor Maximilian I and Pope Leo X. Consequently, after Ferdinand II's funeral on 14 March 1516, Charles I was proclaimed King of Castile and of Aragon jointly with his mother. Finally, the Castilian Regent, Cardinal Jim\u00e9nez de Cisneros accepted the \"fait accompli\", and the Castilian and Aragonese \"Cortes\" paid homage to him as King of Aragon jointly with his mother. Cisneros acceded to Charles's desire to be proclaimed king and imposed his instatement throughout the kingdom. Charles arrived in his new kingdoms in autumn of 1517. Cisneros came to meet him but fell ill along the way, not without a suspicion of poison, and he died before reaching the King.\nDue to the irregularity of Charles assuming the royal title while his mother, the legitimate queen, was alive, the negotiations with the Castilian \"Cortes\" in Valladolid (1518) proved difficult. In the end Charles was accepted under the following conditions: he would learn to speak Castilian; he would not appoint foreigners; he was prohibited from taking precious metals from Castile beyond the Quinto Real; and he would respect the rights of his mother, Queen Joanna. The Cortes paid homage to him in Valladolid in February 1518. After this, Charles departed to the Crown of Aragon. He managed to overcome the resistance of the Aragonese \"Cortes\" and Catalan \"Corts\", and he was recognized as King of Aragon and Count of Barcelona jointly with his mother, while his mother was kept confined and could only rule in name. The Kingdom of Navarre had been invaded by Ferdinand of Aragon jointly with Castile in 1512, but he pledged a formal oath to respect the kingdom. On Charles's accession to the Spanish thrones, the Parliament of Navarre (\"Cortes\") required him to attend the coronation ceremony (to become Charles IV of Navarre). Still, this demand fell on deaf ears, and the parliament kept piling up grievances.\nCharles was accepted as sovereign, even though the Spanish felt uneasy with the Imperial style. Spanish kingdoms varied in their traditions. Castile had become an authoritarian, highly centralized kingdom, where the monarch's own will easily overrode legislative and justice institutions. By contrast, in the Crown of Aragon, and especially in the Pyrenean Kingdom of Navarre, law prevailed, and the monarchy was seen as a contract with the people. This became an inconvenience and a matter of dispute for Charles V and later kings since realm-specific traditions limited their absolute power. With Charles, the government became more absolute, even though until his mother died in 1555, Charles did not hold absolute power in the country.\nSoon resistance to the Emperor arose because of heavy taxation to support foreign wars in which Castilians had little interest and because Charles tended to select Flemings for high offices in Castile and America, ignoring Castilian candidates. The resistance culminated in the Revolt of the Comuneros, which Charles suppressed. Comuneros released Joanna and wanted to depose Charles and support Joanna to be the sole monarch instead. While Joanna refused to depose her son, her confinement would continue after the revolt to prevent possible events alike. Immediately after crushing the Castilian revolt, Charles was confronted again with the hot issue of Navarre when King Henry II attempted to reconquer the kingdom. Main military operations lasted until 1524, when Hondarribia surrendered to Charles's forces, but frequent cross-border clashes in the western Pyrenees only stopped in 1528 (Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai).\nAfter these events, Navarre remained a matter of domestic and international litigation still for a century (a French dynastic claim to the throne did not end until the July Revolution in 1830). Charles wanted his son and heir Philip II to marry the heiress of Navarre, Jeanne d'Albret. Jeanne was instead forced to marry William, Duke of Julich-Cleves-Berg, but that childless marriage was annulled after four years. She next married Antoine de Bourbon, and both she and their son Henry of Navarre would oppose Philip II in the French Wars of Religion.\nAfter its integration into Charles's empire, Castile guaranteed effective military units and its American possessions provided the bulk of the empire's financial resources. However, the two conflicting strategies of Charles V, enhancing the possessions of his family and protecting Catholicism against Protestant heretics, diverted resources away from building up the Spanish economy. Elite elements in Spain called for more protection for the commercial networks, which were threatened by the Ottoman Empire and Barbary pirates. Charles instead focused on defeating Protestantism in Germany and the Netherlands, which proved to be lost causes. Each hastened the economic decline of the Spanish Empire in the next generation. The enormous budget deficit accumulated during Charles's reign, along with the inflation that affected the kingdom, resulted in declaring bankruptcy during the reign of Philip II.\nItalian states.\nThe Crown of Aragon inherited by Charles included the Kingdom of Naples, the Kingdom of Sicily and the Kingdom of Sardinia. As Holy Roman Emperor, Charles was sovereign in several states of northern Italy as King of Italy. The Duchy of Milan, however, was under French control. France took Milan from the House of Sforza after victory against Switzerland at the Battle of Marignano in 1515.\nImperial-Papal troops succeeded in re-installing Francesco II Sforza in Milan in 1521, in the context of an alliance between Charles V and Pope Leo X. A Franco-Swiss army was expelled from Lombardy at the Battle of Bicocca 1522. In 1524, Francis I of France retook the initiative, crossing into Lombardy where Milan, along with several other cities, once again fell to his attack. Pavia alone held out, and on 24 February 1525 (Charles's twenty-fifth birthday), Charles's forces led by Charles de Lannoy captured Francis and crushed his army in the Battle of Pavia.\nIn 1535, Francesco II Sforza died without heirs, and Charles V annexed the territory as a vacant Imperial state with the help of Massimiliano Stampa, one of the most influential courtiers of the late Duke. Charles successfully held on to all of its Italian territories, though they were invaded again on multiple occasions during the Italian Wars.\nIn addition, Habsburg trade in the Mediterranean was consistently disrupted by the Ottoman Empire and its vassal Barbary pirates. In 1538 a Holy League consisting of all the Italian states and the Spanish kingdoms was formed to drive the Ottomans back, but it was defeated at the Battle of Preveza. Decisive naval victory eluded Charles; it would not be achieved until after his death, at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nAfter the death of his paternal grandfather, Maximilian, in 1519, Charles inherited the Habsburg monarchy. He was also the natural candidate of the electors to succeed his grandfather as Holy Roman Emperor. He defeated the candidacies of Frederick III of Saxony, Francis I of France, and Henry VIII of England in the 1519 Imperial election. According to some, Charles became emperor due to the fact that by paying huge bribes to the electors, he was the highest bidder. He won the crown on 28 June 1519. On 23 October 1520, he was crowned in Germany and some ten years later, on 24 February 1530, he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Clement VII in Bologna, the last emperor to receive a papal coronation. Others point out that while the electors were paid, this was not the reason for the outcome, or at most played only a small part. The important factor that swayed the final decision was that Frederick refused the offer, and made a speech in support of Charles on the ground that they needed a strong leader against the Ottomans, Charles had the resources and was a prince of German extraction.\nAlthough even at the beginning of his reign, his position was more powerful than that of any of his predecessors, the decentralized structure of the Empire proved resilient, not least because of the Reformation. It was exactly during this crucial period, Charles V and Ferdinand were too busy with non-German affairs to prevent Imperial Cities in Upper Germany from becoming estranged from Imperial power.\nDue to Charles V's difficulties in coordinating between the Austrian, Hungarian fronts and his Mediterranean fronts in the face of the Ottoman threat, as well as in his German, Burgundian and Italian theatres of war against German Protestant Princes and France, the defense of central Europe, as well as many responsibilities involving the management of the Empire, was subcontracted to Ferdinand. Charles V abdicated as Archduke of Austria in 1522, and nine years after that he had the German princes elect Ferdinand as King of the Romans, who thus became his designated successor as emperor, a move that \"had profound implications for state formation in south-eastern Europe\". Afterwards, Ferdinand managed to gain control of Bohemia, Croatia, and Hungary, with support from local nobles and his German vassals.\nCharles abdicated as emperor in 1556 in favour of his brother Ferdinand; however, due to lengthy debate and bureaucratic procedure, the Imperial Diet did not accept the abdication (and thus make it legally valid) until 24 February 1558. Up to that date, Charles continued to use the title of emperor.\nWars with France.\nMuch of Charles's reign was taken up by conflicts with France, which found itself encircled by Charles's empire while it still maintained ambitions in Italy. In 1520, Charles visited England, where his aunt, Catherine of Aragon, urged her husband, Henry VIII, to ally himself with the Emperor. In 1508 Charles had been nominated by Henry VII to the Order of the Garter. His Garter stall plate survives in Saint George's Chapel.\nThe first war with Charles's great nemesis Francis I of France began in 1521. Charles allied with England and Pope Leo X against the French and the Venetians, and was highly successful, driving the French out of Milan and defeating and capturing Francis at the Battle of Pavia in 1525. To gain his freedom, Francis agreed to cede the Duchy of Burgundy to Charles in the Treaty of Madrid, as well as renouncing his support of Henry II's claim over Navarre.\nWhen he was released, however, Francis had the Parlement of Paris denounce the treaty because it had been signed under duress, thus refusing to hand over the Duchy of Burgundy. France then joined the League of Cognac that Pope Clement VII had formed with Henry VIII of England, the Venetians, the Florentines, and the Milanese to resist imperial domination of Italy. In the ensuing war, Charles's sack of Rome (1527) and virtual imprisonment of Pope Clement VII in 1527 prevented the Pope from annulling the marriage of Henry VIII of England and Charles's aunt Catherine of Aragon, so Henry eventually broke with Rome, thus leading to the English Reformation. In other respects, the war was inconclusive. In the Treaty of Cambrai (1529), called the \"Ladies' Peace\" because it was negotiated between Charles's aunt and Francis' mother, Francis renounced his claims in Italy but retained control of Burgundy.\nA third war erupted in 1536. Following the death of Francesco II Sforza, Charles installed his son Philip in the Duchy of Milan, despite Francis' claims on it. Already in the summer of 1536, the emperor personally led the invasion of Provence, and took Aix-en-Provence on August 5, affirming there his imperial rights over the ancient Kingdom of Arles, but those gains were soon lost. This war too was inconclusive. Francis failed to conquer Milan, but he succeeded in conquering most of the lands of Charles's ally, Charles III, Duke of Savoy, including his capital Turin. The Truce of Nice was concluded in 1538, on the basis of \"uti possidetis\". It ended the war, but lasted only a short time.\nWar resumed in 1542, with Francis now allied with Ottoman Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent and Charles once again allied with Henry VIII. Despite the conquest of Nice by a Franco-Ottoman fleet, the French could not advance toward Milan, while a joint Anglo-Imperial invasion of northern France, led by Charles himself, won some successes but was ultimately abandoned, leading to another peace and restoration of the \"status quo ante bellum\" in 1544.\nA final war erupted with Francis' son and successor, Henry II, in 1551. Henry won early success in Lorraine, where he captured Metz, but French offensives in Italy failed. Charles abdicated midway through this conflict, leaving further conduct of the war to his son, Philip II, and his brother, Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor.\nConflicts with the Ottoman Empire.\nCharles fought continually with the Ottoman Empire and its sultan, Suleiman the Magnificent. The defeat of Hungary at the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs in 1526 \"sent a wave of terror over Europe.\" The Muslim advance in Central Europe was halted at the Siege of Vienna (1529), followed by a counter-attack of Charles V across the Danube river. However, by 1541, central and southern Hungary fell under Ottoman control.\nSuleiman won the contest for mastery of the Mediterranean, in spite of Christian victories such as the conquest of Tunis in 1535. The regular Ottoman fleet came to dominate the Eastern Mediterranean after its victories at Preveza in 1538 and Djerba in 1560 (shortly after Charles's death), which severely decimated the Spanish Navy. At the same time, the Muslim Barbary corsairs, acting under the general authority and supervision of the sultan, regularly devastated the Spanish and Italian coasts and crippled Spanish trade. The advance of the Ottomans in the Mediterranean and central Europe chipped at the foundations of Habsburg power and diminished Imperial prestige.\nIn 1536, Francis I allied France with Suleiman against Charles. While Francis was persuaded to sign a peace treaty in 1538, he again allied himself with the Ottomans in 1542 in a Franco-Ottoman alliance. In 1543, Charles allied himself with Henry VIII and forced Francis to sign the Truce of Cr\u00e9py-en-Laonnois. Later, in 1547, Charles signed a humiliating treaty with the Ottomans to gain himself some respite from the huge expenses of their war.\nCharles V made overtures to the Safavid Empire to open a second front against the Ottomans, in an attempt at creating a Habsburg\u2013Persian alliance. Contacts were positive, but rendered difficult by enormous distances. In effect, however, the Safavids did enter in conflict with the Ottoman Empire in the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War, forcing it to split its military resources.\nDuring the 1541 expedition of Algiers, the losses amongst the invading force were heavy with 150 ships lost, plus large numbers of sailors and soldiers. A Turkish chronicler confirmed that the Berber tribes massacred 12,000 invaders. Leaving war materiel, including 100 to 200 guns which would be recovered to furnish the ramparts of Algiers, Charles' army was taken prisoner in such numbers that the markets of Algiers were filled with slaves.\nProtestant Reformation.\nThe issue of the Reformation was first brought to the imperial attention under Charles V. As Holy Roman Emperor, Charles called Martin Luther to the Diet of Worms in 1521, promising him safe conduct if he would appear. After Luther defended the \"Ninety-five Theses\" and his writings, the Emperor commented: \"that monk will never make me a heretic\". Charles V relied on religious unity to govern his various realms, otherwise unified only in his person, and perceived Luther's teachings as a disruptive form of heresy. He outlawed Luther and issued the Edict of Worms, declaring:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You know that I am a descendant of the Most Christian Emperors of the great German people, of the Catholic Kings of Spain, of the Archdukes of Austria, and of the Dukes of Burgundy. All of these, their whole life long, were faithful sons of the Roman Church\u00a0... After their deaths they left, by natural law and heritage, these holy catholic rites, for us to live and die by, following their example. And so until now I have lived as a true follower of these our ancestors. I am therefore resolved to maintain everything which these my forebears have established to the present.\nCharles V, however, kept his word, and left Martin Luther free to leave the city. Frederick III, Elector of Saxony and protector of Luther, lamented the outcome of the Diet. On the road back from Worms, Luther was kidnapped by Frederick's men and hidden in a distant castle in Wartburg. There, he began to work on his German translation of the bible. The spread of Lutheranism led to two major revolts: that of the knights in 1522\u20131523 and that of the peasants led by Thomas Muntzer in 1524\u20131525. While the pro-Imperial Swabian League, in conjunction with Protestant princes afraid of social revolts, restored order, Charles V used the instrument of pardon to maintain peace. Conflict with the pope led Charles' agents to remind the pope of the bad position that the Protestants were putting the Vatican in.\nFollowing this, Charles V took a tolerant approach and pursued a policy of reconciliation with the Lutherans. The 1530 Imperial Diet of Augsburg was requested by Emperor Charles V to decide on three issues: first, the defence of the Empire against the Ottoman threat; second, issues related to policy, currency and public well-being; and, third, disagreements about Christianity, in attempt to reach some compromise and a chance to deal with the German situation. The Diet was inaugurated by the emperor on 20 June. It produced numerous outcomes, most notably the 1530 declaration of the Lutheran estates known as the Augsburg Confession (\"Confessio Augustana\"), a central document of Lutheranism. Luther's assistant Philip Melanchthon went even further and presented it to Charles V. The Emperor strongly rejected it, and in 1531 the Schmalkaldic League was formed by Protestant princes. In 1532, Charles V recognized the League and effectively suspended the Edict of Worms with the \"standstill of Nuremberg\". The \"standstill\" required the Protestants to continue to take part in the Imperial wars against the Turks and the French, and postponed religious affairs until an ecumenical council of the Catholic Church was called by the Pope to solve the issue.\nDue to Papal delays in organizing a general council, Charles V decided to organize a German summit and presided over the \"Colloquy of Regensburg\" between Catholics and Lutherans in 1541, but no compromise was achieved. In 1545, the Council of Trent was finally opened and the Counter-Reformation began. The Catholic initiative was supported by a number of the princes of the Holy Roman Empire. However, the Schmalkaldic League refused to recognize the validity of the council and occupied territories of Catholic princes. Therefore, Charles V outlawed the Schmalkaldic League and opened hostilities against it in 1546. The next year his forces drove the League's troops out of southern Germany, and defeated John Frederick, Elector of Saxony, and Philip of Hesse at the Battle of M\u00fchlberg, capturing both. At the Augsburg Interim in 1548, he created a solution giving certain allowances to Protestants until the Council of Trent would restore unity. However, members of both sides resented the Interim and some actively opposed it.\nThe council was re-opened in 1550 with the participation of Lutherans, and Charles V set up the Imperial court in Innsbruck, Austria, sufficiently close to Trent for him to follow the evolution of the debates. In 1552 Protestant princes, in alliance with Henry II of France, rebelled again and the Second Schmalkaldic War began. Maurice of Saxony, instrumental for the Imperial victory in the first conflict, switched side to the Protestant cause and bypassed the Imperial army by marching directly into Innsbruck with the goal of capturing the Emperor. Charles V was forced to flee the city during an attack of gout and barely made it alive to Villach in a state of semi-consciousness carried in a litter. After failing to recapture Metz from the French, Charles V returned to the Low Countries for the last years of his emperorship. In 1555, he instructed his brother Ferdinand to sign the Peace of Augsburg in his name. The agreements led to the religious division of Germany between Catholic and Protestant princedoms.\nAbdications and death.\nDivision of the Habsburgs.\nBetween 1554 and 1556, Charles V gradually divided the Habsburg empire between a senior Spanish line and an Austrian branch of the House of Habsburg. His abdications all occurred at the Palace of Coudenberg in Brussels. First he abdicated the thrones of Sicily and Naples, the latter a Papal fief, and the Imperial Duchy of Milan, in favour of his son Philip on 25 July 1554. Philip was secretly invested with Milan already in 1540 and again in 1546, but only in 1554 did the Emperor make it public. Upon the abdications of Naples and Sicily, Philip was invested by Pope Julius III with the Kingdom of Naples on 2 October and with the Kingdom of Sicily on 18 November.\nThe most famous\u00a0\u2013 and only public\u00a0\u2013 abdication took place a year later, on 25 October 1555, when Charles announced to the States General of the Netherlands (reunited in the great hall where he was emancipated forty years before by Emperor Maximilian) his abdication of those territories in favour of his son Philip as well as his intention to step down from all of his positions and retire to a monastery. During the ceremony, the gout-afflicted Emperor Charles V leaned on the shoulder of his advisor William the Silent and, crying, pronounced his resignation speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I was nineteen\u00a0... I undertook to be a candidate for the Imperial crown, not to increase my possessions but rather to engage myself more vigorously in working for the welfare of Germany and my other realms\u00a0... and in the hopes of thereby bringing peace among the Christian peoples and uniting their fighting forces for the defense of the Catholic faith against the Ottomans.\u00a0... I had almost reached my goal, when the attack by the French king and some German princes called me once more to arms. Against my enemies I accomplished what I could, but success in war lies in the hands of God, Who gives victory or takes it away, as He pleases.\u00a0... I must for my part confess that I have often misled myself, either from youthful inexperience, from the pride of mature years, or from some other weakness of human nature. I nonetheless declare to you that I never knowingly or willingly acted unjustly.\u00a0... If actions of this kind are nevertheless justly laid to my account, I formally assure you now that I did them unknowingly and against my own intention. I therefore beg those present today, whom I have offended in this respect, together with those who are absent, to forgive me.\nHe concluded the speech by mentioning his voyages: ten to the Low Countries, nine to Germany, seven to Spain, seven to Italy, four to France, two to England, and two to North Africa. His last public words were, \"My life has been one long journey.\"\nWith no fanfare, in 1556 he finalised his abdications. On 16 January 1556, he gave Spain and the Spanish Empire in the Americas to Philip. On 27 August 1556, he abdicated as Holy Roman Emperor in favour of his brother Ferdinand, elected King of the Romans in 1531. The succession was recognized by the prince-electors assembled at Frankfurt only in 1558, and by the Pope only in 1559. The Imperial abdication also marked the beginning of Ferdinand's legal and suo jure rule in the Austrian possessions, that he governed in Charles's name since 1521\u20131522, and were territorially linked with his rule over Hungary and Bohemia since 1526.\nAccording to scholars, Charles decided to abdicate for a variety of reasons: the religious division of Germany sanctioned in 1555; the state of Spanish finances, bankrupted with inflation by the time his reign ended; the revival of Italian Wars with attacks from Henry II of France; the never-ending advance of the Ottomans in the Mediterranean and central Europe; and his declining health, in particular attacks of gout such as the one that forced him to postpone an attempt to recapture the city of Metz where he was later defeated.\nRetirement, death and burial.\nIn September 1556, Charles left the Low Countries and sailed to Spain accompanied by his sisters, Mary of Hungary and Eleanor of Austria. He arrived at the Monastery of Yuste of Extremadura in 1557. He continued to correspond widely and kept an interest in the situation of the empire, while suffering from severe gout. He lived alone in a secluded monastery, surrounded by paintings by Titian and with clocks lining every wall, which some historians believe were symbols of his reign and his lack of time. In August 1558, Charles was taken seriously ill, with what was diagnosed in the twenty-first century as malaria. \nHe died in the early hours of the morning on 21 September 1558, at the age of 58, holding in his hand the cross that his wife Isabella had been holding when she died. Following his death, there were a plethora of commemorations in his empire, including in Mexico and Peru. Some 30,000 masses were arranged for the soul of the Emperor. Some 30,000 gold ducats that he had set aside for the ransom of prisoners, poor virgins, and paupers were distributed. He still owed huge debts from his constant warfare far beyond the funds on hand, which his heirs spent decades paying off.\nCharles was originally buried in the chapel of the Monastery of Yuste, but he left a codicil in his last will and testament asking for the establishment of a new religious foundation in which he would be reburied with Isabella. Following his return to Spain in 1559, their son Philip undertook the task of fulfilling his father's wish when he founded the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial. After the Monastery's Royal Crypt was completed in 1574, the bodies of Charles and Isabella were relocated and re-interred into a small vault directly underneath the altar of the Royal Chapel, in accordance with Charles's wishes to be buried \"half-body under the altar and half-body under the priest's feet\" side by side with Isabella. \nThey remained in the Royal Chapel while the famous Basilica of the Monastery and the Royal tombs were still under construction. In 1654, after the Basilica and Royal tombs were finally completed during the reign of their great-grandson Philip IV, the remains of Charles and Isabella were moved into the Royal Pantheon of Kings, which lies directly under the Basilica. On one side of the Basilica are bronze effigies of Charles and Isabella, with effigies of their daughter Maria of Austria and Charles's sisters Eleanor of Austria and Maria of Hungary behind them. Adjacent to them on the opposite side of the Basilica are effigies of their son Philip with three of his wives and their ill-fated grandson Carlos, Prince of Asturias.\nAdministration.\nGiven the vast dominions of the House of Habsburg, Charles was often on the road and needed deputies to govern his realms for the times he was absent from his territories. His first Governor of the Netherlands was Margaret of Austria, succeeded by his sister Mary of Hungary and Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy. His first Regent of Spain was Adrian of Utrecht (succeeded by Isabella of Portugal and Philip II of Spain). For the regency and governorship of the Austrian hereditary lands, Charles named his brother Ferdinand archduke in the Austrian lands under his authority at the Diet of Worms (1521).\nCharles agreed to favor the election of Ferdinand as King of the Romans in Germany, which took place in 1531. By virtue of these agreements Ferdinand became Holy Roman Emperor and obtained hereditary rights over Austria at the abdication of Charles in 1556. Charles de Lannoy, Carafa and Antonio Folc de Cardona y Enriquez were viceroys of the kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia, respectively.\nCharles V travelled ten times to the Low Countries, nine to Germany, seven to Spain, seven to Italy, four to France, two to England, and two to North Africa. During all his travels, the Emperor left a documentary trail in almost every place he went, allowing historians to surmise that he spent 10,000 days in the Low Countries, 6,500 days in Spain, 3,000 days in Germany, and 1,000 days in Italy. He spent 195 days in France, 99 in North Africa and 44 days in England. For 260 days his exact location is unrecorded, all of them being days spent at sea travelling between his dominions. As he put it in his last public speech: \"my life has been one long journey\".\nCharles never traveled to his overseas possessions in the Americas, since a transatlantic crossing to a place not central to his political interests at the time was unthinkable.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The New World was an increasingly important part of the balance of power, but it was completely subordinate to European considerations. The Spanish colonial empire took up relatively little of Charles V's time. Its principal function was to provide resources to support his ambitions on the near side of the Atlantic: again and again, it was bullion from the Indies \u2013 a fifth of total revenue \u2013 which either funded campaigns against the French, Turks, and German princes directly, or provided the security against which the Emperor could borrow the great banking house of Fugger in Augsburg. For example, of nearly 2 million escudos' worth of treasury, the largest recipient was Germany, followed by the Low Countries. Charles's travels throughout his reign also show his priority quite clearly: he visited Italy on seven occasions, France on four, and England and Africa on two, and spent six long stays in Spain itself, but he travelled to Flanders and Germany on no fewer than nineteen occasions; he never visited the Americas. His imperial status stemmed from the \"Imperium Romanum\", not the global sweep of his lands. In short, the Holy Roman Empire, not the emerging Spanish empire, provided the Imperial context in which the ambitions of Charles V played out.\u2014\u200a\nHe did, however, establish strong administrative structures to rule them, including the European-based Council of the Indies in 1524 and the establishment of the Viceroyalty of New Spain and the Viceroyalty of Peru when the Aztec and Inca civilizations were conquered in his name.\nIn 1534, Charles accepted a personal audience with Maxixcatzin, a nobleman from Tlaxcala who demanded and received several special privileges for his city and its people. The Tlaxcallans had formed an alliance with Spain and were instrumental in the overthrow of the Aztecs and other conquests in the Americas. Charles' decrees recognized their contributions and promised that Tlaxcala's autonomy would be preserved. His treatment of the Tlaxcallans and other friendly native peoples as important allies rather than conquered subjects ensured strong support from Tlaxcala and other allied native groups for the next three centuries.\nEurope.\nMilitary system.\nUnder the organization and patronage of Maximilian I, Southern Germany had become the leading arms industry region of the 16th century, rivalled only by Northern Italy with the chief centers being Nuremberg, Augsburg, Milan, and Brescia. Charles V continued with the development of mass production and standardization of gun caliber, which greatly affected warfare.\nThe Helmschmied of Augsburg and the Negroli of Milan were among the foremost families of armourers of the time. Under Charles V, the Spanish arms industry was significantly expanded, with significant improvements of muskets.\nThe Landsknechte, originally recruited and organized by Maximilian and Georg von Frundsberg, formed the bulk of Charles V's army. They surpassed the Swiss mercenaries in quality and quantity as the \"best and most easily available mercenaries in Europe\". They were considered best fighting troops in the first half of the 16th century for their brutal and ruthless efficiency, with a French saying going \"a Landsknecht thrown out heaven couldn't get in hell because he would frighten the devil\". \nTerrence McIntosh notes that, Charles V, like his grandfather, \"relied heavily on German military manpower, fearsome landsknechts, as well as redoubtable Swiss-German mercenaries. Maximilian invaded northern Italy in 1496, 1508, and repeatedly between 1509 and 1516. Soon after the Imperial election in 1519, Charles V was waging war there. His overwhelmingly German troops won the Battle of Pavia and captured the French king in 1525; two years later they sacked the city of Rome, murdering between six and twelve thousand residents and pillaging for eight months.\"\nHis expansionist and aggressive policy, in combination with the brutal behaviours of the Landsknechte, which incidentally happened right at the formation of the early modern German nation, left an indelible mark on his neighbours' impression of the German polity, despite the fact that in the long term, it was in general not belligerent.\nCharles V also favoured German heavy cavalry, although costly. Many cavalrymen and noblemen fighting for Charles V were of Burgundian extraction, often part of the Order of the Golden Fleece. Italian condottieri were also recruited.\nIn Spain, inheriting the reform work of Gonzalo Fern\u00e1ndez de C\u00f3rdoba, in 1536, Charles reorganized his infantry and created the first units of the tercios. Later they became \"the most formidable fighting force of the sixteenth century\". The original tercios were exclusively Spanish and this situation remained until Philip II organized the Italian tercios in 1584.\nFinance.\nCharles's main sources of revenue were from Castile, Naples and the Low Countries, which yielded in total an annual amount of around 2.8 million Spanish ducats in the 1520s and about 4.8 million Spanish ducats in the 1540s. Ferdinand I's annual revenue totalled between 1.7 million and 1.9 million Venetian ducats (2.15\u20132.5 million florin or Rhine gulden). Their chief enemy, the Ottomans, had a more streamlined and profitable system, yielding 10 million gold ducats in 1527\u20131528 and did not suffer from deficit.\nHe often had to depend on loans from bankers. He borrowed 28 million ducats in total during his reign, of which 5.5 million ducats came from the Fuggers and 4.2 million from the Welsers of Augsburg. Other creditors were from Genoa, Antwerp and Spain.\nCommunication, diplomatic, and espionage systems.\nThe Habsburg expansion and consolidation of rule was accompanied by remarkable development of communication, diplomatic and espionage systems. In 1495, Emperor Maximilian and Franz von Taxis (from the Thurn und Taxis family) developed the \"Niederl\u00e4ndische Postkurs\", a postal system that connected the Low Countries with Innsbruck. The system quickly converged with the European trade system and an emerging market for news, spurring a pan-Europe communication revolution\nThe system was developed further by Philip the Handsome, who negotiated new standards for the systems with the Taxis, and unified communication between Germany, the Netherlands, France and Spain by adding stations in Granada, Toledo, Blois, Paris and Lyon in 1505.\nAfter his father's death, Charles, as Duke of Burgundy, continued to develop the system. Behringer notes that, \"Whereas the status of private mail remains unclear in the treaty of 1506, it is obvious from the contract of 1516 that the Taxis company had the right to carry mail and keep the profit as long as it guaranteed the delivery of court mail at clearly defined speeds, regulated by time sheets to be filled in by the post riders on the way to their destination. In return, imperial privileges guaranteed exemption from local taxes, local jurisdiction, and military service. 21 The terminology of the early modern communications system and the legal status of its participants were invented at these negotiations.\" He confirmed Jannetto's son Giovanni Battista as Postmaster General (\"chief et maistre general de noz postes par tous noz royaumes, pays, et seigneuries\") in 1520. By Charles V's time, \"the Holy Roman Empire had become the centre of the European communication(s) universe.\"\nCharles V inherited efficient multinational diplomatic networks from both the Trast\u00e1mara and Habsburg-Burgundian dynasties. Following the example of the papal curia, in the late fifteenth century, both dynasties began to employ permanent envoys, earlier than other secular powers. The Habsburg network developed in parallel to their postal system. Charles V combined the Spanish and the Imperial systems into one.\nHis opponents, chiefly France, found a counterweight though, by the alliance with the Ottoman Empire, which Francis I admitted to be the only force that could prevent the Habsburgs from transforming European states into a Europe-wide empire. Charles V's military might frightened other European rulers, thus while he was able to make the pope a reluctant agent like his grandfather Ferdinand had done, no lasting alliance could be achieved. After the Battle of Pavia, the European rulers united to prevent harsh terms from being placed upon France.\nIn the 1530s, in the context of the conflict between the Habsburg empire and their greatest opponent, the Ottomans, an espionage network was built by Charles and Don Alfonso Granai Castriota, the marquis of Atripalda, who conducted its operations. Naples became the main rearguard of the system. Gennaro Varriale writes that, \"on the eve of the Tunis campaign, Emperor Charles V possessed a network of spies based in the Kingdom of Naples that watched over all the corners of the Ottoman Empire.\"\nPatronage of the arts and architecture.\nSeveral notable men were recognized with patronage by Charles. Noted Spanish poet Garcilaso de la Vega, a nobleman and ambassador in the Imperial court of Charles, was first appointed \"contino\" (imperial guard) of the Emperor in 1520. Alfonso de Vald\u00e9s, twin brother of the humanist Juan de Vald\u00e9s and secretary of the Emperor, was a Spanish humanist. Peter Martyr d'Anghiera, an Italian historian at the service of Spain, wrote the first accounts of explorations in Central and South America in a series of letters and reports, grouped in the original Latin publications of 1511 to 1530 into sets of ten chapters called \"decades\". His \"Decades\" are of great value in the history of geography and discovery. His \"De Orbe Novo\" (On the New World, 1530) describes the first contacts of Europeans and Native Americans, Native American civilizations in the Caribbean and North America, as well as Mesoamerica, and includes, for example, the first European reference to India rubber.\nMartyr was given the post of chronicler (\"cronista\") in the newly formed Council of the Indies (1524), commissioned by Charles V to describe what was occurring in the explorations of the New World. In 1523 Charles gave him the title of Count Palatine, and in 1524 called him once more into the Council of the Indies. Martyr was invested by Pope Clement VII, as proposed by Charles V, as Abbot of Jamaica. Juan Bosc\u00e1n Almog\u00e1ver was a poet who participated with Garcilaso de la Vega in giving naval assistance to the Isle of Rhodes during a Turkish invasion. Bosc\u00e0 fought against the Turks again in 1532 with \u00c1lvarez de Toledo and Charles in Vienna. During this period, Bosc\u00e1n had made serious progress in his mastery of verse in the Italian style.\nCharles commissioned several portraits from the painter Titian, including the \"Portrait of Charles V\" and the \"Equestrian Portrait of Charles V\", becoming a friend of the artist. These portraits helped to spread the image of Charles as a powerful ruler and protector of Christendom, promoting his image as an enlightened Renaissance ruler.\nThe building of the Palace of Charles V was commissioned by Charles, who wished to establish his residence close to the Alhambra palaces. Although the Catholic Monarchs had already altered some rooms of the Alhambra after the conquest of the city in 1492, Charles V intended to construct a permanent residence befitting an emperor. The project was given to Pedro Machuca, an architect whose life and development are poorly documented. At the time, Spanish architecture was immersed in the Plateresque style, with traces of Gothic architecture still visible. Machuca built a palace corresponding stylistically to Mannerism, a mode then in its infancy in Italy. The exterior of the building uses a typically Renaissance combination of rustication on the lower level and ashlar on the upper. The building has never been a home to a monarch and stood roofless until 1957.\nAmericas.\nFrom his maternal grandmother, Isabella I of Castile, who had funded Christopher Columbus's first voyage in 1492, Charles inherited Castile's overseas territories in the Americas. Spanish colonization of the Americas began in 1493, but these permanent settlements in the Caribbean and Spanish Main were marginal to Charles's European empire and not the focus of his attention. Through the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494), Spain and Portugal had agreed on a division of overseas territories, so that with the exception of Brazil, which Portugal could claim, Charles could claim the rest of the New World.\nThe realm of his known possessions expanded with the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519\u20131521) under conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s and by Magellan's circumnavigation of the globe in 1522. These successes convinced Charles of his divine mission to become the leader of Christendom, which still perceived a significant threat from Islam. The conquest of central Mexico, bringing a high indigenous civilization under Spanish rule, compelled Charles to grapple with creating structures of institutional rule in the Americas. Charles had begun creating councils to oversee aspects of his realms, first reorganizing the existing Council of Castile, established by the Catholic Monarchs. Indicating the Americas' eventual importance, he founded the Council of the Indies in 1524 to deal with the complexities of Castile's overseas possessions.\nUnlike his European possessions that were not consolidated geographically but were all relatively near each other, ruling the Americas had to take into account the Atlantic Ocean. Prior to the creation of the viceroyalties, he established a high court \"audiencia\" to administer justice. He formalized conversion of indigenous populations to Christianity, the so-called \"spiritual conquest\", by sending Franciscan, Dominican, and Augustinian friars starting in the mid-1520s. With the discovery of large deposits of silver in northern Mexico in the 1540s and in 1545 in Peru at Potos\u00ed, Charles's advisors urged regulation of mining to ensure that bullion was directed to crown coffers.\nAd hoc administrative solutions of the early conquest period gave way to Charles's establishment of the Viceroyalty of New Spain in Mexico City (1535), the Spanish capital founded on the ruins of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan. After the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire in the 1530s, Charles established the Viceroyalty of Peru in the newly founded Spanish capital of Lima (1544). As it became clear that establishing royal control was important, Charles sought to undermine the growing power of the group of conquistadors in Mexico and Peru, awarded personal grants of indigenous labor in perpetuity, by issuing the New Laws of 1542, ending grant holders' rights in perpetuity.\nDominican friar Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas's long term campaign to protect indigenous populations from Spanish conquerors' exploitation influenced Charles's new policy. In Peru, it resulted in a major Spanish rebellion against the crown when the newly appointed viceroy, Blasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez Vela, attempted to implement the measure. In Mexico, Viceroy don Antonio de Mendoza prudently did not. In Peru, the new viceroy was murdered. \"To many Spanish settlers the New Laws seemed like a declaration of war, and their hostile reaction was swift and overwhelming.\" \nThe violent uprising necessitated a major military response, organized by Pedro de la Gasca, to whom Charles granted sweeping powers in order to re-establish royal authority. The rebellion in Peru coincided with one in Germany. In the Americas, Charles was forced to temper the initial order ending inheritance, allowing grants to be passed on to one further generation, but he refused to yield on the question of allowing enslavement of the indigenous.\nRegarding the Spanish rebels supporting the cause of Gonzalo Pizarro, who might have set up a kingdom of Peru with himself as ruler, Charles fully supported Pizarro's beheading and his supporters' execution and confiscation of property. This was similar to the treatment of \"comunero\" rebels early in his Iberian rule. Pizarro's execution marks the end of Spanish rebellion against the crown. Relatively early in his rule, Charles assigned a concession (1528) in Venezuela Province to Bartholomeus V. Welser, in compensation for his inability to repay debts owed. The concession, known as Klein-Venedig (\"little Venice\"), was revoked in 1546 during the rebellion in Peru by Spanish colonists against Charles.\nThe question of labor and treatment of indigenous populations had occupied Charles's maternal grandparents, and as indigenous populations in the Caribbean were decimated by disease and overwork, transshipment of African slaves to replace the labor force began. On 28 August 1518, Charles issued a charter authorizing the transportation of slaves directly from Africa to the Americas. Up until that point (since at least 1510), African slaves had usually been transported to Castile or Portugal and had then been transshipped to the Caribbean. Charles's decision to create a direct, more economically viable Africa to America slave trade fundamentally changed the nature and scale of the transatlantic slave trade.\nProtection of indigenous populations against Spaniards' exploitation was the key motivation behind Charles's issuance of the 1542 New Laws. With Gasca's suppression of Spanish colonists' rebellion in Peru, Charles was still concerned about the welfare of his indigenous subjects. So, on 3 July 1549, Charles ordered the Council of the Indies to stop all the conquests until it was certain that Spain was acting in accordance with the moral law, so penetration into the American continent was suspended until 1556. This was because philosophical questions arose, especially from Catholic jurists and scholastic philosophers, about whether the Hispanic Monarchy had the moral right to legally conquer the Indies.\nSince 1542, a moral crisis was developing in the government because of the Spanish colonization in America. The Crown of Castile was overwhelmed by the constant denunciations of abuses it was receiving, especially from the conquests in Peru and those that occurred in the New Kingdom of Granada, which could cause anguish in people of all Estates, even if they were prelates or knights of the Spanish nobility. Thus, Charles, influenced by the reflections of Francisco de Vitoria and the School of Salamanca, together with the pressure of missionaries, wanted to be sure that their power was beyond reproach. Therefore, it was ordered to stop all military companies in the overseas domains until a board of wise men ruled on the fairest way to carry them out, seriously considering the total or partial abandonment of the New World until the imperial doubt was resolved, regarding how to avoid in the future the possibility of abusive discoveries, overwhelming conquests and predatory colonizations that were based on the oppressive exploitation of indigenous labor.\nIn 1550, Charles convened a conference at Valladolid in order to consider the morality of the force used against the indigenous populations of the New World, which included figures such as Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, from which conceptions of the human rights of the Indians would arise according to the Thomistic natural law, making the Hispanic Monarchy a pioneer, both in theory and in practice, on how to approach respect for the conquered. Theologians and jurists from all parts of the empire began to arrive in the capital, presenting themselves with the best souls of Spain, such as Domingo de Soto, Bartolom\u00e9 Carranza, Melchor Cano, and also Pedro de la Gasca (Peru's first peacemaker after ) together with the jurisconsults of the Council of the Indies. \nBartolom\u00e9 de las Casas defended the position that the wars of conquest were unjust, while Juan Gin\u00e9s de Sep\u00falveda defended the opposite. The court, after long debates, voted and tied, so there was no official sentence, but there were several binding reports in which the purpose was to ensure that the treatment given to the natives was correct. It was the first time that kings and philosophers conceded that men have fundamental rights for the mere fact of being men (Ius gentium), rights of the eternal Law that are prior to any positive law written in the treaties. Never before had a European people wondered in such depth where their own rights of the victor ended, and where the rights of the defeated begin.\nFinally, Spain did not abandon the Indies, largely based on the sayings of Vitoria: \"After many barbarians have converted there, it would not be convenient or lawful for the prince to abandon the administration of those provinces.\" Therefore, Spanish rule was maintained as Sep\u00falveda claimed, but it was recognized that the Indians were people with their own rights as de las Casas paid for and enshrined in the New Laws, together with the papal bull Sublimis Deus. Given this, there was no longer talks about conquest, but about pacification, so urbanization was resumed, with specific instructions to avoid harm to the Indians. The regulations on how to act in the future, in terms of discoveries and colonizations, were the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;-In the discoveries: They would be made with a license from the Audiencia and carrying at least one religious designated by it. On these trips it was forbidden to steal the goods from the natives and take them by force, except for some of them who wanted to go as interpreters. No Viceroy or Governor would undertake new voyages of discovery on their own. Neither by sea nor by land.\n-In the colonizations: parcels would be prohibited from the first life; Indian slaves would be freed (it was forbidden to make them slaves in the future); a revision of the repartimientos de indios (to the Audiencias) would be ordered so that those that some Spaniards had in excess would pass to the Crown; All the Indians that private individuals had without legitimate title would be transferred to the Crown; it would be forbidden to charge the natives (except where it was inexcusable); moderate rates would be imposed on taxes and services; Rates and tributes would be completely abolished in those places where the Indians had been subjected to fierce exploitation (the Antilles).\nDynasty and private life.\nEducation.\nHis father's sister Margaret was the mother figure in his life. She was a huge influence on Charles. A canny, learned, and artistic woman, with a court that included artists Bernard van Orley and Albrecht D\u00fcrer and master tapestry-maker Pieter van Aelst, she taught her nephew \"above all that a court could be a salon.\" She saw to his education, securing as tutor Adrian of Utrecht, a member of the Brethren of the Common Life, which advocated simplicity and promoted a cult of indigence and deprivation. Adrian later became Pope Adrian VI. The Brethren had many important members, including Thomas \u00e0 Kempis. A third major influence in Charles's early life was William de Cro\u00ff, Sieur de Chi\u00e8ves, who became his \"governor and grand chamberlain\", giving Charles a chivalrous education. He was a tough taskmaster, and when questioned about it he said \"Cousin, I am the defender and guardian of his youth. I do not want him to be incapable because he has not understood affairs nor been trained to work.\"\nLanguages.\nCharles spoke several languages from political necessity, though he does not seem to have been a very natural linguist. He was raised speaking French, which remained his most natural language, and is used in most surviving letters handwritten by him. He learned some Dutch, being given lessons from the age of thirteen. He later added an acceptable Castilian Spanish, which he was required to learn by the Castilian . He could also speak some Basque, acquired by the influence of the Basque secretaries serving in the royal court. He gained a decent command of German following the Imperial election, though he never spoke it as well as French. \nBy 1532, Charles was proficient in Portuguese, and spoke Latin. A witticism sometimes attributed to Charles is: \"I speak Spanish/Latin (depending on the source) to God, Italian to women, French to men and German to my horse.\" A variant of the quote is attributed to him by Jonathan Swift in his 1726 \"Gulliver's Travels\", but there are no contemporary accounts referencing the quotation, which has many other variants and it is often attributed instead to Frederick the Great.\nAppearance and health.\nCharles suffered from an enlarged lower jaw (mandibular prognathism), a congenital deformity that became considerably worse in later Habsburg generations, giving rise to the term Habsburg jaw. This deformity may have been caused by the family's long history of repeated intermarriages between close family members, as commonly practiced in royal families of that era to maintain dynastic control of territory.\nSome advisors considered him physically weak and used that as a reason for him to delay his marriage to Mary Tudor. A diplomat in Charles's court described him as \"not much of a womaniser\" and did not have out of wedlock children during his marriage. He suffered from fainting spells, which might have been epilepsy. He was seriously afflicted with gout, presumably caused by a diet consisting mainly of red meat.\nAs he aged, his gout progressed from painful to crippling. In his retirement, he was carried around the Monastery of Yuste in a sedan chair. A ramp was specially constructed to allow him easy access to his rooms.\nMarriage.\nOn 21 December 1507, Charles was betrothed to 11-year-old Mary, the daughter of King Henry VII of England and younger sister to the future King Henry VIII of England, who was to take the throne in two years. The engagement was called off in 1513, on the advice of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. Mary was instead married to King Louis XII of France in 1514.\nAfter his ascension to the Spanish thrones of Castile and Aragon, negotiations for Charles's marriage began shortly after his arrival in Castile, with the Castilian nobles expressing their wishes for him to marry his first cousin Isabella of Portugal, the daughter of King Manuel I of Portugal and Charles's aunt Maria of Aragon. The nobles desired Charles's marriage to a princess of Castilian blood, and a marriage to Isabella would have secured an alliance between Castile and Portugal. The 18-year-old King was in no hurry to marry and ignored the nobles' advice, exploring other marriage options. Instead of marrying Isabella, he sent his sister Eleanor to marry Isabella's widowed father, King Manuel, in 1518.\nIn 1521, on the advice of his Flemish counsellors, especially William de Cro\u00ff, Charles became engaged to his other first cousin, Mary, daughter of his aunt, Catherine of Aragon, and King Henry VIII, in order to secure an alliance with England. However, this engagement was very problematic because Mary was only six years old at the time, sixteen years Charles's junior, which meant that he would have to wait for her to be old enough to marry.\nBy 1525, Charles could not wait any longer to marry and have legitimate children as heirs. He had abandoned the idea of an English alliance, cancelled his engagement to Mary and decided to marry Isabella and form an alliance with Portugal. He wrote to Isabella's brother, King John III of Portugal, making a double marriage contract \u2013 Charles would marry Isabella and John would marry Charles's youngest sister, Catherine.\nA marriage to Isabella was more beneficial for Charles, as she was closer to him in age, was fluent in Spanish and provided him with a very handsome dowry of 900,000 \"doblas de oro castellanas\" would help to solve the financial problems brought on by the Italian Wars. The marriage brought him the additional titles as \"monarch of the Canaries [Canary Islands] and of the [Portuguese] Indies, the isles of mainland, and the Ocean Sea.\" Marrying Isabella would allow Charles to have her serve as regent in Spain whenever he left. Ultimately this union would result in their son Philip having the strongest claim to the Portuguese throne when the House of Aviz died out in 1580, resulting in the Iberian Union.\nOn 10 March 1526, Charles and Isabella met at the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville. The marriage was originally a political arrangement, but on their first meeting, the couple fell deeply in love: Isabella captivated the Emperor with her beauty and charm. They were married that very same night in a quiet ceremony in the Hall of Ambassadors, just after midnight. Following their wedding, Charles and Isabella spent a long and happy honeymoon at the Alhambra in Granada. Charles began the construction of the Palace of Charles V in 1527, wishing to establish a permanent residence befitting an emperor and empress in the Alhambra palaces. However, the palace was not completed during their lifetimes and remained roofless until the late 20th century.\nDespite the Emperor's long absences due to political affairs abroad, the marriage was a happy one, as both partners were always devoted and faithful to each other. The Empress acted as regent of Spain during her husband's absences, and she proved herself to be a good politician and ruler, thoroughly impressing the Emperor with many of her political accomplishments and decisions.\nThe marriage lasted for 13 years until Isabella's death in 1539. The Empress contracted a fever during the third month of her seventh pregnancy, which resulted in antenatal complications that caused her to miscarry a stillborn son. Her health further deteriorated due to an infection, and she died two weeks later on 1 May 1539, aged 35. Charles was left so grief-stricken by his wife's death that for two months he shut himself up in a monastery, where he prayed and mourned for her in solitude. \nCharles never recovered from Isabella's death, dressing in black for the rest of his life to show his eternal mourning, and, unlike most kings of the time, he never remarried. In memory of his wife, the Emperor commissioned the painter Titian to paint several posthumous portraits of Isabella. The finished portraits included Titian's \"Portrait of Isabella of Portugal\" and \"La Gloria\". Charles kept these paintings with him whenever he travelled, and they were among those that he brought with him after his retirement to the Monastery of Yuste in 1557. \nIn 1540, Charles paid tribute to Isabella's memory when he commissioned the Flemish composer Thomas Crecquillon to compose new music as a memorial to her. Crecquillon composed his \"Missa 'Mort m'a priv\u00e9\" in memory of the Empress. It expresses the Emperor's grief and great wish for a heavenly reunion with his beloved wife.\nDuring his lifetime, Charles V had several nonmarital liaisons, including some that produced children. One relationship was with his step-grandmother, Germaine de Foix, which may have produced a child, Isabel. After the death of his wife, Charles \"seduced Barbara Blomberg, a teenager exactly the same age as his son Philip.\" He kept the relationship and the existence of this out-of-wedlock son secret, \"no doubt because he felt ashamed of his affair with a teenager when he was forty-six.\" The child named Ger\u00f3nimo, later became known as John of Austria; the emperor made provisions for the child in a secret codicil to his will. As with his other out-of-wedlock children, the baby was taken from the mother. He met this son once. The relationship was not revealed to his legitimate children in his lifetime, but they became aware of the relationship after his death.\nIssue.\nCharles and Isabella had seven legitimate children, but only three of them survived to adulthood. Charles also had natural children before he married and after he was widowed.\nDue to Philip II being a grandson of Manuel I of Portugal through his mother, he was in the line of succession to the throne of Portugal, and claimed it after his uncle's death, Henry, the Cardinal-King, in 1580, establishing the personal union between Spain and Portugal.\nCharles also had six children out of wedlock:\nTitles and coat of arms.\nCharles V styled himself as Holy Roman Emperor after his election, according to a Papal dispensation conferred to the Habsburg family by Pope Julius II in 1508 and confirmed in 1519 to the prince-electors by the legates of Pope Leo X. Although Papal coronation was no longer necessary to confirm the Imperial title, Charles V was crowned in the city of Bologna by Pope Clement VII in the medieval fashion.\nCharles V accumulated a large number of titles due to his vast inheritance of Burgundian, Spanish, and Austrian realms. Following the Pacts of Worms (21 April 1521) and Brussels (7 February 1522), he secretly gave the Austrian lands to his younger brother Ferdinand and elevated him to the status of archduke. Nevertheless, according to the agreements, Charles continued to style himself as archduke of Austria and maintained that Ferdinand acted as his vassal and vicar. The pacts of 1521\u20131522 imposed restrictions on the governorship and regency of Ferdinand. For example, all of Ferdinand's letters to Charles V were signed \"your obedient brother and servant\". Nonetheless, the same agreements promised Ferdinand the designation as future emperor and the transfer of hereditary rights over Austria at the imperial succession.\nFollowing the death of Louis II, King of Hungary and Bohemia, at the Battle of Mohacs in 1526, Charles V favoured the election of Ferdinand as king of Hungary (and Croatia) and Bohemia. Despite this, Charles also styled himself as king of Hungary and Bohemia and retained this titular use in official acts (such as his testament) as in the case of the Austrian lands. As a consequence, cartographers and historians have described those kingdoms both as realms of Charles V and as possessions of Ferdinand, not without confusion. Others, such as the Venetian envoys, reported that the states of Ferdinand were \"all held in common with the Emperor\".\nTherefore, although he had agreed on the future division of the dynasty between Ferdinand and Philip II of Spain, during his own reign Charles V conceived the existence of a single \"House of Austria\" of which he was the sole head. In the abdications of 1554\u20131556, Charles left his personal possessions to Philip II and the Imperial title to Ferdinand. The titles of king of Hungary, Croatia, etc., were also nominally left to the Spanish line (in particular to Carlos, Prince of Asturias and son of Philip II). However, Charles's Imperial abdication marked the beginning of Ferdinand's \"suo jure\" rule in Austria and his other lands: despite the claims of Philip and his descendants, Hungary and Bohemia were left under the nominal and substantial rule of Ferdinand and his successors. Formal disputes between the two lines over Hungary and Bohemia were to be solved with the Onate treaty of 1617.\nAs part of Andreas Palaiologos' will, he theoretically inherited the title of Eastern Roman Emperor from Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castille, therefore cementing the claim of the Holy Roman Empire of inheriting the Roman legacy since the Fall of Constantinople. However, the Byzantine imperial title was never formally hereditary and rested on possession of that city, which led to imperial status being claimed by the Ottoman sultans.\nCharles's full titulature went as follows:\n\"Charles, by the grace of God, Emperor of the Romans, forever August, King in (of) Germany, King of Italy, King of all Spains, of Castile, Aragon, Le\u00f3n, of Hungary, of Dalmatia, of Croatia, Navarra, Grenada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia, Mallorca, Sevilla, Cordova, Murcia, Ja\u00e9n, Algarves, Algeciras, Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, King of both Hither and Ultra Sicily, of Sardinia, Corsica, King of Jerusalem, King of the Indies, of the Islands and Mainland of the Ocean Sea, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Lorraine, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, Limburg, Luxembourg, Gelderland, Neopatria, W\u00fcrttemberg, Landgrave of Alsace, Prince of Swabia, Asturia, Count of Flanders, Habsburg, Tyrol, Gorizia, Barcelona, Artois, Burgundy Palatine, Hainaut, Holland, Seeland, Ferrette, Kyburg, Namur, Roussillon, Cerdagne, Drenthe, Zutphen, Margrave of the Holy Roman Empire, Burgau, Oristano and Gociano, Lord of Frisia, the Wendish March, Pordenone, Biscay, Molina, Salins, Tripoli and Mechelen.\"\nBelow is the coat of arms of Charles V according to the description: Arms of Charles added to those of Castile, Leon, Aragon, Two Sicilies and Granada present in the previous coat, those of Austria, ancient Burgundy, modern Burgundy, Brabant, Flanders and Tyrol. Charles I also incorporates the pillars of Hercules with the inscription \"\", representing the overseas Spanish empire and surrounding coat with the collar of the Golden Fleece, as sovereign of the Order ringing the shield with the imperial crown and Acola double-headed eagle of the Holy Roman Empire and behind it the Cross of Burgundy. From 1520 added to the corresponding quarter to Aragon and Sicily, one in which the arms of Jerusalem, Naples and Navarre are incorporated.\nHistoriography, commemoration, and popular culture.\nCharles V has traditionally attracted considerable scholarly attention. There are differences among historians regarding his character, his rule and achievements (or failures) in the countries in his personal empire as well as various social movements and wider problems associated with his reign. Historically seen as a great ruler by some or a tragic failure of a politician by others, he is generally seen by modern historians as an overall capable politician, a brave and effective military leader, although his political vision and financial management tend to be questioned. References to Charles in popular culture include a large number of legends and folk tales; literary renderings of historical events connected to his life and romantic adventures, his relationship to Flanders, and his abdication; and products marketed in his name.\nCharles V as a ruler has been commemorated over time in many parts of Europe. An imperial resolution of Franz Joseph I of Austria, dated 28 February 1863, included Charles V in the list of the \"most famous Austrian rulers and generals worthy of everlasting emulation\", and honored him with a life-size statue, made by the Bohemian sculptor Emanuel Max, located at the Museum of Military History, Vienna. The 400th anniversary of his death, celebrated in 1958 in Francoist Spain, brought together the local National Catholic intelligentsia and a number of European (Catholic) conservative figures, underpinning an imperial nostalgia for Charles V's Europe and the \"Universitas Christiana\", also propelling a peculiar brand of europeanism. In 2000, celebrations for the 500th anniversary of Charles's birth took place in Belgium.\nPublic monuments.\nUnusually among major European monarchs, Charles V discouraged monumental depictions of himself during his lifetime. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70717", "revid": "10239913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70717", "title": "Ivan the Terrible (disambiguation)", "text": "Ivan the Terrible (1530\u20131584), or Ivan IV Vasilyevich, was a ruler of Russia.\nIvan the Terrible may also refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70718", "revid": "49842254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70718", "title": "Ivan the Terrible", "text": "Tsar of Russia from 1547 to 1584\nIvan IV Vasilyevich (; 25 August\u00a0[O.S. 15 August]\u00a01530\u00a0\u2013 28 March\u00a0[O.S. 18 March]\u00a01584), commonly known as Ivan the Terrible, was Grand Prince of Moscow and all Russia from 1533 to 1547, and the first Tsar and Grand Prince of all Russia from 1547 until his death in 1584. Ivan's reign was characterised by Russia's transformation from a medieval state to a fledgling empire, but at an immense cost to its people and long-term economy.\nIvan IV was the eldest son of Vasili III by his second wife Elena Glinskaya, and a grandson of Ivan III. He succeeded his father after his death, when he was three years old. A group of reformers united around the young Ivan, crowning him as tsar in 1547 at the age of 16. In the early years of his reign, Ivan ruled with the group of reformers known as the Chosen Council and established the \"Zemsky Sobor\", a new assembly convened by the tsar. He also revised the legal code and introduced reforms, including elements of local self-government, as well as establishing the first Russian standing army, the \"streltsy\". Ivan conquered the khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan, bringing the entire length of the Volga river under Russian control.\nAfter he had consolidated his power, Ivan rid himself of the advisers from the Chosen Council and, in an effort to establish a stronghold in the Baltic Sea, he triggered the Livonian War of 1558 to 1583, which ravaged Russia and resulted in failure to take control over Livonia and the loss of Ingria, but allowed him to establish greater autocratic control over the Russian nobility, which he violently purged using Russia's first political police, the \"oprichniki\". The later years of Ivan's reign were marked by the massacre of Novgorod by the \"oprichniki\" and the burning of Moscow by the Tatars. Ivan also pursued cultural improvements, such as importing the first printing press to Russia, and began several processes that would continue for centuries, including deepening connections with other European states, particularly England, fighting wars against the Ottoman Empire, and the conquest of Siberia.\nContemporary sources present disparate accounts of Ivan's complex personality. He was described as intelligent and devout, but also prone to paranoia, rage, and episodic outbreaks of mental instability that worsened with age. Historians generally believe that in a fit of anger, he murdered his eldest son and heir, Ivan Ivanovich; he might also have caused the miscarriage of the latter's unborn child. This left his younger son, the politically ineffectual Feodor Ivanovich, to inherit the throne, a man whose rule and subsequent childless death led to the end of the Rurik dynasty and the beginning of the Time of Troubles.\nEpithet.\nThe English word \"terrible\" is usually used to translate the Russian word () in Ivan's epithet, but this is a somewhat archaic translation. The Russian word reflects the older English usage of \"terrible\" as in \"inspiring fear or terror; dangerous; powerful\" (i.e., similar to modern English \"terrifying\" or \"formidable\"). It does not convey the more modern connotations of English \"terrible\" such as \"defective\" or \"evil\". According to Edward L. Keenan, Ivan the Terrible's image in popular culture as a tyrant came from politicised Western travel literature of the Renaissance era. Anti-Russian propaganda during the Livonian War portrayed Ivan as a sadistic and oriental despot. Vladimir Dal defines specifically in archaic usage and as an epithet for tsars: \"courageous, magnificent, magisterial and keeping enemies in fear, but people in obedience\". Other translations have also been suggested by modern scholars, including \"formidable\", as well as \"awe-inspiring\".\nEarly life.\nIvan Vasilyevich was the first son of Vasili III by his second wife, Elena Glinskaya. Vasili's mother, Sophia Palaiologina, was a Byzantine princess of the Palaiologos family. She was a daughter of Thomas Palaiologos, the younger brother of the last Byzantine emperor, Constantine XI Palaiologos (r.\u20091449\u00a0\u2013\u00a01453). Elena's mother was a Serbian princess and her father's family, the Tatar Glinski clan (nobles based in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania), claimed descent both from Orthodox Hungarian nobles and the Mongol ruler Mamai (1335\u20131380). Born on 25 August, he received the name Ivan in honor of St.\u00a0John the Baptist, the day of whose beheading falls on 29 August. In some texts of that era, it is also occasionally mentioned with the names Titus and Smaragd, in accordance with the tradition of polyonymy among the Rurikids. He was baptized in the Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius by Abbot Joasaph (Skripitsyn) and two elders of the Joseph-Volokolamsk Monastery were elected as recipients\u2014the monk Cassian Bossoy and the hegumen Daniel. Tradition says that in honor of the birth of Ivan, the Church of the Ascension was built in Kolomenskoye.\nWhen Ivan was three years old, his father died from an abscess and inflammation on his leg that developed into blood poisoning. The closest contenders to the throne, except for the young Ivan, were the younger brothers of Vasily. Of the six sons of Ivan III, only two remained: Andrey and Yuri. Ivan was proclaimed the grand prince at the request of his father. His mother Elena Glinskaya initially acted as regent, but died in 1538, when Ivan was eight years old; many believe that she was poisoned. The regency then alternated between several feuding boyar families that fought for control. According to his own letters, Ivan, along with his younger brother Yuri, often felt neglected and offended by the mighty boyars from the Shuisky and Belsky families. In a letter to Andrey Kurbsky, Ivan remembered, \"My brother Iurii, of blessed memory, and me they brought up like vagrants and children of the poorest. What have I suffered for want of garments and food!\" That account has been challenged by the historian Edward Keenan, who doubts the authenticity of the source in which the quotations are found.\nOn 16 January 1547, at the age of 16, Ivan was crowned at the Cathedral of the Dormition in the Moscow Kremlin. The metropolitan placed on Ivan the signs of royal dignity: the Cross of the Life-Giving Tree, barmas, and the cap of Monomakh; Ivan Vasilyevich was anointed with myrrh, and then the metropolitan blessed the tsar. He was the first Russian monarch to be crowned the tsar of all Russia, partly imitating his grandfather, Ivan III. Until then, the rulers of Moscow were crowned as grand princes, but Ivan III assumed the title of sovereign of all Russia and used the title of tsar in his correspondence with other monarchs. \nTwo weeks after his coronation in 1547, Ivan IV married Anastasia Romanovna, a member of the Romanov family, who became the first Russian Tsaritsa.\nBy being crowned tsar, Ivan was sending a message to the world and to Russia that he was now the only supreme ruler of the country, and his will was not to be questioned. According to historian Janet Martin, the new title \"symbolized an assumption of powers equivalent and parallel to those held by the former Byzantine caesar and the Tatar khan, both known in Russian sources as tsar. The political effect was to elevate Ivan's position\". The new title not only secured the throne but also granted Ivan a new dimension of power that was intimately tied to religion. He was now a \"divine\" leader appointed to enact God's will, as \"church texts described Old Testament kings as 'Tsars' and Christ as the Heavenly Tsar\". The newly appointed title was then passed on from generation to generation, and \"succeeding Muscovite rulers... benefited from the divine nature of the power of the Russian monarch... crystallized during Ivan's reign\".\nLike the Habsburgs and other monarchs in Europe, the first Russian tsars adopted mythological genealogies that connected them to Ancient Rome. In \"The Tale of the Princes of Vladimir\", their lineage is traced to Rurik, the first prince of Novgorod in northern Russia, while a certain Prus, an alleged brother of Augustus who ruled what would become Prussia, is mentioned as a direct ancestor of Rurik. Ivan IV often mentioned his apparent kinship with Augustus, claiming not to be a \"Russe\" and highlighting his \"German\" descent from Rurik. Such genealogies served to elevate the position of the Russian monarch in the eyes of his subjects and other European powers, who were also creating mythological ancestors for themselves.\nDespite the devastation caused by the Great Fire of 1547, the early years of Ivan IV\u2019s reign were characterized by a period of reform and modernization. Ivan revised the legal code, issuing the Sudebnik of 1550, and established a standing army, the streltsy. He also convened the Zemsky Sobor, regarded as the first Russian parliament of feudal estates. He also established the Chosen Council, a body of advisers drawn from the nobility and clergy.\nIn ecclesiastical matters, Ivan strengthened the authority of the Russian Orthodox Church through the Council of the Hundred Chapters (Stoglavy Sobor, 1551), which standardized rituals and ecclesiastical law across the realm. He further introduced forms of local self-government in rural areas\u2014particularly in northeastern Russia, populated by state peasants\u2014to improve local administration and tax collection.\nIn 1553, Ivan suffered a near-fatal illness and was thought not able to recover. While on his presumed deathbed Ivan had asked the boyars to swear an oath of allegiance to his eldest son, an infant at the time. Many boyars refused since they deemed the tsar's health too hopeless for him to survive. This angered Ivan and added to his distrust of the boyars. There followed brutal reprisals and assassinations, including those of Metropolitan Philip and Prince Alexander Gorbatyi-Shuisky.\nIn 1553, Ivan IV ordered the establishment of the Moscow Print Yard, introducing the first printing press to Russia. During the 1550s and 1560s, several religious books in Church Slavonic were printed, marking the beginning of Russian movable-type printing. However, the new technology provoked strong opposition from traditional scribes, culminating in an arson attack that destroyed the Print Yard. The printers Ivan Fyodorov and Pyotr Mstislavets subsequently fled to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, where they continued their work. Printing in Moscow resumed in 1568, under Andronik Timofeevich Nevezha and his son Ivan, who reestablished production at the rebuilt Print Yard.\nIvan had Saint Basil's Cathedral constructed in Moscow to commemorate the seizure of Kazan. There is a legend that he was so impressed with the structure that he had the architect, Postnik Yakovlev, blinded so that he could never design anything as beautiful again. However, in reality Postnik Yakovlev went on to design more churches for Ivan and the walls of the Kazan Kremlin in the early 1560s as well as the chapel over Saint Basil's grave, which was added to Saint Basil's Cathedral in 1588, several years after Ivan's death. Although more than one architect was associated with that name, it is believed that the principal architect is the same person.\nOther events of the period include the introduction of the first laws restricting peasants' mobility, which would eventually lead to serfdom and were instituted during the rule of the future Tsar Boris Godunov in 1597. (See also Serfdom in Russia.)\nThe combination of poor harvests, the devastation caused by the \"Oprichnina\" and Tatar raids, the strain of a prolonged war, and overpopulation led to a severe social and economic crisis during the latter part of Ivan IV\u2019s reign.\nThe 1560s brought a series of hardships that marked a turning point in Ivan IV\u2019s reign and led to a sharp change in his domestic and foreign policies. Russia suffered from a combination of drought, famine, military defeats in the wars against the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, recurring Tatar invasions, and a naval blockade of Baltic trade imposed by the Swedes, Poles, and the Hanseatic League.\nIn 1560, the death of Ivan\u2019s first wife, Anastasia Romanovna,\u2014believed by some contemporaries to have been caused by poisoning\u2014was a profound personal blow that reportedly worsened his already volatile temperament and mental state. Around the same time, one of his closest advisers, Andrey Kurbsky, defected to Lithuania, where he took command of Lithuanian forces and led raids into Russian territory, including the Velikiye Luki region. This perceived betrayal, combined with mounting internal instability, deepened Ivan\u2019s distrust of the nobility, leading to increasingly repressive measures against the boyar class.\nOn 3 December 1564, Ivan left Moscow for Aleksandrova Sloboda, where he sent two letters in which he announced his abdication because of the alleged embezzlement and treason of the aristocracy and the clergy. The boyar court was unable to rule in Ivan's absence and feared the wrath of the Muscovite citizens. A boyar envoy departed for Aleksandrova Sloboda to beg Ivan to return to the throne. Ivan agreed to return on condition of being granted absolute power. He demanded the right to condemn and execute traitors and confiscate their estates without interference from the boyar council or church. Ivan decreed the creation of the .\nThe was a separate territory within Russia, mostly in the former Novgorod Republic in the north. Ivan held exclusive power over the territory. The Boyar Council ruled the ('land'), the second division of the state. Ivan also recruited a personal guard known as the , originally numbered 1,000. The were headed by Malyuta Skuratov. One known was the German adventurer Heinrich von Staden. The enjoyed social and economic privileges under the . They owed their allegiance and status to Ivan, not heredity or local bonds.\nThe first wave of persecutions targeted primarily the princely clans of Russia, notably the influential families of Suzdal. Ivan executed, exiled or forcibly tonsured prominent members of the boyar clans on questionable accusations of conspiracy. Among those who were executed were the Metropolitan Philip and the prominent warlord Alexander Gorbaty-Shuisky. In 1566, Ivan extended the to eight central districts. Of the 12,000 nobles, 570 became and the rest were expelled.\nUnder the new political and administrative system of the \"Oprichnina\", members of the \"Oprichniki\" were granted large estates, but\u2014unlike earlier landholders\u2014they were not held accountable for their actions. According to contemporary accounts, they seized nearly all that peasants possessed, forcing them to pay \u201cin one year as much as they used to pay in ten.\u201d The resulting oppression and instability prompted a growing number of peasants to flee their lands, leading to a decline in agricultural production. As a consequence, the price of grain increased roughly tenfold, exacerbating the wider economic crisis of Ivan\u2019s later reign.\nFollowing the death of his son and the excesses committed under the \"Oprichnina\", Ivan IV reportedly expressed remorse for his actions. He is said to have compiled lists of the Christian victims executed or persecuted during the period and sent them to monasteries, requesting that prayers be offered for each by name.\nSack of Novgorod.\nConditions under the were worsened by the 1570 epidemic, a plague that killed 10,000 people in Novgorod and 600 to 1,000 daily in Moscow. During the grim conditions of the epidemic, a famine and the ongoing Livonian War, Ivan grew suspicious that noblemen in the wealthy city of Novgorod were planning to defect and place the city under the control of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. A Novgorod citizen, Petr Volynets, warned the tsar about an alleged conspiracy, that modern historians believe never happened. In 1570, Ivan ordered the to raid the city. The burned and pillaged Novgorod and the surrounding villages; the city has never regained its former prominence.\nCasualty figures vary between different sources. The First Pskov Chronicle estimates the number of victims at 60,000. According to the Third Novgorod Chronicle, the massacre lasted for five weeks. The massacre of Novgorod consisted of men, women and children who were tied to sleighs and run into the freezing waters of the Volkhov River, which Ivan ordered on the basis of unproven accusations of treason. He then tortured its inhabitants and killed thousands in a pogrom. The archbishop was also hunted to death. Almost every day, 500 or 600 people were killed, some by drowning, but the official death toll named 1,500 of Novgorod's \"big\" people (nobility) and mentioned only about the same number of \"smaller\" people. Many modern researchers estimate the number of victims to range from 2,000 to 3,000 since after the famine and epidemics of the 1560s the population of Novgorod most likely did not exceed 10,000\u201320,000. Many survivors were deported from the city.\nThe \"Oprichnina\" did not survive long after the Massacre of Novgorod. During the Russo-Crimean campaigns of 1571\u20131572, the \"Oprichniki\" failed to demonstrate effectiveness against regular Tatar and Ottoman forces. Their poor performance during the Crimean raid of 1571 and subsequent defeats highlighted the system\u2019s military and administrative weaknesses. In 1572, Ivan IV formally abolished the \"Oprichnina\" and disbanded the \"Oprichniki\", reintegrating the territories and administration into the regular state structure.\nAppointment of Simeon Bekbulatovich.\nIn September or October 1575, Ivan IV unexpectedly proclaimed Simeon Bekbulatovich, a statesman of Tatar origin, as Grand Prince of All Russia. Simeon served as a nominal ruler for about a year, while Ivan retained de facto control of the government. According to the English envoy Giles Fletcher the Elder, Simeon\u2014acting on Ivan\u2019s instructions\u2014confiscated lands belonging to monasteries, while Ivan publicly feigned opposition to the measure. When the throne was formally restored to Ivan in September 1576, he returned some of the confiscated estates but retained a substantial portion for the crown.\nForeign policy.\nDiplomacy and trade.\nIn 1547, Ivan IV sent his agent Hans Schlitte to Germany to recruit skilled craftsmen and specialists for service in Russia. However, the recruits were arrested in L\u00fcbeck at the request of Poland and Livonia, preventing their arrival. Despite Ivan\u2019s efforts to open direct access to Western trade, his newly established Ivangorod port on the Narva River in 1550 was largely ignored by German merchant companies, which continued to route commerce through Livonian-controlled Baltic ports. As a result, Russia remained effectively isolated from maritime trade with Western Europe.\nIvan established close ties with the Kingdom of England. Russian\u2013English relations can be traced to 1551, when the Muscovy Company was formed by Richard Chancellor, Sebastian Cabot, Sir Hugh Willoughby and several London merchants. In 1553, Chancellor sailed to the White Sea and continued overland to Moscow, where he visited Ivan's court. Ivan opened up the White Sea and the port of Arkhangelsk to the company and granted it the privilege of trading throughout his reign without paying the standard customs fees.\nThrough English merchants, Ivan engaged in a long correspondence with Elizabeth I of England. While the queen focused on commerce, Ivan was more interested in a military alliance. Ivan even proposed to her once, and during his troubled relations with the boyars, he even asked her for a guarantee to be granted asylum in England if his rule was jeopardised. Elizabeth agreed on the condition that he provide for himself during his potential stay.\nIvan corresponded with overseas Orthodox leaders. In response to a letter of Patriarch Joachim of Alexandria asking him for financial assistance for the Saint Catherine's Monastery, in the Sinai Peninsula, which had suffered by the Turks, Ivan sent in 1558 a delegation to Egypt Eyalet by Archdeacon Gennady, who, however, died in Constantinople before he could reach Egypt. From then on, the embassy was headed by Smolensk merchant Vasily Poznyakov, whose delegation visited Alexandria, Cairo, and the Sinai; brought the patriarch a fur coat and an icon sent by Ivan and left an interesting account of his two-and-a-half years of travels.\nIvan was the first ruler to begin cooperating with the free Cossacks on a large scale. Relations were handled through the Posolsky Prikaz diplomatic department; Moscow sent them money and weapons, while tolerating their freedoms, to draw them into an alliance against the Tatars. The first evidence of cooperation surfaces in 1549 when Ivan ordered the Don Cossacks to attack Crimea.\nConquest of Kazan and Astrakhan.\nWhile Ivan was a child, armies of the Kazan Khanate repeatedly raided northeastern Russia. \nIn the 1530s, the Crimean Khan formed an offensive alliance with his relative Safa Giray, the Khan of Kazan, in an effort to counter the growing power of Muscovy. Both khanates, successor states of the Golden Horde, sought to reassert influence over the Volga and Oka river regions, where Moscow had steadily expanded its control. In December 1540, Safa Giray launched an invasion of Muscovite territory, advancing toward Murom. His campaign was checked by forces that included Qasim Tatars, Muslim allies of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. After his advance was halted near Murom, Safa Giray was forced to withdraw to Kazan.\nThe failure of the 1540 campaign marked a turning point in relations between Kazan and Moscow. Continued raids and internal instability within the Kazan Khanate prompted renewed Muscovite military expeditions in the 1540s and early 1550s. These culminated in Ivan IV\u2019s successful conquest of Kazan in 1552, which brought the khanate under Russian control and extended Muscovy\u2019s dominion deep into the Volga basin.\nThe military setbacks suffered by Safa Giray weakened his authority within the Kazan Khanate. In the aftermath, a pro-Russian faction led by Shahghali (also known as Shah Ali), the khan of the Qasim Khanate, gained influence and made several attempts to seize the Kazan throne with Muscovite backing. In 1545, Ivan IV personally led an expedition down the Volga River to demonstrate support for Shahghali and the pro-Moscow party within Kazan.\nIn 1551, Tsar Ivan IV dispatched envoys to the Nogai Horde, who agreed to maintain neutrality during the impending campaign against the Khanate of Kazan. During the same period, several local groups, including the Ar begs and Udmurts, acknowledged Muscovite authority, strengthening Russia\u2019s strategic position along the Volga River frontier in preparation for the final assault on Kazan.\nThat same year, the Russians constructed the wooden fortress of Sviyazhsk, which was assembled in Uglich and transported in sections down the Volga River to a site near Kazan. The fortress served as the main place of arms\u2014a fortified base of operations\u2014for the decisive campaign of 1552, from which Ivan IV\u2019s army launched its successful assault on the Tatar capital.\nOn 16 June 1552, Ivan IV led a large Russian army toward Kazan, beginning the final campaign against the Kazan Khanate. The siege of Kazan began on 30 August 1552. Under the command of Prince Alexander Gorbaty-Shuysky, the Russians employed battering rams, a siege tower, undermining tactics, and a formidable artillery train of around 150 cannons. The army also benefited from the expertise of foreign military engineers, who played a crucial role in breaching the city\u2019s defences.\nThe Russian forces cut off Kazan\u2019s water supply, bombarded its fortifications, and eventually breached the walls. On 2 October 1552, the city fell after intense fighting; its fortifications were destroyed, and a large portion of the population was killed, though thousands of Russian prisoners and slaves held within the city were freed. Ivan IV marked his victory with the construction of several commemorative churches in Moscow, the most famous being Saint Basil\u2019s Cathedral on Red Square, whose distinctive design incorporates oriental architectural features in tribute to the conquest.\nThe fall of Kazan marked the beginning of a prolonged period of resistance along the Middle Volga, known as the Cheremis wars. These uprisings, led by the Cheremis (Mari) and other local groups, challenged Moscow\u2019s attempts to consolidate its control over the region and were suppressed only with great difficulty. The First Cheremis War (1552\u20131556) concluded in 1557, by which time the Bashkirs had also accepted Ivan IV\u2019s authority, completing the first stage of Muscovite expansion into the Volga basin.\nIn campaigns in 1554 and 1556, Russian troops conquered the Astrakhan Khanate at the mouths of the Volga River, and the new Astrakhan fortress was built in 1558 by Ivan Vyrodkov to replace the old Tatar capital. The annexation of the Tatar khanates meant the conquest of vast territories, access to large markets and control of the entire length of the Volga River. According to Martin (2007), \"the subjugation of the Muslim khanates transformed Muscovy into an empire and fundamentally altered the balance of power on the steppe.\"\nAfter his conquest of Kazan, Ivan is said to have ordered the crescent, a symbol of Islam, to be placed underneath the Christian cross on the domes of Orthodox Christian churches.\nRusso-Turkish War.\nIn 1568, Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha, who was the real power in the administration of the Ottoman Empire under Sultan Selim, initiated the first encounter between the Ottoman Empire and its future northern rival. The results presaged the many disasters to come. A plan to unite the Volga and Don by a canal was detailed in Constantinople. In the summer of 1569, a large force under Kasim Pasha of 1,500 Janissaries, 2,000 Sipahis, and a few thousand Azaps and Ak\u0131nc\u0131s were sent to lay siege to Astrakhan and to begin the canal works while an Ottoman fleet besieged Azov.\nIn early 1570, Ivan's ambassadors concluded a treaty at Constantinople that restored friendly relations between the sultan and the tsar. The envoys were directed to tell the sultan: \"My Tsar is not an enemy of the Moslem faith. His servant Sain Bulat rules the Khanate of Kassimov; Prince Kaibula in Yuriev, Ibak in Suroshsk, and the Nogai Princes in Romanov.\u201d\nLivonian War.\nIn 1558, Ivan IV launched the Livonian War in an effort to secure access to the Baltic Sea and its lucrative trade routes. The conflict, which ultimately proved unsuccessful, lasted for 24 years and drew in multiple regional powers, including the Kingdom of Sweden, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the Teutonic Knights of Livonia.\nThe prolonged war devastated the Russian economy and, together with the internal turmoil caused by the oprichnina, severely disrupted governance and social stability. During the later stages of the conflict, the Union of Lublin (1569) united Lithuania and Poland into the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, which soon gained a vigorous new monarch, Stephen B\u00e1thory, a skilled military commander supported by Russia\u2019s southern rival, the Ottoman Empire. By the 1570s, Ivan\u2019s realm found itself strategically encircled, pressured by two of the era\u2019s dominant powers to the west and south.\nAfter rejecting several peace proposals from his adversaries, Ivan IV found himself in an increasingly unstable position by 1579. The protracted Livonian War had drained Russia\u2019s resources, while refugee movements from devastated border regions worsened the effects of a severe drought that struck the country at the same time. These overlapping crises contributed to widespread famine and epidemic outbreaks, resulting in heavy loss of life and further weakening the stability of the Russian state.\nB\u00e1thory then launched a series of major offensives against Muscovy between 1579 and 1581, aiming to sever the Kingdom of Livonia from Russian control. In his first campaign of 1579, B\u00e1thory captured Polotsk with an army of approximately 22,000 men. During his second offensive in 1580, he seized Velikiye Luki with a force estimated at 29,000 troops. The following year, in 1581, he initiated the Siege of Pskov with an army reportedly numbering around 100,000 men, marking the largest engagement of the war. Meanwhile, in the north, Narva\u2014in present-day Estonia\u2014was recaptured by Sweden in the same year, further eroding Muscovy\u2019s positions along the Baltic frontier.\nUnlike Sweden and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Frederick II of Denmark struggled to sustain Denmark\u2019s involvement in the Livonian War. In 1580, he reached an agreement with John III of Sweden, transferring Denmark\u2019s titular claims to Livonia to the Swedish crown. Muscovy formally recognised Polish\u2013Lithuanian control of Livonia only in 1582, following the Truce of Yam-Zapolsky. After the death of Magnus of Livonia, Frederick\u2019s brother and a former ally of Ivan IV, in 1583, Polish forces occupied Magnus\u2019s holdings in the Duchy of Courland. Facing limited influence in the region, Frederick II sold his hereditary claims. By 1585, Denmark had effectively withdrawn from Livonia, retaining only the island of Saaremaa in the Baltic Sea.\nThe Livonian War concluded in 1583 with the Truce of Plussa between Muscovy and Sweden, following the earlier Truce of Yam-Zapolsky (1582) with the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The twin agreements effectively ended Muscovy\u2019s presence in Livonia and deprived it of direct access to the Baltic Sea. The war established Sweden and Poland\u2013Lithuania as the dominant powers in the eastern Baltic region, while Muscovy\u2019s defeat marked the end of Ivan IV\u2019s expansionist ambitions in the northwest. The economic exhaustion and social disruption that followed contributed to the political instability of the late 16th century, laying part of the groundwork for the Time of Troubles that engulfed Russia in the early 17th century.\nCrimean raids.\nIn the later years of Ivan's reign, the southern borders of Muscovy were disturbed by Crimean Tatars, mainly to capture slaves. (See also Slavery in the Ottoman Empire.) Devlet I Giray, Khan of the Crimean Khanate, conducted several raids into Muscovite territory during the late 16th century. In 1571, a Crimean\u2013Ottoman army of about 40,000 men launched a large-scale invasion of the Moscow region. Because most Russian forces were engaged in the ongoing Livonian War, the capital was defended by a garrison of only around 6,000 troops, insufficient to resist the Tatar advance. The Crimean force entered Moscow virtually unopposed, burning much of the city and its surrounding settlements in what became known as the Fire of Moscow (1571). Contemporary and modern estimates of the number of people killed in the fire vary widely, ranging from 10,000 to 80,000.\nIn the aftermath of the 1571 raid, Ivan IV sought to buy peace from Devlet I Giray by offering to relinquish Russian claims to Astrakhan in favor of the Crimean Khanate. However, the proposed concession was purely diplomatic and was never implemented, as Astrakhan remained under Russian control. The devastation of Moscow deeply angered Ivan, who began preparing for a renewed confrontation with the Crimean Tatars. Between 1571 and 1572, extensive defensive preparations were undertaken on his orders. In addition to reinforcing the Zasechnaya cherta (a line of fortified earthworks and wooden walls), a new system of advanced fortifications was constructed beyond the Oka River, then forming the southern frontier of the Russian state.\nThe following year, Devlet launched another raid on Moscow, now with a numerous horde, reinforced by Turkish janissaries equipped with firearms and cannons. The Russian army, led by Prince Mikhail Vorotynsky, was half the size but was experienced and supported by \"streltsy\", equipped with modern firearms and gulyay-gorods. In addition, it was no longer divided into two parts (the and ), unlike during the 1571 defeat. On 27 July, the horde broke through the defensive line along the Oka River and moved towards Moscow. The Russian troops did not have time to intercept it, but the regiment of Prince Khvorostinin vigorously attacked the Tatars from the rear. The Khan stopped only 30\u00a0km from Moscow and brought down his entire army back on the Russians, who managed to take up defense near the village of Molodi. After several days of heavy fighting, Mikhail Vorotynsky with the main part of the army flanked the Tatars and dealt a sudden blow on 2 August. Khvorostinin made a sortie from the fortifications. The Tatars were completely defeated and fled. The next year, Ivan, who had sat out in distant Novgorod during the battle, killed Mikhail Vorotynsky.\nConquest of Siberia.\nDuring the reign of Ivan IV, Russia began its large-scale expansion and colonization of Siberia, laying the foundations for future eastward conquest. In 1555, shortly after the Conquest of Kazan, the Siberian khan Yadegar and Khan Ismail of the Nogai Horde pledged their allegiance to Ivan in hopes of gaining his support against rival steppe powers. However, Yadegar failed to deliver the full tribute he had promised to Moscow, and Ivan took no action to assist his struggling vassal. In 1563, Yadegar was overthrown and killed by Khan Kuchum, who consolidated power in the Khanate of Sibir and refused to acknowledge Moscow\u2019s authority or pay tribute.\nIn 1558, Ivan IV granted the Stroganov family, a prominent merchant dynasty, a charter to colonize the rich lands along the Kama River. In 1574, their holdings were expanded to include territories beyond the Ural Mountains, along the Tura and Tobol. The Stroganovs were also authorized to construct fortified settlements along the Ob and Irtysh, facilitating trade and defense in the region.\nBy around 1577, facing frequent raids from the forces of the Siberian Khan Kuchum, the Stroganovs enlisted the Cossack leader Yermak Timofeyevich to defend their frontier lands. This alliance would soon evolve into the first Russian-led expedition into Siberia, marking the beginning of the region\u2019s gradual conquest and incorporation into the Russian state.\nIn 1580, Yermak started his conquest of Siberia. With some 540 Cossacks, he started to penetrate territories that were tributary to Kuchum. Yermak pressured and persuaded the various family-based tribes to change their loyalties and to become tributaries of Russia. Some agreed voluntarily because they were offered better terms than with Kuchum, but others were forced. He also established distant forts in the newly conquered lands. The campaign was successful, and the Cossacks managed to defeat the Siberian army in the Battle of Chuvash Cape, but Yermak still needed reinforcements. He sent an envoy to Ivan the Terrible with a message that proclaimed Yermak-conquered Siberia to be part of Russia, to the dismay of the Stroganovs, who had planned to keep Siberia for themselves. Ivan agreed to reinforce the Cossacks with his streltsy, but the detachment sent to Siberia died of starvation without any benefit. The Cossacks were defeated by the local peoples, Yermak died, and the survivors immediately left Siberia. Only in 1586, two years after the death of Ivan, would the Russians manage to gain a foothold in Siberia by founding the city of Tyumen.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nIvan the Terrible had at least six (possibly eight) wives, although only four of them were recognised by the Church. Three of them were allegedly poisoned by his enemies or by rival aristocratic families who wanted to promote their daughters to be his brides.\nIvan IV had nine children, though not all survived infancy. His offspring were born from multiple marriages, most prominently with his first wife, Anastasia Romanovna, who bore him several heirs. Of his sons, Ivan Ivanovich, Feodor I, and Dmitry of Uglich are the best known. Only Feodor survived to inherit the throne, reigning from 1584 to 1598.\nIn 1580, his heir, Ivan Ivanovich, married Yelena Sheremeteva from the Sheremetev noble family, which was a rare instance of the daughter of a boyar marrying into the dynasty.\nOn 19 November\u00a0[O.S. 9 November]\u00a01581, Ivan chastised Yelena for being unsuitably dressed, considering her advanced pregnancy, leading to an altercation with his son Ivan Ivanovich. Historians generally believe that Ivan killed his son in a fit of rage, with the argument ending after the elder Ivan fatally struck his son in the head with his pointed staff. Yelena also suffered a miscarriage within hours of the incident. \nThe event is depicted in the celebrated Ilya Repin painting Ivan the Terrible and His Son Ivan (1885), which captures the tsar\u2019s immediate horror and remorse after the fatal blow.\nUnconfirmed marriages.\nSome contemporary and later foreign accounts alleged that Ivan IV maintained a close relationship with the courtier Fyodor Basmanov, a member of the oprichnina guard. According to these reports, when the boyar Dmitry Ovchinin mocked Basmanov over his intimacy with the tsar, Ivan allegedly killed Ovchinin in a fit of rage. However, modern historians regard these claims\u2014recorded mainly by hostile or second-hand sources\u2014as anecdotal and unsubstantiated by Russian chronicles.\nArts.\nIvan was a poet and a composer of considerable talent. His Orthodox liturgical hymn, \"Stichiron No. 1 in Honor of St. Peter\", and fragments of his letters were set to music by the Soviet composer Rodion Shchedrin. The recording, the first Soviet-produced CD, was released in 1988 to mark the millennium of Christianity in Russia.\nLetters.\nD. S. Mirsky (1958) called Ivan \"a pamphleteer of genius\". The exchange of letters attributed to Ivan and his former vassal Andrey Kurbsky, who defected to Lithuania in 1564, is often said to be the only existing source on Ivan's personality that could provide crucial information on his reign, but Harvard professor Edward L. Keenan (1971) has argued that the letters are 17th-century forgeries. That contention, however, has not been widely accepted (exceptions include Donald Ostrowski and Brian Boeck); most other scholars, such as John Fennell and Ruslan Skrynnikov, have continued to argue for their authenticity. The most frequently cited argument by proponents of authenticity is the 1987 Morozov article on a manuscript, variously dated to 1594\u201395 or the 1620s, of the first Kurbskii letter to Ivan, which Martin (2007) asserted \"has substantially strengthened the argument for the authenticity of the correspondence\". Skeptics point out that Morozov later acknowledged the 1620s as the date of composition, and that he never followed-up his preliminary findings with a separate study that he called for.\nReligion.\nIvan was a devoted follower of Orthodox Christianity but in his own specific manner. He placed the most emphasis on defending the divine right of the ruler to unlimited power under God. Some scholars explain the sadistic and brutal deeds of Ivan the Terrible with the religious concepts of the 16th century, which included drowning and roasting people alive or torturing victims with boiling or freezing water, corresponding to the torments of hell. That was consistent with Ivan's view of being God's representative on Earth with a sacred right and duty to punish. He may also have been inspired by the model of Archangel Michael with the idea of divine punishment.\nDespite the absolute prohibition of the Church for even the fourth marriage, Ivan had seven wives. Even while his seventh wife was alive, he was negotiating to marry Mary Hastings, a distant relative of Queen Elizabeth of England. Polygamy was also prohibited by the Church. Still, Ivan planned to \"put his wife away\". Ivan freely interfered in church affairs by ousting Metropolitan Philip and ordering him to be killed and accusing of treason and deposing the second-oldest hierarch, Novgorod Archbishop Pimen. Many monks were tortured to death during the Massacre of Novgorod.\nIn the conquered Khanates of Khazan and Astrakhan, Ivan was somewhat tolerant of Islam. This was largely to avoid a conflict with the Ottoman sultan over control of newly conquered Tatar regions. He considered these conquests to be a Christian victory. He was notable for his anti-Semitism. For example, after the capture of Polotsk, all unconverted Jews were ordered to be drowned, despite their role in the city's economy.\nDeath.\nIvan died from a stroke while he was playing chess with Bogdan Belsky on 28 March\u00a0[O.S. 18 March]\u00a01584. Upon Ivan's death, the Russian throne was left to his middle son, Feodor, a weak-minded figure. Feodor died childless in 1598, which ushered in the Time of Troubles. He was buried at the Cathedral of the Archangel in Moscow.\nAppearance.\nLittle is known about Ivan's appearance, as virtually all existing portraits were made after his death and contain uncertain amounts of artist's impression. In 1567, the ambassador Daniel Prinz von Buchau said about Ivan that: \"He is very tall. His body is full of strength and quite thick, his large eyes, which constantly run around, observe everything carefully. His beard is red with a slight shade of black, quite long and thick, but like most Russians, he shaves his hair with a razor\".\nAccording to , the son-in-law of Michael I of Russia, Ivan had an unpleasant face with a long and crooked nose. He was tall and athletically built, with broad shoulders and a narrow waist.\nIn 1963, the graves of Ivan and his sons were excavated and examined by Soviet scientists. Chemical and structural analysis of his remains disproved earlier suggestions that Ivan suffered from syphilis or that he was poisoned by arsenic or strangled. At the time of his death, he was 178\u00a0cm tall (5\u00a0ft. 10 in.) and weighed 85\u201390\u00a0kg (187\u2013198\u00a0lb.). His body was rather asymmetrical, had a large amount of osteophytes uncharacteristic of his age and contained excessive concentration of mercury. Researchers concluded that Ivan was athletically built in his youth but, in his last years, had developed various bone diseases and could barely move. They attributed the high mercury content in his body to his use of ointments to heal his joints.\nTitle.\nIvan had the following title towards the end of his reign:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKazan was added to Ivan's title in 1553 and Astrakhan in 1554. The titles \"tsar of Kazan, tsar of Astrakhan\" first appeared in 1556. The title \"master of all the Siberian lands\" first appeared in 1555, and from 1582, was written as \"dominator of all the Siberian lands and northern countries\". During the Livonian War, Livonia first appeared in his title in 1558. Polotsk was also included following its capture in 1562. Despite Russia's defeat in the Livonian War, the title of Livonia was not abandoned.\nIn English, Ivan's title of tsar was often translated as \"emperor\" from the first visit of Richard Chancellor to Moscow in 1553. For example: \"We, greatest Ivan Vassilleviche by the Grace of God Emperor of all Russia and Great Duke\". However, the title was not consistently translated as \"emperor\", such as in 1582: \"The Great Lord, King and Great Duke John the sonne of Vasili of all Russia...\".\nLegacy.\nIvan completely altered Russia's governmental structure, establishing the character of modern Russian political organisation. Ivan's creation of the \"oprichnina\", answerable only to him, afforded him personal protection and curtailed the traditional powers and rights of the boyars. Henceforth, tsarist autocracy and despotism would lie at the heart of the Russian state. Ivan bypassed the \"mestnichestvo\" system and offered positions of power to his supporters among the minor gentry. The empire's local administration combined both locally and centrally appointed officials; the system proved durable and practical and sufficiently flexible to tolerate later modification.\nIvan's expedition against Poland failed at a military level, but it helped extend Russia's trade, political and cultural links with other European states. Peter the Great built on those connections in his bid to make Russia a major European power. At Ivan's death, the empire encompassed the Caspian to the southwest and Western Siberia to the east. His southern conquests ignited several conflicts with the expansionist Ottoman Empire, whose territories were thus confined to the Balkans and the Black Sea regions.\nIvan's management of Russia's economy had negative consequences, both in his lifetime and afterwards. He had inherited a government in debt, and in an effort to raise more revenue for his expansionist wars, he instituted a series of taxes on the peasantry and urban population. Martin (2007) stated: \"The reign of Ivan IV the Terrible was, in short, a disaster for Muscovy. (...) his subjects were impoverished, his economic resources depleted, his army weakened, and his realm militarily defeated. (...) By the time Ivan IV the Terrible died in 1584 , Muscovy (...) was on the brink of ruin\".\nPosthumous reputation.\nIvan's notorious outbursts and autocratic whims helped characterise the position of tsar as one accountable to no earthly authority but only to God. Tsarist absolutism faced few serious challenges until the 19th century. The earliest and most influential account of his reign prior to 1917 was by the historian Nikolay Karamzin, who described Ivan as a 'tormentor' of his people, particularly from 1560, though even after that date Karamzin believed there was a mix of 'good' and 'evil' in his character. In 1922, the historian Robert Wipper wrote a biography that reassessed Ivan as a monarch \"who loved the ordinary people\" and praised his agrarian reforms.\nIn the 1920s, Mikhail Pokrovsky, who dominated the study of history in the Soviet Union, attributed the success of the \"oprichnina\" to their being on the side of the small state owners and townsfolk in a decades-long class struggle against the large landowners, and downgraded Ivan's role to that of the instrument of the emerging Russian bourgeoisie. But in February 1941, the poet Boris Pasternak observantly remarked in a letter to his cousin that \"the new cult, openly proselytized, is Ivan the Terrible, the \"Oprichnina\", the brutality.\" Joseph Stalin, who had read Wipper's biography, had decided that Soviet historians should praise the role of strong leaders, such as Ivan, Alexander Nevsky and Peter the Great, who had strengthened and expanded Russia. \nA consequence was that the writer Alexei Tolstoy began work on a stage version of Ivan's life, and Sergei Eisenstein began what was to be a three-part film tribute to Ivan. Both projects were personally supervised by Stalin, at a time when the Soviet Union was engaged in a war with Nazi Germany. He read the scripts of Tolstoy's play and the first of Eisenstein's films in tandem after the Battle of Kursk in 1943, praised Eisenstein's version but rejected Tolstoy's. It took Tolstoy until 1944 to write a version that satisfied Stalin. Eisenstein's success with \"Ivan the Terrible Part 1\" was not repeated with the follow-up, \"The Boyar's Revolt\", which angered Stalin because it portrayed a man suffering pangs of conscience. Stalin told Eisenstein: \"Ivan the Terrible was very cruel. You can show that he was cruel, but you have to show why it was essential to be cruel. One of Ivan the Terrible's mistakes was that he didn't finish off the five major families.\" The film was suppressed until 1958.\nIn post-Soviet Russia, there was a campaign to seek the granting of sainthood to Ivan IV, but the Russian Orthodox Church opposed the idea.\nThe first statue of Ivan the Terrible was officially open in Oryol, Russia, in 2016. Formally, the statue was unveiled in honor of the 450th anniversary of the founding of Oryol, a Russian city of about 310,000 that was established as a fortress to defend Moscow's southern borders. Informally, there was a big political subtext. The opposition thinks that Ivan the Terrible's rehabilitation echoes Stalin's era. The erection of the statue was widely covered in international media like \"The Guardian\", \"The Washington Post\", \"Politico\", and others. The Russian Orthodox Church officially supported the erection of the monument.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70719", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70719", "title": "List of notorious Dictators", "text": ""}
{"id": "70721", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70721", "title": "Ivan Grozny", "text": ""}
{"id": "70724", "revid": "8839503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70724", "title": "Fairlight", "text": "Fairlight may refer to:\nIn places:\nIn other uses:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70725", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70725", "title": "Colonel Gaddafi", "text": ""}
{"id": "70727", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70727", "title": "Mike Royko", "text": "American newspaper columnist (1932\u20131997)\nMichael Royko Jr. (September 19, 1932 \u2013 April 29, 1997) was an American newspaper columnist from Chicago, Illinois. Over his 42-year career, he wrote more than 7,500 daily columns for the \"Chicago Daily News\", the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", and the \"Chicago Tribune\". A humorist who focused on life in Chicago, he was the winner of the 1972 Pulitzer Prize for commentary.\nEarly life and education.\nRoyko was born and grew up in Chicago, where he lived in an apartment above a bar. His mother, Helen (n\u00e9e Zak), was Polish, and his father, Michael Royko, was Ukrainian (born in Dolyna). He briefly attended Wright Junior College and then enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1952.\nCareer.\nJournalism.\nOn becoming a columnist, Royko drew on experiences from his childhood. He began his newsman's career as a columnist in 1955 for \"The O'Hare News\", a U.S. Air Force newspaper, the City News Bureau of Chicago and Lerner Newspapers' \"Lincoln-Belmont Booster\" before working at the \"Chicago Daily News\" as a reporter, becoming an irritant to the City's politicians with penetrating and skeptical questions and reports.\nRoyko covered Cook County politics and government in a weekly political column, soon supplemented with a second, weekly column reporting about Chicago's folk music scene.\nThe success of those columns earned him a daily column in 1964, writing about all topics for the \"Daily News\", an afternoon newspaper. His column appeared five days a week until 1992, when he cut back to four days a week. Studs Terkel explained Royko's incredible productivity and longevity by simply saying, \"He is possessed by a demon.\" In 1972, Royko received the Pulitzer Prize for commentary as a \"Daily News\" columnist.\nChicago Sun-Times.\nWhen the \"Daily News\" closed, Royko worked for its allied morning newspaper, the \"Chicago Sun-Times\". In 1984, Rupert Murdoch, for whom Royko said he would never work, bought the \"Sun-Times\". Royko commented \"No self-respecting fish would want to be wrapped in a Murdoch paper,\" and that \"his goal is not quality journalism. His goal is vast power for Rupert Murdoch, political power.\" Mike Royko then worked for the rival \"Chicago Tribune\", a paper he had said he'd never work for and at which he never felt comfortable. For a period after the takeover, the \"Sun-Times\" reprinted Royko's columns, while new columns appeared in the \"Tribune.\"\nMany of Royko's columns are collected in books. He also authored \"Boss\", his unauthorized biography of Richard J. Daley, the 48th mayor of Chicago, and the father of Richard, William, and John P. Daley. \nIn 1976, a Royko column criticized the Chicago Police Department for providing an around-the-clock security detail for Frank Sinatra. Sinatra responded with a letter calling Royko a \"pimp,\" and threatening to \"punch [Royko] in the mouth\" for speculating that he wore a toup\u00e9e. Royko auctioned the letter, the proceeds going to the Salvation Army. The winner of the auction was Vie Carlson, mother of Cheap Trick drummer Bun E. Carlos. After appearing on \"Antiques Roadshow\", Carlson consigned the letter to Freeman's, which auctioned it in 2010.\nLike some other columnists, Royko created fictitious personae with whom he could \"converse,\" the most famous being Slats Grobnik, a comically stereotyped working class Polish-Chicagoan. Generally, the Slats Grobnik columns described two men discussing a current event in a Polish neighborhood bar. In 1973, Royko collected several of the Grobnik columns in a collection titled \"Slats Grobnik and Some Other Friends\". Another of Royko's characters was his pseudo-psychiatrist Dr. I. M. Kookie (eponymous protagonist of \"Dr. Kookie, You're Right!\" [1989]). Dr. Kookie, purportedly the founder of the Asylumism religion \u2013 according to which Earth was settled by a higher civilization's rejected insane people \u2013 satirized pop culture and pop psychology. Through his columns, Royko helped make his favorite after-work bar, the Billy Goat Tavern, famous, and popularized the curse of the Billy Goat. Billy Goat's reciprocated by sponsoring the \"Daily News's\" 16-inch softball team and featuring Royko's columns on their walls.\nRoyko's columns were syndicated country-wide in more than 600 newspapers. He produced more than 7,500 columns in a four-decade career. He also wrote or compiled dozens of \"That's Outrageous!\" columns for \"Reader's Digest\".\nBy the 1990s he turned to national themes, often taking a conservative perspective on issues, including gay rights.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages.\nRoyko married Carol Duckman in 1954, and they had two sons, David and Robert. She suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and died on September 19, 1979, Royko's 47th birthday. He later described that time as \"a period of disintegration.\" The only column he wrote during that period was a short note to readers on October 5, 1979, in which Royko wrote, \"We met when she was 6 and I was 9. Same neighborhood street. Same grammar school. So if you ever have a 9-year-old son who says he is in love, don't laugh at him. It can happen.\" That column ended with a much-remembered line: \"If there's someone you love but haven't said so in a while, say it now. Always, always, say it now.\"\nIn 1986, Royko married Judy Arndt, who had worked as the head of the \"Sun-Times\" public service office and was a tennis instructor. The couple lived on Chicago's Northwest Side and then on the city's North Side before moving to Winnetka, Illinois. He and Judy had two children.\nBaseball and Chicago Cubs.\nRoyko was a fervent devotee of 16-inch softball as a player and team sponsor. After his death, he was inducted into the Chicago 16-inch Softball Hall of Fame, an honor Royko's family insists he would have considered as meaningful as his Pulitzer. In the closing seconds of \"Royko at the Goat\", the documentary by Scott Jacobs, Royko is heard saying, \"The Pulitzer Prize can't compare\" to hitting a home run.\nRoyko was a life-long fan and critic of the Chicago Cubs. Every spring he would devote a column to a \"Cubs Quiz,\" posing obscure trivia questions about mediocre Cubs players from his youth, such as Heinz Becker and Dom Dallessandro. Just prior to the 1990 World Series, he wrote about the findings of another fan, Ron Berler, who had discovered a spurious correlation called the \"Ex-Cubs Factor.\" Berler and Royko predicted that the heavily favored Oakland Athletics, who had a \"critical mass\" of ex-Cubs players on their Series roster, would lose the championship to the Cincinnati Reds. The Reds achieved an upset outcome in a four-game sweep of the A's, with Royko's sponsorship propelling the Ex-Cubs Factor theory into the spotlight. Carl Erskine repeats Royko's claim of the Ex-Cubs Factor, and applies it to the 1951 Dodgers, in his book \"Carl Erskine's Tales from the Dodgers Dugout.\"\nDeath.\nOn April 22, 1997, Royko was admitted to Evanston Hospital after experiencing chest pains. He was later transferred to Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, and had surgery for an aneurysm; he died there from heart failure on April 29, at the age of 64. His body is entombed in Acacia Mausoleum, Acacia Park Cemetery, just outside Chicago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70728", "revid": "50877034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70728", "title": "William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke", "text": "Anglo-Norman soldier and statesman (1146/7\u20131219)\nWilliam Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke (1146 or 1147 \u2013 14 May 1219), also called William the Marshal (Norman French: ', French: '), was an Anglo-Norman soldier and statesman during High Medieval England who served five English kings\u2014Henry II and his son and co-ruler Young Henry, Richard I, John, and Henry III\u2014as a royal adviser and agent and as a warrior of outstanding prowess.\nKnighted in 1166, William spent his younger years as a successful competitor in military tournaments; 13th century chronicler Stephen Langton eulogises him as the \"best knight that ever lived.\" In 1189, he became earl of Pembroke through his marriage to Isabel de Clare, whose parents were Aoife MacMurrough and Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke. The title of earl was not officially granted until 1199 and is considered to be the second creation of the . In 1216 upon the death of King John, William was appointed protector for John's nine-year-old Henry III and (Latin for \"governor of the king and of the kingdom\"). Just before his death, William fulfilled a promise he said he made in his youth while on crusade by taking vows as a Knight Templar, and was buried in the Temple Church in London.\nBefore William, his father's family held a hereditary title of Marshal to the King, which by his father's time had become recognised as a chief or master marshalcy, involving management over other marshals and functionaries. William became known as \"the Marshal\", although by his time much of the function was delegated to more specialised representatives (as happened with other functions in the king's household). Because he was an earl, and also known as the marshal, the term \"earl marshal\" was commonly used, and this later became an established hereditary title in the English peerage.\nEarly life.\nWilliam's father, John Marshal, supported King Stephen when Stephen took the throne in 1135, but in about 1139 John changed sides to support the rival claimant Empress Matilda in her war of succession against Stephen, which led to the collapse of England into a 15-year civil war known as \"the Anarchy\". When Stephen besieged Newbury Castle in 1152, according to William's biographer, he used the young William as a hostage to ensure that John kept his promise to surrender the castle. John, however, used the time allotted to reinforce the castle and to alert Matilda's forces. When Stephen ordered John to surrender, threatening that William would be hanged, John replied that he should go ahead, saying, \"I still have the hammer and the anvil with which to forge still more and better sons!\" \nSubsequently, a pretence was made to launch William from a \"pierri\u00e8re\" (a type of trebuchet) towards the castle, but Stephen could not bring himself to harm young William. William remained a crown hostage for many months and was released following the peace resulting from the terms agreed at Winchester on 6 November 1153, by which the civil war was ended.\nKnight.\nAs a younger son of a minor nobleman, William had no lands or fortune to inherit and had to make his own way in life. Around age 12, when his father's career was faltering, he was sent to the Ch\u00e2teau de Tancarville in Normandy to be brought up in the household of William de Tancarville, a great magnate and cousin of William's mother. Here he began his training as a knight. This would have included biblical stories, Latin prayers, and exposure to French romance literature to confer precepts of chivalry upon the future knight. In Tancarville's household he is also likely to have learned practical lessons in the politics of courtly life. According to his 13th-century biography, \"\", Marshal had enemies at Tancarville's court who plotted against him\u2014presumably men threatened by his close relationship with the magnate.\nIn 1166, William was knighted on campaign in Upper Normandy, which was invaded from Flanders. His first experience in battle received mixed reviews. According to ', everyone who witnessed William in combat agreed that he had acquitted himself well. However, as medieval historian David Crouch remarks, \"War in the twelfth century was not fought wholly for honour. Profit was there to be made...\" In this regard William was not so successful, as he was unable to translate his combat victories into profit from either ransom or seized booty. ' relates that the earl of Essex, expecting the customary tribute from his valorous knight after the battle, jokingly remarked: \"Oh? But Marshal, what are you saying? You had forty or sixty of them\u2014yet you refuse me so small a thing!\"\nIn 1167, William was sponsored by William de Tancarville in his first tournament, where he found his true calling and began to develop skills that later made him a tournament champion.\nIn 1168 William served in the household of his mother's brother, Patrick, Earl of Salisbury. Later that year Patrick was escorting Queen Eleanor on a journey near the boundary of her province of Aquitaine and Marshal was part of the escort. They were ambushed by Guy de Lusignan who was trying to capture Eleanor. Although Eleanor escaped unharmed, Patrick was killed; William was wounded in the thigh and was taken prisoner and conveyed to a Lusignan castle to be held for ransom. Someone at the castle took pity on William because it is told that he received a loaf of bread in which were concealed several lengths of clean linen bandages with which to dress his wounds. This act of kindness by an unknown person perhaps saved William's life as infection of the wound could have killed him. After a period of time, he was ransomed by Eleanor, who was apparently impressed by tales of his bravery. He remained a member of Eleanor's household for the next two years, taking part in tournaments and increasing his reputation as a chivalrous knight.\nService to Young King Henry.\nIn 1170 Henry II appointed William as tutor-in-arms to his son, Henry the Young King. During the Revolt of 1173\u20131174 led by the Young King, little is known of William's specific activities besides his loyalty to Young Henry. After the failed rebellion, Young Henry and his retinue, including William, travelled with Henry II for 18 months before receiving permission to travel to Europe to participate in knightly tournaments. William followed the Young King, and from 1176 to 1182 both men gained prestige from winning tournaments. Tournaments were dangerous, often deadly, staged battles in which money and valuable prizes were to be won by capturing and ransoming opponents, their horses and armour. William became a legendary tournament champion: on his deathbed, he recalled besting 500 knights during his tournament career.\nIn late 1182 William was accused of having an affair with Young Henry's wife, Margaret of France. Historian Thomas Asbridge states that while the affair very strongly appears to have been fabricated by William's political enemies within the Young King's service, it cannot be proven either way. David Crouch suggests that the charge against William was actually one of \"l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9\", brought on by William's own arrogance and greed, with the charge of adultery only introduced in \"Life of William Marshal\" as a distraction from the real charges, of which he was most probably guilty. Regardless of the truth of the accusations, by early 1183 William had been removed from the Young King's service.\nYoung Henry declared war against his brother Richard in January 1183, with Henry II siding with Richard. By May, William had been cleared of all charges against the Young King and returned to his service. However, the Young King became sick and died on 11 June 1183. On his deathbed, the Young King asked William to fulfil the vow the Young King had made in 1182 to take up the cross and undertake a crusade to the Holy Land, and after receiving Henry II's blessing William left for Jerusalem in late 1183. Nothing is known of his activities during the two years he was gone, except that he fulfilled Young Henry's vow and secretly committed to joining the Knights Templar on his deathbed. Historians disagree about why his time on crusade received no coverage in the otherwise-detailed \"History of William Marshal\". Georges Duby believes it was at William's own discretion, perhaps relating to his having joined the Templars. Thomas Asbridge examined the complex circumstances in the Latin East at the time of William's journey, and concludes that even if he had taken part in military engagements, like the relief of Kerak in 1184 or King Guy of Lusignan's attack on the Bedouin in Sinai the same year, these battles might not have been worth recounting. Nicholas Paul has suggested that stories surrounding William's crusade by the time of the composition of the \"History of William Marshal\" may, on the contrary, have been considered too outlandish by the author.\nRoyal favour.\nAfter his return from the Holy Land in late 1185 or early 1186, William rejoined the court of King Henry II and served as a loyal captain through the many difficulties of Henry's final years. The returns of royal favour were almost immediate. The king gave William the large royal estate of Cartmel in Cumbria and the keeping of Heloise, the heiress of the northern barony of Lancaster. It may be that the king expected him to take the opportunity to marry her and become a northern baron, but William seems to have had grander ambitions for his marriage.\nIn 1188, faced with an attempt by Philip II to seize the disputed region of Berry, Henry summoned William to his side. The letter by which he did this survives and makes some sarcastic comments about William's complaints that he had not been properly rewarded to date for his service to the king. Henry therefore promised him the marriage and lands of Dionisia, lady of Ch\u00e2teauroux in Berry. In the resulting campaign, the king fell out with his heir Richard, count of Poitou, who consequently allied with Philip II against his father.\nIn 1189 while covering the flight of Henry from Le Mans to Chinon, William unhorsed Richard in a skirmish. William could have killed the prince but killed his horse instead, to make that point clear. He is said to have been the only man ever to unhorse Richard. Nonetheless, after Henry's death William was welcomed at court by Richard, apparently recognising that William's loyalty and military accomplishments were too useful to ignore, especially for a king who was intending to go on crusade.\nDuring Henry's last days he had promised William the hand and estates of Isabel de Clare but had not completed the arrangements. King Richard, however, confirmed the offer and so in August 1189, William and Isabel married. William acquired large estates and claims in England, Wales, Normandy and Ireland. Some estates, however, were excluded from the deal. Marshal did not obtain Pembroke and the title of earl, which his father-in-law had enjoyed, until 1199, as it had been taken into the king's hand in 1154. However, the marriage transformed the landless knight from a minor family into one of the richest men in the kingdom, a sign of his power and prestige at court. They had five sons and five daughters, and have numerous descendants. William made many improvements to his wife's lands, including extensive additions to Pembroke Castle and Chepstow Castle. Even though the marriage was a reward for his political and military services, and despite a significant age difference, the couple appear to have developed a real love and affection for each other. It is also notable that there is no evidence that Marshal ever took a mistress, which was commonplace for nobles and often widely discussed and reported.\nWilliam was included in the council of regency which Richard appointed on his departure for the Third Crusade in 1190. He took the side of John, the king's brother, when the latter expelled Justiciar William Longchamp from the kingdom, but he soon discovered that the interests of John were different from those of Richard. Hence in 1193 he joined with the loyalists in making war upon him. In the spring of 1194 during the course of the hostilities in England and before Richard's return, William's elder brother John Marshal (who was serving as seneschal) was killed while defending Marlborough for John. Richard allowed William to succeed his brother in the hereditary marshalship and his paternal honour of Hamstead Marshall. William served Richard in his wars in Normandy against Philip II. On Richard's deathbed, he designated William as custodian of Rouen and of the royal treasure during the interregnum.\nKing John and Magna Carta.\nWilliam supported John when he became king in 1199, arguing against those who maintained the claims of Arthur of Brittany, the teenage son of John's elder brother Geoffrey. William was heavily engaged with the defence of Normandy against the growing pressure of the Capetian armies between 1200 and 1203. He sailed with John when he abandoned the duchy in December 1203. William and John had a falling out in the aftermath of the loss of Normandy when he was sent with the earl of Leicester as ambassadors to negotiate a truce with King Philip in 1204. William took the opportunity to negotiate the continued possession of his Norman lands.\nBefore commencing negotiations with Philip, William had been generously permitted to do homage to Philip by King John so he might keep his possessions in Normandy. However, once official negotiations began, Philip demanded that such homage be paid exclusively to him, which John had not consented to. When William paid homage to Philip, John took offence and there was a major row at court which led to cool relations between the two men. This became outright hostility in 1207 when John began to move against several major Irish magnates, including William. Though he left for Leinster in 1207, William was recalled and humiliated at court in the autumn of 1208, while John's justiciar in Ireland Meilyr fitz Henry invaded his lands, burning the town of New Ross.\nMeilyr's defeat by Countess Isabel led to her husband's return to Leinster. He was once again in conflict with King John in his war with the Braose and Lacy families in 1210, but managed to survive. He stayed in Ireland until 1213, during which time he had Carlow Castle erected and restructured his honour of Leinster. Taken back into favour in 1212, he was summoned in 1213 to return to the English court. Despite their differences, William remained loyal throughout the hostilities between John and his barons which culminated on 15 June 1215 at Runnymede with the sealing of Magna Carta. William was one of the few English earls to remain loyal to the king through the First Barons' War. It was William whom John trusted on his deathbed to make sure John's nine-year-old son Henry would get the throne. William took responsibility for the king's funeral and burial at Worcester Cathedral.\nRegent for Henry III.\nOn 11 November 1216 at Gloucester, upon the death of King John, William was named by the king's council (the chief barons who had remained loyal to King John in the First Barons' War) to serve as protector of Henry and regent of the kingdom. In spite of his advanced age (around 70) he prosecuted the war against Prince Louis and the rebel barons with remarkable energy. In the battle of Lincoln he charged and fought at the head of the army, leading them to victory. He was preparing to besiege Louis in London when the war was terminated by the naval victory of Hubert de Burgh in the Strait of Dover.\nWilliam was criticised for the generosity of the terms he accorded to Louis in September 1217, but his expedient settlement was dictated by sound statesmanship and a desire to remove the French from England as quickly as possible. Self-restraint and compromise were the keynotes of William's policy, hoping to secure peace and stability for Henry. Both before and after the peace of 1217 he reissued Magna Carta, in which he is a signatory as one of the witnessing barons.\nDeath and legacy.\nWilliam, who had enjoyed robust health throughout his life, was \"plagued by illness and pain\" in early 1219. By March he realised that he was dying, so he summoned his eldest son William and his household knights and left the Tower of London for his estate at Caversham where he called a meeting of the barons, Henry, the Papal Legate Pandulf Verraccio, Justiciar Hubert de Burgh, and Peter des Roches (Bishop of Winchester and Henry's guardian). William rejected the bishop's claim to the regency and entrusted the regency to the care of the papal legate; he apparently did not trust the bishop or any of the other magnates that he had gathered to this meeting. Fulfilling the vow he had made while on crusade, he was invested into the order of the Knights Templar on his deathbed. He died peacefully on 14 May 1219 at Caversham, surrounded by his friends and family. He was buried in the Temple Church in London, where his tomb can still be seen.\nA statue of Marshal on horseback was unveiled in front of Pembroke Castle in 2022. It was created by Harriet Addyman, and followed a campaign by Pembroke and Monkton Local History Society.\nDescendants.\nDuring Ireland's civil wars, William took two manors that the Bishop of Ferns claimed but could not get back. Some years after William's death, that bishop is said to have laid a curse on the family that William's sons would have no children and that William's estates would be scattered. Each of William's sons did become earl of Pembroke and marshal of England, and each died without legitimate issue. William's vast holdings were then divided among the husbands of his five daughters. The title of \"Marshal\" went to the husband of the oldest daughter, Hugh Bigod, 3rd Earl of Norfolk, and later passed to the Mowbray dukes of Norfolk and then to the Howard dukes of Norfolk, becoming \"Earl Marshal\" along the way. The title of \"Earl of Pembroke\" passed to William of Valence, the husband of Joan Marshal's daughter, Joan de Munchensi; he became the first of the de Valence line of earls of Pembroke.\nThrough his daughter Isabel, William is an ancestor to both the Bruce and Stewart kings of Scots. Through his granddaughter Maud de Braose, William is an ancestor to the last Plantagenet kings, Edward IV through to Richard III, and all English monarchs from Henry VIII and afterward.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70729", "revid": "3141616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70729", "title": "Non-linear editing", "text": "Non-destructive audio, video, or image editing\nNon-linear editing (NLE) is a form of offline editing for audio, video, and image editing. In offline editing, the original content is not modified in the course of editing. In non-linear editing, edits are specified and modified by specialized software. A pointer-based playlist, effectively an edit decision list (EDL), for video and audio, or a directed acyclic graph for still images, is used to keep track of edits. Each time the edited audio, video, or image is rendered, played back, or accessed, it is reconstructed from the original source and the specified editing steps. Although this process is more computationally intensive than directly modifying the original content, changing the edits themselves can be almost instantaneous, and it prevents further generation loss as the audio, video, or image is edited.\nA non-linear editing system is a video editing (NLVE) program or application, or an audio editing (NLAE) digital audio workstation (DAW) system. These perform non-destructive editing on source material. The name is in contrast to 20th-century methods of linear video editing and film editing.\nBasic techniques.\nA non-linear editing approach may be used when all assets are available as files on video servers, or on local solid-state drives or hard disks, rather than recordings on reels or tapes. While linear editing is tied to the need to sequentially view film or hear tape, non-linear editing enables direct access to any video frame in a digital video clip, without having to play or scrub/shuttle through adjacent footage to reach it, as is necessary with video tape linear editing systems.\nWhen ingesting audio or video feeds, metadata is attached to the clip. That metadata can be attached automatically (timecode, localization, take number, name of the clip) or manually (players' names, characters, in sports). It is then possible to access any frame by entering directly the timecode or the descriptive metadata. An editor can, for example, at the end of the day in the Olympic Games, easily retrieve all the clips related to the players who received a gold medal.\nThe non-linear editing method is similar in concept to the cut and paste techniques used in information technology (IT). However, with the use of non-linear editing systems, the destructive act of cutting of film negatives is eliminated. It can also be viewed as the audio/video equivalent of word processing, which is why it is called desktop video editing in the consumer space.\nBroadcast workflows and advantages.\nIn broadcasting applications, video and audio data are first captured to hard disk-based systems or other digital storage devices. The data are then imported into servers employing any necessary transcoding, digitizing or transfer. Once imported, the source material can be edited on a computer using any of a wide range of video editing software.\nThe end product of the offline non-linear editing process is a frame-accurate edit decision list (EDL), which can be taken, together with the source tapes, to an online quality tape or film editing suite. The EDL is then read into an edit controller and used to create a replica of the offline edit by playing portions of the source tapes back at full quality and recording them to a master as per the exact edit points of the EDL.\nEditing software records the editor's decisions in an EDL that is exportable to other editing tools. Many generations and variations of the EDL can exist without storing many different copies of the final product, allowing for very flexible editing. It also makes it easy to change cuts and undo previous decisions simply by editing the EDL. Generation loss is also controlled, due to not having to repeatedly re-encode the data when different effects are applied. Generation loss can still occur in digital video or audio when using lossy video or audio compression algorithms, as these introduce artifacts into the source material with each encoding or re-encoding. Codecs such as Apple ProRes, Advanced Video Coding and MP3 are very widely used as they allow for dramatic reductions in file size while often being indistinguishable from the uncompressed or losslessly compressed original.\nCompared to the linear method of tape-to-tape editing, non-linear editing offers the flexibility of film editing, with random access and easy project organization. In non-linear editing, the original source files are not lost or modified during editing. This is one of the biggest advantages of non-linear editing compared to linear editing. With the EDLs, the editor can work on low-resolution copies of the video. This makes it possible to edit both standard-definition broadcast quality and high definition broadcast quality very quickly on desktop computers that may not have the power to process huge full-quality high-resolution data in real-time.\nThe costs of editing systems have dropped such that non-linear editing tools are now within the reach of home users. Some editing software can now be accessed free as web applications; some, like Cinelerra (focused on the professional market) and Blender, can be downloaded as free software; and some, like Microsoft's Windows Movie Maker or Apple Inc.'s iMovie, come included with the appropriate operating system.\nAccessing the material.\nThe non-linear editing retrieves video media for editing. Because these media exist on the video server or other mass storage that stores the video feeds in a given codec, the editing system can use several methods to access the material:\nThe video server records feeds with a codec readable by the editing system, has network connection to the editor and allows direct editing. The editor previews material directly on the server (which it sees as remote storage) and edits directly on the server without transcoding or transfer.\nThe video server transfers feeds to and from shared storage that is accessible by all editors. Media in the appropriate codec on the server need only be transferred. If recorded with a different codec, media must be transcoded during transfer. In some cases (depending on material), files on shared storage can be edited even before the transfer is finished.\nThe editor downloads the material and edits it locally. This method can be used with the previous methods.\nEditor brands.\nThe leading professional non-linear editing software for many years has been Avid Media Composer. This software is likely to be present in almost all post-production houses globally, and it is used for feature films, television programs, advertising and corporate editing. In 2011, reports indicated, \"Avid is still the most-used NLE on prime-time TV productions, being employed on up to 90 percent of evening broadcast shows.\"\nSince then the rise in semi-professional and domestic users of editing software has seen a large rise in other titles becoming very popular in these areas. Other significant software used by many editors is Adobe Premiere Pro (part of Adobe Creative Cloud), Apple Final Cut Pro X, DaVinci Resolve and Lightworks. The take-up of these software titles is to an extent dictated by cost and subscription licence arrangements, as well as the rise in mobile apps and free software. As of January 2019[ [update]], Davinci Resolve has risen in popularity within professional users and others alike - it had a user base of more than 2 million using the free version alone. This is a comparable user base to Apple's Final Cut Pro X, which also had 2 million users as of April 2017[ [update]].\nSome notable NLEs are:\nHome use.\nEarly consumer applications using a multimedia computer for non-linear editing of video may have a video capture card to capture analog video or a FireWire connection to capture digital video from a DV camera, with its video editing software. Various editing tasks could then be performed on the imported video before export to another medium, or MPEG encoded for transfer to a DVD.\nModern web-based editing systems can take video directly from a camera phone over a mobile connection, and editing can take place through a web browser interface, so, strictly speaking, a computer for video editing does not require any installed hardware or software beyond a web browser and an Internet connection.\nNowadays there is a huge amount of home editing which takes place both on desktop and tablets or smartphones. The social media revolution has brought about a significant change in access to powerful editing tools or apps, at everyone's disposal.\nHistory.\nWhen videotapes were first developed in the 1950s, the only way to edit was to physically cut the tape with a razor blade and splice segments together. While the footage excised in this process was not technically destroyed, continuity was lost and the footage was generally discarded. In 1963, with the introduction of the Ampex Editec, videotape could be edited electronically with a process known as linear video editing by selectively copying the original footage to another tape called a \"master\". The original recordings are not destroyed or altered in this process. However, since the final product is a copy of the original, there is a generation loss of quality.\nFirst non-linear editor.\nThe first truly non-linear editor, the CMX 600, was introduced in 1971 by CMX Systems, a joint venture between CBS and Memorex. It recorded and played back black-and-white analog video recorded in \"skip-field\" mode on modified disk pack drives the size of washing machines that could store a half-hour worth of video &amp; audio for editing. These disk packs were commonly used to store data digitally on mainframe computers of the time. The 600 had a console with two monitors built in. The right monitor, which played the preview video, was used by the editor to make cuts and edit decisions using a light pen. The editor selected from options superimposed as text over the preview video. The left monitor was used to display the edited video. A DEC PDP-11 computer served as a controller for the whole system. Because the video edited on the 600 was in low-resolution black and white, the 600 was suitable only for offline editing.\nThe 1980s.\nNon-linear editing systems were built in the 1980s using computers coordinating multiple LaserDiscs or banks of VCRs. One example of these tape and disc-based systems was Lucasfilm's EditDroid, which used several LaserDiscs of the same raw footage to simulate random-access editing. EditDroid was demonstrated at NAB in 1984. EditDroid was the first system to introduce modern concepts in non-linear editing such as timeline editing and clip bins.\nThe LA-based post house Laser Edit also had an in-house system using recordable random-access LaserDiscs.\nThe most popular non-linear system in the 1980s was Ediflex, which used a bank of U-matic and VHS VCRs for offline editing. Ediflex was introduced in 1983 on the Universal series \"Still the Beaver\". By 1985 it was used on over 80% of filmed network programs and Cinedco was awarded the Technical Emmy for \"Design and Implementation of Non-Linear Editing for Filmed Programs.\"\nIn 1984, Montage Picture Processor was demonstrated at NAB. Montage used 17 identical copies of a set of film rushes on modified consumer Betamax VCRs. A custom circuit board was added to each deck that enabled frame-accurate switching and playback using vertical interval timecode. Intelligent positioning and sequencing of the source decks provided a simulation of random-access playback of a lengthy edited sequence without any re-recording. The theory was that with so many copies of the rushes, there could always be one machine cued up to replay the next shot in real time. Changing the EDL could be done easily, and the results seen immediately.\nThe first feature edited on the Montage was Sidney Lumet's \"Power\". Notably, Francis Coppola edited \"The Godfather Part III\" on the system, and Stanley Kubrick used it for \"Full Metal Jacket\". It was used on several episodic TV shows (\"Knots Landing\", for one) and on hundreds of commercials and music videos.\nThe original Montage system won an Academy Award for Technical Achievement in 1988. Montage was reincarnated as Montage II in 1987, and Montage III appeared at NAB in 1991, using digital disk technology, which was considerably less cumbersome than the Betamax system.\nAll of these original systems were slow, cumbersome, and had problems with the limited computer horsepower of the time, but the mid-to-late-1980s saw a trend towards non-linear editing, moving away from film editing on Moviolas and the linear videotape method using U-matic VCRs. Computer processing advanced sufficiently by the end of the 1980s to enable true digital imagery and has progressed today to provide this capability in personal desktop computers.\nAn example of computing power progressing to make non-linear editing possible was demonstrated in the first all-digital non-linear editing system, the \"Harry\" effects compositing system manufactured by Quantel in 1985. Although it was more of a video effects system, it had some non-linear editing capabilities. Most importantly, it could record (and apply effects to) 80 seconds (due to hard disk space limitations) of broadcast-quality uncompressed digital video encoded in 8-bit CCIR 601 format on its built-in hard disk array.\nThe 1990s.\nThe term \"nonlinear editing\" was formalized in 1991 with the publication of Michael Rubin's \"Nonlinear: A Guide to Digital Film and Video Editing\"\u2014which popularized this terminology over other terminology common at the time, including \"real-time\" editing, \"random-access\" or \"RA\" editing, \"virtual\" editing, \"electronic film\" editing, and so on.\nNon-linear editing with computers as it is known today was first introduced by Editing Machines Corp. in 1989 with the EMC2 editor, a PC-based non-linear off-line editing system that utilized magneto-optical disks for storage and playback of video, using half-screen-resolution video at 15 frames per second. A couple of weeks later that same year, Avid introduced the Avid/1, the first in the line of their Media Composer systems. It was based on the Apple Macintosh computer platform (Macintosh II systems were used) with special hardware and software developed and installed by Avid.\nThe video quality of the Avid/1 (and later Media Composer systems from the late 1980s) was somewhat low (about VHS quality), due to the use of a very early version of a Motion JPEG (M-JPEG) codec. It was sufficient, however, to provide a versatile system for offline editing. \"Lost in Yonkers\" (1993) was the first film edited with Avid Media Composer, and the first long-form documentary so edited was the HBO program \"Earth and the American Dream\", which won a National Primetime Emmy Award for Editing in 1993.\nThe NewTek Video Toaster Flyer for the Amiga included non-linear editing capabilities in addition to processing live video signals. The Flyer used hard drives to store video clips and audio, and supported complex scripted playback. The Flyer provided simultaneous dual-channel playback, which let the Toaster's video switcher perform transitions and other effects on video clips without additional rendering. The Flyer portion of the Video Toaster/Flyer combination was a complete computer of its own, having its own microprocessor and embedded software. Its hardware included three embedded SCSI controllers. Two of these SCSI buses were used to store video data, and the third to store audio. The Flyer used a proprietary wavelet compression algorithm known as VTASC, which was well regarded at the time for offering better visual quality than comparable non-linear editing systems using motion JPEG.\nUntil 1993, the Avid Media Composer was most often used for editing commercials or other small-content and high-value projects. This was primarily because the purchase cost of the system was very high, especially in comparison to the offline tape-based systems that were then in general use. Hard disk storage was also expensive enough to be a limiting factor on the quality of footage that most editors could work with or the amount of material that could be held digitized at any one time.\nUp until 1992, the Apple Macintosh computers could access only 50 gigabytes of storage at once. This limitation was overcome by a digital video R&amp;D team at the Disney Channel led by Rick Eye. By February 1993, this team had integrated a long-form system that let the Avid Media Composer running on the Apple Macintosh access over seven terabytes of digital video data. With instant access to the shot footage of an entire movie, long-form non-linear editing was now possible. The system made its debut at the NAB conference in 1993 in the booths of the three primary sub-system manufacturers, Avid, Silicon Graphics and Sony. Within a year, thousands of these systems had replaced 35mm film editing equipment in major motion picture studios and TV stations worldwide.\nAlthough M-JPEG became the standard codec for NLE during the early 1990s, it had drawbacks. Its high computational requirements ruled out software implementations imposing extra cost and complexity of hardware compression/playback cards. More importantly, the traditional tape workflow had involved editing from videotape, often in a rented facility. When the editor left the edit suite, they could securely take their tapes with them. But the M-JPEG data rate was too high for systems like Avid/1 on the Apple Macintosh and Lightworks on PC to store the video on removable storage. The content needed to be stored on fixed hard disks instead. The secure tape paradigm of keeping your content with you was not possible with these fixed disks. Editing machines were often rented from facilities houses on a per-hour basis, and some productions chose to delete their material after each edit session, and then ingest it again the next day to guarantee the security of their content. In addition, each NLE system had storage limited by its fixed disk capacity.\nThese issues were addressed by a small UK company, Eidos Interactive. Eidos chose the new ARM-based computers from the UK and implemented an editing system, launched in Europe in 1990 at the International Broadcasting Convention. Because it implemented its own compression software designed specifically for non-linear editing, the Eidos system had no requirement for JPEG hardware and was cheap to produce. The software could decode multiple video and audio streams at once for real-time effects at no extra cost. But most significantly, for the first time, it supported unlimited cheap removable storage. The Eidos Edit 1, Edit 2, and later Optima systems let the editor use \"any\" Eidos system, rather than being tied down to a particular one, and still keep his data secure. The Optima software editing system was closely tied to Acorn hardware, such that when Acorn ceased development of a successor to its Risc PC and discontinued its traditional operations in the late 1990s, it presented difficulties that Eidos's founder, Stephen Streater, attempted to overcome through an ultimately unsuccessful bid for various Acorn hardware and software technologies. Due to a corporate decision to focus on the games industry, Eidos discontinued the Optima system, and Streater left the company in 1999.\nIn the early 1990s, a small American company called Data Translation took what it knew about coding and decoding pictures for the US military and large corporate clients and spent $12 million developing a desktop editor based on its proprietary compression algorithms and off-the-shelf parts. Their aim was to democratize the desktop and take some of Avid's market. In August 1993, Media 100 entered the market, providing would-be editors with a low-cost, high-quality platform.\nAround the same period, other competitors provided non-linear systems that required special hardware\u2014typically cards added to the computer system. Fast Video Machine was a PC-based system that first came out as an offline system, and later became more online editing capable. The Imix video cube was also a contender for media production companies. The Imix Video Cube had a control surface with faders to allow mixing and shuttle control. Data Translation's Media 100 came with three different JPEG codecs for different types of graphics and many resolutions. DOS-based D/Vision Pro was released by TouchVision Systems, Inc. in the mid-1990s and worked with the Action Media II board. These other companies caused tremendous downward market pressure on Avid. Avid was forced to continually offer lower-priced systems to compete with the Media 100 and other systems.\nInspired by the success of Media 100, members of the Premiere development team left Adobe to start a project called \"Keygrip\" for Macromedia. Difficulty raising support and money for development led the team to take their non-linear editor to the NAB Show. After various companies made offers, Keygrip was purchased by Apple as Steve Jobs wanted a product to compete with Adobe Premiere in the desktop video market. At around the same time, Avid\u2014now with Windows versions of its editing software\u2014was considering abandoning the Macintosh platform. Apple released Final Cut Pro in 1999, and despite not being taken seriously at first by professionals, it has evolved into a serious competitor to entry-level Avid systems.\nDV.\nAnother leap came in the late 1990s with the launch of DV-based video formats for consumer and professional use. With DV came IEEE 1394 (FireWire/iLink), a simple and inexpensive way of getting video into and out of computers. Users no longer had to convert video from analog to digital\u2014it was recorded as digital to start with\u2014and FireWire offered a straightforward way to transfer video data without additional hardware. With this innovation, editing became a more realistic proposition for software running on standard computers. It enabled desktop editing, producing high-quality results at a fraction of the cost of earlier systems.\nHD.\nIn early 2000, the introduction of highly compressed HD formats such as HDV has continued this trend, making it possible to edit HD material on a standard computer running a software-only editing system.\nAvid is an industry standard used for major feature films, television programs, and commercials. Final Cut Pro received a Technology &amp; Engineering Emmy Award in 2002.\nSince 2000, many personal computers include basic non-linear video editing software free of charge. This is the case of Apple iMovie for the Macintosh platform, various open-source programs like Kdenlive, Cinelerra-GG Infinity and PiTiVi for the Linux platform, and Windows Movie Maker for the Windows platform. This phenomenon has brought low-cost non-linear editing to consumers.\nThe cloud.\nThe demands of video editing in terms of the volumes of data involved means the proximity of the stored footage being edited to the NLE system doing the editing is governed partly by the capacity of the data connection between the two. The increasing availability of broadband internet combined with the use of lower-resolution copies of original material provides an opportunity to not just review and edit material remotely but also open up access to far more people to the same content at the same time. In 2004 the first cloud-based video editor, known as Blackbird and based on technology invented by Stephen Streater, was demonstrated at IBC and recognized by the RTS the following year. Since that time a number of other cloud-based editors have become available including systems from Avid, WeVideo and Grabyo. Despite their reliance on a network connection, the need to ingest material before editing can take place, and the use of lower-resolution \"video proxies\", their adoption has grown. Their popularity has been driven largely by efficiencies arising from opportunities for greater collaboration and the potential for cost savings derived from using a shared platform, hiring rather than buying infrastructure, and the use of conventional IT equipment over hardware specifically designed for video editing.\n4K.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], 4K Video in NLE was fairly new, but it was being used in the creation of many movies throughout the world, due to the increased use of advanced 4K cameras such as the Red Camera. Examples of software for this task include Avid Media Composer, Apple's Final Cut Pro X, Sony Vegas, Adobe Premiere, DaVinci Resolve, Edius, and Cinelerra-GG Infinity for Linux.\n8K.\n 8K video was relatively new. 8K video editing requires advanced hardware and software capable of handling the standard.\nImage editing.\nFor imaging software, early works such as HSC Software's Live Picture brought non-destructive editing to the professional market and current efforts such as GEGL provide an implementation being used in open-source image editing software.\nQuality.\nAn early concern with non-linear editing had been picture and sound quality available to editors. Storage limitations at the time required that all material undergo lossy compression techniques to reduce the amount of memory occupied. Improvements in compression techniques and disk storage capacity have mitigated these concerns, and the migration to high-definition video and audio has virtually removed this concern completely. Most professional NLEs are also able to edit uncompressed video with the appropriate hardware.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70730", "revid": "29317249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70730", "title": "Tribune Tower", "text": "Office skyscraper in Chicago, Illinois\nThe Tribune Tower is a , 36-floor neo-Gothic skyscraper located at 435 North Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois, United States. The early 1920s international design competition for the tower became a historic event in 20th-century architecture. Built for \"Chicago Tribune\" owner Robert R. McCormick, since 2018 it has been converted into luxury residences and in 2023 won a Driehaus Prize for architectural preservation and adaptive reuse from Landmarks Illinois.\nThe tower was the home of the \"Tribune\" and the related Tribune Media, Tribune Broadcasting, and Tribune Publishing. WGN Radio (720\u00a0kHz) originated broadcasts from the building until June 18, 2018. CNN's Chicago bureau was also located in the building. It is listed as a Chicago Landmark and is a contributing property to the Michigan\u2013Wacker Historic District. One of its predecessors, the first \"Tribune Tower\", had been built in 1868 and was destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871.\nHistory.\nDesign competition.\nIn 1922 the \"Chicago Tribune\" hosted an international interior and exterior design competition for its new headquarters to mark its 75th anniversary, and offered $100,000 in prize money with a $50,000 first prize for \"the most beautiful and distinctive office building in the world\". The competition worked brilliantly for months as a publicity stunt, and the resulting entries still reveal a unique turning point in American architectural history. More than 260 entries were received.\nThe winner was a neo-Gothic design by New York architects John Mead Howells and Raymond Hood, with buttresses near the top.\nThe entry that many perceived as the best, by the Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen, took second place and received $20,000. Saarinen's tower was preferred by architects like Louis Sullivan, and was a strong influence on the next generation of skyscrapers, including Raymond Hood's own subsequent work on the McGraw-Hill Building and the Rockefeller Center. The 1929 Gulf Building in Houston, Texas, designed by architects Alfred C. Finn, Kenneth Franzheim, and J. E. R. Carpenter, is a close realization of that Saarinen design. C\u00e9sar Pelli's 181 West Madison Street Building in Chicago is also thought to be inspired by Saarinen's design.\nOther Tribune tower entries by figures like Walter Gropius, Bertram Goodhue, Walter Burley Griffin, Bruno Taut, and Adolf Loos remain intriguing suggestions of what might have been, but perhaps not as intriguing as the one surmounted by a Mount Rushmore-like head of an American Indian. These entries were originally published by the Tribune Company in 1923 under the title \"Tribune Tower Competition\" and later in \"The Chicago Tribune Tower Competition: Skyscraper Design and Cultural Change in the 1920s\" by Katherine Solomonson, 2001.\nIn the 1980 book entitled \"The Tribune Tower Competition\" published by Rizzoli, authors Robert A. M. Stern, Stanley Tigerman as well as Bruce Abbey and other architects jokingly submitted \"late entries\" in Volume II of the work.\nArchival materials regarding the competition and the building are held by the Ryerson &amp; Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago.\nPost-opening.\nOn April 11, 2006, the McCormick Tribune Freedom Museum opened, occupying two stories of the building, including the previous location of high-end gift store Hammacher Schlemmer. The museum closed this location on March 1, 2009, and redirected its efforts to become an online museum.\nTribune Tower has participated in Chicago Architecture Foundation's event Open House Chicago every year, starting in 2011. This annual opportunity allows visitors to tour the interior of the building for free.\nThe \"Chicago Tribune\", the building's main tenant since it opened, moved out in June 2018, in order for the building to be converted to condos. The conversion of the building is set to cost more than $500 million. The conversion has run into some legal troubles regarding the sign: the \"Chicago Tribune\" contends that the sign is their intellectual property, so it can not remain on the building, but the developers stated that they had a contractual agreement to buy the sign for one dollar. Col. Robert R. McCormick's former iconic office on the 24th floor will be turned into offices. In the former parking lot for Tribune Tower, there are plans to build Tribune Tower East, a super-tall skyscraper that would become the city's second-tallest.\nIn 2025, the investment firm North American Real Estate bought the Tribune Tower's retail space.\nArchitecture.\nBy 1922 the neo-Gothic skyscraper had become an established design tactic, with the first important so-called \"American Perpendicular Style\" at Cass Gilbert's Woolworth Building of 1913. This was a late example, perhaps the last important example, and criticized for its perceived historicism. Construction on the Tribune Tower was completed in 1925 and reached a height of 462 feet (141\u00a0m) above ground. The ornate buttresses surrounding the peak of the tower are especially visible when the tower is lit at night.\nAs was the case with most of Hood's projects, the sculptures and decorations were made by the American artist Rene Paul Chambellan. The tower features carved images of Robin Hood (Hood) and a howling dog (Howells) near the main entrance to commemorate the architects. The top of the tower is designed after the \"Tour de beurre\" (\u2033butter tower\u2033) of the Rouen Cathedral in France, which is characteristic of the Late-Gothic style, that is to say, without a spire but with a crown-shaped top.\nRene Paul Chambellan contributed his sculpture talents to the buildings ornamentation, gargoyles and the Aesops' Screen over the main entrance doors. Rene Chambellan worked on other projects with Raymond Hood including the American Radiator Building and Rockefeller Center in New York City. Also, among the gargoyles on the Tribune Tower is one of a frog. That piece was created by Rene Chambellan to represent himself jokingly as he is of French ancestry.\nThe building's lobby also serves as a hall of inscriptions, with quotations about liberty and the freedom of the press taken from the work of Benjamin Franklin, James Madison, Euripides, Voltaire, Daniel Webster, and others, carved into the walls. This includes Thomas Jefferson's \u201cOur liberty depends on the freedom of the press, and that can not be limited without being lost.\u201d\nCollection of famous building fragments.\nPrior to the building of the Tribune Tower, correspondents for the \"Chicago Tribune\" had brought back rocks and bricks from a variety of historically important sites throughout the world at the request of Colonel McCormick. Many of these fragments have been incorporated into the lowest levels of the building and are labeled with their location of origin. Stones included in the wall are from such sites as the St. Stephen's Cathedral, Trondheim Cathedral, Taj Mahal, Clementine Hall, the Parthenon, Hagia Sophia, S\u00fcleymaniye Mosque, Corregidor Island, Palace of Westminster, petrified wood from the Redwood National and State Parks, the Great Pyramid, The Alamo, Notre-Dame de Paris, Abraham Lincoln's Tomb, the Great Wall of China, Independence Hall, Fort Santiago, Angkor Wat, Ta Prohm, Wawel Castle, Banteay Srei, and Rouen Cathedral's Butter Tower, which inspired the shape of the building.\nIn 1999, during a celebration of the 30th anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission, Buzz Aldrin presented a rock brought from the Moon, which was displayed in a window in the Tribune gift store (it could not be added to the wall, as NASA owns a large majority of the Apollo Moon rocks, and this one was merely on loan to the Tribune). The rock was removed in 2011 due to an outdated display. A new rock display is planned but has not been installed . A piece of steel recovered from the World Trade Center has been added to the wall. Tiles from the Sydney Opera House were added in 2006.\nPlaza.\nThe building's plaza has a bronze sculpture by Bela Pratt depicting Nathan Hale, commissioned by McCormick in 1940. It is a replica of one commissioned by Yale University in 1899; Pratt's widow gave permission for the copy. The statue was dedicated on June 4, 1940, with an event that included musical performances and an address by Professor William Warren Sweet, attended by high school Reserve Officers' Training Corps members. It depicts Hale with wrists and ankles bound. The pedestal states that it is \"Dedicated to the reserve officers of America\" and the statue's base has Hale's famous quote \"I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.\"\nImpact.\nBuildings influenced by the Tower.\nSeveral buildings around the world make reference to the design of the Tribune Tower, most notably in Australia: the spires of the Grace Building in Sydney and the Manchester Unity Building in Melbourne. The Title Guarantee and Trust Building in Los Angeles also took inspiration from Tribune Tower in its design. Additionally, the architects of One Atlantic Center located in the Midtown section of Atlanta were influenced by the building which is most evident in the shaft of the building as well as the base.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70733", "revid": "1279098212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70733", "title": "Sohonet", "text": "Sohonet is a community-of-interest network for the television, film and media production community based in the Soho area of London.\nFounded in 1995 by a group of post-production companies, Sohonet links many of the British film studios to London's post-production community. Sohonet also provides access to the Internet, and private wide-area links to other countries.\nThe system links film and media companies, TV broadcasters, publishers, Internet providers, graphic designers and recording studios via seamless transatlantic fibre connections to a global media network in the United States, (Los Angeles, New York City, Hawaii, Chicago, Seattle, Atlanta, etc.), Canada (Vancouver, Toronto, Montreal), New Zealand, Australia, France, Netherlands, Germany, Spain, Singapore and Italy ( Rome) and the ability to provide connectivity to locations worldwide via Fibre Optic links.\nLeading British film studios, Pinewood Studios, Shepperton Studios, Three Mills Studios, Twickenham Film Studios, Longcross Studios and Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden, have direct optical fiber connectivity to the Sohonet London Fiber Ring, with campus connectivity on the sites provided via fiber and VDSL technologies. As well as may other studios globally, Australian examples Village Roadshow Studios, Melbourne City Studios, and Los Angeles shooting film studios Hollywood Center Studios, and Red Studios Hollywood, as well as Warner Bros., Universal Studios, HBO to name a few.\nA pioneering user of IP-over-ATM networking, Sohonet has since moved away from ATM to using gigabit Ethernet, 10 Gigabit Ethernet and MPLS technologies, including the use of wavelength division multiplexing on backbone connections. Sohonet is one of the pioneers of tapeless digital intermediate, and one of the instigators of the media dispatch protocol developed by the Pro-MPEG consortium, which later became a SMPTE standard. All types of media file formats, from QuickTime DV MPEG AES/EBU MXF through OMFi, AAF, OpenEXR, to 4k DPX files are supported.\nSohonet has its own private optical fibre networks in several cities and provides high speed object storage based on OpenStack Swift, in number of locations worldwide Los Angeles, London, and Sydney. On top of these stores, Sohonet operates a fast file transfer service called FileRunner. Sohonet also provides high speed secure connections, referred to as FastLane, into a number of public cloud providers Google Cloud Platform, SoftLayer, and Amazon Web Services, to enable large scale Cloud computing for 3D rendering.\nIn 2020, Sohonet won a Primetime Engineering Emmy Award for its collaborative video review and editing platform, ClearView Flex. The Clearview Flex platform was also among the winners of the Advanced Imaging Society's Entertainment Technology Lumiere Awards for 2020.\nIn 2022, Sohonet won an additional Primetime Engineering Emmy Award for its ClearView Pivot remote collaboration tool, Clearview Pivot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70734", "revid": "21054272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70734", "title": "Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula", "text": "Peninsula in Quebec, Canada\nThe Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula, also known as Gaspesia (, ), is a peninsula along the south shore of the St. Lawrence River that extends from the Matapedia Valley in Quebec, Canada, into the Gulf of St. Lawrence. It is separated from New Brunswick on its southern side by Chaleur Bay and the Restigouche River. The name \"Gasp\u00e9\" comes from the Mi'kmaq word , meaning \"end\", referring to the end of the land.\nThe Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula is slightly larger than Belgium, at . The population is 140,599 as of the 2011 census. It is also noted as the only region outside the Channel Islands to contain native speakers of Jersey Norman.\nGeography.\nSea cliffs dominate the peninsula's northern shore along the St. Lawrence River. Cap Gasp\u00e9, jutting into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, is the easternmost point of the peninsula. Perc\u00e9 Rock (or \"Rocher Perc\u00e9\"), an island pierced by a natural arch, is just offshore of the peninsula's eastern end. The peninsula's interior is a rugged northward continuation of the Appalachian Mountains called the Chic-Chocs, with Mount Jacques-Cartier at the peninsula's highest peak.\nMount Albert (Mont Albert) at is another high mountain in the Chic-Chocs. Its summit, an alpine area above the tree line, is a nearly flat plateau about across composed of serpentine bedrock and supporting quite unusual flora. The ascent of Mount Albert from near sea level is challenging, but popular with hikers, offering a view of the St. Lawrence and the C\u00f4te-Nord, the river's north shore, part of the ancient bedrock of the Canadian Shield.\nInland.\nThe interior portions of the peninsula are dominated by the Chic-Choc Mountains, part of the Notre Dame Mountains, an extension of the Appalachian Mountains.\nThe town of Murdochville, at about above sea level, has had a varied history, and is now home to several wind turbines. It is reached by Route 198, which extends inland from the northern shore of the peninsula, soon climbing into the mountains and entering vast forests, crossing several small rivers before reaching the town. From Murdochville, Route 198 follows the York River to the city of Gasp\u00e9 on the peninsula's eastern tip.\nEconomy.\nThe peninsula's economy has historically been focused on fishing, agriculture and forestry. But primary resource-based industries are suffering due to overfishing, overexploitation, and fewer numbers of farmers in business, forcing the region to move towards tourism and the services industry.\nTourism.\nThe peninsula is one of Quebec's most popular tourism regions. The Gasp\u00e9 National Park (Parc national de la Gasp\u00e9sie) is in the Chic-Chocs, and Forillon National Park is at the peninsula's northeastern tip. A section of the International Appalachian Trail travels through the peninsula's mountains. Bonaventure National Park is here. As of September 2018 the area also hosts Canada's third UNESCO Global Geopark.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70735", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70735", "title": "Chaleur Bay", "text": "Western Arm of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence between Quebec and New Brunswick, Canada\nChaleur Bay, also Chaleurs Bay, Bay of Chaleur (in , ), in Mi'gmaq it is called Mawipoqtapei, is an arm of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence located between Quebec and New Brunswick, Canada.\nThe name of the bay is attributed to explorer Jacques Cartier (Baie des Chaleurs). It translates into English as \"bay of warmth\" or \"bay of torrid weather\".\nChaleur Bay is the 31st member of the Most Beautiful Bays of the World Club.\nChaleur Bay is host to an unusual visual phenomenon, the Fireship of Chaleur Bay, an apparition of sorts resembling a ship on fire which has reportedly appeared at several locations in the bay. It is possibly linked to similar sightings several hundred kilometres to the south where the Fireship of Northumberland Strait has been seen in the Northumberland Strait. This may have given rise to a phantom ship legend, which dates back more than two centuries. The story (and witnesses) claim that a sailing ship burned in the waters north of the city of Campbellton, New Brunswick on the Restigouche River, possibly from the Battle of the Restigouche, and is visible in certain weather and light conditions. A drawing of a ghost wielding an anchor and menacing two sailors can be seen on the city's welcome sign. \nGeography.\nChaleur Bay opens to the east with its southern shore formed by the north shore of New Brunswick. The northern shore is formed by the south shore of the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula. The bay measures approximately in width at its widest point between Bathurst and New Carlisle. The western end of the bay transitions into the estuary of the Restigouche River at Dalhousie, New Brunswick.\nThe mouth of the bay is delineated by a line running from \"Haut-fond Leander\" near Grande-Rivi\u00e8re, Quebec in the north and the \"Miscou Shoals\" near Miscou Island, New Brunswick in the south.\nCanadian Hydrographic Service chart number 4486 is the bathymetric navigational data repository for the area.\nBeaches.\nThe shores of Chaleur Bay include numerous beaches, particularly in the south. Many rivers also form barachois or \"barrier beaches\". The Eel River Bar is one such beach, located at the mouth of the Eel River, immediately to the west of the village of Charlo, New Brunswick. This sand bar is unique, in that it not only has fresh water on one side and salt water on the other, but it is also home to the endangered piping plover.\nTourism in the region has been driven mainly by beachgoers in the summer months. The warm ocean currents emitting from the larger Gulf of Saint Lawrence result in some of the warmest saltwater on the Atlantic coast north of Virginia.\nRivers and Bays.\nThe estuaries of various rivers emptying into the bay create a prominent smell of salt water, notably in the estuary of the Restigouche River.\nThe following major rivers flow into the bay:\nQuebec:\nNew Brunswick (from north to south):\nBetween Quebec and New Brunswick:\nThe Restigouche Estuary was designated (June, 2000) an Important Bird Area of International Significance (the first in New Brunswick) because it is the largest staging area in eastern North America for Black scoter.\nIslands.\nChaleur Bay has several islands. Although not entirely located within the bay, the northern shores of Miscou Island and Lameque Island form part of the southern shore of the bay. Heron Island lies near Dalhousie, New Brunswick and is located south of Carleton-sur-Mer, Quebec.\nClimate.\nThe bay's shape and the steep cliffs along its northern shore sometimes create particularly windy conditions especially off Nepisiguit Bay. Under the right wind direction and speed, sea conditions on large areas of the bay can become quite treacherous. Tidal currents are generally weak, except at the mouths of some rivers and certain channels. Its configuration tends to channel the wind for two reasons: the steep cliffs on its North side, and its V shape. This means that in the middle of this section, off Nepisiguit Bay, there is a zone that is particularly windy and subject to high seas if the wind is from the Northwest or the Northeast.\nTidal currents in this section rarely reach one knot, except at the mouths of some rivers and some channels.\nHistory.\nIn chapter X of his \"R\u00e9cits de voyages en nouvelle-france\" (1603-1632), French navigator, explorer, and colonizer, Samuel de Champlain, describes the Baie des Chaleurs and its coastal environs. His account, from the summer of 1603, suggests interactions with resident Mi\u2019kmaq, who provided information about the region. During this excursion, Champlain\u2019s party passed by \u00cele Bonaventure on his ship\u2019s entry into the bay.\nImmigration from Arran Island, Scotland: Bryce's \"The Geology of Arran\" 1855 notes: \"Many years ago, a large population, the largest then collected in any one spot in [the island of] Arran, inhabited [Sannox] glen, and gained a scanty subsistence by fishing and by cultivating fertile plots on the sunny hill-sides. In 1832, the whole of the families amounting to 500 persons, were obliged [in the Scottish Highland Clearances] to leave the island, but were furnished with the means of reaching New Brunswick. They formed a settlement at Chaleur Bay, which became very prosperous\".\nThe eastern end of Chaleur Bay was the site of the Royal Canadian Navy's Operation Pointe Maisonnette in September 1943, during the Battle of the St. Lawrence.\nFauna.\nChaleur Bay is home to a variety of marine life including numerous species of ground fish and shellfish such as lobster and scallops.\nAdditionally, many of the bay's pristine rivers support some of the largest wild Atlantic Salmon remaining in the north Atlantic Ocean, creating a haven for sport angling.\nWhile whale watching including endangered targets such as Fin whales are popular attractions in the bay, North Atlantic right whales, one of the rarest whales and had been considered to be rare in Gulf of St. Lawrence region, were recently confirmed to be present in Chaleur Bay more often in recent years.\nIn literature.\nChaleur Bay is mentioned in John Greenleaf Whittier's poem, \"Skipper Ireson's Ride.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70736", "revid": "30211467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70736", "title": "Wrigley Building", "text": "Office skyscraper in Chicago, Illinois\nThe Wrigley Building is a skyscraper located at 400\u2013410 North Michigan Avenue on Chicago's Near North Side. It is located on the Magnificent Mile directly across Michigan Avenue from the Tribune Tower. Its two towers in an elaborate style were built between 1920 and 1924 to house the corporate headquarters of the Wrigley Company. Its bright white facade is covered in terra cotta.\nHistory.\nWhen ground was broken for the Wrigley Building in 1920, there were no major office buildings north of the Chicago River. The Michigan Avenue Bridge, which spans the river just south of the building, was still under construction. The land was selected by chewing gum magnate William Wrigley Jr. for the headquarters of his company. The building was designed by the architectural firm of Graham, Anderson, Probst &amp; White using the shape of the Giralda tower of Seville's Cathedral combined with French Renaissance details. The south tower was completed in September 1921 and the north tower in May 1924. Walkways between the towers were added at the ground level and the third floor. In 1931, another walkway was added at the fourteenth floor to allow for a rearrangement of Wrigley's offices. The two towers, not including the levels below Michigan Avenue, have a combined area of .\nThe two towers are of differing heights, with the south tower rising to 30 stories and the north tower to 21 stories. On the south tower is a clock with faces pointing in all directions. Each face is in diameter. The building is clad in glazed terra-cotta, which provides its gleaming white fa\u00e7ade. On occasion, the entire building is hand washed to preserve the terra cotta. At night, the building is brightly lit with floodlights.\nThe Wrigley Building was Chicago's first air-conditioned office building. If one walks through the center doors, one will enter a secluded park area overlooking the Chicago River.\nIn the 1957 science fiction film \"Beginning of the End\", giant grasshoppers attack downtown Chicago, and in one scene are shown climbing up the side of the Wrigley Building.\nThe Wrigley Building was sold in 2011 to a group of investors that includes Zeller Realty Group and Groupon co-founders Eric Lefkofsky and Brad Keywell. The new owners made the building more attractive to businesses by adding a Walgreens, a coffee shop, a fitness center and a nursing room for mothers.\nIn 2019, billionaire Joe Mansueto completed the purchase of the Wrigley Building.\nTenants.\nAddresses at 400 North Michigan Avenue:\nAddresses at 410 North Michigan Avenue:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70738", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70738", "title": "Arctic Archipelago", "text": "Canadian islands in the Arctic Ocean\nThe Arctic Archipelago, also known as the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, is an archipelago lying to the north of the Canadian continental mainland, excluding Greenland (an autonomous territory of the Danish Realm, which is, by itself, much larger than the combined area of the archipelago), and Iceland (an independent country).\nSituated in the northern extremity of North America and covering about , this group of 36,563 islands, surrounded by the Arctic Ocean, comprises much of Northern Canada, predominately Nunavut and the Northwest Territories. The archipelago is showing some effects of climate change, with some computer estimates determining that melting there will contribute to the rise in sea levels by 2100.\nHistory.\nAround 2500\u00a0BCE, the first humans, the Paleo-Eskimos, arrived in the archipelago from the Canadian mainland. Between 1000 and 1500\u00a0CE, they were replaced by the Thule people, who are the ancestors of today's Inuit.\nBritish claims on the islands, the British Arctic Territories, were based on the explorations in the 1570s by Martin Frobisher. Canadian sovereignty was originally (1870\u201380) only over island portions that drained into Foxe Basin, Hudson Bay and Hudson Strait. Canadian sovereignty over the islands was established by 1880 when Britain transferred them to Canada. The District of Franklin\u2014established in 1895\u2014comprised almost all of the archipelago. The district was dissolved upon the creation of Nunavut in 1999. Canada claims all the waterways of the Northwest Passage as Canadian Internal Waters; however, most maritime countries view these as international waters. Disagreement over the passages' status has raised Canadian concerns about environmental enforcement, national security, and general sovereignty. East of Ellesmere Island, in the Nares Strait, lies Hans Island, ownership of which is now shared between Canada and Denmark, after a decades-long dispute.\nGeography.\nThe archipelago extends some longitudinally and from the mainland to Cape Columbia, the northernmost point on Ellesmere Island. It is bounded on the west by the Beaufort Sea; on the northwest by the Arctic Ocean; on the east by Greenland, Baffin Bay and Davis Strait; and on the south by Hudson Bay and the Canadian mainland. The various islands are separated from each other and the continental mainland by a series of waterways collectively known as the Northwest Passage. Two large peninsulas, Boothia and Melville, extend northward from the mainland. The northernmost cluster of islands, including Ellesmere Island, is known as the Queen Elizabeth Islands and was formerly the Parry Islands.\nThe archipelago consists of 36,563 islands, of which 94 are classified as major islands, being larger than , and cover a total area of .\nThe islands of the Canadian Arctic over , in order of descending area, are: As of 2021[ [update]] the total population of all islands in the Arctic was 23,073.\nAfter Greenland, the archipelago is the world's largest high-Arctic land area. The climate of the islands is Arctic, and the terrain consists of tundra except in mountainous regions. Most of the islands are uninhabited; human settlement is extremely thin and scattered, being mainly coastal Inuit settlements on the southern islands.\nMap with links to islands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulated islands.\nOf the more than 36,000 islands, only 11 are populated. Baffin Island, the largest, also has the largest population of 13,309. The population accounts for 67.37 per cent of the 19,355 people in the Qikiqtaaluk Region, 56.51 per cent of the population of the Arctic Archipelago, and 35.38 per cent of the population of Nunavut.\nMapping.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70739", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70739", "title": "Papua New Guinea/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "70740", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70740", "title": "Betty Cuthbert", "text": "Australian sprinter (1938\u20132017)\nElizabeth Alyse Cuthbert (20 April 1938 \u2013 6 August 2017), was an Australian athlete and a four-time Olympic champion. She was nicknamed Australia's \"Golden Girl\". During her career, she set world records for 60 metres, 100 yards, 200 metres, 220 yards and 440 yards. Cuthbert also contributed to Australian relay teams completing a win in the 4 \u00d7 100 metres, 4 \u00d7 110 yards, 4 \u00d7 200 metres and 4 \u00d7 220 yards. Cuthbert had a distinctive running style, with a high knee lift and mouth wide open. She was named in 1998 an Australian National Treasure and was inducted as a Legend in the Sport Australia Hall of Fame in 1994 and the Athletics Australia Hall of Fame in 2000.\nEarly life.\nCuthbert was born to Leslie and Marion alongside her nonidentical twin sister, Marie 'Midge'. She also had another sister, Jean and a brother, John. Cuthbert was born 20 minutes before Marie. According to Midge, the twins were not alike, but very special to each other. The daughter of nursery owners, Cuthbert was born in Merrylands, New South Wales, and grew up in the Sydney suburb of Ermington, where she attended Ermington Public School. Of her upbringing, Cuthbert stated \"My parents always encouraged me and I had a good home life. We were always taught to respect things and other people.\"\nMarion attended church and sent her four children to Sunday school. As a teenager, Cuthbert attended Parramatta Home Science School. She left school at the age of 16 to work in the family nursery.\nAthletic career.\nCuthbert was a member of the Western Suburbs Athletic Club. At the age of 18, with the 1956 Summer Olympics to be held in Melbourne, Cuthbert set a World Record in the 200 metres, making her one of the favourites for a gold in that event. Cuthbert first reached the finals of the 100 metres, setting an Olympic record of 11.4 seconds in her heat (also her personal best), while the Australian world record holder Shirley Strickland was eliminated.\nCuthbert won the final and was then the big favourite for the 200 metres title. She lived up to the expectations and became the Australian \"Golden Girl\". A third gold medal for Cuthbert came when she ran the final leg on in the 4 \u00d7 100 metres final, which the Australian team won in a new world record.\nDuring 1958 Cuthbert set world records for 100 and 220 yards but was beaten in both events by arch-rival and double-Olympic bronze medallist Marlene Mathews at the Australian Championships. Later in the year, at the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Cardiff, Wales, Cuthbert could only place fourth in the 100y and second in the 220y, again behind Mathews.\nShe set a world record at 440 yards, which was broken in September 1959 by Maria Itkina of the Soviet Union.\nIn the lead-up to the 1960 Summer Olympics, in Rome, Cuthbert set a world 220 yards and 200 metres record of 23.2 seconds in winning the Australian championships. At the Rome Games, she suffered from injury and was eliminated from the quarterfinals of the 100 metres. Subsequently, she retired from the sport of track and field.\nHer retirement did not last long, though, for she returned at the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Perth, Western Australia, helping Australia to a gold medal in the sprint relay.\nAfterwards, she concentrated on the 400 metres, and she competed in that event in the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, when it was on the Olympic program for women for the first time. Though not impressive in the heats, Cuthbert won the title for her fourth Olympic gold medal, beating Ann Packer of Great Britain in an Olympic record of 52.01. She is the only Olympian, male or female, to have won a gold medal in all sprint (running) events: 100, 200 and 400 metres. She subsequently verified her retirement for good after Tokyo. Also in 1964 she received the Helms Award for her sporting contributions.\nShe was coached by June Ferguson, who was her physical education teacher in high school.\nPersonal life.\nCuthbert had multiple sclerosis from 1969 and in 2002 had a severe brain haemorrhage. She stated that, despite her MS, she never once asked God 'Why me?', and instead \"knew that God wanted her to use it to help other people.\" In 1985, Cuthbert became a born-again Christian at the age of 47. Always believing she was a Christian, the speaker at a public rally said there were private-practising Christians present. She felt compelled to publicly declare her faith in Jesus. From then on, Cuthbert tried to share the good news of Jesus with as many people as possible. She did, however, initially want to be healed of her MS, and someone encouraged her to go to church where she could be healed. She claimed she went, looking for healing, instead of the Healer. In her own words: \"I found out about the healer, and then I couldn't care less about the healing. That's the best thing. I get so much joy out of it and I want to tell other people about it. I think that's why I was meant to come back to the Olympics in 1964 because now I'm well known and it helps me to tell people about Jesus.\"\nFollowing her diagnosis with multiple sclerosis, Cuthbert became a dedicated advocate for the disease and was an important player in the creation of MS Research Australia, attending the organisation's 2004 inauguration alongside then-PM John Howard. She was a tireless campaigner for national awareness of the disease, and, following her death in 2017, was credited by CEO of MS Research Australia, Dr. Matthew Miles, as having had an incredible impact on Australia's recognition and understanding of MS.\nIn 1991, Cuthbert left her home state, New South Wales, for Western Australia, where she settled in Mandurah. Cuthbert was one of the bearers of the Olympic Torch at the Opening Ceremony of the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Sitting in a wheelchair and accompanied by Raelene Boyle, she carried the Olympic Torch at the stadium, as one of the runners for the final segment, before the lighting of the Olympic Flame by Cathy Freeman.\nCuthbert died in 2017, aged 79, in Mandurah. She never married or had children. Rhonda Gillam, a 78-year-old West Australian mother-of-three, devoted the last 26 years of her life to caring for Cuthbert. Gillam stated that Cuthbert's MS also took her hearing. Cuthbert's twin sister, Midge Johnston, stated that Betty had been struggling with dementia in recent years, worrying that Betty would not remember her, but Betty always said \"Midge, of course I remember you.\"\nPost-death.\nThe day after her death, there was a minute's silence before the start of competition at the 2017 World Athletics Championships in London, and Australian athletes were granted permission by the International Association of Athletics Federations to wear black armbands in competition. Cuthbert was the only Australian among the 10 inaugural inductees to the IAAF Hall of Fame in 2012. There were many tributes to Cuthbert's career and life from significant Australians:\nCuthbert's funeral was held on 16 August 2017 in Mandurah and her body was cremated at Fremantle Cemetery. Several hundred were present, including Margaret Court, Raelene Boyle, and Marjorie Jackson. Dawn Fraser (whom Cuthbert handed the Olympic Torch to during the opening ceremony of the 2000 Sydney Olympics) gave a speech. Her twin sister, Midge, lit a candle of remembrance; and niece and nephew, Louise and Peter, also gave speeches. A public memorial service for Cuthbert was held on 21 August 2017, at the Sydney Cricket Ground. Tributes were led by broadcaster Alan Jones and Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce. Also in attendance were former athletes Norma Fleming and Marlene Matthews.\nWorld records.\nCuthbert achieved 14 world records during her career comprising 10 individual and four relays. In addition she set a number of world best, including unclaimed records, and metric distance bests.\nBooks.\nThere are two books on Cuthbert's life: \"Golden girl\" as told to Jim Webster (1966) and \"Golden girl : an autobiography\" by Betty Cuthbert (2000).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70742", "revid": "49681265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70742", "title": "Lists of popes, patriarchs, primates, archbishops, and bishops", "text": "This is a directory of patriarchs, archbishops, and bishops across various Christian denominations. To find an individual who was a bishop, see the most relevant article linked below or .\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "70745", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70745", "title": "Banks Island", "text": "Inhabited island in the Northwest Territories, Canada\nBanks Island is one of the larger members of the Arctic Archipelago. Situated in the Inuvik Region, and part of the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, of the Northwest Territories, it is separated from Victoria Island to its east by the Prince of Wales Strait and from the mainland by Amundsen Gulf to its south. The Beaufort Sea lies to its west, and to its northeast M'Clure Strait separates the island from Prince Patrick Island and Melville Island.\nIt is home to at least fourteen mammal species including the Peary caribou, barren-ground caribou, and polar bears. At one time over 68,000 muskoxen lived on the island, the majority of the world's population. However, the bacterium \"Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae\" has led to a sharp decline in their numbers. The island is the summer home to hundreds of thousands of migratory birds who nest at Banks Island Migratory Bird Sanctuary No. 1 and Banks Island Migratory Bird Sanctuary No. 2.\nAs of the 2016 census it had a human population of 103, all in Sachs Harbour.\nHuman settlements and discoveries.\nPre-Dorset cultural sites have been found that date from approximately 1500 BCE but European contact came much later. In 1820 it was seen from Melville Island by Sir William Edward Parry and named \"Banks Land\" in honour of Sir Joseph Banks. However, during the later exploration of the area by the McClure Arctic Expedition the island was marked on their maps as \"Baring Island\". McClure's ship, , was frozen in Prince of Wales Strait. That spring he sent out sledging parties and determined that Banks Island was an island. In the following year he almost circumnavigated the island but was again frozen in at Mercy Bay where he and his crew spent the next three months before making their escape across the ice.\nThe only permanent settlement on the island is the Inuvialuit hamlet of Sachs Harbour (Ikahuak), on the southwest coast.\nDescription.\nBanks Island covers an area and it is the world's 24th largest island and Canada's fifth largest island. It is about long, and at its widest point at the northern end, across. The highest point of the island is in the south, Durham Heights and rises to about .\nEcology.\nThe island is treeless, with the tallest plant, the Arctic willow, growing occasionally to about the height of a person's knee but usually standing no taller than .\nBanks Island is home to a large colony of lesser snow geese, which make their way across the Amundsen Gulf from the mainland. There is an annual goose hunt in the spring out of Sachs Harbour. The island is part of the tundra world biome, which has extremely cold winters. The island is home to barren-ground caribou, polar bears, muskoxen, and birds, including year round residents the common raven and ptarmigan.\nTwo federal migratory bird sanctuaries were founded on the island in 1961.\nAulavik National Park of Canada, a fly-in park, protects about of Arctic lowlands at the northern end of the island. The park has the highest concentration of muskoxen on earth, and is home to the endangered Peary caribou. The Thomsen River runs through the park, and is the northernmost navigable river (by canoe) in North America. Ptarmigan and ravens are considered the only year-round birds in the park, although 43 species make seasonal use of the area. In Inuvialuktun, \"Aulavik\" means \"place where people travel\" and the \"wildlife and land have supported aboriginal peoples for more than 3,400 years, from Pre-Dorset cultures to contemporary Inuvialuit.\"\nThe first confirmed grizzly\u2013polar bear hybrid found in the wild was shot on Banks Island in April 2006, near Sachs Harbour.\nClimate.\nBanks Island has a tundra climate (K\u00f6ppen \"ET\") typical of the Canadian Arctic with long, cold winters and short, cool summers. Since the activities of many residents of the community revolve around fishing, hunting, and travel, many residents have considerable knowledge of weather conditions, permafrost, and even erosion patterns.\nHMS \"Investigator\".\nIn July 2010, Parks Canada archaeologists looking for found it 15 minutes after they started a sonar scan of Banks Island's Mercy Bay. The archaeology crew had no plans to raise the ship. They planned to conduct a thorough sonar scan of the area, then send a remotely operated vehicle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70748", "revid": "47844293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70748", "title": "Flag of the Netherlands", "text": "The national flag of the Netherlands () is a horizontal tricolour of red, white, and blue. The current design originates as a variant of the late 16th century orange-white-blue \"Prinsenvlag\" (\"Prince's Flag\"), evolving in the early 17th century as the red-white-blue \"Statenvlag\" (\"States Flag\"), the naval flag of the States-General of the Dutch Republic, making the Dutch flag the oldest tricolour flag in continuous use. As a flag that symbolises the transformation from monarchy to republic, it has inspired both the derivative Russian flag, and after the French Revolution in 1789, the vertically striped French tricolour; both flags in turn influenced many other tricolours.\nDuring the 1920s and the economic crisis of the 1930s, the old Prince's Flag with the colour orange gained some popularity among Protestants, Orangists, conservative liberals, fascists, and others. To end the confusion, the colours red, white and blue and its official status as the national flag of the Kingdom of the Netherlands were reaffirmed by royal decree on 19 February 1937.\nDescription.\nThe national flag of the Netherlands is a tricolour flag. The horizontal fesses are bands of equal size in the colours from top to bottom, red (officially described as a \"bright vermilion\"), white (silver), and blue (\"cobalt blue\"). The flag proportions (width:length) are 2:3. The colour parameters were defined in November 1958 by the NEN (former HCNN) in as the following:\nIn this definition, the colours are defined using CIE-1931 colour space and Standard illuminant C at a 45\u00b0 angle.\nThe flag of the Netherlands is similar to that of Luxembourg, but it has a smaller width and it uses slightly darker shades of red and blue. The similarity of the two flags has given rise to a national debate to change the flag of Luxembourg, initiated by Michel Wolter in 2006.\nSymbolism.\nAccording to heraldic traditions, red symbolizes bravery, strength, valor, and hardiness, white symbolizes peace and honesty, and blue symbolizes vigilance, truth, loyalty, perseverance, and justice.\nAnother theory as to why the Dutch flag has these colours is because some researchers claim that they used to be a symbol of society: red symbolizes the people, white the church and blue the nobility.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nAt the end of the 15th century, when the majority of the Netherlands provinces were united under the Duke of Burgundy, the Cross of Burgundy flag of the Duke of Burgundy was used for joint expeditions, which consisted of a red saltire resembling two crossed, roughly-pruned (knotted) branches, on a white field. Under the later House of Habsburg this flag remained in use.\nPrince's Flag.\nIn 1568 provinces of the Low Countries rose in revolt against King Philip II of Spain, and Prince William of Orange (1533\u20131584) placed himself at the head of the rebels. The etymology of the House of Orange is unrelated to the name of the fruit or the colour. Usage of the colours orange, white and blue (Dutch: \"Oranje, Wit, Blauw\", from French \"Orange, Blanc, Bleu\") was based on the livery of William and was first recorded in the siege of Leiden in 1574, when Dutch officers wore orange-white-blue brassards. The first known full colour depiction of the flag appeared in 1575 (see image). In Ghent in 1577, William was welcomed with a number of theatrical allegories represented by a young girl wearing orange, blue and white. The first explicit reference to a naval flag in these colours is found in the ordonnances of the Admiralty of Zeeland, dated 1587, i.e. shortly after William's death.\nThe colour combination of orange, white, and blue is commonly considered the first Dutch flag. The 400th anniversary of the introduction of the Dutch flag was commemorated in the Netherlands by the issue of a postage stamp in 1972. That was based on the fact that in 1572 the \"Watergeuzen\" (\"Gueux de mer\", \"Sea Beggars\"), the pro-Dutch privateers, captured Den Briel in name of William, Prince of Orange. However, it is uncertain whether they took an orange-white-blue flag with them on the event, although they certainly started using an orange-white-blue tricolour somewhat later in the 1570s. It became later known as the Prinsenvlag (\"Prince's flag\") and served as the basis for the former South African flag, the flags of New York City and the Flag of Albany, New York, all three former dominions of the Dutch Republic.\nStatenvlag.\nRed as replacement for orange appeared as early as 1597, but more often after about 1630, as indicated by paintings of that time. Red gradually replaced orange (1630\u201360) as a sign of political change and growing dissociation of the Republic from the House of Orange. It appears that prior to 1664, the red-white-blue tricolour was commonly known as the \"Flag of Holland\" (); named after one of the revolting provinces. In 1664, the States of Zeeland, one of the other revolting provinces, complained about this, and a resolution of the States-General introduced the name \"States Flag\" (), which the red, white and blue tricolour will be known hereafter. The Dutch navy between 1588 and 1630 had always displayed the Prince's Flag, and after 1663 always the States Flag, with both flag variants being in use during the period of 1630\u20131662.\nThe red-white-blue triband flag as used in the 17th century is said to have influenced the designs of both the seminal Russian flag and the French flag. In turn, these two flags would later influence many others.\nFlag of the Batavian Navy (Batavian flag).\nWith the Batavian Revolution in the Netherlands in the last decade of the 18th century, and the subsequent conquest by the French, the name \"Prince's Flag\" was forbidden and the red-white-blue of the Statenvlag was the only flag allowed, analogous as it was to France's own tricolour, chosen just a few months earlier, ironically influenced by that same Statenvlag. In a separate flag prepared for the navy in 1796, the red division of the flag was embellished with the figure of a Netherlands maiden, with a lion at her feet, in the upper left corner. In one hand she bore a shield with the Roman fasces and in the other a lance crowned with the cap of liberty. This flag had a life as short as that of the Batavian Republic for which it was created.\nLouis Bonaparte, made king of Holland by his brother the Emperor Napoleon, wished to pursue a purely Dutch policy and to respect national sentiments as much as possible. He removed the maiden of freedom from the flag and restored the old tricolour. His pro-Dutch policies led to conflicts with his brother, however, and the Netherlands were incorporated into the French Empire. In 1810 its flag was replaced by the imperial emblems.\nModern flag.\nIn 1813, the Netherlands regained its independence and the Prince of Orange returned from exile and contemporary newspapers report that the red-white-blue flag was flown decorated with an orange Pennon/pennant and solid\u2010coloured orange flags were displayed in many places in the country as a sign of allegiance of the people to the House of Orange.\nJust before the outbreak of World War II, the Prince's Flag resurfaced again. Some people were convinced that orange, white, and blue were the true colours of the Dutch flag, particularly members of the National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands. To end the discussion, a royal decree established the colours of the Dutch flag as: 'The colours of the flag of the Kingdom of the Netherlands are red, white and blue' (). It became the shortest decree in history, and was issued by Queen Wilhelmina on 19 February 1937.\nIt was only on 16 August 1949 that the exact colour parameters were defined by the Ministry of the Navy as bright vermilion (red), white and cobalt blue. The pennant is usually added on King's Day (, 27 April) or other festive occasions related to the Royal Family.\nDisplay and use.\nThe flag is customarily flown at government buildings and military bases in the Netherlands and abroad all year round. Private use is more uncommon. Only on national holidays is there widespread private use. At the birthdays or weddings of specific members of the Royal House, an orange pennant is added to the flag. There are special non-holiday festivities or remembrance occasions when the flag is flown, such as at the homes of students who have just graduated. The flag is then often accompanied by the graduate's school bag hung from the tip of the flagpole. The flag can also be displayed at times of sadness at half-mast (or a black pennant is added to the flag when hanging at half-mast is not possible) as a sign of respect or national mourning.\nThere are a number of flag-flying days in the Netherlands. The holidays on which flags are put out by the government, according to the flag instruction, are:\nThe dates mentioned in parentheses are the dates when the flags are put out, should the original scheduled flag day fall on a Sunday, when possible. Exceptions are Remembrance of the Dead and Liberation Day, should one of them fall on a Sunday, the flags are put out anyway.\nThe prime minister of the Netherlands is responsible for announcing updates to the flag instruction (last given in 2013 when Queen's Day on 30 April became King's Day on 27 April), announcing one-off flag days (last given on 19 March 2019 to remember the Utrecht tram shooting), and announcing one-off modifications to the current flag days (last given in 2020 when the flags were put out at half-mast on 4 May the whole day instead of from 18:00, due to the 75-year anniversary of the liberation of the Netherlands and the COVID-19 pandemic).\nWhen a member of the Dutch Royal House is born, the flag instruction will be determined some weeks before the child is expected. In the most recent occasions \u2013 in 2003, 2005 and 2007, when Princess M\u00e1xima was expecting Princess Amalia, Princess Alexia and Princess Ariane respectively, it was announced that immediately upon announcement of the birth, the flags would be put out with the orange pennant. However, because Amalia and Ariane were born while darkness already fell (and Amalia was born on a Sunday), the flag day was postponed until the next day.\nFlags of current countries in the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nFlag of Aruba.\nThe national flag of Aruba was officially adopted on 18 March 1976. The blue field represents the sky, the sea, peace, hope, Aruba's future and its ties to the past. The two narrow stripes \"suggest the movement toward status aparte\". One represents \"the flow of tourists to sun-drenched Aruba, enriching the island as well as vacationers\", the other \"industry, all the minerals (gold and phosphates in the past, petroleum in the early 20th century)\". In addition to sun, gold, and abundance, the yellow is also said to represent wanglo flowers. The star has particularly complex symbolism. It is vexillologically unusual in having four points, representing the four cardinal directions. These refer in turn to the many countries of origin of the people of Aruba. They also represent the four main languages of Aruba: Papiamento, Spanish, English, and Dutch. The star also represents the island itself: a land of often red soil bordered by white beaches in a blue sea. The red also represents blood shed by Arubans during war, past Indian inhabitants, patriotic love, and Brazil wood. The white also represents purity and honesty.\nFlag of Cura\u00e7ao.\nThe flag of Cura\u00e7ao is a navy blue field with a horizontal hot yellow stripe slightly below the midline and two white, five-pointed stars in the canton. The blue symbolises the sea and sky (the bottom and top blue sections, respectively) divided by a yellow stroke representing the bright sun which bathes the island. The two stars represent Cura\u00e7ao and Klein Cura\u00e7ao, but also 'Love &amp; Happiness'. The five points on each star symbolise the five continents from which Cura\u00e7ao's people come.\nFlag of Sint Maarten.\nThe flag of Sint Maarten is the national flag of the Dutch part of Saint Martin island, which is a country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It was adopted on 13 June 1985. It resembles the war flag of the Philippines.\nFlags of former countries in the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nSuriname.\nThe pre-independence flag of Suriname consisted of five coloured stars (from top left clockwise: white, black, brown, yellow, and red) connected by an ellipse. The coloured stars represent the major ethnic groups that comprise the Surinamese population: the original Amerindians, the colonising Europeans, the Africans brought in as slaves to work in plantations and the Indians, Javanese and Chinese who came as indentured workers to replace the Africans who escaped slavery and settled in the hinterland. The ellipse represents the harmonious relationship amongst the groups.\nNetherlands Antilles.\nWithin the flag of the Netherlands Antilles, there were five stars that symbolise the five islands that made up the country. While the colours red, white and blue refer to the flag of the Netherlands. A six-star version was used until 1986 when Aruba became its own country within the Kingdom. This original version was adopted on 19 November 1959.\nThis flag fell into disuse when the Netherlands Antilles was dissolved on 10 October 2010.\nThe islands of Sint Maarten and Cura\u00e7ao obtained their separate country status within the Kingdom and the islands Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba are now overseas entities of the Netherlands.\nFlags of former colonies of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nDutch West India Company.\nNew Holland (Brazil).\nThe flag of Dutch Brazil, or New Holland, also known as the flag of Dutch Brazil, was the flag used by the Vereenigde West-Indische Compagnie (English: Dutch West India Company) for the territories that were under its control in Brazil from 1630 until 1654.\nThe flag consists of three horizontal stripes in the colours of the flag of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands (red, white and blue) and it displays a monogram on the central stripe and a crown on the upper stripe, both gold-coloured. The origin of the monogram as well as its initials and its meaning is not known.\nNew Netherland (United States).\nThe orange-white-blue Prince's Flag directly inspired historical and modern day flags in the former Dutch colony of New Netherland in what is today the East Coast of the United States. The colony of New Netherland used the Statenvlag of the Dutch Republic, and was one of the territories under control of the Dutch West India Company. The flag of New York City, originally called New Amsterdam, was designed after the Prince's Flag. Furthermore, the flags of other counties, cities, and institutions in this region are designed after the Prince's Flag, such as Albany (originally Beverwijck), Schenectady County, New York, and Jersey City.\nDutch East India Company.\nNetherlands East Indies.\nFor the majority of the existence of the Netherlands East Indies the flag of the Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie (English: Dutch East India Company) was used. When the VOC became bankrupt and was formally dissolved in 1800, its possessions and debt were taken over by the government of the Batavian Republic. The VOC's territories became the Netherlands East Indies and were expanded over the course of the 19th century to include the whole of the Indonesian archipelago. As such, the flag of the Batavian Republic and Kingdom of the Netherlands were used.\nThe flag of the Netherlands has been said to be the origin of the Indonesian flag. To symbolise the intention of forcing out the Dutch, the Indonesian nationalists would rip apart the Dutch flag. They tore off the bottom third of the flag, and separated the red and white colours from the blue colour.\nNetherlands New Guinea.\nThe Morning Star flag () represented the Netherlands New Guinea from 1 December 1961 until 1 October 1962 when the territory came under administration of the United Nations Temporary Executive Authority (UNTEA). The flag is commonly used by the West Papuan population including OPM (; Free Papua Movement) supporters to rally self-determination human rights support and is popularly flown on 1 December each year in defiance of Indonesian domestic laws. The flag consists of a red vertical band along the hoist side, with a white five-pointed star in the centre. The flag was first raised on 1 December 1961 and used until the United Nations became the territory's administrator on 1 October 1962.\nSouth Africa.\nThe flag of the Boer Republics, Transvaal, the Orange Free State, Natalia Republic, and the flag of South Africa from 1928 to 1994 are all based on the flag of the Netherlands, or its predecessor the Prince's Flag. These were in turn part of the inspiration for the present South African flag.\nOther related flags.\nAs the Prince's Flag was the first created tricolour flag, it (in)directly inspired many historical and modern day tricolour flags. The flags below are directly influenced by the Dutch flag, or its predecessors, in colour use and design as a result of a shared history (as flags of former colonies) or economic relations, which is the case for the Russian flag. See the flags in the former colonies section above for more examples.\nDutch flag-inspired.\nThe modern red-white-blue Dutch flag is the oldest tricolour flag in use, and directly inspired these historical and modern day flags:\nPan-Slavic colours.\nThe Russian flag in turn is believed to have influenced many flags of other Slavic countries, resulting in many red-white-blue styled tribands in other parts of Europe, and also the red-white-green flag of Bulgaria. Peter the Great of Russia was building a new Russian Navy mostly on Dutch standards; therefore the merchant flag of Russia at sea would be the inverted colours of the Dutch flag.\nPrince's Flag-inspired.\nThe orange-white-blue Prince's Flag directly inspired many historical and modern day flags. Especially flags in the former colonies of New Netherland and South Africa are designed after this flag. See the flags in the former colonies section above for more examples.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70750", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70750", "title": "410 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 410 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Mamercinus and Volusus (or, less frequently, year 344 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 410 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy subject.\nArt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70751", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70751", "title": "411 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 411 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Mugillanus and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 343 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 411 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70752", "revid": "41503339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70752", "title": "412 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 412 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ambustus and Pacilus (or, less frequently, year 342 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 412 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRome.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70753", "revid": "43272954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70753", "title": "Akhal-Teke", "text": "Turkmen horse breed\nThe Akhal-Teke ( or ; from Turkmen \"Ahalteke\", ) is a Turkmen horse breed. They have a reputation for speed and endurance, intelligence, thin manes and a distinctive metallic sheen which led to their nickname, \"Golden Horses\" These horses are adapted to survive in severe climatic conditions and are thought to be one of the oldest existing horse breeds. There are currently about 6,600 Akhal-Tekes in the world, mostly in Turkmenistan, although they are also found throughout Europe and North America. The first part of their name, \"Akhal,\" is the name of the line of oases along the north slope of the Kopet Dag mountains in Turkmenistan, inhabited by the Teke tribe of Turkmens.\nThere are several theories regarding the original ancestry of the Akhal-Teke, some dating back thousands of years. The Akhal-Teke is probably a descendant of an older breed known as the Turkoman horse, which some claim is the same breed. The tribes of Turkmenistan selectively bred these horses, recording their pedigrees orally. The breed was used in raiding, and in the losing fight against the Russian Empire where it was subsumed into the Empire along with its country. The Turkoman has influenced many other breeds, including modern warmbloods, and recent research confirms that Turkoman stallions made significant contributions to the development of the Thoroughbred. However, there also exists the possibility that all Akhal-Tekes today have a Thoroughbred sire line. The studbook was closed in 1932. The Soviet Union printed the first breed registry in 1941, including over 700 horses.\nHistory.\nThe ancestors of the breed may date back to animals living 3,000 years ago, who were known by a number of names. The precise ancestry is difficult to trace, however, because prior to about 1600\u00a0AD, horse breeds in the modern sense did not exist; rather, horses were identified by local strain or type.\nThe breed is very similar to\u2014and possibly the direct descendant of\u2014the Turkoman horse, a breed believed to be extinct, though a related strain may be bred today in Iran. Other breeds or strains with Turkoman roots also include the Yomud, the Goklan, and the Nokhorli. Some historians believe that these are different strains of the same breed. Other ancient strains that may have contributed to the breed, including those named the Massaget and Parthian. There are also claims that Akhal-Teke horse is the descendant of the original Fergana horse which was breed in Fergana valley in 104 BC.\nIt remains a disputed question whether the Arabian was the ancestor of the Turkoman or was developed out of that breed, but current DNA evidence points to a possible common ancestor for both. A substantial number of Arabian mares were reportedly used to improve the breed in the 14th and 19th century. It is also possible that the so-called \"hot blooded\" breeds such as the Arabian, Turkoman, Akhal-Teke, and the Barb all developed from a single \"oriental horse\" predecessor.\nTribal people in what today is Turkmenistan first used the Akhal-Teke for raiding. The horses were their most treasured possession since they were crucial for income and survival. They selectively bred their horses, keeping records of the pedigrees via an oral tradition. Horses were managed and trained in very specific ways. Stallions were tethered next to the tent while mares and foals were free to seek forage. The stallions were covered from head to tail with up to seven layers of felt, which kept their coat short and shiny. Before raids they were put on a sparse diet to prepare them for the long ride through the desert with no water and hardly any feed. The horses were called \"Argamaks\" (divine or Sacred Horses) by the Russians and heavenly horses by ancient China, and were cherished by those who valued their speed and stamina in the desert and loyalty to their owner. Han emperors from China waged two expeditions to secure the \"heavenly horses\". Access to these horse breeds fueled the success in China's future campaign against their nomadic neighbors.\nIn 1881, Turkmenistan became part of the Russian Empire.\nThe tribes fought with the tsar, eventually losing. In the process, however, the Russian general Kuropatkin developed a fondness for the horses he had seen while fighting the tribesmen. He founded a breeding farm after the war and renamed the horses, \"Akhal-Tekes\", after the Teke Turkmen tribe that lived around the Akhal oasis (near Geok Tepe). The Russians closed the studbook in 1932 which included 287 stallions and 468 mares. Stallions are not gelded in Central Asia. The studbook was printed in 1941.\nThe ancestral Akhal-Teke has had influence on many breeds, possibly including the Thoroughbred; the Byerly Turk, which may have been an Arabian, or a Turkoman Horse, was one of the three major foundation stallions of the breed. Three other stallions thought to be of Turkoman origin, known as the \"Lister Turk\", the \"White Turk\", and the \"Yellow Turk\" were among a number of minor stallions from the orient who contributed to the foundation bloodstock of the Thoroughbred breed. The Trakehner has also been influenced by the Akhal-Teke, most notably by the stallion, Turkmen-Atti, as have the Russian breeds Don, Budyonny, Karabair, and Karabakh.\nThe breed suffered greatly when the Soviet Union required horses to be slaughtered for meat, even though local Turkmen refused to eat them. At one point only 1,250 horses remained and export from the Soviet Union was banned. The government of Turkmenistan now uses the horses as diplomatic presents as well as auctioning a few to raise money for improved horse breeding programs.\nIn the early 20th century, crossbreeding between the Thoroughbred and the Akhal-Teke took place, aiming to create a faster long-distance racehorse. The Anglo Akhal-Tekes were not so resilient however, as their Akhal-Teke ancestors, and many died due to the harsh conditions of Central Asia. After the endurance race from Ashkabad to Moscow in 1935, when the purebreds finished in much better condition than the part-breds, the studbook management decided to consider all crossbred horses born after 1936 as not purebred. Horses with English Thoroughbred ancestors born prior to that date were allowed to remain inside the studbook (e.g. 044 Tillyakush, grandson of Thoroughbred Burlak; 831 Makh, granddaughter of Thoroughbred Blondelli of the St. Simon line and great-great-granddaughter of Thoroughbred Junak; and line founder 9 Ak Belek, a direct descendant in the male line of the Thoroughbred stallion Fortingbrass, by Fogabal of the Sir Hercules line). Due to this fact, there does not exist any Akhal-Teke today whose ancestry does not contain a Thoroughbred. Since 1973, all foals must be blood typed to be accepted in the stud book in order to protect the integrity of the breed. From 2014 on, a DNA test based on hair follicles is sufficient if the DNA of the parents is on file. A stallion not producing the right type of horse may be removed. Nowadays, artificial insemination is allowed as well as embryo transfer. The surrogate mother, however, needs to be a pureblood Akhal-Teke mare for the foal to be registered in the General Studbook as a pureblood Akhal-Teke.\nAkhal-Teke horses are bred all over the world. In addition to Turkmenistan there are breeders in Russia and Central Asia, Europe, the US, Uruguay, and Australia.\nTurkmenistan.\nTurkmenistan has a separate agency, Turkmen Atlary, responsible for the breeding, training and maintenance of Akhal-Teke horses. However, the agency's work has been the focus of criticism from the President of the country, who holds the agency responsible for decreasing numbers of horses and inadequate facilities for their breeding, training and management. At present, Akhal-Teke horses in Turkmenistan are not registered with any other studbook. The main reason for this are allegations of a heavy infusion of Thoroughbred blood into the breed to create faster horses for racing in Turkmenistan. There are estimates that as many as 30% of the horses in the Ashgabat hippodrome were not purebred.\nWhen the first horse minister of newly independent Turkmenistan, Geldy Kyarizov, a lifelong advocate for the Akhal-Teke and former chair of the International Association of Akhal-Teke Breeders, began utilizing DNA to establish an Akhal-Teke studbook, he uncovered the pattern of adding in Thoroughbred blood. His decision to go public with this information was viewed as a threat to the profits of the horse-breeding establishment and he fell out of favor with the Turkmenistan government, and in particular, then-President Saparmurat Niyazov.\nHe was charged with abuse of office and negligence in 2002, convicted and sentenced to six years in prison. He was ultimately pardoned in October 2007, when Niyazov died and his successor, Gurbanguly Berdymukhammedov, took control of the country. By 2012, Kyarizov's health, which had been poor since his arrest and subsequent imprisonment, had deteriorated to the point he needed to go abroad for medical care, but was initially prevented from leaving the country. By 2015, he was allowed to travel to Moscow for medical care, but family members, including his 14-year-old daughter, were forced to remain behind to \"guarantee\" his return. In September 2015, the entire family was allowed to leave.\nTurkmen Atlary, in its capacity as the administrative arm of the International Akhal-Teke Horse Association, hosts a meeting of the association once or twice a year upon invitation in Ashgabat. Most of the bigger breeding farms and national Akhal Teke associations as well as Akhal Teke owners and representatives of the horse industry from around the world attend. There is a horse racing organization called \"Galkinysh\" . In Ashgabat, the \"Akhal-Teke equestrian complex\", one of the largest in Central Asia, is a horse-breeding center. A holiday celebrated on the last Sunday in April was renamed from \"Akhal-Teke Horse Holiday,\" to \"Turkmen Horse Day.\"\nCharacteristics.\nThe Akhal-Teke is of medium size, usually standing some at the withers, with a weight between .433 Coat colors vary widely: the most frequent are bays (about 40%), duns (about 22%), blacks (about 12%) and chestnuts (about 11%); other colors include grey, cream and yellow.433 The coat often has a characteristic metallic sheen, which in duns may produce an unusual golden effect; it is sometimes claimed that this provided camouflage in the desert.\nThe Akhal-Teke has a refined head with predominantly a straight or slightly convex profile, and long ears. It can also have almond-shaped or \"hooded\" eyes. The mane and tail are usually sparse. The long back is lightly muscled, and is coupled to a flat croup and long, upright neck. The Akhal-Teke possess sloping shoulders and thin skin.\nThe breed is tough and resilient, having adapted to the harshness of Turkmenistan lands, where horses must live without much food or water. This has also made the horses good for sport. The breed is known for its endurance, as shown in 1935 when a group of Turkmen riders rode the from Ashgabat to Moscow in 84 days, including a three-day crossing of of desert without water. The Akhal-Teke is also known for its form and grace as a show jumper.\nThe quality of the Akhal-Teke horses are determined by the studbook manager. Depending on type, conformation, pedigree, quality of offspring and achievement in sport, the horses are designated as either Elite or Class I or Class II. There are usually 2 annual grading events in Moscow, Russia called the \"International Sport Meeting and World Championship\", \"Heavenly Argamak\", and \"Golden Akhal-Teke Cup Shael\", where breeders present their best horses to a group of judges. At the World Championship, a group of judges evaluates the horses in age and gender categories as well as in various sport disciplines and a halter class.\nUses.\nThe Akhal-Teke, due to its natural athleticism, can be an excellent sport horse. They are good at dressage, show jumping, eventing, racing, and endurance riding. A noted example was the Akhal-Teke stallion, \"Absent\", who won the Grand Prix de Dressage at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome, while being ridden by Sergei Filatov. He went again with Filatov to win the bronze individual medal in Tokyo in the 1964 Summer Olympics, and won the Soviet team gold medal under Ivan Kalita at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City. However, by today's studbook standards he wouldn't be admitted as Akhal-Teke, owing to the Thoroughbred ancestry of his dam Bakkara.\nIn 2009, an Akhal-Teke named Almila carried the French poet Laurence Bougault on a trek alone from Isfahan in Iran to Paris by way of Turkey, Greece and Italy. Her trip covered 6,500 kilometres (4,000\u00a0mi) in less than six months.\nGenetic diseases.\nThere are several genetic diseases of concern to Akhal-Teke breeders. The genetic diversity of the breed is relatively low with an AVK (Ancestor Loss Coefficient ) of 30\u201350%, which raises concerns for dealing with an increase in carriers of these conditions, and even some risk of inbreeding depression. To date, there are no DNA tests for these conditions.\nCommemorations.\nThere are monuments to the Akhal-Teke breed in many Turkmenistan cities. The largest number of sculptures is located in Ashgabat. Akhal-Tekes are represented in the official emblem and banknotes of Turkmenistan, as well as on stamps of Turkmenistan and other countries.\n\"Art of Akhal-Teke horse breeding and traditions of horses' decoration\" were recognized as part of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO. This recognition occurred during the 18th session of the Intergovernmental Committee for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2023. The nomination celebrates the unique cultural significance of these practices, deeply rooted in Turkmenistan's heritage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70754", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70754", "title": "413 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 413 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cossus and Medullinus (or, less frequently, year 341 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 413 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70755", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70755", "title": "414 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 414 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Cossus, Ambustus, Potitus and Albinus (or, less frequently, year 340 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 414 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nDrama.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
