{"id": "68982", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68982", "title": "Demographics of Bermuda", "text": "This is a demography of the population of Bermuda including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population, including changes in the demographic make-up of Bermuda over the centuries of its permanent settlement.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2016 census the de jure population was 63,779, compared to 64,319 in 2010 and 62,098 in 2000. The estimated mid-year population of is (medium fertility scenario of ).\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 20.V.2016): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Based on the results of the 2016 Population Census.): \nEthnic groups.\nCurrent.\nAs noted above, only in recent years have Bermudians been given the option to define themselves by more than one race on census returns (and birth registrations), with the 2000 Census giving respondents the options of \"black\", \"white\", \"Asian\", \"black and white\", \"black and other\", \"white and other\", \"other\", and \"not stated\". For a variety of reasons, most Bermudians have continued to identify themselves by a single racial group.\nOne race.\nThe 2016 Census results reported roughly 91% of the population self-identifying as only one racial group which was slightly lower than the 2010 Census. The largest group reported Black alone, which decreased slightly from 54% in 2010 to 52% in 2016. The White population remained constant at about 31% of the total population in 2016. The remaining 8% of the 2016 population who reported one race consisted of persons reporting Asian only (4%), and those reporting an other race from the ones listed (4%). The proportions of these respective racial groups were similar to what they were in 2010.\nMore than one race.\nNine percent of the population reported belonging to more than one race in 2016, up from 8% in 2010. The black and white category was the most common, representing 39% of the number reporting multi-racial groups and 4% of the total population of Bermuda. The proportion of 'black and other' increased from 2% to 3% of the total population, making up 35% of the people identifying as mixed race. The remainder were of 'white and other' mixed descent, and remained unchanged at 2% of the total population. The changing racial composition of Bermuda's population is consequence of immigration and an increase of interracial marriage.\nLanguages.\nThe predominant language on Bermuda is Bermudian English. It exhibits characteristics of British, West Indian, and American English. Perhaps most interesting is its closeness to acrolectal English compared to varieties in the West Indies.\nBritish English spellings and conventions are used in print media and formal written communications.\nPortuguese is also spoken in Bermuda; this is owing to immigration from Portugal, particularly from the Azores, as well as from Madeira and the Cape Verde Islands.\nReligion.\nDuring the intercensal period, the distribution of persons across the various religious affiliations shifted but remained generally widespread. All religious groups experienced declines in their followings with the exception of Roman Catholics, Seventh-Day Adventists and non-denominational groups. Nearly one fifth or 20% of the population claimed no religious affiliation in 2010 compared with a 14% share in 2000. Although the number of Roman Catholics increased to 9,340 persons, its share remained constant at 15% compared to 2000. Over the ten-year period, nondenominational congregations increased a strong 33% while the Seventh-Day Adventist following rose 6%.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nFrom settlement until the 19th century, the largest demographic group remained what in the United States is referred to as white-Anglo (or white Anglo-Saxon Protestant). The reason Black slaves did not quickly come to outnumber Whites, as was the case in continental and West Indian colonies at that time (such as Carolina Colony and Barbados), was that Bermuda's 17th-century agricultural industry continued to rely on indentured servants, mostly from England, until 1684, thanks to it remaining a company colony (with poor would-be settlers contracting to provide a fixed number of years' labour in exchange for the cost of transport). Spanish-speaking Blacks began to immigrate in numbers from the West Indies as indentured servants in the mid-17th century, but White fears at their growing numbers led to their terms of indenture being raised from seven years, as with Whites, to 99 years. Throughout the next two centuries, frequent efforts were made to lower the Black population.\nFree Blacks, who were the majority of Black Bermudians in the 17th century, were threatened with enslavement as an attempt to encourage their emigration, and slave owners were encouraged to export enslaved Blacks whenever a war loomed, as they were portrayed as unnecessary bellies to feed during times of shortage (even before abandoning agriculture for maritime activities in 1684, Bermuda had become reliant on food imports).\nIn addition to free and enslaved Blacks, 17th-century Bermuda had large minorities of Irish indentured servants and Native American slaves, as well as a smaller number of Scots, all forced to leave their homelands and shipped to Bermuda. Native Americans sold into chattel slavery in Bermuda were brought from various parts of North America, including Mexico, but most particularly from the Algonquian areas of the Atlantic seaboard, from which natives were subjected to genocide by the English; most famously following the Pequot War and Metacomet's War. The Irish and Scots are usually described as prisoners-of-war, which was certainly true of the Scots. The Irish shipped to Bermuda following the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland included both prisoners-of-war and civilians of either sex ethnically cleansed from lands slated for resettlement by Protestants from Britain, including Cromwell's soldiers who were to be paid with Irish land. In Bermuda they were sold into indentured servitude. The Scots and the Irish were ostracised by the white English population, who were particularly fearful of the Irish, who plotted rebellions with Black slaves, and intermarried with the Blacks and Native Americans. The majority white-Anglo population, or at least its elites, became alarmed very early at the increasing numbers of Irish and non-whites, most of whom were presumed to be clinging to Catholicism (recusancy was a crime in Bermuda, as it was in England).\nDespite the banning of the importation of any more Irish after they were perceived to be the leaders of a foiled 1661 uprising intended to be carried out in concert with black slaves, the passing of a law against miscegenation in 1663, the first of a succession of attempts to force free blacks to emigrate in 1656 (in response to an uprising by enslaved blacks), and frequent encouragement of the owners of black slaves to export them, by the 18th century the merging of the various minority groups, along with some of the white-Anglos, had resulted in a new demographic group, \"coloured\" (which term, in Bermuda, referred to anyone not wholly of European ancestry) Bermudians, who gained a slight majority by the 19th century.\nNational Archives population numbers.\nThe population of Bermuda on 1 January 1699 was 5,862, including 3,615 white (with 724 men able to bear arms) and 2,247 coloured (with 529 men able to bear arms).\nThe population of Bermuda on 17 April 1721 was listed as 8,364, composed of: \"Totals:\u2014Men on the Muster roll, 1,078; men otherwise, 91; Women, 1,596; boys, 1,072; girls, 1,013. Blacks; Men, 817, women 965; boys 880; girls, 852.\"\nThe population of Bermuda in 1727 was 8,347, and included 4,470 white (910 men; 1,261 boys; 1,168 women; 1,131 girls) and 3,877 coloured (787 men; 1,158 boys; 945 women; 987 girls).\nThe population of Bermuda in 1783 was 10,381, and included 5,462 white (1,076 males under 15; 1,325 males over 15; 3,061 females) and 4,919 coloured (1,153 males under 15; 1,193 males over 15; 2,573 females).\nBy 18 November 1811, the permanent population of Bermuda was 10,180, including 5,425 coloured and 4,755 white:\nRobert Kennedy's population figures, 1812.\nBy 1831, the permanent population of Bermuda' (not including the thousands of Royal Navy sailors and marines or British Army and Board of Ordnance soldiers based in Bermuda, or the 1,500 convicts shipped from Britain and Ireland to labour at the Royal Naval Dockyard) was 11,250, including 7,330 white and free coloured, and 3,920 enslaved (coloured).\nTerminology.\nThe term \"coloured\" was generally used in preference to \"black\", with anyone who was of wholly European ancestry (at least Northern European) defined as white, leaving everyone else as coloured. This included the multi-racial descendants of the previous minority demographic groups (Black, Irish and Native American) that had quickly blended together, along with some part of the White Anglo-Saxon Protestant majority, as well as the occasional Jew, Persian, East Asian or other non-White and non-Black Bermudian.\n It was largely by this method (mixed-race Bermudians being added to the number of Blacks, rather than added to the number of Whites or being defined as a separate demographic group) that Coloured (subsequently redefined after the Second World War as Black) Bermudians came to outnumber White Bermudians by the end of the 18th century, despite starting off at a numerical disadvantage, and despite low Black immigration prior to the latter 19th century. The scale of White relative to Black emigration in the 17th and 18th centuries also doubtlessly played a factor. Roughly 10,000 Bermudians are estimated to have emigrated, primarily to the North American continental colonies (particularly: Virginia; Carolina Colony, which later became South Carolina and North Carolina; Georgia; and Florida) before United States independence in 1783. This included white Bermudians from every level of society, but particularly poorer, landless ones as Bermuda's high birth rate produced population growth that could not be sustained without emigration. Many free black Bermudians also emigrated, but this was less likely to be voluntary given that they would be leaving families behind and generally faced poorer prospects outside of Bermuda (although white fear of the growing number of blacks did result in free blacks being coerced to emigrate, though how many did is not recorded).\nTestimonies of enslaved Black Bermudians.\nEnslaved Black Bermudians, by comparison, had little choice but to go where they were taken, and more affluent white Bermudians who settled on the continent or elsewhere often brought slaves with them, as was the case with Denmark Vesey (born in the West Indies, who was enslaved for years to a Bermudian who then resettled with him in South Carolina). Given the choice, enslaved black Bermudians consequently generally chose not to emigrate, even when it would have meant freedom. Abandoning their families in Bermuda was too great a step. Enslaved adult black Bermudian men, like white Bermudian men, were generally sailors and or shipwrights, and hired themselves out as did free men, or were hired out, with their earnings usually divided between themselves and the slave masters, who used the enslaved man's family bonds to Bermuda to control him; allowing slaves to carry out a small degree of control over their economic life and to accumulate meager savings also worked to discourage slaves from escaping overseas, where they might find freedom, but also likely face poverty and social exclusion.\nBy example, in 1828 the ship \"Lavinia\" stopped in Bermuda on a voyage from Trinidad to Belfast, Ireland, and signed on twelve enslaved Bermudian sailors as crew. On reaching Belfast, where slavery was illegal, in September, eleven of the enslaved Bermudians were brought before a magistrate with members of the Anti-Slavery Society in attendance after a member of the Society of Friends had reported their presence (the twelfth, Thomas Albouy, failed to appear as he was on watch duty aboard the Lavinia and unwilling to abandon his post). Each man was asked individually whether he wished to remain in Ireland as a free man. Their replies were:\nThe Royal Gazette, on 13 December 1926, quoted a contemporary Irish newspaper as having described the enslaved Bermudians as \"they spoke English very well, and were stout, healthy men, clean and well dressed. They told the magistrate that in Bermuda their employment was not arduous, they did very little work on the Sabbath day, and they all attended a place of worship. They were usually hired out by their masters, who got two-thirds of their wage and they got the other third. They knew before they left Bermuda that they might be freed in Great Britain, but they had no complaint to make of their condition and, when they spoke of returning to their families, they indicated \"the finest emotions and susceptibilities of affection\".\"\nOther contributing factors to the changing ratio of the coloured to white population during the 17th and 18th centuries included the greater mortality of Whites from disease in the late 17th century, and patriarchal property laws that transferred a woman's property to her husband upon her marriage. This, combined with the shortage of white males due to the steady outflow of marriageable white sailors from Bermuda who settled abroad or were lost at sea, resulted in a sizeable contingent of aging and childless white unwed women for which Bermuda was noted well into the 20th century.\nConsiderable written material (letters, official reports, petitions, et cetera, and, from 1783, the content of Bermudian newspapers) that survives in archives and museums gives insight into the social, economic and political life of Bermuda between its settlement in the 17th century and the mid-19th century. Most of the Bermudians mentioned by name in these documents, however, tend to have been the more prominent white males. The views expressed about Bermudians, certainly in official correspondence from governors, naval and military officers, and other representatives of the imperial government, were often negative, resulting from the antagonistic relationship with Bermuda's native elites, whose economic interests often were not aligned with imperial interests (this was not necessarily always the case for poorer whites and free or enslaved coloured Bermudians). After the American War of Independence, there was deep distrust of Bermuda's local government and the merchant class that dominated it due to the prominent Bermudians who had schemed with the continental rebels, supplying them with ships and gunpowder, and continuing to trade with them in violation of the law. Although it was observed that enslaved coloured Bermudians were generally less likely to revolt than slaves in other colonies, the experience of various slave revolts in other British colonies during the preceding decades and the then ongoing uprising of slaves in Saint Domingue (now Haiti) during the French Revolution, the facts of which it was believed that well-travelled enslaved Bermudian sailors were particularly well-acquainted with and would be inspired by, combined with the relative freedom of movement and association of Bermuda's slaves, meant they were seen as a potential threat by officers of the British Government. As it was also perceived that slaves were not vital to the colony as slave-ownership was common among less well-to-do white households in which much of the work performed by slaves should, and elsewhere would, have been carried out by the more common class of whites themselves (this may have been true of household slaves, who acted as servants and tended small adjacent plots of vegetables grown for the subsistence of the household, which was virtually the only agriculture carried out in Bermuda between 1684 and the 1840s, but most able-bodied enslaved men were actually engaged in maritime activities that were essential to Bermuda's economic survival), it was also felt that the threat of a slave revolt was an unnecessary one.\nThis was not the only instance where the assumptions of officers of the British government, who were usually aristocrats or from the most privileged class of commoners, coloured their views of Bermudians and Bermudian society. A frequent comment made of Bermudians in the late 18th and early 19th century was that they were lazy or indolent. Most frequently cited in evidence of this was the apparent failure of Bermudians to fell the cedar forest cloaking the archipelago in order to adopt any manner of intensive agriculture. Numerous governors attempted to encourage agriculture, with little success due partly to the stigma in Bermuda against working the land. What was not obvious to many outside observers was Bermuda's shortage of wood, specifically Bermuda cedar, upon which its maritime economy relied. Bermuda's shipbuilders struggled not to exhaust this precious resource, and land-owning Bermudians counted cedars on their property as wealth which accrued interest over decades as the trees grew, and the remaining forest was consequently protected.\nThe voices of Bermudians themselves, at least of the poorer ones, the enslaved, and the women, were not generally recorded in the documents that were handed down by those generations.\nBermuda was a popular subject for playwrights, authors and poets in England during the early years of its colonisation, given the drama of its unintended settlement through the wreck of the Sea Venture and its being by far the more successful of the Virginia Company's two settlements until the 1620s. However, as Virginia developed and new colonies were established in the West Indies, Bermuda slipped from the view of writers and the public in England (nearly a century after its settlement, Bermuda, along with the rest of the Kingdom of England, united with the Kingdom of Scotland to become the Kingdom of Great Britain). Although rarely mentioned in histories or other reference books between the latter 17th century and the 19th century, Bermuda's designation as an Imperial fortress, Britain's primary naval and military base in the region of North America and the West Indies following US independence, and the emergence of the tourism industry in the latter 19th century, brought many erudite visitors and short-term residents, some already published authors, and more comprehensive ethnographic information on the people of Bermuda was included in many subsequently published recollections, travel guides, and magazine articles, such as the book \"BERMUDA; A COLONY, A FORTRESS AND A PRISON; OR, Eighteen Months in the Somers Islands\", published anonymously (the author, Ferdinand Whittingham, was identified only as \"A FIELD OFFICER\" who had served in the Bermuda Garrison) in 1857, though the authors' observations often gave more reliable insight into the assumptions and nature of their own societies and classes.\nIn 1828, Purser \"Richard Otter\" of the Royal Navy published \"Sketches of Bermuda, or Somers' Islands\", a description of Bermuda based on his own observations while serving there, assigned to the North America and West Indies Station. Of his reasons for writing the account, he wrote in the preface:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The obscurity in which the Bermuda's, or Somers' Islands, have remained in point of historical facts, since they were first peopled, and my fruitless endeavours to gain information respecting that Colony, on my appointment to a public situation there, four years ago, determined me to glean all I could during a residence of that period.\nI am free to confess that I had many motives in collecting all I could on a place that at first sight interested me in no trifling degree.\nThe friendly hospitality of the men, the mild and gentle demeanour of the women, that needed not a frown to awe the libertine to respect them, the curiosity natural to a citizen of the world, the wish to become useful to my country, and last, though not least, a desire to make my researches as advantageous as possible to my numerous family, were irresistible inducements, first to collect all the materials I could, and now to trust my feelings and my fate to a generous public.\nOf Bermuda's importance to the British Empire, he observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The possession of Bermuda, as the key of all our Western Colonies, is of the first importance to England, for if a foe of any maritime strength had possession of it, our trade would be exposed to much annoyance, if not total destruction.\nOf the prevailing opinion of Bermudians as expressed by other Imperial government officials who had served there, and of his own opinion of Bermudians, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has become too much the fashion amongst the officers of the various branches of the public service to ridicule the Bermudians, after partaking of their hospitality, but the latter are not inferior in any particular to the people of the Mother country; the women are as chaste and as fair, and the men as clever, as friendly, and as hospitable too in proportion to their relative means. It is true, that owing to the relaxation consequent to a warm climate, added, to the expensiveness of apparel, the ladies do not find it convenient to be at home at all times to receive idle visitors, but at the Governor's parties, public balls, and amateur plays, they are neatly dressed, and each lady may claim the merit of being her own dressmaker.\nThe men of business are shrewd and well-informed, many of them have acquired their knowledge of trade in America, the mode of that country being better suited to the limited traffic of Bermuda, than the broad scale upon which the mercandize of England is conducted.\nThe rich history of Bermudians and Bermuda, and the important roles they had played in almost every Imperial endeavour of England and Britain in the Americas and beyond during the 17th and 18th centuries, eluded Otter, who briefly summarised the first few years of settlement before recording:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Archives of the Colony present nothing worthy of notice after this period, and tradition hands down no more than the quarrels between a long succession of Governors and the people.\nAnd:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...when one of the first writers of the age declared, after several years residence at Bermuda, that its annals afforded nothing upon which a history could be founded, it would be great presumption in a man who has spent his life at sea to attempt swelling out those annals into a large volume.\nOn the subject of contemporary Bermudians, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...the Bermudians have neither vinegar nor cayenne in their composition, and a stranger who does not meet kind treatment from them has to blame himself only...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...The population of Bermuda is between nine and ten thousand souls, (if negroes have souls, and one is apt to be of uncle Toby's opinion, that \"it would be putting one sadly over the head of another if they had not,\") something more than half of this number are whites of whom nearly two thirds are females. This may be accounted for in part from the men, who are of an enterprising spirit, being often obliged to risk their lives in crazy little vessels, badly manned and indifferently navigated, to the West Indies and different parts of America, in search of a field for industry in a commercial line, which their little Colony does not afford.\nThe attachment of the women does not die with their husbands; there are many instances where a lady, widowed in the prime of youth, rejects every offer of conjugal consolation, however advantageous, during the rest of her life.\nThe negro population of Bermuda (all natives) is distressing to their owners, as well as to the Colony in general, and the prohibition of sending them to the West India Islands falls heavily on them, inasmuch as the owners are obliged to have recourse to America for live stock, flour, India corn, and corn meal for their maintenance; added to which, the arrival of seven hundred convicts for the public works, threw back upon their (in several instances) helpless owners, many of this ill-fated race of our species.\nMany of the females of Bermuda have no other property than a place to live in and a few slaves, left them by their deceased relatives. There being little field work, the black children being cherished as property, are brought up in the house of their mothers' owners, and become playmates to the owners' children; this creates an attachment that lasts through life.\nAn instance of this occurred not long ago. A lady complained to a magistrate of a negro man having struck a negress, (a fellow slave;) the case having been fully proved, the magistrate ordered the delinquent to be punished, when the mistress exclaimed in agony, \"what! flog my poor Jem, who has been brought up from infancy with me,\" and fainted. The female slave joined her supplications to the silent but powerful eloquence of the mistress, and Jem of course had his punishment remitted.\nHe also wrote at length about the industry, economy and subsistence strategies of Bermuda, showing the usual attitude of Imperial officials to Bermudians perceived failure to clear forest to turn land over to commercial agriculture:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...Of the twelve thousand acres which Bermuda is said to contain, two thousand might be brought into cultivation if there was less veneration for cedar trees, and a trifling exertion made to drain or embank the marshes, whereas at present there are not two hundred acres disturbed by the spade or the plough; indeed there is but one plough in the Colony, and that belongs to an Englishman named Winsor, who has proved what could be made of ground apparently barren...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...The facility of receiving supplies from America, has too long made the Bermudians regardless of internal resources; and the produce of the soil, even with the quick succession and perpetual vegetation, will not keep pace with the active mind of a man accustomed from boyhood to the more quick returns of commercial speculations...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...Almost all the occupiers of land sow a small quantity of barley, but in getting in their harvest they seem to scorn the copying system; neither scythe nor sickle are in use, but an old woman (generally a black) is furnished with a basket, and a pair of scissors, of equal standing in the family with herself: thus equipped, she proceeds to cut off the ears of Barley, and in the course of time she has the satisfaction to see a whole rood of barley reduced to headless straw, which is soon converted into bonnets. Europeans are highly amused on witnessing, this novel mode of farming. Their method of preparing the barley is by boiling it into a thick jelly, which they call barley broth, having first deprived it of its husks in a mortar...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...The great variety and abundance of fish is considered by some the reverse of a blessing, as it draws off the attention of the lower orders from the cultivation of the soil. The better sort of people, and a few provident fishermen, have ponds which they stock in summer for winter supply, but the lower order of whites are the most miserable of the human creation. When they catch fish, they reserve as much as will sustain nature as long as the price of what they sell will produce rum enough to keep them in a state of intoxication, using neither bread nor vegetables; their wives and children live on the bounty of the ladies of their respective neighbourhoods, who are without exception kind-hearted and charitable. These fishermen live in hovels or old ruins, and are little encumbered with cloathing...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...Bermuda, until the restriction of trade in 1826, derived all its supplies of oxen and sheep from the United States of America, but since that period the Bermudians have in part imitated the mode used by the Americans in naturalizing British subjects, and without the process of rocking the ox in a cradle, naturalize them in droves by driving them over the boundary into our North American dominions, and thence shipping them for our insulated Colonies.\nThe American Farmer has no other mart for the disposal of his surplus produce but our Colonies in the Western Archipelago, hence the restriction in commerce must press more heavily on the American citizens than on our Colonists; but this mode of supply is attended with greater expence, inasmuch as the Americans are cheaper carriers than the English.\nBermuda produces fresh butter and milk sufficient to meet the demand for those articles, but they do not rear more cattle than what are merely necessary to keep up their stock, killing the calves when about two months old. Except with a few who can afford to enclose their grounds, the cattle of Bermuda are tethered on the pasture; even hogs and goats can range no farther than the length of their strings, the Bermudians being very jealous of trespassers. They rear but few sheep, there being scarcely any enclosure in the country capable of restraining the roving propensity of these animals. The country is very productive in the propagation of every species of domestic poultry except geese, which do not thrive here, although several have been introduced at various times from America. A few wild geese are sometimes driven thither in the winter gales...\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...It is a mistaken notion that Bermuda cannot produce sufficient of all the necessaries of life to support its population, even with its redundancy of blacks, if proper exertions were made to cultivate the soil, but it may be repeated that with half its present number of negroes the Colony would be more prosperous...\n\"Susette Harriet Lloyd\" travelled to Bermuda in company with the Church of England's Archdeacon of Bermuda Aubrey Spencer, Mrs Spencer, and Ella, Miss Parker, Major and Mrs Hutchison and their daughter, the Reverend Robert Whitehead, Lieutenant Thompson of the 74th Regiment of Foot, and Lieutenant Young, aboard , which was delivering a military detachment from England to the Bermuda Garrison. Lloyd's visit to Bermuda lasted two years, and her \"Sketches of Bermuda\" (a collection of letters she had written en route to, and during her stay in, Bermuda, and dedicated to Archdeacon Spencer) was published in 1835, immediately following the abolition of slavery in Bermuda and the remainder of the British Empire in 1834 (Bermuda elected to end slavery immediately, becoming the first colony to do so, though all other British colonies except for Antigua availed themselves of an allowance made by the Imperial government enabling them to phase slavery out gradually). Lloyd's book gives a rare contemporary account of Bermudian society immediately prior to the abolition of slavery.\nOf white Bermudians, her observations included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The last assertion, that 'the women are without colour,' I cannot treat as I do the remarks on birds and flowers, for you will expect something beyond a mere description of their persons. Like the plants, they languish in the summer, and when we landed, I saw but few whose cheek retained any tint of the rose ; the children, in particular, struck me as having a sickly appearance. But this month of cool weather has already restored their bloom to many. They are tall and slender ; though there are a few handsome brunettes, they are generally fair, with light hair and full blue eyes. I have seen some who are really lovely-but it is that evanescent loveliness which does not survive the first bloom of youth. The young girls, who at the age of fifteen or sixteen are just merging into the woman, have an air of charming simplicity-a certain naivete and winningness of manner, which is very pleasing to strangers. They are amiable and affectionate, exemplary in the discharge of the domestic duties, and extremely quiet and retiring ; which surprised me, when I heard that, with but few exceptions, the young ladies receive their education in a boys' school. In several of the grammar-schools nearly a third are females, some of whom learn to construe Greek and Latin. As they are great sufferers under a system which prevents them from acquiring the more feminine accomplishments, I am glad to find that several ladies' seminaries are about to be established in Bermuda, which will call forth the talents they undoubtedly possess, and open a wider field for intellectual conversation.\nThe gentlemen are very domestic, distinguished for their hospitality and attention to strangers, and for the uprightness and integrity which characterize their commercial transactions. Many of them have been called to offices of high trust in other colonies, as well as in the mother country.\nShe devoted more attention to the subject of black Bermudians, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some most Caliban looking negroes have just been dancing on the lawn ; for in this season of general festivity, they are all permitted to indulge in the wildest mirth and revelry. The oldest among them participates with the child in the delights of their Gombey-a show which reminds me of the 'Jack-in-the-Green' scenes of our May-day chimney-sweepers. Here nature clothes them with their dusky livery, and they endeavour to heighten the effect by a plentiful bedaubing of red and yellow paints, scarlet cloth, flowers and ribbons. They completely besieged my room, which opens on the garden, so that I was forced to remain a close prisoner, and listen to their rude songs, which I should fancy must be very like the wild yelling scream that we read of in African travels. How much would the diffusion of true christian principles do for these poor people, by teaching them the real nature of rejoicing, and the folly of all these superstitious festivities.\nThe most famous Gombey parties are those of Hamilton and Hearne Bay ; they were preceded by really tolerable bands, composed of negroes dressed in a neat white uniform with scarlet facings. These musicians are all self-taught, and play many favourite airs with great accuracy. This is the more surprising, since they do not know a single note in music. They learn and play every thing by ear, and certainly have great natural taste, and love for music.\nWhen engaged about their work, or walking along the road, they generally beguile the time with a song; and in the evening you frequently hear the sounds of a flute or violin from a negro cottage. Many also possess the talent of extemporaneous composition, which they exercise in finding words for \"Di piacer\" and various Italian airs. Others content themselves with singing the last new song, and 'I'd be a butterfly,' and 'Oh, no, we never mention her,' are beginning to be general favourites.\nThere is a black woman here who ranks high as an improvisatrice; every passing event, every one who is so unfortunate as to incur her displeasure, is made the subject of her verse. A slave, an industrious man, to whom she does not bear a very friendly feeling, had the misfortune, a short time ago, to be robbed of a bag in which he had been hoarding some doubloons towards the purchase of his freedom. All pitied the poor fellow; when he one day came up to me in tears, saying that no one would credit his story since Piny had been making a song upon him, which had got all over Hamilton; and when he attempted to enquire after his doubloons, the negroes answered him by singing this song. These verses are of course very uncouth, but possess a great deal of wit.\nA thoughtless gaiety of disposition characterises the negro; and it has perhaps been wisely bestowed to counterbalance the pressure of the religious and moral degradation under which he labours. In proportion as this is removed, will his mind be open to more serious impressions.\nThe islands of Bermuda were first colonized in the year 1612, and were soon afterwards supplied with Negroes, partly from the coast of Africa, and partly from the West Indies, which had been previously settled. The population of Bermuda consists of about 10,000 souls, of which the proportions of white and coloured are nearly equal.\nThe latter are mostly in a state of slavery, not above seven hundred and forty having been emancipated, or born free. Instances of manumission are not frequent, and it was only during a late session of the local legislature, that a law was passed which gave the slave a legal right to property that might purchase his emancipation.\nIt must be confessed that in these islands slavery wears the mildest aspect of which that pitiable condition is susceptible. The character of the Bermudians is kind and humane, and their slaves enjoy many secular advantages of which the poor in our own country are frequently destitute. To the enslaved Negro all the wants of nature are amply supplied. He is, under every contingency, clothed, fed, and attended in sickness, at his master's cost. The ancient laws of slavery, odious and merciless as they are, are never enforced against him, and instances of domestic or private cruelty are, I believe I may venture to assert, almost unknown. Indeed, in many houses the young Negro grows up with his master's children, and is considered as one of the family.\nStill, however, after all these concessions, the coloured inhabitants of Bermuda are bondsmen, and have long suffered the two heaviest ills of bondage, a political incapacity to receive equal justice, and a spiritual privation of religious instruction and happiness.\nThe gleam of Christianity which penetrated the dreary dungeon of their African superstition, was at first so faint that it served rather to discover the gloom than to dispel the darkness which shrouded them; and having embraced the profession of the gospel, they adopted its name without receiving its influence in their heart. It is only within the last five or six years that any \"regular\" system has been adopted to give the coloured people instruction in schools connected with the church of England. This blessing is now imparted to nearly 1000 persons, in which number I do not include those who are educated in the schools under the dissenters, some of which are very flourishing.\nAs there are no plantations of sugar-cane, the negroes are employed in light agricultural labour, but principally as domestic servants. The entire wealth of many individuals often consists in two, three, twelve, or more of these slaves; and if the owner has no occasion for their services himself, he hires one out as a carpenter, another as a mason, house-servant, &amp;c. They regularly bring their full wages to their master, who commonly allows them a small proportion of their earnings. The price of labour varies from a pistorine (tenpence sterling), to a dollar (four shillings sterling) per day.\nIn their spare hours they (I mean the mechanics) are permitted to work on their own account; and it is by no means unusual for slaves to work out their freedom.\nA singular circumstance occurred a short time since. A slave, after having obtained his own freedom by his industry, went to his master to purchase his wife. When her owner offered to give him her deed of manumission, the man positively refused to have one drawn up: and thus the wife is literally her husband's slave. Surely, if slavery knew no other evil, the abuse of such a power as this would prove the iniquity of the system.\nSome of the free negroes are industrious and respectable; every thing, as among us, of course, depends upon individual exertion. If the negro is inclined to work, there seems to be no reason why he should not be as successful as an English labourer. That slaves are frequently so little disposed to labour, is probably because they know that, whether they work or not, their master is bound to support them. The slothful are therefore not made to feel so sensibly the consequences of their idleness, while the upright and conscientious have only the very abstract motive of their master's interest to encourage them to diligence and fidelity:-altogether the system of slavery is a sad check upon active industry and persevering exertions; and I am convinced, that, even with a temporary loss, the slave-owners would ultimately be infinite gainers by the introduction of free labour, and the power of employing only such workmen and servants as should produce a given quantity of labour for fair and stipulated remuneration.\nIt is a great misfortune to a slave if he happens to be married to a free woman. His time is of course his master's, and yet he must find a house, food and clothing for his wife and family. There is a poor man here, a native North American Indian, who is in this situation, and his family are consequently in great poverty.\nThe price of a slave varies from 25l. (but these are of the very lowest class,) to 70l. and even 100l. currency. But there are some who are above all price, and whom their owners would not part with for any sum.\nI know a slave, a religious and well-informed young man, who is a carpenter by trade, and being an excellent workman, can earn one dollar per day-that is, about 100l. currency, or 70l. sterling per annum. This sum he takes regularly to his owner. As it would of course enable him to maintain himself respectably, he is very anxious to be free, and has offered any sum that may be asked, but his master refuses to listen to any terms. As he has laboured faithfully many years, he naturally feels himself aggrieved; and yet such is the strength of his Christian principles, that he never speaks of his master but in terms of the highest respect. To such a character as this, who can doubt that emancipation would prove a blessing?\nSeveral persons have given freedom to their slaves-oftenest I think to a female. But should the poor woman happen to marry a slave, she is in most cases a sufferer, as all her children are of course free, and dependent upon her for support.\nI do not think that there are above three or four native Africans in Bermuda, the rest are born here. One of these Africans is a female, who has her face curiously slashed and tattooed; another, a man, who lives near us, and is one of the most good tempered, gay, and thoughtless beings in the world. He one day told me a long story of his having been carried off in a big ship while playing in a garden with his brothers and sisters. But I rather suspect there was some little romance about this. Having by chance seen my guitar, he now comes frequently and begs for some of my 'fiddle strings,' promising that in return he will play me the bravest tune at the gombeys. I had often remonstrated with him for not attending church; when he one afternoon made his appearance there, and told me very gravely the next morning that he had put the date into the little book which I had given him ; that he would look at it every Sunday, and that when he died he would have it laid upon his heart and buried with him. 'And surely,' said he, 'if I can find legs to go every morning to Hamilton to get doubloons for my mistress, I may as well get a bit of good to my soul by going to church on Sundays.'\nA Negro is the most loquacious being on earth-he seems to talk in spite of himself, and is a very child in the expression of his feelings.\nLloyd's negative comments on the \"dissenters\" reflected the Church of England's belated attempts to counter the inroads made by Methodists with coloured Bermudians. Although the Church of England is the established church, and as such was the only church originally permitted to operate in Bermuda, Presbyterians were permitted to have separate churches and to conduct their own services during the 18th century, and Methodists were permitted worship in the 19th century, despite initial steps taken by the Government to prevent this. The Wesleyan Methodists sought to include enslaved blacks resulting in 1800 in the passage of a law by the Parliament of Bermuda barring any but Church of England and Presbyterian ministers from preaching. In December 1800, the Methodist Reverend John Stephenson was incarcerated for six months for preaching to slaves. The Methodists also promoted education of slaves. The Church of England had generally been unwelcoming to slaves, and was never able to catch up to the Methodist's lead. In 1869, the African Methodist Episcopal Church was launched in Bermuda, and today the Anglican Church of Bermuda (as the Church of England in Bermuda was re-titled in 1978), though the largest denomination, has a disproportionately white membership. Stephenson was followed in 1808 by the Reverend Joshua Marsden. There were 136 members of the Society when Marsden left Bermuda in 1812. The Methodists were permitted to conduct baptisms and weddings, but not funerals for some time (the only civil cemeteries in Bermuda prior to the 20th century having all been attached to the churchyards of the nine Church of England parish churches and the Presbyterian Christ Church in Warwick), which were the remit of the established church.\nThe foundation stone of a Wesleyan Methodist Chapel was laid in St. George's Town on 8 June 1840, the local Society (by then numbering 37 class leaders, 489 Members, and 20 other communicants) having previously occupied a small, increasingly decrepit building that had been damaged beyond use in a storm in 1839. The inscription on the foundation stone included: \"Mr. James Dawson is the gratuitous Architect; Mr. Robert Lavis Brown, the Overseer. The Lot of Land on which the Chapel is built was purchased, 24 April 1839, from Miss Caroline Lewis, for Two hundred and fifty pounds currency. The names of the Trustees are, William Arthur Outerbridge, William Gibbons, Thomas Stowe Tuzo, Alfred Tucker Deane, James Richardson, Thomas Richardson, John Stephens, Samuel Rankin Higgs, Robert Lavis Brown, James Andrew Durnford, Thomas Argent Smith, John P. Outerbridge, and Benjamin Burchall.\" The African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME) First District website records that in the autumn of 1869, \"three farsighted Christian men\u2014Benjamin Burchall of St. George's, William B. Jennings of Devonshire and Charles Roach Ratteray of Somerset\u2014set in motion the wheels that brought African Methodism to\" Bermuda. The first AME church in Bermuda was erected in 1885 in Hamilton Parish, on the shore of Harrington Sound, and titled \"St. John African Methodist Episcopal Church\" (the congregation had begun previously as part of the British Methodist Episcopal Church of Canada). Although the Church of England (since 1978, titled the Anglican Church of Bermuda) remains the largest denomination in Bermuda (15.8%), the AME quickly flourished (accounting for 8.6% of the population today), overtaking the Wesleyan Methodists (2.7% today).\nAmong other observations of coloured Bermudians, Lloyd also recorded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But notwithstanding all this good humour, the passions of the negro are violent, and his anger easily roused. A few evenings ago a fine and generous hearted youth, whose complexion may vie with the raven's wing, felt his honour mortally offended on being called a \"black nigger\" by a negro a few shades lighter than himself; he instantly seized a knife that was lying before him, and would have plunged it into the man's breast, had not some one providentially held back his arm. To be called a Black Nigger seems to be considered the very acme of insult, and, like the 'Dummer Junge' of the German students must be avenged.\nUsage of the word \"nigger\" was generally avoided in Bermuda, where blacks and whites always lived in close quarters (and language was characterised by euphemisms), even by the most negrophobic whites, and, unlike the \"reclamation\" of the word by some blacks in the United States of America, it has not been adopted or made in any way acceptable today by Bermuda's blacks and remains the foulest and most unutterable racial slur. Lieutenant-Colonel John McMaster Milling, an avid fisherman who befriended coloured Bermudians who shared his passion, wrote of his period serving in Bermuda as a Lieutenant in the 2nd Battalion, The Bedfordshire Regiment, from 1910 to 1912:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...they are blacker still. But you mustn't say so! The word nigger is the highest insult. He's a coloured gentleman, and you must be very careful about it indeed.\nThomas Atkins used to find this nicety of nomenclature of great inconvenience on first arrival. To him, with his easy-going tongue, and an aptness at the best of times to refer to a spade as a spade, everything connected with a black skin was automatically a nigger. It led at first to an odd fracas or two, but, like everything else in Nature, given time and a hopeful constitution, rectification came all in its own due course\".\nLater writers generally agreed on the subject of Bermuda's politely mannered society, generally understood to be a requirement in a small, tightly knit community which could not afford to allow tempers to be frayed.\nAs Christiana Rounds wrote in Harper's Magazine (re-published in an advertising pamphlet by A.L Mellen, the Proprietor of the Hamilton Hotel in 1876):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who plume themselves on their culture, and who regard all places except those in which they have resided as very benighted quarters, would, of course, look upon Bermuda as almost outside the limits of civilization. Closer acquaintance would dispel many of these delusions. A stranger would be impressed at once with the marked courtesy of the people. From the lowest to the highest one will receive the most polite attention. A simplicity almost Arcadian characterizes their manners, especially those of the women. Many who have led very circumscribed lives, who have never been away from Bermuda, possess an ease and grace which would do credit to habitues of society, arising apparently from perfect faith in others, and an earnest desire to add to their pleasure in every possible way. In matters of etiquette they are generally much more exact than Americans. The kindliness and formality aside \u2014 and they are not to be underrated \u2014 one would hardly derive much inspiration from the Bermudian, whose outlook is not a broad one. His life has not fostered extended views, and he is, perhaps, as little to be blamed for not possessing them as for being born in mid-ocean.\nThey are a comfortable, well-to-do set of people, with here and there a family possessing ample means. As in England, property, especially real estate, remains in the same family for a long period. There is very little real suffering from poverty, though there are many poor people, who had rather be poor than make the necessary exertion to improve their condition. In this connection the colored people deserve some notice, forming, as they do, a large majority of the population. The importation of negroes from Africa ceased long before the abolition of slavery, which may account for the improved type of physiognomy one encounters here. The faces of some are fine, and many of the women are really pretty. They are polite, about as well dressed as anybody, attend all the churches, and are members thereof, are more interested in schools than the poor whites, and a very large proportion of them can both read and write. They have their own secret and benevolent societies, and are just as improvident here as elsewhere. If they have any money, work is uninteresting to them. When utterly destitute they are ready to improve their finances, but when pay-day comes they are quite apt to retire from business and spend their earnings, running the risk of again finding employment when compelled by necessity; and most of them live in this make-shift way all their lives. A strong feeling of prejudice exists against them, which will probably die out when they have acquired a few of the sterling virtues at present monopolized by white people.\nH.C. Walsh wrote in the December 1890 issue of \"Lippincott's Monthly Magazine\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The population of the islands amounts to about fifteen thousand souls, of whom something over sixty per cent, are colored. The white population is mostly composed of descendants of the old English settlers, with a sprinkling of immigrants from America and Portugal. The negroes are descended from African and American-Indian slaves : they were emancipated in 1834, and now enjoy the same political privileges as the whites; they seem anxious to improve themselves, and are gradually taking a better position. Their upward progress is looked upon with considerable uneasiness by the whites, who, of course, are anxious to retain the upper hand, and seem to fear the negroes as possible rivals in the local government of Bermuda.\nAs Bermuda's maritime economy began to falter during the 19th century, Bermudians would turn some of the woodland over to growing export crops, but most of the farming (or \"gardening\", as it is known in Bermuda) would be carried out by imported labour, beginning with immigration from Portuguese Atlantic islands in the 1840s. Later in the 19th century, large-scale West Indian immigration began (initially, also to provide labourers for the new export agriculture industry, then greatly increased at the turn of the century during the expansion of the Royal Naval Dockyard). The Black West Indians, unlike the Portuguese immigrants, were British citizens and not obliged to leave Bermuda, as many Portuguese were, at the end of a contracted period, although they were effectively indentured to the firm contracted by the Admiralty to carry out the construction work, and due to delays in construction, many found themselves in financial hardship.\nIn the latter 20th century, those with any degree of sub-Saharan African ancestry (which was virtually everyone who had been defined as coloured) were redefined as Black, with Asian and other non-White Bermudians defined by separate racial groups (although it also, in the 1960s, ceased to be the practice to record race on birth or other records). On census returns, only in recent years have Bermudians been given the option to define themselves by more than one race (the 2000 Census gave respondents the options of \"black\", \"white\", \"Asian\", \"black and white\", \"black and other\", \"white and other\", \"other\", and \"not stated\"), although there was considerable opposition to this from many Black leaders who discouraged Black Bermudians from doing so.\nIn the U.S., there is similar resistance from minority groups to defining themselves by more than one race on census returns, or as multi-racial, as it is feared that this will fragment demographic groups, and lower the percentage of the population recorded as belonging to a particular race, with possible negative effects on government policies (such as affirmative action) aimed at addressing the concerns of disadvantaged minority groups. As Bermuda's Blacks (whether perceived as a diverse, multi-racial group or as homogeneously Black African) have been in the majority for two centuries, but are still comparatively less well-off than White Bermudians (the Government of Bermuda's 2009 employment survey showed the median annual income for blacks for the year 2007-8 was $50,539, and for whites was $71,607, with white Bermudian clerks earning $8,000 a year more than black Bermudian clerks, and black Bermudian \"senior officials and managers\" earning $73,242 compared to $91,846 for white Bermudian senior officials and managers; the racial disparity was also observed among expatriate workers, with white non-Bermudian senior officials and managers earning $47,000 more than black non-Bermudian senior officials and managers), this fear may presumably also be the cause for the opposition to census reform in Bermuda. Large-scale West Indian immigration over the last century has also decreased the ratio of Black Bermudians who are multi-racial, and hardened attitudes. Most academic books on the subject emphasise the characteristic multi-racialism of Bermuda's Black population (at least those who might be defined as ethnically Bermudian, as opposed to those resulting from recent immigration), and it has been pointed out in other publications that, if those Black Bermudians who have White ancestry were numbered instead with the White population, the Black population of Bermuda would be negligible.\nThis overlooks the resentment felt by most Black Bermudians over a history of racial repression, segregation, discrimination and marginalisation that continued long after slavery, and that did not distinguish between black and bi/multi-racial Bermudians. With the increasingly racially divisive politics that have followed the election of the PLP government, as well as the decades of increasing costs-of-living, the exclusion of unskilled workers from jobs in the white collar international business sector that has come to dominate Bermuda's economy, and the global economic downturn, all of which many Black Bermudians perceive as hitting them hardest, there is little sentiment today amongst people who have long been obliged to think of themselves as Black, in opposition to being White, to identify even partly with their European ancestry. Additionally, most multi-racial Bermudians do not today result from having parents of different races, but inherit diverse ancestry via many generations of mixed-race forebears, most of whom may have assumed themselves to have been entirely of Black African ancestry, and certainly were generally characterised as such by whites (and hence by the mainstream culture). The Progressive Labour Party, the first party formed in 1963 before party politics was legalised, quickly came to be dominated by West Indians and West Indian Bermudians such as Lois Browne-Evans (or more recently Rolfe Commissiong, the son of a Trinidadian musician, Premier Edward David Burt, whose mother is Jamaican), and Deputy Premier Walter Roban (son of Matthew Roban, from St. Vincent and the Grenadines), and is still derided by many white and black Bermudians as promoting racially divisive, black nationalist \"plantation politics\" (a term with double meaning in traditionally sea-faring Bermuda where there remains a strong stigma against agricultural work).\nMany West Indian labourers emigrated from the West Indies at the end of the 19th Century as United States victory in the 1898 Spanish-American War was to result in United States companies (such as United Fruit Company, formed in 1899) gaining control of the sugar and tropical fruit production of several former Spanish colonies, driving down the prices that British West Indian producers of the same products, exporting primarily to the United States, could obtain. This co-incided with the expansion of the Royal Naval Dockyard in Bermuda. The system of convict labour that had been relied upon to build the original yard (which became the \"North Yard\" with the completion of the new \"South Yard\") had ended in the 1860s, and with the price of labour being high in Bermuda, the Admiralty's contractor brought in desperate, impoverished manual labourers from the West Indies without consulting the local Government.\nBermudian blacks were generally antagonistic to West Indians, who, like the early Portuguese immigrants, were perceived as driving down the cost of labour, primarily to the disadvantage of Bermudian blacks, and in recent decades (Jamaicans especially) have often been blamed for the illegal drug trade and violent crimes, including the 1996 murder of Rebecca Middleton. In recent decades, West Indians also came to be associated in Bermuda with law enforcement. The difficulty faced by the Bermuda Police Service in obtaining recruits locally had long led to recruitment of constables from the British Isles, which resulted in criticism of the racial make up of the force not reflecting that of the wider community. Consequently, in 1966 the Bermuda Police Force (as it was then titled) began also recruiting constables from British West Indian police forces, starting with seven constables from Barbados. Although the practice of recruiting from the British west Indies would continue, it was not deemed entirely successful. As the \"Bermuda Report for the year 1971\" recorded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;More recently police have been recruited from the Caribbean with a view to correcting the racial imbalance in the force. This has not been particularly successful, Bermudians regarding West Indians as much, if not more, expatriate as recruits from the United Kingdom, which has been and remains the main source of recruitment.\nBermudian blacks described black West Indians disparagingly as \"Jump-ups\", and were in turn perceived by many West Indian blacks as what in the United States are described as Uncle Toms, although more derogatory terms have been used for Bermudian blacks who oppose the party's agenda, especially on independence from the United Kingdom. Consequently, the party long struggled to unite Bermudian blacks with West Indian Bermudians under a banner of racial solidarity against white Bermudians to whom Bermudian blacks were tied by common heritage and blood, and did not win an election until 1998, after the United Bermuda Party (which PLP politicians characterised as the party for whites) was split by internal conflict following Premier John W. Swan's forcing an unpopular referendum on independence in 1995. The desire amongst black nationalists, and especially those of West Indian stock, to obscure the distinction between Bermudian blacks and West Indians by stressing black African heritage has also contributed to intolerance of Bermudian blacks identifying with their non-African, especially their white, ancestry.\nDespite these concerns, small numbers of Black Bermudians have chosen to describe themselves on census returns as mixed-racial, and the Native American demographic, which had disappeared for centuries, is slowly re-emerging, as more Bermudians \u2013 especially on St. David's Island \u2013 choose to identify to some degree, if not exclusively, with their Native American ancestry (although many may feel that, in an increasingly polarised climate, this is a safer option than identifying themselves as in any way White or European).\nNonetheless, any assumption of Bermudian demographics that is based on census returns, or other sources derived from them, suffers from anecdotal evidence being the basis of all of the data, in asking Bermudians to self-identify, without resorting to any documentary evidence or genetic studies being used to confirm their ancestry, if not their identification. There is similar pressure on Black Bermudians (most of whom are multi-racial) not to self-identify as mixed race as there is in Blacks in the US, where President Barack Obama, raised by his single, white mother, sparked debate when he identified himself on the census as black, rather than mixed race, and in the UK, in both of which countries greater flexibility is also now allowed for people to describe themselves racially.\nPortuguese immigration, from Atlantic islands including the Azores, Madeira and the Cape Verde Islands, began in the 19th century to provide labour for the nascent agricultural industry. From the beginning, Portuguese labourers, who have emigrated under special agreements, have not been allowed to do so on the basis of permanent immigration. They were expected to return to their homelands after a fixed period. Some were able to stay, however and by the 1940s there was a sizeable number Portuguese-Bermudians who were legally Bermudian (and British by citizenship). Until the recession of the 1990s, however, Bermuda continued to rely on large-scale immigration of temporary Portuguese workers who laboured at jobs Bermudians considered unworthy (notably, anything to do with agriculture or horticulture). Many of these immigrants lived and worked in Bermuda for decades on repeatedly renewed work permits, without gaining the right to permanent residence, British citizenship, or Bermudian status. When work permits were not renewed, especially during the recession, many were forced to return to the Azores, often with full-grown children who had been born and brought up in Bermuda. Although the numbers of Portuguese \"guest workers\" has not returned to its former levels, the number of Bermudians today described as \"Portuguese\" (often considered a distinct racial group from Whites of Northern European ancestry, and historically stigmatised by all other Bermudians) is usually given as ten percent of the population. This number does not include many Black Bermudians with White Portuguese ancestry, and obscures also that some of the Portuguese immigrants were Blacks from the Cape Verde Islands. The actual percentage of Bermudians with Portuguese ancestry is likely far larger.\nNoting that Bermudians of Portuguese heritage have made considerable contributions to the Island \u2013 from politics and public service, to sport, entertainment and industry \u2013 Premier Edward David Burt announced that 4 November 2019 \"will be declared a public holiday to mark the 170th anniversary of the arrival of the first Portuguese immigrants in Bermuda. Those first immigrants arrived from Madeira aboard the vessel the Golden Rule on 4th November 1849.\"\nSource populations and genetic research.\nThe founder population that settled in Bermuda between 1609 and the 1630s was almost entirely English. Typical Bermudian surnames that date to the seventeenth century indicate that the primary area of England from which settlers were sourced during that period was East Anglia and surrounding counties. Examples include \"Ingham\", from Ingham, Lincolnshire, and \"Trimingham\", from the village of \"Trimingham\" in Norfolk. This ancestry is shared, today, by both white and black Bermudians (the latter demographic group, as noted above, being made up of individuals of a blend of African, European and Native American ancestry, though not necessarily in that order). A continuous inward flow of immigrants from other parts of the British Isles, other British (or formerly British) territories, and foreign countries has added to the white population over the centuries, including sustained immigration from Portuguese Atlantic islands from the 1840s, and numerous Royal Navy and British Army personnel who were discharged and remained in Bermuda to contribute to the permanent population (white and multi-racial). The white population (that is, those Bermudians presumed to be entirely of European ancestry) has consequently grown more diverse. No genetic study has as yet been conducted either of or including the white population of Bermuda. Although European ancestry is the largest component of Bermuda's ancestry, and those entirely of European ancestry are by far the largest mono-racial group (based on actual ancestry, rather than self-identification), whites (and the European ancestry of blacks) are often excluded when Bermuda's source populations are discussed. By example, National Geographic's Genographic Project Reference Population (Geno 2.0 Next Generation) for \"Bermudian\" (as of 28 June 2020) was described on its website (which was taken offline after 30 June 2020) as \"based on samples collected from mixed populations living in Bermuda\" (this was not based on a survey of even the mixed, or other-than-entirely-European population, of Bermuda, as no such survey of all of Bermuda has been carried out).\nIn the British West Indian islands (and also in the southern continental colonies that were to become states of the United States of America), the majority of enslaved blacks brought across the Atlantic came from West Africa (roughly between modern Senegal and Ghana). By contrast, very little of Bermuda's original black emigration came (directly or indirectly) from this area. The first blacks to arrive in Bermuda in any numbers were free blacks who came in the mid-seventeenth century from Spanish-speaking areas of the West Indies, and most of the remainder were recently enslaved Africans captured from the Spanish. Spain was little involved in the trans-Atlantic slave trade, instead purchasing enslaved Africans from the Portuguese and Arab slave traders. The Portuguese sourced most of their slaves from South-West Africa, through ports in modern-day Angola; and the Arabs' slave trading was centred in Zanzibar, in South-East Africa.\nThis history has been well understood from the written record, and was confirmed in 2009 by the only genetic survey of Bermuda, which looked exclusively at the black population of St. David's Island (as the purpose of the study was to seek Native American haplogroups, which could be assumed to be absent from the white population) consequently showed that the African ancestry of black Bermudians (other than those resulting from recent immigration from the British West Indian islands) is largely from a band across southern Africa, from Angola to Mozambique, which is similar to what is revealed in Latin America, but distinctly different from the blacks of the British West Indies and the United States. 68% of the mtDNA (maternal) lineages of the black islanders were found to be African, with the two most common being L0a and L3e, which are sourced from populations spread from Central-West to South-East Africa. These lineages represent less than 5% of the mtDNA lineages of blacks in the United States and the English-speaking West Indies. They are, however, common in Brazil and the Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America. L3e, by example, is typical of !Kung-speaking populations of the Kalahari, as well as of parts of Mozambique and Nigeria. The modern nation where it represents the highest percentage of the population is actually Brazil, where it represents 21% of mtDNA lineages. 31% of the mtDNA lineages of blacks in Bermuda are West Eurasian (European), with J1c being the most common. 1% were Native American.\nFor NRY (paternal) haplogroups among black Bermudians, the study found about a third were made up of three African ones (of which E1b1a, the most common NRY haplogroup in West and Central African populations, \"accounted for the vast majority of the African NRY samples (83%)\" ), with the remainder (about 64.79%) being West Eurasian excepting one individual (1.88%) with a Native American NRY haplogroup Q1a3a. Of the individuals with European NRY haplogroups, more than half had R1b1b2, which is common in Europe and is found at frequencies over 75% in England and Wales. None of these percentages can be taken as equivalent to the percentage of ancestry in the black population from the specific regions as genetic drift tends to erase minority haplogroups over generations. This explains the near absence of Native American haplogroups despite the hundreds of Native Americans known to have been involuntarily brought to Bermuda in the seventeenth century.\nWomen in Bermuda.\nWomen in Bermuda includes British nationals with local status, British nationals without Bermudian status who are resident in Bermuda, and Commonwealth nationals and foreign nationals who are resident in Bermuda, although in most cases only the first of these groups is intended to be connoted.\nAlthough women and girls were among the passengers of the Sea Venture, the flagship of the Virginia Company that was wrecked at Bermuda in 1609, starting the permanent settlement of the archipelago as an English (following the 1707 union of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland, \"British\") colony, none were among the three (living) people left in Bermuda in 1610 (when most of the crew and passengers continued to Jamestown, Virginia in two newly-constructed ships. In 1612, with its Royal Charter officially extended to include Bermuda (officially named \"Virginiola\", and quickly renamed \"The Somers Isles\") as part of its territory in Virginia, the Virginia Company sent sixty settlers, including women, under a Lieutenant-Governor aboard the \"Plough\" to join the three men left behind in 1610. An under-company, the \"Company of the City of London for the Plantacion of The Somers Isles\" (or Somers Isles Company) was already planned in 1612 and administration of the Somers Isles was transferred to it in 1615, though Bermuda and Virginia continued to be closely interlinked. Bermuda was grouped with the North American continental colonies until 1783 as part of British America, and from then until 1907 as part of British North America, when the Colony of Newfoundland became the Dominion of Newfoundland, leaving Bermuda as the only remaining British colony in the North American region, and it was thereafter administered by the Colonial Office under the same department as the British West Indies. Bermuda's closest neighbours in order of distance are the United States of America (640 miles), Canada (768 miles) and the nearest West Indian islands (roughly 1,000 miles).\nThe companies would utilise indentured servitude as a source of cheap labour until the latter company lost its Royal Charter in 1684 and the Crown took over direct administration. Most settlers who arrived voluntarily over the early decades of settlement exchanged seven years of servitude for the cost of their transport. The early settlers were disproportionately men, and female convicts were shipped to Bermuda and sold to local men to provide an adequate supply of brides. During the Civil War, women were among the native Irish who were forcibly exported to Bermuda and other trans-Atlantic colonies and sold into servitude. Native American prisoners from areas of the continent that were ethnically cleansed to make way for settlers were also sent to Bermuda in the mid-17th Century, disproportionately women. Although slavery was not to become the feature it did in other colonies, due to the indentured servants, privateers based at Bermuda from its settlement onwards often brought enslaved Africans or people of African ancestry captured from the Spanish or French or other foes. Others arrived via shipwreck, and after the Civil War there was a considerable influx of coloured indentured servants from former Spanish territories annexed by England.\nThe founder population of the 17th Century was consequently diverse. All women in Bermuda, regardless of status, were constrained by the same laws as elsewhere in England and its colonies. They had no representation, or ability to stand for election, and their property generally became their husbands' upon marriage. Some men were as cruel to their daughters, wives and enslaved females as was common elsewhere, but in 1684, following the revocation of the Somers Isles Company's charter, Bermudians were freed to develop their maritime economy, and by the 18th Century virtually the only industries were shipbuilding and sea faring.\nThis had a profound effect on the lot of women as most Bermudian men spent months away at sea, leaving wives to handle matters at home as best as they could, with many becoming competent at managing financial affairs. As a significant number of Bermudian men were lost at sea, there were, as mentioned above, a large number of young widows who, having come into possession of their husband's estates (including what had been their own property 'til marriage) declined to remarry and lose their property to another husband. Being a small, closely-knit community, where good manners and modesty were the norm, when Bermudian men were at home they were mindful of their reputations. Mary Prince, born into slavery in Bermuda, related in \" The History of Mary Prince\" (1831) vicious attacks on his daughter by one of her masters in which she sought to protect the other woman, chastising him that they were in Bermuda, not the Turks Islands (where some Bermudians, free and enslaved, migrated seasonally to gather salt for sale on the continent, and where, out of sight of their wives and polite society, some men resorted to debauchery they would not dare to at home), and his having her bathe his naked body until she refused, .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My old master often got drunk, and then he would get in a fury with his daughter, and beat her till she was not fit to be seen. I remember on one occasion, I had gone to fetch water, and when I Was coming up the hill I heard a great screaming; I ran as fast as I could to the house, put down the water, and went into the chamber, where I found my master beating Miss D\u2014\u2014 dreadfully. I strove with all my strength to get her away from him; for she was all black and blue with bruises. He had beat her with his fist, and almost killed her. The people gave me credit for getting her away. He turned round and began to lick me. Then I said, \"Sir, this is not Turk's Island.\" I can't repeat his answer, the words were too wicked\u2014too bad to say. He wanted to treat me the same in Bermuda as he had done in Turk's Island.\nHe had an ugly fashion of stripping himself quite naked, and ordering me then to wash him in a tub of water. This was worse to me than all the licks. Sometimes when he called me to wash him I would not come, my eyes were so full of shame. He would then come to beat me. One time I had plates and knives in my hand, and I dropped both plates and knives, and some of the plates were broken. He struck me so severely for this, that at last I defended myself, for I thought it was high time to do so. I then told him I would not live longer with him, for he was a very indecent man\u2014very spiteful, and too indecent; with no shame for his servants, no shame for his own flesh. So I went away to a neighbouring house and sat down and cried till the next morning, when I went home again, not knowing what else to do.\nAfter that I was hired to work at Cedar Hills, and every Saturday night I paid the money to my master.\nThis led to a marked difference in the way women functioned in Bermuda, and were and are perceived (both by themselves and by men), when compared with Britain, the United States, Canada, or the British West Indies. Bermudian society is often perceived as matriarchal by outsiders.\nFrom the 1840s, there has been a steady immigration from Portuguese Atlantic islands, and there has been a considerable immigration during the 20th Century from the British Isles, the British West Indies, the United states, and Canada, among other areas, often causing culture clashes over the perceived treatment of women by men of various demographic groups (with Bermudians sometimes perceiving West Indian and Portuguese immigrants as patriarchal, or even misogynistic).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68983", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68983", "title": "Government of Algeria", "text": ""}
{"id": "68984", "revid": "38004052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68984", "title": "Politics of Bermuda", "text": " \nBermuda is the oldest British Overseas Territory, and the oldest self-governing British Overseas Territory, and has a great degree of internal autonomy through authority and roles of governance delegated to it by the national Government (the British Government, which is ultimately responsible for the governance of all British territory). Its parliament held its first session in 1620, making it the third-oldest continuous parliament in the world. As part of the British realm, King Charles III is head of state and is represented in Bermuda by a Governor, whom he appoints on the advice of the British Government. The Governor has special responsibilities in four areas: external affairs, defence, internal security, and policing.\nInternally, Bermuda is a parliamentary representative democratic dependency. The premier is the head of government, and there is a multi-party system. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Military defence is officially the responsibility of the sovereign government (the government of the United Kingdom), but various military forces have been raised under local legislation, including the current Royal Bermuda Regiment.\nBermuda is represented by British delegations in the UN and its related agencies. The United Nations Committee on Decolonisation includes Bermuda on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories.\nHistory.\nThe original system of government was created under the Virginia Company, which colonised Bermuda, accidentally in 1609, and deliberately from 1612. The Virginia Company lost its Royal Charter for its territory on the continent of North America (\"Virginia\") in 1622, and the Crown assumed responsibility for the administration of the continental colony. Bermuda, however, passed in 1615 to a new company (a \"Spin-off\" of the Virginia Company, described at the time as an \"under-company\"), The Somers Isles Company (\"The Somers Isles\" being the other official name of the colony), formed by the same shareholders.\nThe colonial government was established in 1612 with the arrival of the first Governor of Bermuda, Richard Moore. Moore was actually the \"Lieutenant-Governor\", under the Governor of Virginia. The office would remain a Lieutenant-Governorship under an overseas Governor until the revocation of the Royal Charter of the Somers Isles Company in 1684 (and would continue to be termed as such until re-titled \"Governor of Bermuda\" in 1738). Moore was also instructed to appoint a \"Counsell of Six\" to assist in the governance of the colony. The original form of local government that developed was similar to that of a County in England and Wales, with a number of prominent men appointed to key roles, such as the judiciary, Secretary, and Sherriff. As the trans-Atlantic colonies were too distant from the political centre at London for the national government (the \"English Government\") to easily fill its role as it did within counties of England and Wales, the (Lieutenant-) Governor was appointed to represent the English Government (and also the company) locally. The Governor was also appointed to fill the role performed in counties of England and Wales by the Lord-Lieutenant, in command of the local Militia (there being no standing English Army at that time), with this office titled Commander-in-Chief or Captain-General. The various appointed officers of the local government were also ex-officio members of the Council, a body that advised the Governor as the Privy Council of England advised the King, and that functioned as a Cabinet.\nThe elected House of Assembly was created in 1620 under that the Somers Isles Company, functioning as a Lower House of the Parliament of Bermuda with the Council acting as the Upper House until 1888, when the Council was split into an Executive Council (which later became the Cabinet) and a Legislative Council as the Upper House. As there was originally no \"Deputy Governor\", the President of The Council could find himself temporarily acting as Governor in the event of the absence, incapacitation or death of the Governor (or during an interregnum, which occasionally resulted from a retiring Governor departing Bermuda before the arrival of his replacement) until the mid-19th Century, after which the senior military (army, rather than naval) officer in Bermuda assumed the role of \"Officer Administering the Government\" during the absence of the Governor.\nVoting was originally restricted to males, but (unlike the franchise for the national House of Commons) there was no property qualification as virtually all private land in Bermuda belonged to absentees until the 1630s, when the falling profits of Bermudian tobacco led many of the Company's adventurers to sell their landholdings, usually to the agents or tenants who occupied them (a property qualification would ultimately be introduced to minimise the number of coloured and poor white islanders who could vote). When the numbers of non-white landowners began to increase, a minimum value was established for the properties which entitled their owners to vote. In 1960, this was \u00a360. A man could vote in each parish in which he owned sufficiently valuable land \u2013 giving the richest whites as many as nine votes each if they so desired.\nSince 1968 Bermuda has had a constitution that sets out its structure of government. The constitution provides the island with formal responsibility for internal self-government, while the British Government retains responsibility for external affairs, defence, and security. The Bermudian Government is always consulted on any international negotiations affecting the territory. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament. The party system is dominated by the Progressive Labour Party and the One Bermuda Alliance, while prior to 1998 it had been dominated by the United Bermuda Party.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Governor is appointed by the Monarch. The Governor invites the leader of largest party in Parliament to form a government as Premier. The premier is head of government and leader of the majority party in the elected House of Assembly. The Cabinet is composed of 14 members selected by the premier from among members of the bicameral parliament consisting of the nominated Senate and the House of Assembly.\nThe Governor appoints a number of senior government positions, including the puisne judges, police commissioner, the auditor general and the parliamentary registrar.\nCabinet.\nFollowing the 2025 Bermudian general election, a new cabinet was appointed:\nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament has two chambers: the House of Assembly and the Senate. The House of Assembly was originally composed of 40 members from 20 electoral districts (two representatives from each district) for a term not to exceed 5 years. As the districts, based on the old parish boundaries, contained significantly differing numbers of voters (malapportionment), that body was replaced in 2002 with a 36-member House elected from single-seat electoral districts of roughly equal population for a five-year term. The Senate, called the Legislative Council until 1980, is the revising chamber and serves concurrently with the House of Assembly. There are 11 senators: five appointed by the governor in consultation with the premier; three in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition; and three at the governor's discretion.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe latest election results for the House of Assembly are as follows:\nJudicial branch.\nThe Magistrates' Court is a creature of statute. Its jurisdiction includes: adjudicating on small claims in civil matters, dealing with a number of regulatory applications, trial of summary criminal offences and serving as examining justices on indictable matters (that is, determining if there is sufficient evidence to commit a criminal suspect for trial on indictment in the Supreme Court).\nThe Supreme Court has inherent original jurisdiction for most civil matters, with concurrent jurisdiction in common law and equity. The Supreme Court also deals with trials on indictment (that is, the most serious criminal matters). The Supreme Court can judicially review government action in accordance with the principles of Administrative Law and entertain petitions that laws or public acts are contrary to the Constitution of Bermuda. It also has appellate jurisdiction on matters from the Magistrates' Court.\nThe Court of Appeal has appellate jurisdiction on matters from the Supreme Court.\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court on all matters from Bermuda.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBermuda has two municipal subnational entities: the city of Hamilton and the town of St. George. There are also nine traditional parishes, but these have no administrative or legal role. When Bermuda was first colonised, the territory was divided between eight primary landowners (the shareholders of the Bermuda Company) in equal allotments, and public land (St. George's); these divisions, then called \"Tribes\", came to be known as \"Parishes\". Until the late 20th century, the parishes maintained their own community councils responsible for such functions as birth records. Today, the Bermuda parishes are as follows:\nInternational organization participation.\nCaricom (associate), CCC, ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), IOC\nPolitical conditions.\nBermuda's first political party, the Progressive Labour Party (PLP), was formed in February 1963 with predominantly black and working class adherents. Its leadership quickly became dominated by West Indian Bermudians (the 20th century had seen considerable immigration from the West Indies, resulting in profound social and political changes in Bermuda). In 1965, the two-party system was launched with the formation of the United Bermuda Party (UBP), which had the support of the majority of white voters and of some blacks. A third party, the Bermuda Democratic Alliance (BDA) (not to be confused with a party of the same name founded in 2009), was formed in the summer of 1967 with a splinter group from the PLP as a nucleus; it disbanded in 1970. It was later replaced by the National Liberal Party (NLP) which contested elections until 2003 with no success.\nBermuda's first election held on the basis of universal adult suffrage and equal voting took place on 22 May 1968; previously, the franchise had been limited to property owners and those above the age of 21. Persons who owned land in one or more parishes could vote in each parish. In the 1968 election, the UBP won 30 House of Assembly seats, while the PLP won 10 and the BDP lost the three seats it had previously held. The UBP continued to maintain control of the government, although by decreasing margins in the Assembly, until 1998 when the PLP won the general election for the first time with 54% of the popular vote and a 24-seat majority in the 40-member Assembly. The PLP would succeed gaining a second term in July 2003, although by a reduced majority of 52% margin of the popular vote and 22 seats in a new 36-seat Assembly. A leadership battle followed the election, resulting in the PLP's first Premier, Jennifer M. Smith (now Dame Jennifer) being ousted with William Alexander Scott chosen as new Party Leader and later Premier. In December 2007, after an October 2006 party leadership change in which Ewart F. Brown, Jr. became Premier, the PLP gained a third term by maintaining a 52% margin of the popular vote and 22 out of 36 seats in the Assembly. Paula Cox replaced Brown as leader of the PLP, and therefore the Premier, in October 2010.\nUnsatisfied aspirations, particularly among young blacks, led to a brief civil disturbance in December 1977, following the execution of two men found guilty of the 1972\u201373 assassinations of Governor Sir Richard Sharples and four others. In the 1980s, the increasing prosperity of Bermudians, combined with limited land area, caused severe pressure in housing. Despite a general strike in 1981 and poor economic conditions worldwide during 1981\u201383, Bermuda's social, political, and economic institutions showed resilience and stability.\nBermuda's positive experience with internal self-government has led to discussions of possible complete independence by both parties. However, an independence referendum called by a sharply divided UBP in the summer of 1995 was resoundingly defeated and resulted in the resignation of the Premier and UBP leader, Sir John Swan. Just over 58% of the electorate voted in the independence referendum, which had to be postponed one day due to disruptions caused by Hurricane Felix in 1995. Of those voting, over 73% voted against independence, while only 25% voted in favour. The vote may not have been a true test of support for independence, however, as the Progressive Labour Party (PLP) urged its membership and supporters to boycott the referendum. The PLP stated that the unwillingness of the UBP government to put forward a plan of substantive constitutional reform made it impossible for it to support the referendum.\nThis was despite independence having been one of the PLP's central principles since the party's inception in 1963. In 1968, the PLP election platform stated that, \"No government can be either responsible or democratic while under the rule of another country. Colonialism is a cancer...Therefore we shall return to London to examine with the British Government what arrangements can be made for our independence.\"\nDespite the previous emphasis, any mention of independence was absent from the PLP's general election platform both in 1998, when the PLP first triumphed at the polls, and again in 2003. In fact, Premier Jennifer M. Smith stated that she would not pursue independence during her first term. Again, in 2001, she made the following statement: \"As I have stated repeatedly, consistently and unequivocally since assuming the leadership of the Bermuda Progressive Labour Party, I shall state once again for the record \u2013 independence is not an issue that we will address in our first term and probably not in our second term...We believe that there are a number of areas that need addressing before Bermuda heads down this road.\"\nUnder the leadership of Smith, the Government of Bermuda began to systematically address the issues that it believes are fundamental prerequisites for independence. It very quickly enacted legislation providing for the elimination of annual voter registration. In 2001, the government began taking steps to amend Bermuda's constitution in order to abolish the island's system of parish-based, dual-seat constituencies which favored voters in parishes of small, predominantly white populations. The British Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) prepared an Order in Council empowering the Constituency Boundaries Commission to recommend to the governor the number and boundaries of single-member constituencies into which Bermuda should be divided. The Commission held meetings with the public and concluded its deliberations. The governor then submitted the commission's report to the UK's Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, together with the views of the House of Assembly. Finally, the FCO prepared a second Order in Council for presentation to the Privy Council to effect the proposals made by the commission, including constitutional amendments relating to electoral boundaries and representation.\nThe possibility of independence has relevance to newly enacted UK legislation entitling citizens of Britain's Overseas Territories, including Bermuda, to British citizenship. The British's Overseas Territories Act, passed in February 2002, provides automatic acquisition of British citizenship, including automatic transmission of citizenship to their children; the right of abode, including the right to live and work in Britain and the European Union; the right not to exercise or to formally renounce British citizenship; and the right to use the fast track EU/EEA channel at the airport, free of British immigration controls.\nA poll conducted by the \"Bermuda Sun\", a local semiweekly newspaper, reveals support for British citizenship\u2014however, that support largely comes from whites and the majority of blacks in the island\u2014that is, Bermuda's majority\u2014are not interested in British citizenship, opting rather to live and study in North America. The March 2002 poll revealed that of the 356 persons surveyed, 66.9% were interested in accepting British citizenship, and only 18% said that they would refuse it. However, the poll has come under much controversy recently, with some saying the data and focus are grossly inaccurate. There are no conditions attached to the granting of British citizenship to the Overseas Territories, a fact of particular importance to Bermuda where the issue of independence lies dormant. The white paper specifically states, \"The new grant of British citizenship will not be a barrier, therefore, to those Overseas Territories choosing to become independent of Britain...Our Overseas Territories are British for as long as they wish to remain British. Britain has willingly granted independence where it has been requested; and we will continue to do so where this is an option.\"\nThere is a Bermuda Independence Commission https://, and it has published reports and papers to address issues related to independence.\nBermuda electoral politics has been characterized by single-party dominance: the UBP was the dominant party from 1968 to 1998, winning every election; while the PLP has continuously been in power since 1998. The formation of the opposition One Bermuda Alliance from a merger of the Bermuda Democratic Alliance and most members of the UBP was driven by polls showing that the PLP would easily win a fourth straight term if they faced either the UBP or BDA in an election.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68985", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68985", "title": "Geography of Bermuda", "text": "Bermuda (officially, The Bermuda Islands or The Somers Isles) is an overseas territory of the United Kingdom in the North Atlantic Ocean. Located off the east coast of the United States, it is situated around northeast of Miami, Florida, and south of Halifax, Nova Scotia, south-southwest of Saint Pierre and Miquelon (France), west of Faj\u00e3 Grande, Ilha des Flores, A\u00e7ores, Portugal, north-northwest of the Nascente do Panar\u00ee, Brazil (and from Oiapoque, Brazil), north of Havana, Cuba and north-northeast of San Juan, Puerto Rico. The nearest landmass is Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, about west-northwest, followed by Cape Sable Island, Nova Scotia, Canada northward. Although commonly referred to in the singular (i.e., \"The Island\", \"The Rock\", and \"Bermuda\"), the territory consists of approximately 138 islands, with a total area of .\nNative terrestrial ecology.\nBermuda's ecology has been altered radically since the 16th century by humans and the plants and animals they introduced. Some species had actually become extinct long before this, including the short-tailed albatross, a species which occurs today only in the northern Pacific Ocean.\nFlora.\nForest cover is around 20% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,000 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, which was unchanged from 1990. Of 165 plant species found in Bermuda today, 14 are endemic, and 25 are endangered. \nWhen discovered, about 1505, the island's habitat was dominated by the remnant, old-growth forest of Bermuda Juniper (\"Juniperus bermudiana\"). Underwater archaeology of the caldera basin to the north shows that the area was once densely forested with junipers when it was above sea level. The juniper is an endemic species, though related to species found in North America. Its wood is an unusually deep red, indicative of the high iron content of the island's soil (which is similarly very red). Prior to human settlement, there were several million juniper trees in Bermuda. \nBy the 1830s, large areas of Bermuda had been denuded by the shipbuilding industry. As that industry died out in the 19th century, however, the junipers rapidly recovered their numbers. By 1900, when the human population neared 20,000, the islands were again covered densely with juniper, although many of these were juvenile trees. The respite proved temporary, however. \nIn the 1940s, it was realised that two species of scale insect, \"Lepidosaphes newsteadi\" and \"Carulaspis minima\", had accidentally been introduced, and were rapidly killing off the junipers, which had no immunity to their toxicological effect. Attempts were made to control the infestation naturally, which involved the large-scale introduction of ladybird beetles (\"Coccinellidae\"), but these were to no avail. Over the next decade, roughly 8 million juniper trees were lost to the scales. Motor cars were legalised in Bermuda in 1948, as a result of changes wrought by World War II, and the resultant sprawl of the rapidly growing population (which had reached 60,000 by the 1980s) outward from the pre-war population centres happened simultaneously with the destruction of the forests. Unlike in the 19th century, many plant species that had been introduced, some, like the \"Casuarina\", specifically to replace the windbreak lost with the juniper, spread virulently. The juniper grows slowly by comparison to many of the introduced species, and has been unable to thrive in the presence of \"Casuarina\" and Brazilian pepper trees. Efforts to restore it centre around intensively managed land areas, such as gardens and golf courses. Other large plant species, which were never as numerous as the juniper, had also fared poorly in the presence of invasive species, but have become popular with gardeners and their numbers also have increased in managed areas. These include two native species, the Bermuda olivewood (\"Elaeodendron laneanum\"), and the Bermuda palmetto (\"Sabal bermudana\"), the only native or endemic palm. In some coastal areas and inland marshes, \nBermuda is the most northerly point at which mangrove trees are found. Smaller plants include many ferns. Notable among these is the rare Bermuda cave fern (\"Ctenitis sloanei\"). An even rarer fern,\" Diplazium laffanianum\", no longer survives in the wild. Another native plant is the iris \"Bermudiana\" (\"Sisyrinchium bermudiana\"). This was thought to be endemic, but also appears in two locations in Ireland. Many of the smaller endemic and native plants of Bermuda are rare and endangered, but others have survived and prospered. The common Bermuda grass is not actually Bermudian, but a Mediterranean import.\nFauna.\nThere were few species of land animal in Bermuda before the arrival of humans. The only vertebrate species was the Bermuda skink, or \"rock lizard\" (\"Eumeces longirostris\"). These were quite numerous, but have become rare due to predation by introduced species, and, especially, the introduction of glass bottles, in which they easily become trapped. Unlike the introduced anoles, their feet are unable to adhere to glass. Their range had been largely reduced to small islands of Castle Harbour, but they have re-colonised the mainland, and their numbers are increasing. \nThe only other large land animals found on the island were crustaceans, notably two species of land crab, including the rare giant land crab (\"Cardisoma quantami\"). Insects included the endemic, ground-burrowing solitary bee, which has not been observed for several decades and is believed extinct. The native cicada also became extinct with the loss of the juniper forest. Other native insects survive, including the migratory monarch butterfly (\"Danaus plexippus\"), which has become threatened due to the loss of milkweed, which has been eradicated as a weed. \nThe most numerous animals were, and are, birds. Several native species are related to North American species, including the eastern bluebird (\"Sialia sialis\"), and the white-eyed vireo (\"Vireo griseus bermudianus\"). Both of these were common, but have suffered from loss of habitat, from competition for nest sites with introduced house sparrows (\"Passer domesticus\"), and nest-predation by European starlings (\"Sturnus vulgaris\") and great kiskadees (\"Pitangus sulphuratus\") - this last species was deliberately introduced as late as 1957, with the intent that it would control the previously introduced anoles. Other native birds, including the grey catbird, have suffered from the same causes. \nThe most famous Bermudian bird is the endemic Bermuda petrel (\"Pterodroma cahow\"), or \"cahow\". This is a pelagic seabird which had dug burrows for its nests. Humans are believed to have killed millions of them after settlement began in 1609, and feral pigs, introduced presumably by Spaniards decades before, also attacked their nests. Before the 17th century was over, the cahow was believed to be extinct. After sightings of the bird at sea, a young Bermudian, David B. Wingate, theorised cahows might still be nesting on rocky islets of Castle Harbour. He visited these islets with ornithologists Robert Cushman Murphy and Louis S. Mowbray in 1951 and discovered a handful of nesting pairs. Under Wingate's supervision, a conservation programme has steadily increased the cahow's numbers. Species that arrived by natural dispersion and become native after human settlement include the barn owl (\"Tyto alba\"), and the mourning dove (\"Zenaida macroura\").\nIntroduced flora and fauna.\nSince discovery by humans, numerous species have been introduced to the island, some deliberately, like the casurina, the feral pig, the cardinal (\"Cardinalis cardinalis\"), anoles, ladybird beetles, and the kiskadee, some incidentally, like the Norwegian rat (\"Rattus norvegicus\") and the black rat (\"Rattus rattus\"), and the others accidentally, like the scale mites, and the brown widow spider (\"Latrodectus geometricus\"). Other imported species include the cane toad (\"Bufo marinus\"), and tree frogs.\nIn addition to casuarinas, numerous other species of tree, bush, shrub, cacti, palm, and other grasses have been introduced, with many of them proving to be invasive species. Despite the decimation of the cedar, those parts of the island not covered in buildings and tarmac are now densely covered in trees and shrubbery, including allspice (\"Pimenta dioica \"), fiddlewood, Norfolk Island pine (\"Araucaria heterophylla\"), bay grape (\"Coccoloba uvifera\"), Surinam cherry (\"Eugenia uniflora\"), poinciana (\"Delonix regia\"), fan palms, coconut palm (\"Cocos nucifera\"), royal palm (\"Roystonea\"), pittusporum, Natal plum, loquat (\"Eriobotrya japonica\"), oleander (\"Nerium oleander\"), and hibiscus. Most of the introduced species have proved to be unequal to Bermuda's frequently fierce weather. A succession of winter storms and a few powerful hurricanes that have struck over the last two decades have reduced woodlands, and available nest sites for small birds. The number of large trees, particularly, has been reduced. Although cedars are adapted to the local climate, and not so affected by stormy weather, rising sea levels are beginning to inundate the roots of old-growth cedars near low-lying marshlands, causing many to die.\nMany domestic animal species have been introduced, including dogs, horses, goats, sheep, chickens, and cats, with cats long having established a large feral population. Feral chickens have recently become numerous (since the government ended its policy of allowing members of the local shotgun club to shoot them), and feral rabbits can also be found. Populations of feral guinea pigs have been established and then eradicated. Feral pigs were hunted to extinction centuries ago. Today, introduced feral species, particularly cats, are blamed for falling numbers of native birds, from bluebirds to \"longtails\", but the primary threats are loss of habitat, due now to overdevelopment, and climate change (rising sea levels, increased hurricane activity, and rising temperatures are all having an effect on cahow nests, particularly).\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification Bermuda lies in the transition zone between tropical rainforest climate (\"Af\") and humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). Although Bermuda meets the temperature threshold of a tropical climate (coolest month has a mean temperature of or higher), the higher latitude of Bermuda (32\u00b018\u2032North) is north of the latitude that most tropical climates are typically found. Bermuda has never experienced a freeze or frost, and winters are quite warm by European and North American standards.\nBermuda experiences hot and humid summers (mid-summer high temperatures generally reach as high a , with a record high of during August, 1989) with the majority of precipitation falling from isolated showers and thunderstorms, and mild winters. Occasional Tropical Waves and Tropical Cyclones can also play a role in summertime precipitation totals when they exit the tropics. Winters are mild to semi-warm, with temperatures rarely falling below . Precipitation in wintertime is controlled by fronts moving eastward from the North American continent and into the Atlantic Ocean. During the peak of winter in Bermuda, these fronts can be followed by northwesterly gales and gusty showers that sometimes contain small hail. Precipitation is fairly evenly distributed through the year, but is somewhat less reliable in April and especially May, Bermuda's driest months on average, when the Bermuda-Azores High can bring extended dry spells. Summers are hot and humid, with frequent intense (but brief) thundershowers. On average, August is the wettest month. It is not uncommon, during the summer, to ride on sunbaked roads, then round a corner to come suddenly on drenched and steaming tarmac where a shower has passed only minutes earlier.\nBermuda's weather is largely controlled by the position and structure of the Bermuda-Azores High. This semi-permanent high pressure area (often centered southwest of the Azores) extends a ridge westward toward Bermuda during the spring and summer when the high is most intense. Oriented west-to-east to the near south of Bermuda, clockwise flow around the surface high brings prevailing winds from the southwest for much of the summer and subsequently prevents fronts from reaching the island. However, the ridge sometimes shifts to the north of the island allowing easterly or northeasterly winds. In fall and winter, the ridge near Bermuda becomes more transient, allowing frontal systems to affect the island. Winds around these systems are much more variable (and often stronger) but typically settle out of the southwest ahead of a cold front and shift to the west or northwest behind a cold front.\nA local weather phenomenon that occurs mainly in late summer is colloquially known as \"Morgan's Cloud\". On otherwise fair, hot summer days with light southwesterly winds, convective clouds can develop along the length of the island and blow to the northeast growing. In extreme cases, this cloud formation can develop into heavy showers and thunderstorms and it has been known to produce funnel clouds and waterspouts in the eastern parishes. This phenomenon also occurs in the less common northeasterly wind regime (\"reverse\" Morgan's Cloud) but its effects are felt in the western parishes. The key to Morgan's Cloud forming is light winds blowing along the length of the island which is often warmer than the surrounding waters on hot summer days. This organizes upward motions allowing this cloud formation to occur. Similar localized cloud development is observed in linear tropical and subtropical islands globally. Furthermore, showers following strong cold fronts in wintertime form in a similar manner to lake-effect snow. Cold air blowing over warm water decreases atmospheric stability, allowing convection to form and grow into showers.\nThe hardiness zone is 11B/12A. In other words, the coldest that the annual minimum temperature may be expected to be is between . This is unusual for such a northerly latitude, and is a half-zone higher than the lower Florida Keys.\nHuman geography.\nThe early colony.\nWhen settled, in the 17th century, first by the Virginia Company, then by its spin-off, the Somers Isles Company, Bermuda was divided into nine equally sized administrative areas. These comprised one public territory (known as \"St. George's\") and eight \"tribes\" (soon retitled as \"parishes\"). These \"tribes\" were subdivided into lots, separated by narrow \"tribe roads\" (supposedly created by clearing the path of a barrel rolled from the south to north shores). These roads served both to demarcate the boundaries of lots, and also as access routes to the shoreline, as the primary method of transport about Bermuda would remain by boat for the next three centuries. Each of the lots equated to shares in the company. Each of the tribes was named for a major \"adventurer\" (shareholder) of the company. Most were nobles, who used the toponyms of their titles, hence most of the parishes bear place names from England, Scotland, or Wales: \"Devonshire\" (for William Cavendish, 1st Earl of Devonshire, 1552\u20131626), \"Hamilton\" (for James Hamilton, 2nd Marquess of Hamilton, 1589\u20131625), \"Pembroke\" (for William Herbert, 3rd Earl of Pembroke, 1580\u20131630), \"Southampton\" (for Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton, 1573\u20131624), and \"Warwick\" (for Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick, 1587\u20131658). The others are \"Paget\" (for William Paget, 4th Baron Paget de Beaudesert, 1572\u20131629), \"Sandys\" (for Sir Edwin Sandys, 1561\u20131629), and Smith's (for Sir Thomas Smith, 1588\u20131625). Hamilton Parish was originally named \"Bedford\", after Lucy Russell, Countess of Bedford, who sold her shares to the Scottish nobleman, James Hamilton. Devonshire Parish had originally been named \"Cavendish Tribe\". The short-lived use of the word \"tribes\" for administrative regions appears to have been unique to the Bermuda example. The ninth parish was \"common\" (or \"King's\", or \"general\") land, not subdivided by tribe roads, and was named for the patron saint of England, Saint George. It includes the island and the town both of the same name.\nNomenclature.\nBermudian convention, where a toponym contains the name of a person, is to render the person's name in the possessive form. The place is rarely treated as equivalent to the person.\nAmong many examples of such place names in Bermuda are St. David's Island, Bailey's Bay, Sandys' Parish (named for Sir Edwin Sandys), Skeeters' Island (often mistakenly rendered \"Skeeter's Island\", it is named for Edward Skeeters and is also known as \"Burt's Island\"), Gibb's Hill, Barr's Bay, Ackermann's Hill, Nelly's Island, Cooper's Island, Darrell's Island, Paynter's Vale, Abbot's Head (or Abbot's Cliff), and Fort St. Catherine's. The possessive form is also used for titles, as with \"Collector's Hill\" (named for the Collector of Taxes).\nThe use of the possessive form is not exclusive, however, as exemplified by place names such as the names of most of the parishes (which - other than St. George's Parish - all commemorate historical people), such as Hamilton Parish (named for James Hamilton, 2nd Marquess of Hamilton), Devonshire Parish (named for), and Paget Parish. Some of these exceptions may have originated with changed syntax, as \"Devonshire Parish\" may originally have been \"The Parish of Devonshire\". This is seen with the City of Hamilton (named for Henry Hamilton, a former Governor of Bermuda). Whereas the City of Hamilton is commonly referred to as \"Hamilton\", The Town of St. George, St. George's Parish, St. George's Island, and St. George's Harbour (and any other toponym usually containing a person's name in the possessive form) always remains possessive when shortened, such as in the \"St. George's Foundation\".\n* Territorial sea: \n* Exclusive fishing zone: \n* Arable land: 14.8%\n* Permanent crops: 0%\n* Other: 85.2% (55% developed, 45% rural/open space) (2012)\n Hurricanes (June to November)\n sustainable development\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68986", "revid": "30418064", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68986", "title": "Economy of Bermuda", "text": "Bermuda is a British Overseas Territory comprising a number of islands, with an area of , located in the North Atlantic Ocean, which in 2016 had a population of 65,331.\nBermuda now has the fourth highest per capita income in the world, primarily fueled by offshore financial services for non-resident firms, especially offshore insurance and reinsurance, and tourism. In 2014, 584,702 tourists visited the territory. Tourism accounts for an estimated 28% of gross domestic product (GDP), 85% of which is from North America. The industrial sector is small, and agriculture is now severely limited by a lack of suitable land. About 80% of food is imported. International business contributes over 60% of Bermuda's economic output. A failed independence vote in late 1995 can be partially attributed to Bermudian fears of scaring away foreign firms. Government economic priorities are for further strengthening of the tourist and international financial sectors.\nHistory.\nEarly-season vegetable exports to USA before World War II.\nThe major Bermudian industry since the 1800s was the export by sea of early vegetables and flowers to New York: Bermuda had three crops per year. The Bermuda Botanic Gardens (now with 38 acres) had been established in 1898.\nIn 1922, complete, concise and clear acts dealing with agriculture were placed on the Bermudian statute book; inspection of produce was initiated; and seed testing began. Local seedsmen were registered in 1923. Mr McCallan, the Agricultural Director, reorganised the Agricultural Exhibition for 1923. Seed potatoes were gradually improved after much investigation with US experts. A local farmers' market started in 1923.\nFor a year in 1921\u201323, Professor H H Whetzel of Cornell University advised remedies for the cash crop diseases of potato blight, onion thrips, celery leaf spot, lily \"Botritis\", and melon mildew. He suggested that the colony should appoint a full-time plant pathologist. During this time, exports of agricultural products to the United States contributed the most to Bermuda's economy.\nLawrence Ogilvie from Scotland was the Government's plant pathologist from September 1923 to April 1928. He introduced regulations in 1924 governing the control of local diseases and pests, and the import of plants \u2013 so vital for an island. Import embargoes applied for banana plants, lily bulbs, sweet potatoes, citrus fruits from the West Indies, and certain Irish potatoes. In 1924 a concrete fumigation chamber was built to fumigate infected imports. Good crops of celery were achieved in the 1920s. Citrus cultivation was affected by the Mediterranean fruit fly and only really developed in 1944.\n1890s to 1920s Economy badly affected by lily virus in over 200 fields.\nThe early Easter-lily bulb exports to New York and the Isle of Man \u2013 high-value and vital financially to Bermuda \u2013 became badly diseased from the late 19th century to the mid-1920s. In 1924 Lawrence Ogilvie (age 25) saved the industry by identifying the problem as a virus (not aphid damage as previously thought) and instituting controls in the fields and packing houses. There was a marked improvement in exporting 23 cases of lily bulbs in 1918 to 6043 cases in 1927 from the then 204 lily fields. Still in his 20s, Ogilvie was professionally honoured by an article in \"Nature\". The lily export trade continued to flourish until the 1940s when the Japanese captured much of the market.\nAfter World War II.\nBermuda has had steady economic prosperity since the end of World War II, although the island has experienced recessions, including during the early 1990s, when the contraction of the economy led to a population reduction of 2,000 people (with work permits of many long-term residents not being renewed), and a mild recession in 2001\u201302, both paralleling recessions in the United States. Its economy is based primarily upon international business (especially re-insurance, for which it is now a world centre) and tourism, with those two sectors accounting for more than 70% of the total balance of payments current account foreign exchange receipts. However, the role of international business in the economy is expanding, whereas that of tourism is contracting.\nCurrent economy.\nThe Bermuda Monetary Authority (BMA) is an independent regulator of Bermuda's financial services sector, including the Bermuda Stock Exchange. The BMA is not a central bank, and does not provide lender of last resort facilities. The BMA has licensed four local banks: Butterfield Bank, Clarien Bank, Bermuda Commercial Bank and the HSBC Bank Bermuda. Bermuda's currency is the Bermudian dollar, which is pegged to the US dollar on a one-to-one basis. Both currencies circulate in Bermuda on an equal basis, but the Bermudian dollar is not normally traded outside the territory. In May 2020 the Bermuda Government's debt stood at $2.68 billion and the debt limit was increased to $2.9 billion in response to COVID-19 related expenditures. The BMA implemented Basel II in Bermuda from 1 January 2009 and Basel III from 1 January 2015, combined becoming the final rules for the enhancement of capital adequacy and liquidity in Bermuda's banking sector.\nIn 2000, 19% of the population lived below the poverty line. The inflation rate (consumer prices) in 2005 was 2.8%. In 2004, 19% of the total labour force of 38,360 was in clerical occupations, 22% services, 3% labourers, 17% professional and technical, 15% administrative and managerial, 19% sales, and 3% agriculture and fishing; there was an unemployment rate of 2.1%.\nIn 2006, Bermuda's exports (mostly reexports of pharmaceuticals) were valued at $783m; export partners included Spain (13.8%), Germany (11.7%), Switzerland (8.8%), Denmark (6.6%), and the UK (6%).\nIn 2007, imports (of clothing, fuels, machinery and transport equipment, construction materials, chemicals, food, and live animals) were valued at $1.162bn; import partners included South Korea (36.4%), the US (15.7%), Germany (13.2%) and Italy (11.8%).\nIn 2018, Bermuda had a GDP of $7.263bn, and the GDP per capita was $111,540, with a real growth rate of 1.7%. In 2018 (est.), agriculture contributed 0.3% to GDP, industry 5%, and services 94.2%. In 2018/19 actual government revenues were $1,090 million with a deficit of $77.8 million after $58.6 million capital expenditure The major sources of Government revenue were: $467 million payroll tax and $226 million customs duties. Between 2008 and 2014 debt rose by 20% or more every year. By 2020 net borrowings were $2.586 billion. In September 2020 it was reported that \"Bermuda faces a fiscal cliff if its debt-to-revenue ratio, currently at 340 per cent, continues to rise.\" Annual debt interest is $127.1 million. $354 million of debt matures in January 2023. A further $402 million of debt matures in February 2024.\nOffshore financial services.\nBermuda is considered an offshore financial centre. According to the Foot report, Bermuda is the second largest captive insurance domicile, and is the third largest reinsurance centre in the world. It is the domicile of 6% of offshore funds (at 2010) and has a presence in aircraft registration and maintains an open ship registry.\nAn October 2000 KPMG report titled \"https://\" stated that the island's legislative framework was not compliant with international standards, which led critics to conclude that Bermuda is committed to the facilitation of money laundering and other financial crimes. The Bermuda Government has since signed tax transparency and compliance agreements with the United States and Seychelles.\nIn response to the KPMG October 2000 report, Bermuda enacted the \"Trust (Regulation of Trust Business) Act 2001\" to transfer the finance minister's responsibilities to the BMA, with respect to granting and revoking trust company licences. It also requires all individuals or companies operating trust companies to have a licence unless they are exempt. Previously, only trust companies needed a licence. Additionally, the legislation gives the BMA more comprehensive intervention powers. It will be able to request more detailed documentation and, in the event of a problem, restrict a trust operator's licence. Information should be kept confidential, except in the event of a criminal investigation.\nComprehensive new legislation will be introduced in the upcoming parliamentary session to further streamline the incorporation process, facilitate registration of foreign names and address conflicts in law for registered securities, again consistent with the KPMG report. Amendments are being proposed to the BMA (Collective Investment Scheme Classification) Regulations 1998, part of a strategic plan for the development of financial services in Bermuda.\nForeign companies.\nMost foreign companies in Bermuda are incorporated under the \"Companies Act of 1981\". Bermuda-registered companies need only one director and one shareholder, who can be the same person, and neither needs to be resident in Bermuda. Most companies do not need to file financial accounts or annual returns. Business records can be maintained outside the territory. A company need only file an annual declaration, which lists the authorized share capital, which is the basis for determining the annual fee. (See Taxation in Bermuda#Licence fees.) Foreign companies require a local secretary and agent, which charges a fee. Foreign companies that wish to establish a place of business in Bermuda require a permit, but a permit is not required for offshore activities. There are no taxes on profits, income, dividends, capital gains, estate, or death duties.\nThere are more than 12,500 foreign companies registered in Bermuda, many US-owned, which are an important source of foreign exchange for the island. Offshore companies spent US$967m in Bermuda in 2000. Total income, including secondary effects, was US$1.3bn. Many large international companies are based in Bermuda, including Bacardi Ltd., Bunge Limited, Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd., Global Crossing Ltd. and Royall Lyme Bermuda Ltd. Some companies, however, are considering or planning a move to Ireland in search of \"a more stable environment\", including Willis Group.\nThe growing importance of international business is reflected in its increased share of GDP, which grew from 12.6% in 1996 to 13.8% in 2000. In 2000, foreign companies directly employed 3,224 Bermudians and non-Bermudians. Foreign companies directly and indirectly supported 9,450 jobs in Bermuda and strongly influenced a further 4,670.\nThe Bermuda Department of Maritime Administration maintains an open ship registry, enabling foreign-owned ships to be registered in Bermuda, fly its flag, and be subject to its maritime and taxation laws. It is considered a flag of convenience state. In 2012, 139 vessels were registered in Bermuda of which 105 were foreign-owned (76%). 160 ships were registered in 2017, including 18 oil tankers, 10 bulk carriers, 8 container ships, and one general cargo ship. Thirteen of the 17 ships of the Princess Cruises line are registered in Bermuda, as are seven of the eight ships of the P&amp;O Cruises line. In 2011, the Cunard Line registered all its ships in Bermuda to enable its ship captains to marry couples at sea, weddings at sea being described as a lucrative market. The move brought in additional hundreds of thousands in annual fees to a registry that already takes in about $3 million a year.\nBermuda is notable for its open aircraft register.\nTourism.\nTourism is Bermuda's third most important industry. That it is an industry in trouble is evident from the statistical comparison. In 1996, Bermuda had 571,700 visitors. By 2000, that figure has dropped to 538,059 visitors, and further decreased to 454,444 visitors in 2001. Bed nights sold declined from over 2.4 million in 1995 to 1.9 million in 2001. Visitors contributed an estimated $475 million to the economy in 1996, but that figure declined to $431 million in 2000. Direct employment in the tourism industry (5,700 jobs in 2000) and related industry is dropping in tandem with declining visitor numbers.\nFollowing the September 11, 2001, attacks in the United States, a number of new re-insurance companies located to the island, contributing to an already robust international business sector. On the other hand, Bermuda's already weakening tourism industry was hit hard, as American tourists chose not to travel.\nTotal arrivals in 2014 were 584,702 out of which air arrivals were 224,329 (down by 5.1%), cruise arrivals were 356,093 (up by 4.7%), and yacht arrivals were 4,280 (up by 24.6%).\nIn 2018, Bermuda experienced its most visitor arrivals ever with a record number of 770,683 visitor arrivals. With 203,697 leisure air arrivals in 2018, Bermuda experienced its best performance since 2002, a year which recorded 218,248 leisure travellers by air. Total leisure spending between air and cruise was $411 million in 2018, up from $320 million in 2017. Cruise arrivals were also up by 34% in 2018 for non-summer months (September through May).\nPopulation and labour.\nThe population of Bermuda on census night, 20 May 2010, was 71,328 persons (an increase of 7% over 2000), comprising 59,014 civilians, 822 persons in institutions and 11,492 visitors and transients (an increase of 38%), including those on board cruise ships and yachts. There were 64,319 persons usually resident in Bermuda (i.e., including those temporarily out of the territory), an increase of 4% or 2,178 persons. About 79% of Bermuda's 2010 resident population has Bermudian status and 21% does not. Bermudian status arises by birth, grant or marriage. There were three cruise ships in Bermuda on census night compared to one at the 2000 census. According to the 1991 census, about 73% of Bermuda's 1991 resident population was born in Bermuda and 27% was foreign-born. UK immigrants constituted 30.6% of the immigrant population; U.S., 19.9%; Canada, 10.5%; and Portugal and the Azores, 13.5%. In 2016, Bermuda had a resident population of 65,331.\nTotal filled jobs in 2000 were 38,017, but preliminary estimates for 2001 revealed a 1.1% decline in employment. Nevertheless, unemployment remained in the 4% range, and many Bermudians held more than one job. In 2000, about 25% of workers were union members. There are three primary unions in Bermuda: the blue-collar Bermuda Industrial Union, Bermuda's largest labour organisation; the professional Bermuda Public Services Association, with a steadily increasing membership; and the Bermuda Union of Teachers, which is affiliated with the Caribbean Union of Teachers.\nOrganised labour enjoys a high profile in Bermuda. Union action, however, was moderate in recent years. The average days lost per worker involved dropped from a high of 65 in 1991 to a low of 0.8 in 1999. Although still active, unions have tempered their demands, partly as a result of new labour legislation and partly in recognition that Bermuda's economy, in line with that of the United States, entered a recessionary phase in 2001. The island's tourism industry, in which many Bermudians have historically been employed, continues to experience tough times, made even worse by 11 September. Past industrial action in the tourism sector hurt that industry, which was already suffering a chronic downturn without the additional blow of tourist displeasure and displacement due to work stoppages.\nForeign trade.\nBermuda has little in the way of exports or manufacturing, and almost all manufactured goods and foodstuffs must be imported. The value of imports continues to rise, up from US$551m in 1994 to US$712m in 1999. The U.S. is Bermuda's primary trading partner; from a value of US$400m in 1994, U.S. imports expanded to US$533m in 2000. The United Kingdom, Canada, Seychelles and the Caribbean countries (mainly the Netherlands Antilles) also are important trading partners. Exports from Bermuda, including imports into the small free port, which are subsequently re-exported, increased from US$35m in 1993 to almost US$51m in 1999.\nDuty on imports is a major source of revenue for the Government of Bermuda. In fiscal year 1998\u201399, the government obtained slightly more than $166 million, or about 30% of its revenue base from imports. Heavy importation duties are reflected in retail prices. Although Bermuda imposes no income, sales, or profit taxes, it does levy a real estate tax and a payroll tax.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68987", "revid": "638216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68987", "title": "Tombs (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68988", "revid": "1241673197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68988", "title": "Telecommunications in Bermuda", "text": " \nBermuda has three main television stations, a small cable microwave system, three public GSM services (Digicel, One Communications, http://), multiple submarine cables (CB-1, Gemini Bermuda, GlobeNet, CBUS), and two main Internet service providers (Digicel, One Communications). \nTelephone.\nCountry Code: +1 (441)&lt;br&gt;\nInternational Call Prefix: 011 (outside the North American Numbering Plan (NANP))\nCalls from Bermuda to the US, Canada, and other NANP nations are dialed as 1 + NANP area code + 7-digit number. Calls from Bermuda to non-NANP countries are dialed as 011 + country code + phone number with local area code.\nNumber Format: nxx-xxxx\nRadio.\nThere are three main broadcasting companies in Bermuda: LTT Broadcasting Co. Ltd. (Irie), The Bermuda Broadcasting Company Ltd. (ZFB/ZBM) (not to be confused with the British Broadcasting Corporation), and Inter-Island Communications Ltd. (Hott/Magic).\nThe BBC owns four with the call signs of 2 with ZFB and two with the call signs ZBM. One of BBC's popular stations include Power 95 (94.9). It plays mostly hip hop, R&amp;B, and reggae. It has been popular over the years, until competition from Hott 107.5 began. \nThe recent change of LTT Broadcasting's Jazz format and frequency from 98.1 to 98.3 in November 2010 to Roots and Classic Reggae (www.irie.bm) has shifted audience from Power 94.9 and Hott 107.5 to place overall second in the market in the broad 18-54 demographic based on research from Research Innovations Ltd in February 2011.\nIn April 2004 2 FM licenses were assigned to each Inter-Island Communications and LTT Broadcasting Co. Ltd. Inter-Island Communications operates Hott 107.5 FM, which plays a mixture of R&amp;B, hip hop, reggae and some gospel. Overnight Hott 107.5 FM became the number one radio station in Bermuda. The Programme Director and part owner for the station was Elroy RC Smith, formerly of WGCI-FM of Chicago, Illinois, who is widely respected as one of the top PD in America. He has since departed from the station. Inter-Island Communications Ltd. launched its Adult Contemporary station, Magic 102.7 FM in February 2007.\nReggae star Collie Buddz (real name: Collin Harper) &amp; his brother Matthew Harper started \"Vibe 103\" on March 30, 2012, under the corporate name of Harper Digital.\nThe Government of Bermuda's Maritime Operations Centre has also set up a shortwave radio station in 2007 (call-sign: ZBR), http://\nThe Government of Bermuda also operates a radio station at 100.1 FM to broadcast emergency information, such as hurricane watches and warnings.\nThe Government of Bermuda also operates a DGPS beacon for Maritime Operations on 323kHz\nAmerican satellite radio is also available.\nOrganised by frequency, the stations are listed below:\nDefunct:\nTelevision.\nSince 2014, the Bermuda Broadcasting Company (BBC, not to be confused with the BBC in the mainland UK) is the sole company operating television stations on Bermuda. It operates ZBM-TV channel 9, a CBS affiliate, and ZFB-TV channel 7, an ABC affiliate. Until 2014, there was a third station on the island, VSB-TV channel 11, an NBC affiliate, owned by the locally based DeFontes Group. All of these television stations are commercial - there is no equivalent to the US's PBS, and the UK's BBC in Bermuda. Another TV station, Fresh Creations, is a community TV station. Another channel, called Look TV, is primarily a rolling calendar of events. There is also a Government information service channel, which highlights history and current event programmes produced by the Government's information department.\nAll five TV channels are transmitted over the air, however most residents use cable for reception.\nIn recent years, there had been talk http://http://http:// in the Bermudian government of creating its own TV station, saying that it is needed \"to speak directly to the public 'in an unmediated and unedited fashion'\"http://, while critics state that it will be no more than a propaganda exercise.\nSatellite television is also used, but was unreliable when the only satellites available are those mainly servicing the United States of America, Canada, Latin America and placed on the edge of the reception area. In 2013, Bermuda started their own telecommunication industry when it obtained the Bermudasat 1 (former private American EchoStar VI) satellite that was moved to Bermuda's owned geostationary point at 96.2\u00b0 West.\nDigital TV cable is available, as is wireless.\nInternet.\nThe .bm code is controlled by the Bermuda Government's Department of Intellectual Property, a part of the Registry General and administered by CSSD, the government's IT support group. The .bm domains are primarily granted to Licensed Businesses. Private accounts do exist, however.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Much of the material in this article is adapted from the CIA World Factbook 2009.\""}
{"id": "68989", "revid": "30011325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68989", "title": "Transport in Bermuda", "text": " \nBermuda consists of several islands with an area of with of paved roads\u2014 of which are public roads and are private paved roads. A former railway track has been converted into a walking trail. There are also two marine ports (Hamilton and St. George's), and an airport, the L.F. Wade International Airport, located at the former U.S. Naval Air Station. A causeway links Hamilton Parish, Bermuda to St. George's and the airport.\nIn common with the United Kingdom and most British Overseas Territories, traffic drives on the left.\nPublic transport.\nBermuda's \"Ministry of Tourism and Transport\" manages the public ferry service, \"SeaExpress\", and the public bus system.\nBus service.\nBermuda is serviced by a bus system. From the main bus terminal in Hamilton eleven bus routes spread out in all directions of the island. As the island is relatively narrow and in most sections has a northern and southern route that are serviced, access to the system is usually within a short distance. The MAN buses have a pink and blue livery and stop at pink or blue markers.\nFares are based on sections traveled, and transfers are available; and visitors can obtain multiday passes that are valid on buses and ferries.\nFerry service.\nSeaExpress operates four routes for ferries and boats that originate from the ferry terminal in Hamilton. The \"Blue Route\" services the West End and the Dockyard of Sandys, the \"Orange Route\" links to the Dockyard and St. George's, the \"Green Route\" travels to Rockaway of Southampton, and the \"Pink Route\" brings passengers to points in Paget and Warwick. Fare for travelling by ferry is inexpensive, and allow travel for frequent travel at most hours. In 2003, high-speed catamaran ferry service was introduced.\nPrivate cars and taxis.\nCars were not allowed in Bermuda until 1946. Today, Bermuda has a large number of private cars, almost one for every two inhabitants; however, only residents are allowed to drive them. This is largely because, with close to 300,000 visitors a year, allowing car rental on one of the world's most densely populated islands would quickly bring traffic to a standstill, as well as bankrupt the island's taxi industry. Car prices are much higher than in the United States, Canada, and Europe, due to heavy import duties, and residents are also limited to one car per household. The size of cars is also restricted (due to the narrow and winding roads on Bermuda), meaning that many models popular in the United States, Canada, and Europe are not available in Bermuda. Only the Governor and Premier are exempt from these restrictions.\nVisitors may only rent small two-seat electric cars or low-power motor scooters; there are no other rental vehicles available; they may also use the extensive public bus system, or take taxis. The highest speed limit anywhere on the island is 35\u00a0km/h (approximately 22\u00a0mph), and it is lower in built-up and other congested areas.\nRailways.\nBetween 1931 and 1948, Bermuda Railway provided rail passenger and freight services between St George's and Somerset in Sandys Parish, via Hamilton. The railway was replaced by a bus service and the line dismantled in 1948. Much of the old railway right-of-way has been converted to the \"Bermuda Railway Trail\" for hiking and biking.\nRoadways.\nAs at 2007, Bermuda had of paved roads\u2014of which were public roads and were private paved roads.\nPorts and harbours.\nThere are ports in Hamilton, St George's, and Dockyard (in Sandys Parish). During summer months, large cruise ships dock at the Dockyard (which cruise lines call King's Wharf) at the northwestern end of the island.\nAirport.\nThe only airport in Bermuda is L.F. Wade International Airport (formerly named Bermuda International Airport) located in the parish of St. George's, northeast of Hamilton. In 2006, the airport handled about 900,000 passengers. It has one passenger terminal, one cargo terminal, eight aircraft stands and can support all aircraft sizes up to the Airbus A380. As at 2006, seven airlines operated seasonal or year-round scheduled services to Bermuda from Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. It has a paved runway.\nThe airport is served by a public bus service and taxis. There is no car hire (car rental) in Bermuda.\nMerchant marine.\nBermuda is a flag of convenience, with 160 vessels on its registry as at 2016.\nReferences.\n\"Much of the material in this article is adapted from the CIA World Factbook 2009.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68990", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68990", "title": "Military of Bermuda", "text": "While the defence of Bermuda remains the responsibility of the government of the United Kingdom, rather than of the local Bermudian Government, the island still maintains a militia for the purpose of defence.\nHistory.\nThe defence of the colony against an expected Spanish attack was the first concern of the first Governor of Bermuda, Richard Moore, when he and fifty-one other settlers arrived at Bermuda aboard the Plough on the 11 July 1612, to join the three men left behind in Bermuda from the 1609 wreck of the Sea Venture. The construction of fortified coastal artillery batteries was consequently prioritised over other construction, with the artillery manned by volunteers (convicted criminals were also sometimes sentenced to serve in the batteries instead of imprisonment). A militia was also raised on the lines of the militia in England, which grew to a battalion composed of nine companies (one for each parish). All fit males between the ages of 16 and 60, whether free, indentured, or enslaved, were liable for militia service.\nBermuda tended toward the Royalist side during the English Civil War, being the first of six colonies to recognise Charles II as King on the execution of his father, Charles I, in 1649, and was one of those targeted by the Rump Parliament in An Act for prohibiting Trade with the Barbadoes, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego, which was passed on the 30 October 1650. With control of the \"army\" (the militia), the colony's Royalists deposed the Governor, Captain Thomas Turner, elected John Trimingham to replace him, and exiled many of its Parliamentary-leaning Independents to settle the Bahamas under William Sayle as the Eleutheran Adventurers. Bermuda's defences (coastal artillery batteries and forts, as well as its militia) were too powerful for the task force sent in 1651 by Parliament under the command of Admiral Sir George Ayscue to capture the Royalist colonies. The Parliamentary Navy was consequently forced to blockade Bermuda for several months 'til the Bermudians negotiated a peace.\nBermuda became the primary Royal Navy headquarters and dockyard in the Western Atlantic, following American independence, there was a parallel build-up of military defences to protect the naval base. Seeing the militia as having become superfluous, with the large number of regular soldiers then present, the Colonial Government allowed it to lapse after the War of 1812, however, it did raise volunteer units at the end of the century to form a reserve for the military garrison.\nFollowing the loss of Britain's ports in thirteen of its former continental colonies after the American War of Independence, Bermuda assumed a new strategic prominence for the Royal Navy, and it became one of four Imperial fortresses. When Hamilton, a centrally located port founded in 1790, became the seat of government in 1815, it was partly resultant from the Royal Navy having invested twelve years, following American independence, in charting Bermuda's reefs. It did this in order to locate the deepwater channel by which shipping might reach the islands in, and at the West of, the Great Sound, which it had begun acquiring with a view to building a naval base. However, that channel also gave access to Hamilton Harbour. The Royal Navy had originally invested in property around St. George's, but slowly moved all of its operations to the West End once the channel had been charted. In addition to serving as a naval base and coaling station for its North America &amp; West Indies Squadron, the Royal Navy developed Bermuda as its only dockyard between the Canadian Maritimes and the West Indies where major repairs to large vessels could be made. It was initially the winter headquarters of the Admiralty based in the Maritimes, but became the year-round headquarters during the course of the century. The blockade of the southern US Atlantic Seaboard, as well as the Burning of Washington, carried out during the War of 1812, was orchestrated from the Admiralty House in Bermuda, then located at Mount Wyndham, in Bailey's Bay, just prior to the ill-fated British assaults on Plattsburg, Baltimore and New Orleans.\nPrior to the American War of Independence, the only Regular Army unit in Bermuda was an Independent Company, based in St. George's. With the buildup of the Royal Naval establishment in the first decades of the nineteenth century, a large number of military fortifications and batteries were constructed, and the numbers of regular infantry, artillery, and support units that composed the British Army garrison were steadily increased. The investment into military infrastructure by the War Office proved unsustainable, and poorly thought-out, with far too few artillery men available to man the hundreds of guns emplaced. Rapid technological advance in artillery rendered many of the forts obsolete before they were completed, and several were abandoned, or removed from use, soon after construction. Following the Crimean War, the trend was towards reducing military garrisons in colonies like Bermuda, partly for economic reasons, and partly as it became recognised that the Royal Navy's own ships could provide a better defence for the Dockyard, and Bermuda. Still, the important strategic location of Bermuda meant that the withdrawal, which began, at least in intent, in the 1870s, was carried out very slowly over several decades, continuing until after the Great War. The last Regular Army units were not withdrawn until the Dockyard itself closed in the 1950s. In the 1860s, however, the major build-up of naval and military infrastructure brought vital money into Bermuda at a time when its traditional (cedar- and sail cloth-based) maritime industries were giving way under the assault of steel hulls and steam propulsion. The American Civil War, also, briefly, provided a shot-in-the-arm to the local economy. Tourism and agricultural industries would develop in the latter half of the nineteenth century, however, it was defence infrastructure that formed the central platform of the economy into the twentieth century.\nThe Colony's prominence as a naval station was underlined during both world wars thanks of its location in the North Atlantic Ocean, its naturally-protected waters, and the presence of the Royal Naval Dockyard and its military defences. With the US, the primary threat to Bermuda in the nineteenth century, becoming an ally in both wars, US forces began to make use of Bermuda also.\nThe US had operated a US Naval station on the island during the latter stages of the World War I to serve anti-submarine vessels crossing to the European war zone, and US Navy vessels had also used the island, which was a hub for trans-Atlantic convoys. This involvement of the allied US forces in Bermuda was built upon in the Second World War. Before the USA had entered that conflict, the British Government had granted it a free, 99-year base lease in Bermuda, along with a similar grant in Newfoundland for what became the Ernest Harmon Air Force Base. These grants were an extension of the Destroyers-for-bases deal agreement, but not actually part of it in that no loan of ships or other war material was received in return (although the agreement for the airfield to be constructed in Bermuda was that it be shared with the Royal Air Force). The US Army and the US Navy both began construction of air stations (an airfield and a flying boat station, respectively) in 1941, along with coast artillery batteries, and the USA operated these bases until the end of the Cold War. The bases consisted of of land, largely reclaimed from the sea. From 1941 through 1945 the Bermuda Base Command coordinated the US Army's air, anti-aircraft, and coast artillery assets in Bermuda.\nThe US bases were not the only, or even the first, air stations operating in Bermuda, however. The civil airport, a flying boat station on Darrell's Island, was taken over by the RAF at the start of the war, and used by two commands. The government airline, Imperial Airways/BOAC, which had operated Darrell's Island before the war, adopted its war time role, and its camouflaged flying boats maintained trans-Atlantic service through Bermuda throughout the war. US Navy aircraft also briefly operated from Darrell's Island, maintaining anti-submarine air patrols, before their own base was operational. Before the US entry into the war, anti-submarine air patrols were flown on an ad-hoc basis by the Walrus flying boats of the Royal Navy's Fleet Air Arm, operating from its own base on Boaz Island.\nWith the buildup of the US bases on the island, the enduring alliance post-war, under NATO, Britain's re-assessment of its global military role and responsibilities in light of subsequent break up of the British Empire, and its near bankruptcy from the cost of the war, the value placed on the Imperial bases in Bermuda rapidly diminished on the end of the conflict. However, the air bases remained in operation long after the war. Also, from 1954 to 1995 the US Navy operated a submarine-detecting SOSUS station designated Naval Facility Bermuda in a former Army coast artillery bunker at Tudor Hill.\nThe Royal Naval dockyard and the attendant military garrison were closed during the 1950s. A small supply base, HMS \"Malabar\", continued to operate within the Dockyard until it, too, was closed, along with the American and Canadian bases, in 1995. The US bases closed on 1 September of that year, but unresolved issues\u2014primarily related to environmental factors\u2014delayed the formal return of the base lands to the Government of Bermuda, which finally occurred in 2002.\nThe only military unit remaining in Bermuda, today, is the Royal Bermuda Regiment, an amalgam of the voluntary units formed in the 19th century, and army and naval cadet corps.\nNaval and Military branches.\nDefunct or amalgamated.\nMilitary expenditures 2005/06 (Revised) \u2013 dollar figure: $5,687,000 (Defence), $50,467,000 (Police).\nMilitary expenditures \u2013 per cent of GDP: 0.11 NA% (Not including Police).\nMilitary \u2013 note: defence of Bermuda is the responsibility of the United Kingdom\nAdapted from the CIA World Factbook 2000.\nSee also http://\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68991", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68991", "title": "Tombs in the Bible", "text": ""}
{"id": "68992", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68992", "title": "Foreign relations of Bermuda", "text": ""}
{"id": "68993", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68993", "title": "Tomb", "text": "Repository for the remains of the dead\nA tomb (from \"tumbos\", meaning \"mound\" or \"burial monument\") is a repository for the remains of the dead. It may be above or below ground and can vary greatly in form, size, and cultural significance. Tombs are one of the oldest forms of funerary monuments, serving both as a means of final disposition and as expressions of religious belief, commemoration, and social status. \nPlacing a body in a tomb can be called \"entombment\", distinct from simpler burial practices. Tombs often involve architectural or artistic design and can become significant cultural or religious landmarks.\nTypes of tombs.\nThe term \"tomb\" encompasses a wide variety of structures and traditions, ranging from prehistoric burial mounds to elaborate monumental mausoleums.\nPrehistoric and ancient tombs.\nMany early societies constructed tombs using earth, stone, and timber, often imbued with religious or ritual significance. \nArchitectural tombs and monuments.\nFreestanding and often monumental tombs became important markers of dynastic, royal, or religious power. \nTombs within religious contexts.\nMany religious traditions incorporate tombs into sacred buildings or cemeteries. \nSymbolism and cultural significance.\nTombs embody the beliefs, values, and aesthetics of the societies that created them. They may symbolize: \nNotable examples.\nSome of the most famous tombs worldwide include: "}
{"id": "68994", "revid": "17820167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68994", "title": "Tishbite", "text": "Epithet of Elijah\nTishbite is a demonym predicated of the Prophet Elijah in the Hebrew Bible. Scholars dispute the precise denotation of the word.\nThe words of 1 Kings 17:1 are usually rendered as \"Elijah the Tishbite of Tishbe in Gilead\". As translated into English, \"Tishbite\" is the demonym for Tishbe: the demonym is predicated of the prophet to denote that his residence or possibly his birthplace was Tishbe.\nAlternatively, the words of 1 Kings 17:1 could be rendered as \"Elijah the dweller from among the inhabitants in Gilead\", because in that verse \"Tishbite\" and the word denoting inhabitants are very similar. \"Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible\" states that the word denotes a dweller, especially as distinguished from a native resident, but not an outlandish dweller, or a temporary inmate or lodger; essentially it denotes a resident alien. The Concordance indicates that the word is used to denote a sojourner nine times, a stranger three times, a foreigner once, and an inhabitant once. The most frequent use of the word is in Leviticus 25, which states sabbatical and jubilee year requirements. The denotation of sojourner is found in Leviticus 25:23, 35, 40 and 47, and the denotation of stranger in Leviticus 25:6, 45 and 47\u2014a total of seven instances. Abraham is mentioned as a sojourner in Genesis 23:4 and King David and \"our fathers\" are described as \"sojourners\" in Psalm 39:12. These other instances of the word in question support this alternative reading for \"Tishbite\", such that 1 Kings 17:1 would not assert that Tishbe was the residence or birthplace of Elijah.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68995", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68995", "title": "Covadonga, Spain", "text": ""}
{"id": "68996", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68996", "title": "Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "68997", "revid": "27595460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68997", "title": "Fernando Collor de Mello", "text": "President of Brazil from 1990 to 1992\nFernando Affonso Collor de Mello (; born 12 August 1949) is a Brazilian politician who served as the 32nd president of Brazil from 1990 to 1992, when he resigned in a failed attempt to stop his impeachment trial by the Brazilian Senate. Collor was the first president democratically elected after the end of the Brazilian military dictatorship. He became the youngest president in Brazilian history, taking office at the age of 40. After he resigned from the presidency, the impeachment trial on charges of corruption continued. Collor was found guilty by the Senate and disqualified from holding elected office for eight years (1992\u20132000). He was later acquitted of ordinary criminal charges in his judicial trial before Brazil's Supreme Federal Court, for lack of valid evidence.\nFernando Collor was born into a political family. He is the son of the former Senator Arnon Affonso de Farias Mello and Leda Collor (daughter of former Labour Minister Lindolfo Collor, led by his father, former governor of Alagoas and proprietor of the Arnon de Mello Organization, a media conglomerate which manages the state-wide television station TV Gazeta de Alagoas, the affiliate of TV Globo in the state.)\n\"Collor\" is a Portuguese adaptation of the German surname K\u00f6hler, from his maternal grandfather Lindolfo Leopoldo Boeckel Collor.\nHis time as president was marked by the implementation of the \"Collor Plan\", the launch of a national privatization program, and the opening of the domestic market to imports, which had a significant impact on the growth of the consumer car market. The plan, initially well-received, ultimately deepened the economic recession, exacerbated by the elimination of over 920,000 jobs in 1990; in addition, allegations of political corruption involving Collor's treasurer, Paulo C\u00e9sar Farias, made by his brother Pedro Collor de Mello, led to an impeachment process against him. Before the process could be finalized, the president resigned on December 29, 1992, handing over the position to his vice president, Itamar Franco, just hours before being convicted by the Federal Senate for crimes of responsibility, resulting in the loss of his political rights for eight years. During his presidency, he signed the Treaty of Asunci\u00f3n in 1991, the founding document of the Southern Common Market (Mercosur). He merged IAPAS and INPS, creating the current federal agency, the National Social Security Institute (INSS). He led the proceedings of the \"Earth Summit\" at ECO-92. He also officially approved the demarcation of the Yanomami Indigenous Territory.\nLater, after some time living in obscurity, Collor served as Senator for Alagoas from February 2007 to February 2023. He first won election in 2006 and was reelected in 2014. In August 2017, Collor was accused by Brazil's Supreme Federal Court of receiving around US$9 million in bribes between 2010 and 2014 from Petrobras subsidiary BR Distributor. On April 24, 2025, his immediate arrest was ordered to serve his sentence by the Supreme Court justice Alexandre de Moraes. In the early hours of April 25, he was arrested by the Brazilian Federal Police.\nEarly career.\nFernando Collor was born on August 12, 1949, to Leda Collor (1916\u20131995) and Arnon Afonso de Farias Mello (1911\u20131983), in a very affluent and politically well-connected family. His father was governor and later senator for the state of Alagoas. He has two brothers, Pedro and Leopoldo, and two sisters, Ledinha and Ana. His grandfather, Lindolfo Collor (1890\u20131942), was a direct descendant of some of the first German immigrants that arrived in Brazil in 1824. Despite being born in Rio de Janeiro, Fernando spent his childhood in the cities of Macei\u00f3, Rio de Janeiro and Bras\u00edlia.\nCollor graduated in economic sciences, in 1972, at the Federal University of Alagoas. That same year, he become president of the \"Gazeta de Alagoas\", a newspaper that was run by his family's media conglomerate. In 1975, he married his first wife Celi Elisabete J\u00falia Monteiro de Carvalho, with whom he had two children. He married a second time, with Rosane Malta (who would become the First Lady) in 1984. No children were born from this union. In 2006, he married Caroline Medeiros, with whom he would have two children. He also had a child born out of wedlock.\nCollor became president of Brazilian football club Centro Sportivo Alagoano (CSA) in 1976. After entering politics, he was successively named mayor of Alagoas' capital Macei\u00f3 in 1979 (National Renewal Alliance Party), elected a federal deputy (Democratic Social Party) in 1982, and eventually elected governor of the small Northeastern state of Alagoas (Brazilian Democratic Movement Party) in 1986.\nDuring his tenure as governor, he gained national attention for his purported efforts to challenge high salaries among public servants, whom he referred to as \"maraj\u00e1s\" (\"maharajas\") (likening them to the former princes of India who received a stipend from the government as compensation for relinquishing their lands). The effectiveness of his policies in reducing public expenses remains a subject of debate. However, his stance on the issue significantly increased his popularity across the country, bolstered by appearances on nationally televised broadcasts\u2014an unusual platform for a governor from a smaller state like Alagoas.\nAlthough he gained national prominence as governor of Alagoas and positioned himself as an anti-corruption and anti-establishment candidate for the presidency, his career was marred by corruption scandals dating back to his tenure as mayor of Macei\u00f3. Earlier in his life, when he was a Federal Deputy in the National Congress, Collor was regarded as a relatively low-profile politician, primarily proposing legislation that appeared to favor his family's business interests.\nPresidency (1990\u20131992).\nIn 1989 Collor defeated Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva in a controversial two-round presidential race with 35 million votes. \nIn December 1989, days prior to the second round, businessman Ab\u00edlio Diniz was the victim of a sensational political kidnapping. The act was asserted by some to be an attempt to sabotage Lula's chances of victory by associating the kidnapping with the left wing. At the time, Brazilian law barred any party from addressing the media on the days prior to election day. Lula's party thus had no opportunity to clarify the accusations that the party (PT) was involved in the kidnapping. Collor won in the state of S\u00e3o Paulo against many prominent political figures. The first president of Brazil elected by popular vote in 29 years, Collor spent the early years of his presidency battling inflation, which at times reached rates of 25% a month.\nThe very day he took office, Collor launched the \"Plano Collor\" (\"Collor Plan\"), implemented by his finance minister Z\u00e9lia Cardoso de Mello (not related to Collor). The plan attempted to reduce the money supply by forcibly converting large portions of consumer bank accounts into non-cashable government bonds, while at the same time increasing the printing of money bills, a counterbalancing measure to combat hyper-inflation.\nFree trade, privatization and state reforms.\nUnder Z\u00e9lia's tenure as Brazil's Minister of Finances, the country had a period of major changes, featuring what \"ISTO\u00c9\" magazine called an \"unprecedented revolution\" in many levels of public administration: \"privatization, opening its market to free trade, encouraging industrial modernization, temporary control of the hyper-inflation and public debt reduction.\"\nIn the month before Collor took power, hyperinflation was at 90 percent per month and climbing. All accounts over 50,000 cruzeiros (about US$500 at that time), were frozen for several weeks. He also proposed freezes in wages and prices, as well as major cuts in government spending. The measures were received unenthusiastically by the people, though many felt that radical measures were necessary to kill the hyperinflation. Within a few months, however, inflation resumed, eventually reaching rates of 10 percent a month.\nDuring the course of his government, Collor was accused of condoning an influence peddling scheme. The accusations weighed on the government and led Collor and his team to an institutional crisis leading to a loss of credibility that reached the finance minister, Z\u00e9lia.\nThis political crisis had negative consequences on his ability to carry out his policies and reforms. The \"Plano Collor I\", under Z\u00e9lia would be renewed with the implementation of the \"Plano Collor II\"; the government's loss of prestige would make that follow-up plan short-lived and largely ineffective. The failure of Z\u00e9lia and Plano Collor I led to their substitution by Marc\u00edlio Marques Moreira and his Plano Collor II. Moreira's plan tried to correct some aspects of the first plan, but it was too late. Collor's administration was paralyzed by the fast deterioration of his image, through a succession of corruption accusations.\nDuring the Plano Collor, yearly inflation was at first reduced from 30,000 percent in 1990 (Collor's first year in government) to 400 percent in 1991, but then climbed back up to 1,020 percent in 1992 (when he left office). Inflation continued to rise to 2,294 percent in 1994 (two years after he left office).\nAlthough Z\u00e9lia acknowledged later that the Plano Collor didn't end inflation, she also stated: \"It is also possible to see with clarity that, under very difficult conditions, we promoted the balancing of the national debt \u2013 and that, together with the commercial opening, it created the basis for the implementation of the Plano Real.\"\nParts of Collor's free trade and privatization program were followed by his successors: Itamar Franco (Collor's running mate), Fernando Henrique Cardoso (a member of the Franco cabinet) and Lula da Silva. Collor's administration privatized 15 different companies (including Acesita), and began the process of privatizing several others, such as Embraer, Telebr\u00e1s and Companhia Vale do Rio Doce. Some members of Collor's government were also part of the later Cardoso administration in different or similar functions: \nLuiz Carlos Bresser-Pereira, a minister in the previous Sarney and the following Fernando Henrique Cardoso administrations, stated that \"Collor changed the political agenda in the country, because he implemented brave and very necessary reforms, and he pursued fiscal adjustments. Although other attempts had been made since 1987, it was during Collor's administration that old statist ideas were confronted and combated (...) by a brave agenda of economic reforms geared towards free trade and privatization.\"\nAccording to Philippe Faucher, professor of political science at McGill University, the combination of the political crisis and the hyperinflation continued to reduce Collor's credibility and in that political vacuum an impeachment process took place, precipitated by Pedro Collor's (Fernando Collor's brother) accusations and other social and political sectors which thought they would be harmed by his policies.\nAwards.\nIn 1991, UNICEF chose three health programs: community agents, lay midwives and eradication of measles as the best in the world. These programs were promoted during Collor's administration. Until 1989, the Brazilian vaccination record, was considered the worst in South America. During Collor's administration, Brazil's vaccination program won a United Nations prize, as the best in South America. Collor's project \"Minha Gente\" (\"My People\") won the UN award \"Project Model for the Humanity\" in 1993.\nCorruption charges and impeachment.\nIn May 1992, Fernando Collor's brother Pedro Collor accused him of condoning an influence peddling scheme run by his campaign treasurer, Paulo Cesar Farias. The Federal Police and the Federal Prosecution Service opened an investigation. On 1 July 1992, a Joint Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry, composed of senators and members of the Chamber of Deputies, formed in Congress to investigate the accusation and review the evidence uncovered by police and federal prosecutors. Senator Amir Lando was chosen as the rapporteur of the Commission of Inquiry, chaired by Congressman Benito Gama. Farias, Pedro Collor, government officials and others were subpoenaed and gave depositions before it. Some weeks later, with the investigation progressing and under fire, Collor asked on national television for the people's support in going out in the street and protesting against \"coup\" forces. On 11 August 1992, thousands of students organized by the National Union of Students (Uni\u00e3o Nacional dos Estudantes \u2013 UNE), protested on the street against Collor. Their faces, often painted in a mixture of the colors of the flag and protest-black, lead to them being called \"\"Caras-pintadas\" (\"Painted Faces\"\").\nOn 26 August 1992, the final congressional inquiry was approved 16\u20135. The report concluded that there was proof that Fernando Collor had had personal expenses paid for by money raised by Paulo Cesar Farias through his influence peddling scheme.\nAs a result, a petition to the Chamber of Deputies by citizens Barbosa Lima Sobrinho and Marcelo Laven\u00e8re Machado, respectively the then president of the Brazilian Press Association and the then-president of the Brazilian Bar Association formally accused Collor of \"crimes of responsibility\" (the Brazilian equivalent of \"high crimes and misdemeanors\", such as abuse of power) warranting removal from office per the constitutional and legal norms for impeachment. In Brazil, a formal petition for impeachment of the president must be submitted by one or more private citizens, not by corporations or public institutions. The formal petition, submitted on 1 September 1992, began impeachment proceedings. The Chamber of Deputies set up a special committee on 3 September 1992 to study the impeachment petition. On 24 September 1992, the committee voted (32 votes in favour, one vote against, one abstention) to approve the impeachment petition and recommend that the full Chamber of Deputies accept the charges of impeachment. Under the Constitution of Brazil, the impeachment process required two thirds of the Chamber of Deputies to vote to allow the charges of impeachment to be escalated to the Senate. On 29 September 1992, Collor was impeached by the Chamber of Deputies, with more than two thirds of its members concurring. In the decisive roll call vote, 441 deputies voted for and 38 deputies voted against the admission of the charges of impeachment.\nOn 30 September 1992, the accusation was formally sent from the Chamber of Deputies to the Senate, and proceedings for impeachment began in the upper house. The Senate formed a committee to examine the case file and determine whether all legal formalities had been followed. The Committee issued its report, recognizing that the charges of impeachment had been presented in accordance with the Constitution and the laws, and proposed that the Senate organize itself into a court of impeachment to conduct the trial of the president. On 1 October 1992, this report was presented on the floor of the Senate, and the full Senate voted to accept it and to proceed. That day the then-president of the Federal Supreme Court, Justice Sydney Sanches, was notified of the opening of the trial process in the Senate, and began to preside over the process. On 2 October 1992, Collor received a formal summons from the Brazilian Senate notifying him that the Senate had accepted the report, and that he was now a defendant in an impeachment trial. Per the Constitution of Brazil, upon receipt of that writ of summons, Collor's presidential powers were suspended for 180 days, and vice president Itamar Franco became acting president. The Senate also sent an official communication to the office of the vice-president to formally acquaint him of the suspension of the president, and to give him notice that he was now the acting president.\nBy the end of December, it was obvious that Collor would be convicted and removed from office by the Senate. In hopes of staving this off, Collor resigned on 29 December 1992 on the last day of the proceedings. Collor's resignation letter was read by his attorney in the floor of the Senate, and the impeachment trial was adjourned so that the Congress could meet in joint session, first to take formal notice of the resignation and proclaim the office of president vacant, and then to swear in Franco.\nHowever, after the inauguration of Franco, the Senate resumed sitting as a court of impeachment with the president of the Supreme Court presiding. Collor's attorneys argued that with Collor's resignation, the impeachment trial could not proceed and should close without ruling on the merits. The attorneys arguing for Collor's removal, however, argued that the trial should continue, to determine whether or not the defendant should face the constitutional penalty of suspension of political rights for eight years. The Senate voted to continue the trial. It ruled that, although the possible penalty of removal from office had been rendered moot, the determination of the former president's guilt or innocence was still relevant because a conviction on charges of impeachment would carry with it a disqualification from holding public office for eight years. The Senate found that, since the trial had already begun, the defendant could not use his right to resign the presidency as a means to avoid a ruling.\nLater, in the early hours of 30 December 1992, by the required two-thirds majority, the Senate found the former president guilty of the charges of impeachment. Of the 81 members of the Senate, 79 took part in the final vote: 76 senators voted to convict the former president, and 3 voted to acquit. The penalty of removal from office was not imposed as Collor had already resigned, but as a result of his conviction the Senate barred Collor from holding public office for eight years. After the vote, the Senate issued a formal written opinion summarizing the conclusions and orders resulting from the judgement, as required by Brazilian law. The Senate's formal written sentence on the impeachment trial, containing its conviction of the former president and disqualification from public office for eight years, signed by the president of the Supreme Court and by the senators on 30 December 1992, was published in the \"Di\u00e1rio Oficial da Uni\u00e3o\" (the Brazilian Federal Government's official journal) on 31 December 1992.\nIn 1993, Collor challenged before the Brazilian Supreme Court the Senate's decision to continue the trial after his resignation but the Supreme Court ruled the Senate's action valid.\nIn 1994, the Supreme Court tried the ordinary criminal charges stemming from the Farias corruption affair; the ordinary criminal accusation was presented by the Brazilian federal prosecution service (\"Minist\u00e9rio P\u00fablico Federal\"). The Supreme Court had original jurisdiction under the Brazilian Constitution because Collor was one of the defendants and the charges mentioned crimes committed by a president while in office. If found guilty of the charges, the former president would face a jail sentence. However, Collor was found not guilty. The Federal Supreme Court threw out the corruption charges against him on a technicality, citing a lack of evidence linking Collor to Farias' influence-peddling scheme. A key piece of evidence, Paulo C\u00e9sar Farias' personal computer, was ruled inadmissible as it had been obtained during an illegal police search conducted without a search warrant. Other pieces of evidence that were only gathered because of the information first extracted from files stored in Farias' computer were also voided, as the Collor defense successfully invoked the \"fruit of the poisonous tree\" doctrine before the Brazilian Supreme Court. Evidence that was only obtained because of the illegally obtained information was also struck from the record.\nAfter his acquittal in the criminal trial, Collor again attempted to void the suspension of his political rights imposed by the Senate, without success, as the Supreme Court ruled that the judicial trial of the ordinary criminal charges and the political trial of the charges of impeachment were independent spheres. Collor thus only regained his political rights in 2000, after the expiration of the eight-year disqualification imposed by the Brazilian Senate.\nCollor's version of the impeachment.\nFor several years after his removal from office, Collor maintained a website which has since been taken offline. In discussing the events surrounding the corruption charges, the former website stated: \"After two and half years of the most intense investigation in Brazilian history, the Supreme Court of Brazil declared him innocent of all charges. Today he is the only politician in Brazil to have an officially clear record validated by an investigation by all interests and sectors of the opposition government. Furthermore, President Fernando Collor signed the initial document authorizing the investigation.\"\nPost-presidency.\nIn 2000, Collor joined the Brazilian Labour Renewal Party (PRTB) and ran for mayor of S\u00e3o Paulo. His candidacy was declared invalid by the electoral authorities, as his political rights were still suspended by the filing deadline. In 2002, with political rights restored, he ran for Governor of Alagoas, but lost to incumbent Governor Ronaldo Lessa, who was seeking reelection.\nIn 2006, Collor was elected to the Federal Senate representing his state of Alagoas, with 44.03% of the vote, running again against Lessa. The following year he abandoned PRTB and switched to the Brazilian Labour Party (PTB). Collor has been, since March 2009, Chairman of the Senate Infrastructure Commission. Collor ran again for Governor of Alagoas in 2010. However, he lost the race, finishing a narrow third after Lessa and incumbent Teotonio Vilela Filho, thus eliminated from the runoff. This was Collor's second electoral loss.\nIn 2014, Collor was re-elected to the Senate with 55% of the vote.\nOn 20 August 2015, Collor was charged by the Prosecutor General of Brazil with corruption, as a development of Operation Car Wash (). Details of the charge were kept under wraps so as not to jeopardize the investigation.\nIn 2016, Collor abandoned PTB and joined the Christian Labour Party (PTC), a small Christian democratic party which had no representatives in the Congress at the time. Collor also voted to impeach Rousseff as Senator.\nIn 2019, Collor left PTC and joined the Republican Party of the Social Order.\nIn 2022, Collor left the Republican Party of the Social Order and rejoined the Brazilian Labour Party (current). Also in 2022, Collor ran for Governor of Alagoas, placing 3rd and not making the run-off. Collor garnered 14,57% of the votes.\nConviction and arrest.\nIn 2023, the Brazilian Supreme Federal Court voted to convict Collor on charges of money laundering and corruption. He was accused of receiving R$30 million in bribes from Petrobras. On 24 April 2025, Justice Alexandre de Moraes rejected Collor's appeal and reinstated his nine-year prison sentence. Collor was arrested the next day at Macei\u00f3's Zumbi dos Palmares International Airport in order to serve his corruption conviction. On 1 May, de Moraes allowed Collor to undergo house arrest on medical grounds.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68998", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68998", "title": "Tirhakah", "text": ""}
{"id": "68999", "revid": "15962153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68999", "title": "Valley of the Cheesemakers", "text": ""}
{"id": "69000", "revid": "63405", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69000", "title": "Geography of Bhutan", "text": " \nBhutan is a sovereign country at the crossroads of East Asia and South Asia, located towards the eastern extreme of the Himalayas mountain range. It is fairly evenly sandwiched between the sovereign territory of two nations: first, the People's Republic of China (PRC) on the north and northwest. There are approximately of border with the country's Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), or simply Tibet. The second nation is the Republic of India on the south, southwest, and east; there are approximately with the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, West Bengal, and Sikkim, in clockwise order from the kingdom. Bhutan's total borders amount to approximately .\nBhutan is a very compact landlocked nation, but with just a small bit more length than width. The nation's territory totals an approximate . Because of its inland, landlocked status, it controls no territorial waters. Bhutan's territory used to extend south into present-day Assam, including the protectorate of Cooch Behar, but, starting from 1772, the British East India Company (EIC) began to push back the borders through a number of wars and treaties, severely reducing Bhutan's size until the Treaty of Sinchula of 1865, when some border land was ceded back. Later, many of these territories were permanently lost to British India under the Treaty of Punakha and today remains a part of modern-day India.\nPolitical geography.\nBhutan is divided into 20 dzongkhags (districts), and further into 205 gewogs (village blocks). Gewogs are in turn divided into numerous thromdes (municipalities) for administration.\nPhysical geography.\nThe Himalaya mountains of Bhutan dominate the north of the country, where peaks can easily reach ; the highest point in Bhutan is Gangkhar Puensum, which has the distinction of being the highest unclimbed mountain in the world, at . Weather is extreme in the mountains: the high peaks have perpetual snow, and the lesser mountains and hewn gorges have high winds all year round, making them barren brown wind tunnels in summer, and frozen wastelands in winter. The blizzards generated in the north each winter often drift southward into the central highlands.\nBelow the rock and ice of the highest peaks lies an extensive arc of Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows, which contain, in additions to grasslands, a wide variety of rhododendrons and herbaceous plants.\nThe highlands are the most populous part of the nation; the capital Thimphu lies in the western region. The region is characterised by its many rivers (flowing into India's Brahmaputra), its isolated valleys that house most of the population, and the expansive forests that cover seventy per cent of the nation. The highlands have Eastern Himalayan subalpine conifer forests at higher elevations and Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests at lower elevations. Winters are cold, summer are hot; the rainy season is accompanied with high-frequency landslides.\nThe valleys of Bhutan are linked by a series of passes (\"La\" in Dzongkha). Between the Haa Valley and Paro Valley is the Chele La (). The Chele La is the highest pass crossed by a Bhutanese highway. The Lateral Road from Thimphu to Punakha crosses the Dochu La (), which features 108 chortens built to commemorate the expulsion of Assamese guerrillas. East of Wangdue Phodrang is the Pele La (). Continuing to the east along the main highway, other major passes include the Yotang La, Shertang La, Wangthang La, Thrumshing La and Kori La ().\nThe extreme southern strip of the nation consists mostly of Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests that grade into the tropical plains of the Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands, more typical of India. It is largely agricultural land, producing mostly rice. Only two per cent of Bhutan is arable land, with most of it focused here.\nCenturies of isolationism, a small population, and topographical extremes have led to Bhutan maintaining one of the most intact ecosystems in the world. The country ranks amongst the top ten countries in the world in terms of species density (species richness per unit area). Over fifty-five hundred varieties of plant life exist, including around 300 medicinal ones. More than 770 species of avifauna and more than 165 species of mammals are known to exist, including many rare and endangered species like the red panda, snow leopard, and golden langur.\nStrategic location.\nBhutan, situated between India and China, is a potential Sino-Indian battleground; India currently has more political influence in the nation. This stems from two things: the fact that after the British granted sovereignty to their South Asian possessions, Bhutan, a protectorate, was never put under the administration of India, except for its Foreign Relation Policies under the Indo-Bhutan Treaty of 1949. The Indian Army patrols Bhutan's frontiers and has played a major role in the development of the country's road infrastructure. Additionally, the Government of India continues to provide approximately 60% of Bhutan's government finances.\nThe second reason comes from the aggression against Tibet by China from 1949 to 1959; the Tibetans have strong cultural, historical, and religious connections to Bhutan.\nBhutan controls several strategic mountain passes through the Himalayas, allowing travel between Tibet and Assam. These passes are also the only way into the kingdom, and, coupled with its centuries-old policies of isolationism, it has been called the \"Mountain Fortress of the Gods.\" The heartland of Bhutan has never been successfully invaded; the British, while establishing a protectorate over the nation, did so with threats to the low-lying territories below the highlands.\nClimate.\nBhutan's climate is as varied as its altitudes and, like India's, is affected by monsoons. Western Bhutan is particularly affected by monsoons that bring between 60 and 90 per cent of the region's rainfall. The climate is humid and subtropical in the southern plains and foothills, temperate in the inner Himalayan valleys of the southern and central regions, and cold in the north, with year-round snow on the main Himalayan summits.\nTemperatures vary according to elevation. Temperatures in Thimphu, located at above sea level in west-central Bhutan, range from approximately during the monsoon season of June through September but drop to between about in January. Most of the central portion of the country experiences a cool, temperate climate year-round. In the south, a hot, humid climate helps maintain a fairly even temperature range of between year-round, although temperatures sometimes reach in the valleys during the summer.\nAnnual precipitation ranges widely in various parts of the country. In the severe climate of the north, there is only about of annual precipitation\u2014primarily snow. In the temperate central regions, a yearly average of around is more common, and per year has been registered at some locations in the humid, subtropical south, ensuring the thick tropical forest, or savanna. Thimphu experiences dry winter months (December through February) and almost no precipitation until March, when rainfall averages a month and increases steadily thereafter to a high of in August for a total annual rainfall of nearly .\nBhutan's generally dry spring starts in early March and lasts until mid-April. Summer weather commences in mid-April with occasional showers and continues through the pre-monsoon rains of late June. The summer monsoon lasts from late June through late September with heavy rains from the southwest. The monsoon weather, blocked from its northward progress by the Himalayas, brings heavy rains, high humidity, flash floods and landslides, and numerous misty, overcast days. Autumn, from late September or early October to late November, follows the rainy season. It is characterised by bright, sunny days and some early snowfalls at higher elevations. From late November until March, winter sets in, with frost throughout much of the country and snowfall common above elevations of . The winter northeast monsoon brings gale-force winds down through high mountain passes.\nGlaciers.\nGlaciers in northern Bhutan, which covered about 10 per cent of the total surface area in the 1980s, are an important renewable source of water for Bhutan's rivers. Fed by fresh snow each winter and slow melting in the summer, the glaciers bring millions of litres of fresh water to Bhutan and downriver areas each year. Glacial melt adds to monsoon-swollen rivers, however, also contributes to flooding. Where glacial movement temporary blocks riverflows, downstream areas may be threatened by glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs), also called \"j\u00f6kulhlaups\".\nBhutan's glaciers are melting. A 2008 United Nations report suggested that due to rising temperatures, glaciers in Bhutan were retreating at a rate of per year, poised to make many lakes burst their banks and send millions of gallons of floodwater downstream. This among many other climate-related issues identified in the report prompted the regional association of government ministers to establish the Southeast Asia Regional Health Emergency Fund in Thimphu in September 2007. Similarly, the member nations of South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) adopted bilateral agreements including measures on climate change and glaciers at its summit in April 2010.\nThe 2008 UN report also indicated Himalayan glaciers would melt within 25 years, however Prime Minister Jigme Thinley expressed a more dim outlook in a press conference in late March 2010, stating, \"Our glaciers are withdrawing very fast and we have reasons to worry that they may in fact disappear not in 2035, but even earlier.\"\nThe new inventory \"Bhutan Glacial Inventory 2018\" includes 700 glaciers covering total area of in the northern frontiers of Bhutan. Glacier area covers 1.64% of the total land cover in Bhutan.\nLakes.\nBhutan is home to at least 59 natural mountain lakes as well as some 2,674 glacial lakes; about 25 of these glacial lakes are potential GLOF hazards.\nNon-glacial lakes in Bhutan cover a total of about . Most are located above an altitude of , and most have no permanent human settlements nearby, though many are used for grazing yaks and may have scattered temporary settlements.\nRiver systems.\nBhutan has four major river systems: the Drangme Chhu; the Puna Tsang Chhu, also called the Sankosh; the Wang Chhu; and the Amo Chhu. Each flows swiftly out of the Himalayas, southerly through the Dooars to join the Brahmaputra River in India, and thence through Bangladesh where the Brahmaputra (or Jamuna in Bangladesh) joins the mighty Ganges (or Padma in Bangladesh) to flow into the Bay of Bengal. The largest river system, the Drangme Chhu, flows southwesterly from India's state of Arunachal Pradesh and has three major branches: the Drangme Chhu, Mangde Chhu, and Bumthang Chhu. These branches form the Drangme Chhu basin, which spreads over most of eastern Bhutan and drains the Tongsa and Bumthang valleys. In the Duars, where eight tributaries join it, the Drangme Chhu is called the Manas Chhu. The Puna Tsang Chhu rises in northwestern Bhutan as the Mo Chhu and Pho Chhu, which are fed by the snows from the Great Himalayan Range. They flow southerly to Punakha, where they join to form the Puna Tsang Chhu, which flows southerly into India's state of West Bengal. The tributaries of the Wang Chhu rise in Tibet. The Wang Chhu itself flows southeasterly through west-central Bhutan, drains the Ha, Paro, and Thimphu valleys, and continues into the Duars, where it enters West Bengal as the Raigye Chhu. The smallest river system, the Torsa Chhu, known as the Amo Chhu in its northern reaches, also flows out of Tibet into the Chumbi Valley and swiftly through western Bhutan before broadening near Phuntsholing and then flowing into India.\nValleys.\nBhutan's valleys are carved into the Himalaya by its rivers, fed by glacial melt and monsoon rains. Much of the Bhutanese population is concentrated in valleys and lowlands, separated by rugged southward spurs of the Inner Himalaya. Despite modernization and development of transport in Bhutan, including a national highway system, travel from one valley to the next remains difficult. Western valleys are bound to the east by the Black Mountains in central Bhutan, which form a watershed between two major river systems, the Mo Chhu (Sankosh River) and the Drangme Chhu. Central valleys are separated from the east by the Donga Range. The more isolated mountain valleys protect several tiny, distinct cultural and linguistic groups.\nForests.\nIn Bhutan forest cover is around 71% of the total land area, equivalent to 2,725,080 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 2,506,720 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 2,704,260 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 20,820 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 15% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 41% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69001", "revid": "17753739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69001", "title": "William IX, Count of Poitiers", "text": "English prince (1153\u20131156)\nWilliam, Count of Poitiers (17 August 1153 \u2013 1156) was the first son of King Henry II of England and Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine.\nWilliam is reported to have died either at the age of 2 in April 1156, or at the age of 3 on 2 December 1156, after suffering a seizure at Wallingford Castle. He was buried in Reading Abbey at the feet of his great-grandfather Henry I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69003", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69003", "title": "Demographics of Bhutan", "text": "This is a demography of the population of Bhutan including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nThe Royal Government of Bhutan listed the country's population as 752,700 in 2003.\nThe Bhutanese numbers can be reconstructed from their 9th Five Year Plan documents, which lists the exact number of households in each gewog. If the Bhutanese refugee advocate groups are correct, a spot check of a southern gewog should show a massive under-reporting of population.\nThe CIA World Fact book number has since been adjusted with a note of former inconsistencies, and attributes the difference to the government not including the \"first modern census of Bhutan, conducted in 2005\". In the 1970s Bhutan was one of the most isolated countries in the world and nobody knew how many people lived there since no census had ever been taken.\nDemographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n708,427 (July 2011 est.)\n716,896 (July 2012 est.)\n750,125 (July 2016 est.)\nPopulation.\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Data refer to projected figures based on the Population and Housing Census 2005 (district projection)):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 30.V.2017) (Excluding 8408 non-Bhutanese/tourists found in hotels on the census reference day.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (30.VII.2020) (Estimates or projections based on the 2017 Population Census.):\nMedian age\nTotal: 27.2 years\nMale: 27.7 years\nFemale: 26.6 years (2016 est.)\nUrbanization\nurban population: 38.6% of total population (2015)\nrate of urbanization: 3.69% annual rate of change (2010-15 est.)\nVital statistics.\nUN estimates.\nBelow is a table of Bhutan vital statistics since 1950 published by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt; \nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nTotal population: 70.2 years\nMale: 68.8 years\nFemale: 71.7 years (2017 est.)\nLife expectancy at birth.\nLife expectancy at birth is 70.2 years, which is an increase from 66.3 years in 2005. Women (71.7 years) live longer than men (68.8).\nIn 2018, Prime Minister Tshering Tobgay announced that the average life expectancy at birth has surpassed 70.\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReligions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69004", "revid": "1283424767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69004", "title": "Politics of Bhutan", "text": "The government of Bhutan has been a constitutional monarchy since 18 July 2008. The King of Bhutan is the head of state. The executive power is exercised by the Lhengye Zhungtshog, or council of ministers, headed by the Prime Minister. Legislative power is vested in the bicameral Parliament, both the upper house, National Council, and the lower house, National Assembly. A royal edict issued on April 22, 2007 lifted the previous ban on political parties in anticipation of the National Assembly elections in the following year. In 2008, Bhutan adopted its first modern Constitution, codifying the institutions of government and the legal framework for a democratic multi-party system.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Bhutan a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nSovereignty.\nBhutanese external relations and foreign policies were put under British control following the 1910 Treaty of Punakha. However, due to the policy of self-imposed isolationism, the effect of the treaty was limited to an extent. After Indian independence in 1949, Bhutan and India agreed to a ten-article, perpetual treaty which effectively continued the relationship, but with India replacing the United Kingdom. India agreed not to interfere in Bhutan's internal relations, while Bhutan agreed \"to be guided by the advice of the Government of India in regard to its external relations\" (Article 2). The treaty also established free trade and full extradition between the two countries.\nIn February 2007, the Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty was substantially revised with all references to phrases such as \"will be guided\" deleted, thus eliminating the last lingering doubts about the sovereign and independent status of Bhutan.\nBranches of government.\nThe Constitution of Bhutan provides for a government consisting of three main branches \u2013 executive, legislative, and judicial \u2013 plus the de facto apolitical Dratshang Lhentshog (Monastic Affairs Commission) of the Drukpa Kagyu state religion. The secular and religious branches of government are unified in the person of the Druk Gyalpo (King of Bhutan).\nThe trichotomy of secular government is not absolute. There are many independent commissions, agencies, and institutions that operate outside this general framework, such as the Royal Monetary Authority and Election Commission. There are also agencies whose members are drawn from more than one branch of government, such as the Judicial Commission. In addition, there are several ministries within the cabinet executive branch, such as the Ministry of Home and Cultural Affairs, which in turn delegate powers to subsidiary departments according to legislation by the legislative branch. The legislative branch itself oversees devolved local governments.\nExecutive branch.\nBhutan's head of state is the Druk Gyalpo (\"Dragon King\"). Although his title is hereditary, he must retire by age 65, and he can be removed by a two-thirds majority vote by the parliament followed by a national referendum, which must pass by a simple majority in all twenty districts of the country. Prior to 2008, a similar abdication process existed under which the unicameral National Assembly, or \"Tshogdu\" could force the king to abdicate.\nThe Je Khenpo is the highest religious official of Bhutan and head of the Dratshang Lhentshog (Monastic Affairs Commission). He is typically viewed as the closest and most powerful advisor to the King of Bhutan. The 70th and present Je Khenpo is Jigme Chhoeda.\nBhutan's head of government is its Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is nominated by the party that wins the most seats in the National Assembly and heads the executive cabinet, called the Lhengye Zhungtshog (Council of Ministers).\nIn 1998, the monarch's executive powers were transferred to the Council of Ministers, or Lhengye Zhungtshog (cabinet). At the time, candidates for the Council of Ministers were elected by the National Assembly for a fixed five-year term and had to be a part of the legislative assembly. The cabinet was headed by the Prime Minister, who was the head of government. The post of Prime Minister rotated each year between the five candidates who secured the highest number of votes. The 2005 draft Constitution of Bhutan included provision for a two-party democratic system that was unveiled after four years of preparation. Previously, the candidates to the cabinet Council of Ministers (Lhengye Zhungtshog) were nominated by the monarch, elected by the National Assembly. The members served fixed, five-year terms. There was also a Royal Advisory Council (Lodoi Tsokde), members nominated by the monarch.\nLegislative branch.\nBhutan elects its legislative branch through universal suffrage under the Constitution of 2008. The Bhutanese parliament is bicameral, consisting of a National Council (upper house) and a National Assembly (lower house).\nPrior to 2008, the legislative branch was the unicameral Tshogdu. The Tshogdu had 150 members, 106 members elected at various dates for a three-year term in single-seat constituencies, 34 appointed members and 10 representatives of the monastic body. Suffrage in Bhutan at that time was unique in that each family unit, rather than individual, had one vote.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nIn Bhutan, political parties, elections, and referendums are overseen by the Election Commission, an independent government regulatory agency.\nCandidates for most elections and appointments in Bhutan must be non-partisan; however, political parties may slate candidates for seats in the National Assembly. The party that wins the most seats nominates the Prime Minister. The first Prime Minister, Jigme Thinley, was a member of the Bhutan Peace and Prosperity Party. The second Prime Minister, Tshering Tobgay, heads the People's Democratic Party. The current Prime Minister, Dr. Lotay Tshering, heads the Druk Nyamrup Tshongpa.\nPolitical pressure groups include the Buddhist clergy; ethnic Nepalese organizations leading militant anti-government campaign; Indian merchant community and the exiled United Front for Democracy.\nJudicial branch.\nBhutan's legal system is based on codes established by Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal in 17th century and influenced by Anglo-Indian common law. Under the Constitution of 2008, the Judicial branch consists of the Supreme Court, the High Court, and twenty Dzongkhag Courts. For thirteen \"dungkhag\" jurisdictions in six Dzongkhags, Dungkhag Courts are the courts of first instance. In all jurisdictions outside \"dungkhags\", the Dzongkhag Courts are the civil and criminal courts of first instance. The High Court is the first court of appeal, and the Supreme Court is the court of final appeal. The Supreme Court also has original jurisdiction over Constitutional questions and matters of national importance referred by the King. Judges of the Supreme and High courts are appointed by the King, and consists of one Chief Justice and four Drangpons (Associate Justices). \nBefore 2008 in the Bhutanese judicial system, the monarch was the final court of appeal (the \"Supreme Court of Appeal\"), and local government officials adjudicated minor crimes. The Royal High Court of Bhutan was the highest court in the country and had original jurisdiction over the twenty districts of the nation. Judicial appointments were made by the monarch, and could be recalled by him at any time.\nLegal system.\nThe criminal justice system is based on trial before a panel of judges, and therefore resembles more the Napoleonic than the British or American adversarial systems. The prosecutor, a government employee, seeks to obtain an acknowledgement of culpability from the accused. If this happens quickly, the sentencing may be lenient. If culpability is obvious but the accused refuses to admit to it, the sentence may be correspondingly severe. Judges may dismiss the case for lack of proof at any time. Recent legislation defines required proof of guilt more closely, providing increased protection against trivial or mistaken charges. Minor criminal offences may be tried by the dzongkhag Drangpon (District Judge).\nBhutan has not accepted compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBhutan is divided in 20 districts (\"dzongkhag\", singular and plural); Bumthang, Chukha, Dagana, Gasa, Ha, Lhuntse, Mongar, Paro, Pemagatshel, Punakha, Samdrup Jongkhar, Samtse, Sarpang, Thimphu, Trashirang, Trashiyangtse, Trongsa, Tsirang, Wangdue Phodrang, and Zhemgang.\nInternational organization participation.\nBhutan is member of the AsDB, BIMSTEC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OPCW, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69005", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69005", "title": "Telecommunications in Bhutan", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Bhutan includes telephones, radio, television, and the Internet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69006", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69006", "title": "Transport in Bhutan", "text": " \nTransport in Bhutan uses about of roads and four airports, three of which are operational and interconnected. Paro Airport is the only airport which accommodates international flights. As part of Bhutan's infrastructure modernization programs, its road system has been under development since the 1960s. There are no railways (although one is planned), and as Bhutan is a landlocked country with no major waterways, there are no ports.\nRoad.\nBhutan had a total of of roads in 2003, of which were paved and unpaved. Because of the lack of paved roads, travel in Bhutan was by foot or on mule- or horseback until 1961; the trip from the Indian border to Thimphu took six days. Road construction began in earnest during the First Development Plan (1961\u201366). The first paved road was completed in 1962. A branch road later linked Paro with the Phuntsholing\u2013Thimphu road, and a jeep track linked Thimphu and Phuntsholing with Jaigaon, West Bengal. Travel time by motor vehicle from the border to Thimphu shrank to six hours. About 30,000 Indian and Nepalese labourers were imported to build the road with Indian aid when India was bolstering its defence against a potential Chinese invasion. Bhutan also provided labour for the construction work. Another road was built to connect Trashigang with Tawang, Arunachal Pradesh.\nAbout of roads were built by the mid-1970s, largely with manual labour. There was a road network in 1989; at least were paved with asphalt, and were classified as national highways. Despite the construction of paved roads linking the principal towns in the south, mountainous terrain elsewhere makes travel difficult even from one valley to the next. Most roads run in river valleys. As part of the Sixth Development Plan (1987\u201392), the Department of Public Works (in cooperation with the Indian Border Roads Organization) made plans to construct and upgrade of roads and to extend the road network through Bhutan's five major river valleys by 1992. Driveable roads were not the only important development; as part of the Fifth Development Plan, Bhutan also needed an estimated of mule tracks to connect the country's 4,500 settlements.\nThe country's primary road is the East-West Highway (known locally as the Lateral Road), which began construction in 1962. The road begins in Phuentsholing on the southwestern Indian border and ends in Trashigang in the far east, with spurs to other major centres such as Paro, Thimphu, and Punakha. The Lateral Road must support traffic in both directions, since the cost of cutting a wider road through the middle Himalayas would be prohibitive. Safety barriers, road markings, and signage are sparse. Traffic is slow, typically about , to minimise head-on collisions. Road accidents are still frequent and, because of the steep topography, typically horrific. Most of the route between Paro Airport and Thimphu has been improved as a two-lane road.\nThe Lateral Road traverses a number of high passes, including Tremo La and Do Chu La. The highest pass on the road is at Chapcha; the second-highest pass is at Trumshing La, in central Bhutan, at an altitude of over .\nMain roads in western and eastern Bhutan are maintained by Dantak, a task force of India's Border Roads Organisation. Roads in the rest of the country are maintained by the Bhutanese government's Department of Roads.\nMuch of the country's geology is unstable and there are frequent slips and landslides, aggravated by the summer monsoon and winter snowstorms and frost heaving. Teams of Indian labourers are housed at work camps in the mountain passes to clear blocked roads. Conditions in the camps are poor, with workers breaking rocks into gravel on a piece-rate basis when not clearing the roads. An international aid project is underway to stabilise the worst sections of the road. A major Japanese aid project aims to replace most of the narrow, single-track bridges with two-way girder spans capable of carrying heavier traffic.\nMost freight is moved on eight-ton Tata trucks, which are often overloaded. There is a network of passenger buses, and the most common vehicle in government and private use is the four-wheel-drive pickup truck.\nA national driver-licensing system includes a driving test. Government drivers are trained at the Samthang Vocational Training Institute's driving school (formerly the National Driving Training Institute). The roads have traffic lights; although a stoplight in Thimphu was dismantled, there are reportedly plans to reinstall it.\nRail.\nBhutan has no railways. On 25 January 2005 the king of Bhutan and the prime minister of India signed an agreement to establish the following the link and initiated the feasibility study. These rail links are listed from west to east and subcategorised by connection to respective states of India:\nAir.\nBhutan has four airports, Paro, Bathpalathang, Yongphulla, and Gelephu Airport. Paro, the country's only international airport, is in a steep-sided valley with its approaches restricted to visual flight rules. During the monsoon season, flights are often delayed by cloud cover. Drukair is the national carrier, connecting Paro with other countries.\nThe airport is one of the highest and most-challenging airports at which to land. Minimal equipment is available to pilots, and special training is required to land in the narrow valley on the short runway. Winds and bad weather may delay or cancel a flight, and the best travel times are April to May and October to November.\nBathpalathang and Yongphulla are Bhutan's domestic airports. The Royal Bhutanese Government's 10th Five-Year Plan (2008\u201313) included the construction of a domestic airport at Gelephu in Sarpang District. An international airport was planned for the Gelephu site, but the project's scope was downgraded to a domestic airport in October 2008. In January 2010, the Bhutanese Department of Civil Aviation indicated that the domestic airport at Gelephu may be expanded into an all-weather airport capable of international traffic in the future. Construction was due to begin in late 2010, with the airport commencing operation in June 2011.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69007", "revid": "34841508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69007", "title": "Military of Bhutan", "text": "Combined military forces of Bhutan\nThe branches of the armed forces of Bhutan are the Royal Bhutan Army (RBA), Royal Bodyguards, and Royal Bhutan Police. Bhutan does not have an air force, nor (being a landlocked country) a navy. India is responsible for military training, arms supplies and the air defense of Bhutan. Bhutan's army is trained by the Indian Armed Forces.\nAir support.\nThe RBA relies on the Eastern Air Command of the Indian Air Force for air assistance. In recent years India has helped Bhutan start to develop its military in all areas through military donations and training. Total 8,000 Army personnel. Historically, on 1 of January 1971 the Government of Bhutan decided to increase military personnel to 4,850 by recruiting additional 600-700 recruits and stricter regulations on liberation from service. Indian Air Force helicopters evacuated RBA casualties to India for treatment during Operation All Clear in 2003.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69008", "revid": "44313162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69008", "title": "Foreign relations of Bhutan", "text": "Bhutan has diplomatic relations with 58 of the other 192 member states of the United Nations and the European Union. This limited number, and the absence of formal relations with any of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, is part of a deliberate isolationist policy of limiting foreign influence in the state. This stance has been safeguarded by close relations with India, of which Bhutan has previously been considered a protected state.\nIn 1971, sponsored by India, Bhutan began to develop its foreign relations by joining the United Nations. In 1981, Bhutan joined the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, followed by the World Health Organization and UNESCO in 1982. It is also an active member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). Bhutan is currently a member of 45 international organizations.\nUnder Article 20 of the Constitution of Bhutan enacted in 2008, Bhutan's foreign relations fall under the purview of the monarch, the Druk Gyalpo on the advice of the Executive, which includes the Prime Minister and other Ministers of the Lhengye Zhungtshog including the Minister of Foreign Affairs.\nDiplomatic relations.\nBhutan has embassies in Bangladesh, Belgium, India, Kuwait, Australia and Thailand. Conversely, only Bangladesh, India, and Kuwait have embassies in Thimphu. The following is a list of countries with which Bhutan maintains diplomatic relations.\nAsia.\nBangladesh.\nBangladesh is one of only three nations to maintain a residential embassy in Thimphu. Bhutan was the first country in the world to recognize Bangladeshi independence in 1971. The two states have agreed to develop hydropower in the Himalayas, as well as initiate free trade and transshipment through Bangladeshi ports. They also cooperate in water resources management.\nBoth Bhutan and Bangladesh are members of SAARC and BIMSTEC.\nChina.\nBhutan has no diplomatic relations with its northern neighbor, the People's Republic of China, and is one of the few countries that does not have relations with either of the Two Chinas. The border between Bhutan and the PRC has been closed since the invasion of Tibet in 1950, which caused an influx of refugees. The border also remains undelineated; in 1961 China published a map that altered the traditional border. Tensions have since lessened, especially after an agreement on border peace and tranquility was signed in 1998: the first bilateral agreement between China and Bhutan. Despite the lack of formal diplomatic relations, Bhutan has also maintained an Honorary Consul in Macau since 2000 and in Hong Kong since 2004.\nIn late 2005, Bhutan claimed that PLA soldiers were building roads and bridges within Bhutanese territory. Bhutanese Foreign Minister Khandu Wangchuk took up the matter with Chinese authorities after the issue was raised in the Bhutanese parliament. In response, Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang of the People's Republic of China has said that the border remains in dispute and that the two sides are continuing to work for a peaceful and cordial resolution of the dispute. The Bhutanese newspaper \"Kuensel\" has said that China might use the roads to further Chinese claims along the border.\nIndia.\nHistorically, ties with India have been close. Both countries signed a first ever Friendship treaty in 1865 between Bhutan and British India. When Bhutan became a monarchy, British India was the first country to recognize it and renewed the treaty in 1910. Bhutan was the first country to recognize Indian independence and renewed the age old treaty with the new government in 1949, including a clause that India would assist Bhutan in foreign relations. On 8 February 2007, the Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty was substantially revised under the Bhutanese King, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck. In the Treaty of 1949 Article 2 read as \"The Government of India undertakes to exercise no interference in the internal administration of Bhutan. On its part the Government of Bhutan agrees to be guided by the advice of the Government of India in regard to its external relations.\" In the revised treaty this now reads as, \"In keeping with the abiding ties of close friendship and cooperation between Bhutan and India, the Government of the Kingdom of Bhutan and the Government of the Republic of India shall cooperate closely with each other on issues relating to their national interests. Neither government shall allow the use of its territory for activities harmful to the national security and interest of the other.\" The revised treaty also includes in it the preamble \"Reaffirming their respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity\", an element that was absent in the earlier version. The Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty of 2007 strengthens Bhutan's status as an independent and sovereign nation.\nThere also exists bi-lateral agreement between Bhutanese and Indian Government wherein citizens of both nations can travel freely in other country without passport or visa.\nIndonesia.\nDiplomatic relations between Indonesia and Bhutan were officially established on December 15, 2011. The joint communiqu\u00e9 was signed by Bhutan's Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations (UN), Lhatu Wangchuk, and Indonesia's Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the UN, Hasan Kleib, in New York. Diplomatic affairs between Indonesia and Bhutan are handled by the Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia (KBRI) in New Delhi, India.\nIsrael.\nBhutan and Israel established formal diplomatic relations in 2020, with the key areas of cooperation being economic, technological and agricultural development.\nMyanmar.\nBoth countries are a member of BIMSTEC and SASEC. Diplomatic relations were formally established on February 1, 2012.\nNepal.\nNepal and Bhutan established relations in 1983. However, since 1992, relations with Nepal have been tense due to the repatriation of refugees from Bhutan.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippines and Bhutan formally established diplomatic relations on 6 October 2025. The Philippines has an embassy in New Delhi, India as representative to dialogues with Bhutan. Numerous senators and high-profile personalities from the Philippines have visited Bhutan and have been pushing for the Gross National Happiness to also be applied in the Philippines, citing its effectiveness and efficiency in nation-building, environmental and cultural conservation, and human rights upholding. Filipina senator Loren Legarda, a United Nations Global Champion for Resilience, has been pushing for greater diplomatic relations between the two countries. In September 2014, the Prime Minister of Bhutan visited the Philippines and the Asian Development Bank headquarters in Manila. In 2018, the Philippines sent its engineers to Bhutan's capital in a bid to develop Bhutan's space program that will be launched in May.\nSouth Korea.\nBhutan and South Korea established formal relations on 24 September 1987. South Korea granted Bhutan a total of US$6.21 million in aid between 1987 and 2012. Imports into South Korea are about $382,000 and imports into Bhutan are about $3.27 million (as of 2012[ [update]]).\nOther countries.\nTurkey.\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations in 2012. Bhutan and Turkey cooperate through their respective embassies in New Delhi. Trade volume between the two countries was US$1.58 million in 2018 (Bhutanese exports/imports: 1.48/0.1 million USD).\nUnited States.\nThe United States and Bhutan have no official diplomatic ties, however, they both maintain \"warm, informal relations\" with each other, as well as consular relations.\nBhutan is represented by its permanent mission in the United Nations, while the American embassy in New Delhi is currently accredited for Bhutan.\nTransnational issues.\nBhutan has relations with other nations based on transnational issues. Among these issues are extradition, terrorism, and refugees. To a limited extent, Bhutanese law provides frameworks for cooperation with countries which Bhutan has no formal mission.\nExtradition.\nBhutan has a legislated policy on extradition of criminals, both to and from the kingdom. Any nation, with or without formal relations, may request the extradition of fugitives who abscond to Bhutan. The Extradition Act requires nations to provide \"all relevant evidence and information\" about the accused, after which the Royal Government may in its discretion refer the matter to the High Court of Bhutan. The Court may then issue a summons or warrant, conduct an inquiry, and collect evidence, holding the accused for a maximum of 30 days. Alternatively, the Royal Government may refer the matter to the courts for trial within Bhutan. Bhutan imposes punishments for offenses committed in treaty states generally, and for offenses in other states resulting in return to Bhutan. Offenses are weighed according to gravity, determined by a schedule and two-part test: extraditable offenses are those enumerated (including murder, theft, forgery, and smuggling), or which in Bhutan would be punished by a prison term exceeding twelve months. All felonies in Bhutan are punishable by a minimum of three years' imprisonment.\nBhutan will refuse requests for extradition if the Royal Government or its courts determine the person is accused of a political offense.\nInternational cooperation against terrorism.\nBhutan cooperates with India to expel Nagaland separatists; lacking any treaty describing the boundary, Bhutan and China continue negotiations to establish a common boundary alignment to resolve territorial disputes arising from substantial cartographic discrepancies, the largest of which lie in Bhutan's northwest and along the Chumbi salient.\nRefugee resettlement.\nThe U.S. has offered to resettle 60,000 of the 107,000 Bhutanese refugees of Nepalese origin now living in seven U.N. refugee camps in southeastern Nepal. Six other nations\u2014Australia, Canada, Norway, Netherlands, New Zealand and Denmark\u2014have offered to resettle 10,000 each.\nOther countries also operate resettlement programs in the camps. Norway has already settled 200 Bhutanese refugees, and Canada has agreed to accept up to 5,000 through to 2012.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69009", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69009", "title": "Tiphsah", "text": ""}
{"id": "69010", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69010", "title": "Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy", "text": "Italian noble (1197\u20131253)\nAmadeus IV (1197\u00a0\u2013 11 June 1253) was Count of Savoy from 1233 to 1253.\nAmadeus was born in Montm\u00e9lian, Savoy. The legitimate heir of Thomas I of Savoy and Margaret of Geneva, he had, however, to fight with his brothers for the inheritance of Savoy's lands after their father's death. His brothers Pietro and Aimone spurred a revolt in Aosta Valley against Amadeus, but he was able to crush it with the help of Manfred III of Saluzzo and Boniface II of Montferrat, who were his sons-in-law. Together with his brother, Thomas, he fought against the communes of Turin and Pinerolo, but with uncertain results.\nHe was succeeded by his young son Boniface.\nCareer.\nHead of the family.\nAs the eldest son of Thomas I of Savoy, Amadeus inherited the county and associated lands on his father's death in 1233. However, his brothers Peter and Aymon demanded that he divide the territories and give them their share. In July 1234, he and his brother William convened a family meeting at Ch\u00e2teau de Chillon. While both sides arrived with armed troops, William was able to negotiate a treaty between the brothers. This treaty kept the lands intact, but recognised the authority of the younger brothers within certain regions under Amadeus. These territories were on the frontiers of Savoy lands, designed to encourage the brothers to expand the county rather than diminish it. When his brother Thomas left his career in the church in 1235, Amadeus granted him similar territories.\nBefore he had a son, Amadeus changed his mind many times regarding his will. Initially, he had made his sons-in-law his heirs, but in 1235, he rewrote his will in favour of his brother Thomas. In December of that year, it went back to having his sons-in-law as heirs, until Amadeus was preparing for the siege. Then he rewrote the will in favour of Thomas. In March 1239, his daughters convinced him to return it to their favour. On 4 November 1240, Thomas returned and persuaded him to rewrite the will in his brother's favour again. When Thomas left, once again the will was reversed. His final will was written in 1252, leaving the title and nearly everything to his son, Boniface, and naming his brother Thomas as regent and second in line for the title.\nAmong European powers.\nAmadeus faced many challenges in balancing the demands of the greater powers in Europe at that time. Henry III of England wrote to Amadeus in 1235 to seek his consent and blessing to marry the Count's niece, Eleanor of Provence In 1238, Amadeus went to the court of Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, in Turin, where he was knighted by the Emperor. Then with his brothers, he led troops as part of the siege of Brescia. In July 1243, Amadeus and his brother Thomas were ordered by Enzo of Sardinia to join him in a siege of Vercelli, which had recently switched allegiances from the Empire to the Pope. Not only was the attack on the city unsuccessful, but Amadeus and his brother were excommunicated for it. When the brothers wrote to the new Pope Innocent IV to appeal the excommunication, he granted their request.\nIn late 1244, when Pope Innocent IV fled from Rome, Amadeus met him in Susa and escorted him through the passes to Chamb\u00e9ry, and then provided his brother Philip as escort for the Pope downriver to Lyon. However, Amadeus was then willing to open the same passes to the imperial army. He also signed a treaty with Henry III on 16 January 1246, which gave rights of passage through the passes to the English in exchange for an annual payment of 200 marks. That same month, Amadeus joined a force which went to Provence to rescue his niece, Beatrice of Provence from the forces of Frederick and escort her to her marriage to Charles of Anjou By May 1247, Frederick was ready to move against the Pope. He had gathered his army in Turin and ordered those still loyal to him in the kingdoms of Arles and France to meet at Chamb\u00e9ry (the capital of Savoy). However, the revolt of Parma pulled Frederick back from this plan. That same summer, Amadeus blocked an attempt by the Pope to send 1500 soldiers to the Lombard League. On 8 November 1248, Frederick asked Amadeus and his brother Thomas to go to Lyon and start negotiations for peace. However, their efforts were unsuccessful and the war continued until the death of Frederick.\nFamily and children.\nHe married twice, and each marriage produced children\nAround 1217, he married Margaret of Burgundy. They had:\nOn 18 December 1244, he married Cecilia of Baux. They had:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69011", "revid": "36623386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69011", "title": "Geography of Bolivia", "text": "The geography of Bolivia includes the Eastern Andes Mountain Range (also called the Cordillera Oriental) which bisects Bolivia roughly from north to south. To the east of that mountain chain are lowland plains of the Amazon Basin, and to the west is the Altiplano which is a highland plateau where Lake Titicaca is located. Bolivia's geography has features similar to those of Peru which abuts Bolivia's northwest border; like Bolivia, Peru is bisected from north to south by the Eastern Andes Mountains, and these two countries share Lake Titicaca which is the highest navigable lake on Earth. Unlike Peru, however, Bolivia is one of the two landlocked countries in South America, the other being Paraguay, which is located along Bolivia's southeast border.\nOverview.\nThe most prominent feature of the Altiplano is the large lake at its northern end, Lake Titicaca. At above sea level. With a surface area of , it is larger than Puerto Rico and is South America's second-largest lake by surface area. Lake Titicaca is also deep, about at its deepest, with an average depth of ; its volume of water is large enough to maintain a constant temperature of . The lake actually moderates the climate for a considerable distance around it, making crops of maize and wheat possible in sheltered areas.\nLake Titicaca drains southward through the slow-moving, reed-filled Desaguadero River to Lake Poop\u00f3. In contrast to the freshwater Lake Titicaca, Lake Poop\u00f3 is salty and shallow, with depths seldom more than .\nIn western Bolivia, the Cordillera Occidental is a chain of dormant volcanoes and solfataras, volcanic vents emitting sulfurous gases. Bolivia's highest peak, the snowcapped Nevado Sajama , is located here. The entire Cordillera is of volcanic origin and an extension of the volcanic region found in southern Peru. Most of the northern part of this range has an elevation of about ; the southern part is somewhat lower. Rainfall, although scanty everywhere, is greater in the northern half, where the land is covered with scrub vegetation. The southern area receives almost no precipitation, and the landscape consists mostly of barren rocks. All of the Cordillera Occidental regions are sparsely populated, and the south is virtually uninhabited.\nThe Altiplano, the high plateau between the previous range, and the Cordillera Oriental, comprises four major basins formed by mountainous spurs that jut eastward from the Cordillera Occidental about halfway to the Cordillera Oriental. Along the Altiplano's eastern side is a continuous flat area, which has served as Bolivia's principal north\u2013south transport corridor since colonial times. The entire Altiplano was originally a deep rift between the cordilleras that gradually filled with highly porous sedimentary debris washed down from the peaks. This sedimentary origin explains its gradual slope from north to south; greater rainfall in the north has washed a larger quantity of debris onto the platform floor.\nRainfall in the Altiplano decreases towards the south, and the scrub vegetation grows more sparse, eventually giving way to barren rocks and dry red clay. The land contains several salt flats, the dried remnants of ancient lakes. The largest of these \u2013 and the world's largest salt concentration \u2013 is the Uyuni Saltpan, which covers over 9,000 square kilometers. The salt is more than five meters deep in the center of this flat. In the dry season, the lake bed can be traversed by heavy trucks. Near the Argentine border, the floor of the Altiplano rises again, creating hills and volcanoes that span the gap between the eastern and western cordilleras of the Andes.\nThe much older Cordillera Oriental enters Bolivia on the north side of Lake Titicaca, extends southeastward to approximately 17 south latitude, then broadens and stretches south to the Argentine border. The northernmost part of the Cordillera Oriental, the Cordillera Real, is an impressive snow-capped series of granite mountains. Some of these peaks exceed and two \u2013 Illimani , which overlooks the city of La Paz, and Illampu \u2013 have large glaciers on their upper slopes. South of 17 south latitudes, the range changes character. Called the Cordillera Central here, the land is a large block of the Earth's crust that has been lifted and tilted eastward. The western edge of this block rises in a series of cliffs from the Altiplano. The backbone of the cordillera is a high, rolling plain, with elevations from , interspersed with irregularly spaced high peaks. Too high to be exploited for large-scale commercial grazing, this area takes its name from the predominant vegetation type, the puna.\nBolivia has three drainage basins:\nIn Bolivia forest cover is around 47% of the total land area, equivalent to 50,833,760 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 57,804,720 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 50,771,160 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 62,600 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 24% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.\nValleys.\nThe northeastern flank of the Cordillera Real is known as the Yungas, from the Aymara and Quechua word \"yunka\" meaning \"warm valley\". The steep, almost inaccessible slopes and peaks of this mainly semitropical valley area northeast of La Paz offer some of the most spectacular scenery in Bolivia. Rainfall is heavy, and lush vegetation clings to the sides of narrow river valleys. The land is among the most fertile in Bolivia, but poor transport has hindered its agricultural development. The government attempted to build a railway through the Yungas in 1917 to connect La Paz with the eastern lowlands. The railway was abandoned, however, after completion of only 150 kilometres.\nThe eastern slopes of the Cordillera Central descend gradually in a series of complex north\u2013south ranges and hills. Rivers, draining to the east, have cut long narrow valleys; these valleys and the basins between the ranges are favorable areas for crops and settlement. Rich alluvial soils fill the low areas, but erosion has followed the removal of vegetation in some places. The valley floors range from 2,000 to 3,000 metres above sea level, and this lower elevation means milder temperatures than those of the Altiplano. The cities of Sucre, Cochabamba and the upper area of Tarija department, are located in basins of this vast region.\nLowlands.\nThe eastern lowlands include all of Bolivia north and east of the Andes. Although comprising over two-thirds of the national territory, the region is sparsely populated and, until recently, has played a minor role in the economy.\nDifferences in topography and climate separate the lowlands into three areas. The flat northern area, made up of Beni and Pando Departments and the northern part of Cochabamba Department, consists of rainforest. Because much of the topsoil is underlain by claypan, drainage is poor, and heavy rainfall periodically converts vast parts of the region to swamp. The central area, comprising the northern half of Santa Cruz Department, has gently rolling hills and a drier climate than the north. Forests alternate with savanna, and much of the land has been cleared for cultivation. Santa Cruz, the largest city in the lowlands, is located here, as are most of Bolivia's petroleum and natural gas reserves. The southeastern part of the lowlands is part of the Gran Chaco. Virtually rainless for nine months of the year, this area becomes flooded for the three months of heavy rains. The extreme variation in rainfall supports only thorny scrub vegetation and cattle grazing, although recent discoveries of natural gas and petroleum near the foothills of the Andes have attracted some settlers to the region.\nMost of Bolivia's important rivers are found in the water-rich northern parts of the lowlands, particularly in the Alto Beni (Upper Beni), where the land is suitable for crops such as coffee and cacao. The northern lowlands are drained by wide, slow-moving rivers, the three largest of which\u2014the Mamor\u00e9, Beni, and Madre de Dios\u2014all flow northward into the Madeira River in Brazil and eventually into the River Amazon. Riverboats along the Beni and the Mamor\u00e9 carry both passenger and freight traffic; rapids on the Madeira prevent river traffic farther into Brazil. Near the Paraguayan border, shallow sandy streams carry the seasonal runoff into the Pilcomayo or Paraguay rivers. Also, the Pantanal, the world's largest wetland of any kind, has some of its area in Bolivia.\nDespite the fact that eastern Bolivia is described as lowland there are some mountains and mountain ranges well beyond the Andes. The most notable of these mountains are the forested Serran\u00edas Chiquitanas in eastern Santa Cruz Department.\nClimate.\nBolivia has several geographical areas and climates, and the three predominant ones are Andean (28% of the territory), sub-Andean (13%), and plains (59%). The climate of Bolivia, especially temperature, is strongly influenced by surface elevation. The climate of Bolivia varies drastically from one ecoregion to the other, from the tropics in the eastern \"llanos\" to polar climates in the western Andes. The summers are warm, humid in the east and dry in the west, with rains that often modify temperatures, humidity, winds, atmospheric pressure and evaporation, giving place to very different climates. When the climatological phenomenon known as\" El Ni\u00f1o\" takes place, it provokes great alterations in the weather. Winters are very cold in the west, and it snows around the mountain ranges, while in the western regions, windy days are more usual. The autumn is dry in the non-tropical regions.\nStatistics.\nTerrain:\nrugged Andes Mountains with a highland plateau (Altiplano), hills, lowland plains of the Amazon Basin\nNatural resources:\ntin, natural gas, petroleum, zinc, tungsten, antimony, silver, iron, lead, gold, timber, hydro-power\nLand borders: Argentina (942\u00a0km), Brazil (3,403\u00a0km), Chile (942\u00a0km), Paraguay (753\u00a0km), Peru (1,212\u00a0km)\nLand use:\nAs of 2016, the population of Bolivia was more urban (66%) than rural (34%).\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n3.97%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n0.20%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n95.83% (2012)\nIrrigated land:\n1,282\u00a0km2 (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n622.5 cu km (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 2.64\u00a0km3/yr (25%/14%/61%)\n&lt;br&gt;\"per capita:\" 305.8 m3/yr (2005)\nNatural hazards:\nflooding in the northeast (March\u2013April)\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\nthe clearing of land for agricultural purposes and the international demand for tropical timber are contributing to deforestation; soil erosion from overgrazing and poor cultivation methods (including slash-and-burn agriculture); desertification; loss of biodiversity; industrial pollution of water supplies used for drinking and irrigation\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands\n&lt;br&gt;\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nEnvironmental Modification, Marine Life Conservation\nGeography \u2013 note:\nlandlocked; separated from the Pacific Ocean via Chile. Bolivia shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's highest navigable lake (elevation 3,805 m), with Peru\nLocation and extreme points.\nBolivia is bordered in the northwest by Peru, and in the southwest by Chile; both Peru and Bolivia are split by the Andes Mountains roughly from north to south, and those two countries therefore have very similar geographic regions, except that Bolivia's Pacific coast was lost to Chile during the War of the Pacific in 1880. Bolivia is also bordered by Brazil in the north and east, by Paraguay in the southeast, and by Argentina in the south.\nClimate policy.\nBolivia has also implemented the Bolivian Strategy on Climate Change, which is based on taking action in these four areas:\nBolivia comprises about 20% of the world's tropical glaciers, along with the Andes Mountains. However, they are vulnerable to global warming and have lost 43% of their surface area between 1986 and 2014. Some Bolivian glaciers have lost more than two-thirds of their mass since the 1980s points out UNESCO in 2018. While the temperature in the tropical Andes is expected to rise by two to five degrees by the end of the 21st century, glaciers would still lose between 78% and 97% of their mass. Glaciers account for between 60% and 85% of La Paz's water supply, depending on the year.\nScientists began alerting the Bolivian government to the problem of melting glaciers in the 1990s, but it was not until 2012 that the authorities responded with real protection policies. A Project for Adaptation to the Impact of Accelerated Glacier Recession in the Tropical Andes (PRAA) was then set up, with the mission to \"strengthen the monitoring network\" and \"generate information useful for decision-making.\" The glaciers have since been monitored by cameras, probes, drones and satellite. Authorities have also developed programs to educate the population about the consequences of global warming to push back on certain harmful agricultural practices.\nIn February 2017, the government mobilized $200\u00a0million to combat drought and global warming.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69012", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69012", "title": "Demographics of Bolivia", "text": " \nThe demographic characteristics of the population of Bolivia are known from censuses, with the first census undertaken in 1826 and the most recent in 2024. The National Institute of Statistics of Bolivia (INE) has performed this task since 1950. The population of Bolivia in 2024 reached 11 million for the first time in history. The population density is 11.36 inhabitants per square kilometer, and the overall life expectancy in Bolivia at birth is 68.2 years. The population has steadily risen from the late 1800s to the present time. The natural growth rate of the population is positive, which has been a continuing trend since the 1950s; in 2012, Bolivia's birth rate continued to be higher than the death rate. Bolivia is in the third stage of demographic transition. In terms of age structure, the population is dominated by the 15\u201364 segment. The median age of the population is 23.1, and the gender ratio of the total population is 0.99 males per female.\nBolivia is inhabited mostly by Mestizo, Quechua and Aymara, while minorities include 37 indigenous groups (0.3% average per group). Spanish, Quechua, Aymara, Guarani languages, as well as 34 other native languages are the official languages of Bolivia. Spanish is the most-spoken language (60.7%) within the population. The main religions of Bolivia are the Catholic Church (81.8%), Evangelicalism (11.5%), and Protestantism (2.6%). There is a literacy rate of 91.2%. An estimated 7.6% of the country's gross domestic product (GDP) is spent on education. The average monthly household income was Bs.1,378 ($293) in 1994. In December 2013 the unemployment rate was 3.2% of the working population. The average urbanization rate in Bolivia is 67%.\nPopulation size and structure.\nThe first true estimate of the population of Bolivia came in 1826, in which 997,427 inhabitants were estimated. This number was calculated from the 1796 census organized by Francisco Gil de Taboada, which consisted of several Bolivian cities. The first modern census was completed in 1831, and ten have been completed since then. The organizer of Bolivia's censuses has changed throughout the years\u2014Andr\u00e9s de Santa Cruz (1831), The Bolivian Statistical Office (1835, 1854, 1882), The Bolivian Statistical Commission (1845), The National Immigration Bureau and The Statistics and Geographic Propaganda (1900), and The Department of Statistics and Censuses (1950)\u2014with the INE conducting the census since 1976. The national census is supposed to be conducted every ten years, however, the 2012 census was late because of \"climatic factors and the financing.\" The 2012 census was conducted on 21 November 2012, in which 10,027,254 inhabitants were in the country. The estimated cost of the census was $50\u00a0million.\nWith a population of 10.0\u00a0million in 2012, Bolivia ranks 87th in the world by population. Its population density is 9.13 inhabitants per square kilometer. The overall life expectancy in Bolivia is 65.4. The total fertility rate is 2.87 children per mother. Since 1950, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates the birth rate exceeded the death rate of the country. The population of Bolivia has been increasing since 1900, and has only had a negative per annum growth rate twice in its history (1835 and 1882). Bolivia is in the third stage of demographic transition. There were 562,461 immigrants in Bolivia in 2012, with the most (40.5%) coming from Argentina. In 2008, there were 48,809 marriages in Bolivia, and 5,887 divorces throughout the country in 2011.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 21.XI.2012): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (30.VI.2021) (Post-censal estimates.): \nVital statistics.\nBirths and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n(c) = Census results.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to a genetic study done on Bolivians, average values of Native American, European and African ancestry are 86%, 12.5%, and 1.5%, in individuals from La Paz and 76.8%, 21.4%, and 1.8% in individuals from Chuquisaca; respectively.\nThe vast majority of Bolivians are mestizo (with the indigenous component higher than the European one), although the government has not included the cultural self-identification \"mestizo\" in the November 2012 census. There are approximately three dozen native groups totaling approximately half of the Bolivian population \u2013 the largest proportion of indigenous people in the Americas. Exact numbers vary based on the wording of the ethnicity question and the available response choices. For example, the 2001 census did not provide the racial category \"mestizo\" as a response choice, resulting in a much higher proportion of respondents identifying themselves as belonging to one of the available indigenous ethnicity choices. Mestizos are distributed throughout the entire country and make up 26% of the Bolivian population, with the predominantly mestizo departments being Beni, Santa Cruz, and Tarija. Most people assume their \"mestizo\" identity while at the same time identifying themselves with one or more indigenous cultures. A 2018 estimate of racial classification put mestizo (mixed white and Amerindian) at 68%, indigenous at 20%, white at 5%, cholo at 2%, black at 1%, other at 4%, while 2% were unspecified; 44% attributed themselves to some indigenous group, predominantly the linguistic categories of Quechuas or Aymaras. White Bolivians comprised about 14% of the population in 2006, and are usually concentrated in the largest cities: La Paz, Santa Cruz de la Sierra and Cochabamba, but as well in some minor cities like Tarija and Sucre. The ancestry of whites and the white ancestry of mestizos lies most notably Spain, Italy, Germany, and Croatia. In the Santa Cruz Department, there are several dozen colonies of German-speaking Mennonites from Russia totaling around 40,000 inhabitants (as of 2012[ [update]]).\nAfro-Bolivians, descendants of African slaves who arrived in the time of the Spanish Empire, inhabit the department of La Paz, and are located mainly in the provinces of Nor Yungas and Sud Yungas. Slavery was abolished in Bolivia in 1831. There are also important communities of Japanese (14,000) and Lebanese (12,900).\nIndigenous peoples, also called \"originarios\" (\"native\" or \"original\") and less frequently, \"Amerindians\", could be categorized by geographic area, such as Andean, like the Aymaras and Quechuas (who formed the ancient Inca Empire), who are concentrated in the western departments of La Paz, Potos\u00ed, Oruro, Cochabamba and Chuquisaca. There also are ethnic populations in the east, composed of the Chiquitano, Chan\u00e9, Guaran\u00ed and Moxos, among others, who inhabit the departments of Santa Cruz, Beni, Tarija and Pando.\nThere are small numbers of European citizens from Germany, France, Italy and Portugal, as well as from other countries of the Americas, as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, the United States, Paraguay, Peru, Mexico and Venezuela, among others. There are important Peruvian colonies in La Paz, El Alto and Santa Cruz de la Sierra.\nThere are around 140,000 Mennonites in Bolivia of Friesian, Flemish and German ethnic origins.\nA few Bolivians carry some Middle Eastern ancestry, mainly from Syria &amp; Lebanon.\nIndigenous peoples.\nThe Indigenous peoples of Bolivia can be divided into two categories of ethnic groups: the Andeans, who are located in the Andean Altiplano and the valley region; and the lowland groups, who inhabit the warm regions of central and eastern Bolivia, including the valleys of Cochabamba Department, the Amazon Basin areas of northern La Paz Department, and the lowland departments of Beni, Pando, Santa Cruz, and Tarija (including the Gran Chaco region in the southeast of the country). Large numbers of Andean peoples have also migrated to form Quechua, Aymara, and intercultural communities in the lowlands.\nLanguages.\nThe official languages of Bolivia are Spanish (60.7%), Quechua (21.2%), Aymara (14.6), and Guaran\u00ed (0.6%), plus another 33 native languages. Originally only Spanish, Aymara, and Quechua were the official languages until the 2009 Constitution was passed. According to the 2001 census, 60.7% of the population over six years old are able to speak Spanish and/or speaks it as a native language.\nReligion.\nIn a 2012 Gallup poll, 87% answered affirmatively when asked \"Is religion important in your daily life?\" Christianity is the largest religion in Bolivia, with Roman Catholicism being the largest denomination.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69013", "revid": "41307770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69013", "title": "Politics of Bolivia", "text": " \nThe politics of Bolivia takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the president is head of state, head of government and head of a diverse multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament. Both the Judiciary and the electoral branch are independent of the executive and the legislature. After the 2014 Bolivian general election, 53.1% of the seats in national parliament were held by women, a higher proportion of women than that of the population.\nHistory.\nThe Bolivian Civil War between the Conservatives and the Liberals ended in 1899 with the latter's victory; a liberal era began that lasted until 1920. A system of public education developed, accompanied by moderate anticlericalism: Catholicism lost its status as the only religion recognized by the State in 1906 and civil marriage was adopted in 1911. Bolivian liberalism, however, clearly lost its progressive character to coexist with the interests of the new tin fortunes (the liberal era is sometimes also considered to be the tin era, with tin production having increased considerably), landowners and the army. Inspired by the example of the Ecuadorian Liberal Revolution of 1895 led by Eloy Alfaro, a new liberalism organized itself into a republican party and expressed some social concerns against the domination of the liberal oligarchy.\nConstitution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBolivia's current constitution was adopted via referendum in 2009, providing for a unitary secular state.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is directly elected to a five-year term by popular vote. A candidate needs either an absolute majority or 40% and a 10-point lead to win the election. In the case that no candidate is elected in the first vote, a run-off vote elects the president from among the two candidates most voted in the first vote.\nHugo Banzer was elected president in 1997. Although no candidate had received more than 50% of the popular vote in the national election, Banzer won a congressional runoff election on 5 August 1997 after forming the so-called \"megacoalition\" with other parties. He resigned in August 2001 and was substituted by his vice president Jorge Quiroga. In August 2002, the winner of the national election Gonzalo S\u00e1nchez de Lozada was chosen president by Congress, winning an 84\u201343 vote against popular vote runner-up Evo Morales. Elected president Gonzalo S\u00e1nchez de Lozada resigned in October 2003, and was substituted by vice-president Carlos Mesa who governed the nation until his resignation in June 2005. He was replaced by chief justice of the Supreme Court Eduardo Rodr\u00edguez, acting as caretaker president. Six months later, on December 18, 2005, cocalero leader Evo Morales was elected president.\nA group of MEPs acting as election observers oversaw a constitutional referendum in Bolivia that gave more power to indigenous peoples 25 January 2009. The tightly fought referendum laid out a number of key reforms such as allowing President Evo Morales to stand for re-election, state control over natural gas and limits on the size of land people can own.\nMinistries.\nBolivia currently has twenty-one ministries in the executive branch. The heads of these ministries form the cabinet.\nLegislative branch.\nThe bicameral Plurinational Legislative Assembly consists of the Chamber of Senators (36 seats; members are elected by proportional representation from party lists to serve five-year terms) and the Chamber of Deputies (130 seats; 70 are directly elected from their districts, 63 are elected by proportional representation from party lists, and 7 are elected by indigenous peoples of most departments, to serve five-year terms).\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary consists of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Plurinational Constitutional Court, the Judiciary Council, Agrarian and Environmental Court, and District (departmental) and lower courts.\nIn October 2011, Bolivia held its first judicial elections to choose members of the national courts by popular vote. Twenty-eight elected members and twenty-eight alternates were sworn in on 3 January 2011 in Sucre.\nPlurinational Constitutional Court.\nThe members of the Plurinational Constitutional Court, elected in October 2011, are: Ligia Vel\u00e1squez, Mirtha Camacho, Melvy Andrade, Zoraida Chanes, Gualberto Cusi, Efra\u00edn Choque, and Ruddy Flores. The elected alternate members are: Isabel Ortu\u00f1o, Lidia Chipana, Mario Pacosillo, Katia L\u00f3pez, Javier Aramayo, Miriam Pacheco, and Rommy Colque.\nSupreme Court of Justice.\nThe members of the Supreme Court of Justice, elected in October 2011, are: Maritza Suntura (La Paz Department), Jorge Isaac Von Borries M\u00e9ndez (Santa Cruz), R\u00f3mulo Calle Mamani (Oruro), Pastor Segundo Mamani Villca (Potos\u00ed), Antonio Guido Campero Segovia (Tarija), Gonzalo Miguel Hurtado Zamorano (Beni), Fidel Marcos Tordoya Rivas (Cochabamba), Rita Susana Nava (Tarija), and Norka Natalia Mercado Guzm\u00e1n (Pando). The elected alternate members are: William Alave (La Paz), Mar\u00eda Arminda R\u00edos Garc\u00eda (Santa Cruz), Ana Adela Quispe Cuba (Oruro), Elisa S\u00e1nchez Mamani (Potos\u00ed), Carmen N\u00fa\u00f1ez Villegas (Tarija), Silvana Rojas Panoso (Beni), Mar\u00eda Lourdes Bustamante (Cochabamba), Javier Medardo Serrano (Tarija), and Delf\u00edn Humberto Betancour Chinchilla (Pando). Gonzalo Miguel Hurtado Zamorano was elected President of the Court on 3 January 2012.\nThe Supreme Court of Justice replaces the Supreme Court, active since Bolivia's founding in 1825.\nJudiciary Council.\nThe members of the Judiciary Council, elected in October 2011, are (in order of total votes received): Cristina Mamani, Freddy Sanabria, Wilma Mamani, Roger Trive\u00f1o, and Ernesto Aran\u00edbar. Cristina Mamani was elected by her peers as the first president of the Judiciary Council on 4 January 2012.\nAgro-environmental Court.\nThe members of the Agro-environmental Court, elected in October 2011, are (in order of total votes received): Bernardo Huarachi, Deysi Villag\u00f3mez, Gabriela Armijo Paz, Javier Pe\u00f1afiel, Juan Ricardo Soto, Lucio Fuentes, and Yola Paucara. The elected alternate members are: Isabel Ortu\u00f1o, Lidia Chipana, Mario Pacosillo, Katia L\u00f3pez, Javier Aramayo, Miriam Pacheco, and Rommy Colque.\nElectoral branch.\nThe electoral branch of Bolivia's government, formally the Plurinational Electoral Organ, is an independent branch of government which replaced the National Electoral Court in 2010. The branch consists of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the nine Departmental Electoral Tribunals, Electoral Judges, the anonymously selected Juries at Election Tables, and Electoral Notaries. Wilfredo Ovando presides over the seven-member Supreme Electoral Tribunal. Its operations are mandated by the Constitution and regulated by the Electoral Regime Law (Law 026, passed 2010). The Organ's first elections will be the country's first judicial election in October 2011 and five municipal special elections expected to be held in 2011.\nLocal government.\nBolivia is divided into nine departments (departamentos, singular \u2013 departamento); Chuquisaca, Cochabamba, Beni, La Paz, Oruro, Pando, Potosi, Santa Cruz, Tarija. \nBolivia's nine departments received greater autonomy under the Administrative Decentralization law of 1995. Departmental autonomy further increased with the first popular elections for departmental governors, known as prefects, on 18 December 2005. Departments are governed by the elected governors (until 2010, prefects; and until 2005, appointed by the President) and by independently elected Departmental Legislative Assemblies (until 2010; Departmental Councils).\ns are governed by directly elected mayors and councils. Municipal elections were last held on 4 April 2010, with both mayors councils elected to five-year terms. The Popular Participation Law of April 1994, which distributes a significant portion of national revenues to municipalities for discretionary use, has enabled previously neglected communities to make striking improvements in their facilities and services.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe governing Movement for Socialism (\"Movimiento al Socialismo\", MAS) is a Left-wing, Socialist political party led by Evo Morales, founded in 1997. It has governed the country since 2006, following the first ever majority victory by a single party in the December 2005 elections. MAS evolved out of the movement to defend the interests of coca growers. Currently, the MAS stands as a party committed to equality, indigenous rights, agrarian land reform, Constitutional reform as well as nationalization of key industries with an aim to redistribute the returns through increased social spending. Among the poor, rural and indigenous population the MAS enjoys nearly unanimous support.\nThe right-of-center opposition includes a variety of political parties. During the 2005\u201309 political cycle the largest of these was PODEMOS, a successor to Nationalist Democratic Action. In the 2009 elections, several parties and politicians united to form Plan Progreso para Bolivia \u2013 Convergencia Nacional, whose presidential candidate, Manfred Reyes Villa and parliamentary slate came in second in the 2009 elections.\nThree political parties were dominant from 1982 to 2005: The Revolutionary Nationalist Movement which had carried out the 1952 Revolution; Revolutionary Left Movement; and Nationalist Democratic Action founded in 1982 by former dictator and later elected President Hugo Banzer. Despite the revolutionary names of the first two, they generally pursued centrist economic policies.\nIn October 2025, Rodrigo Paz of the centre-right Christian Democratic Party (PDC) won the run-off race of the election against right-wing former president Jorge Quiroga, meaning the end of governance by the Movement for Socialism (MAS) party and a clear political shift to the right.\nOther parties include:\nSocial movements.\nSome of Bolivia's social movements are:\nInternational affairs.\nInternational organization participation:\nALBA, CAN, CELAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LAES, LAIA, Mercosur (associate), MIGA, MINUSTAH, MONUC, NAM, OAS, ONUB, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNAMSIL, UNASUR, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIK, UNMIL, UNMISET, UNOCI, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69014", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69014", "title": "Economy of Bolivia", "text": "The economy of Bolivia is the 89th-largest in the world in nominal terms and the 90th-largest in purchasing power parity. Bolivia is classified by the World Bank to be a lower middle income country. With a Human Development Index of 0.703, it is ranked 114th (high human development). Driven largely by its natural resources, Bolivia has become a region leader in measures of economic growth, fiscal stability and foreign reserves, although it remains a historically poor country.\nThe Bolivian economy has had a historic single-commodity focus. From silver to tin to coca, Bolivia has enjoyed only occasional periods of economic diversification. Political instability and difficult topography have constrained efforts to modernize the agricultural sector. Similarly, relatively low population growth coupled with low life expectancy has kept the labor supply in flux and prevented industries from flourishing. Rampant inflation and corruption previously created development challenges, but in the early twenty-first century the fundamentals of its economy showed unexpected improvement, leading Moody's Investors Service to upgrade Bolivia's economic rating in 2010 from B2 to B1. The mining industry, especially the extraction of natural gas and zinc, currently dominates Bolivia's export economy.\nBetween 2006 and 2019 (term of the presidency of the democratic socialist Evo Morales), GDP per capita doubled and the extreme poverty rate declined from 38% to 18%. The poverty rate declined from 22.23% in 2000 to 12.38% in 2010. Moreover, the Gini coefficient declined from 0.60 to 0.446. According to the Bolivian Institute of Foreign Trade, Bolivia had the lowest accumulated inflation of Latin America by October 2021. However, by late 2024 it had one of the highest rates of inflation in the region, amid a new, large-scale economic crisis.\nHistory.\nBolivia was a major mineral exporter during the colonial period. The turbulent independence period led to the collapse of the mining industry. By the 1840s, silver production was half that of 1790. In the decades following 1850, Bolivia experienced economic growth. Bolivia remained a primarily rural country into the 20th century. Tin production became Bolivia's main industry after 1900.\nThe Bolivian economy grew rapidly between 1960 and 1977. According to one study, \"persistent deficits and a fixed exchange rate policy during the 1970s led to a debt crisis that began in 1977. From 1977 to 1986, Bolivia lost almost all the gains in GDP per capita that it had achieved since 1960.\" After 1986, Bolivian economy began to grow again. Between 1998 and 2002, Bolivia experienced a financial crisis.\nInflation has plagued, and at times crippled, the Bolivian economy since the 1970s. At one time in 1985 Bolivia experienced an annual inflation rate of more than 20,000 percent. Fiscal and monetary reform reduced the inflation rate to single digits by the 1990s, and in 2004 Bolivia experienced a manageable 4.9 percent rate of inflation.\nA major blow to the Bolivian economy came with a drastic fall in the price of tin during the early 1980s, which impacted one of Bolivia's main sources of income and one of its major mining industries.\nSince 1985 the government of Bolivia has implemented a far-reaching program of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform aimed at maintaining price stability, creating conditions for sustained growth, and alleviating scarcity. A major reform of the customs service has significantly improved transparency in this area. Parallel legislative reforms have locked into place market-liberal policies, especially in the hydrocarbon and telecommunication sectors, that have encouraged private investment. Foreign investors are accorded national treatment.\nIn April 2000 Hugo Banzer, the former president of Bolivia, signed a contract with Aguas del Tunari, a private consortium, to operate and improve the water supply in Bolivia's third-largest city, Cochabamba. Shortly thereafter, the company tripled the water rates in that city, an action which resulted in protests and rioting among those who could no longer afford clean water. Amidst Bolivia's nationwide economic collapse and growing national unrest over the state of the economy, the Bolivian government was forced to withdraw the water contract.\nOnce Bolivia's government depended heavily on foreign assistance to finance development projects and to pay the public staff. At the end of 2002, the government owed $4.5 billion to its foreign creditors, with $1.6 billion of this amount owed to other governments and most of the balance owed to multilateral development banks. Most payments to other governments have been rescheduled on several occasions since 1987 through the Paris Club mechanism. External creditors have been willing to do this because the Bolivian government has generally achieved the monetary and fiscal targets set by IMF programs since 1987, though economic crises have undercut Bolivia's normally good record. However, by 2013 the foreign assistance is just a fraction of the government budget thanks to tax collection mainly from the profitable exports to Brazil and Argentina of natural gas.\nParallel legislative reforms have locked into place market-oriented policies, especially in the hydrocarbon and telecommunication sectors, that have encouraged private investment. Foreign investors are accorded national treatment, and foreign ownership of companies enjoys virtually no restrictions in Bolivia. While the capitalization program was successful in vastly boosting foreign direct investment (FDI) in Bolivia (US$7\u00a0billion in stock during 1996\u20132002), FDI later decreased as investors completed their capitalization contract obligations.\nIn 1996 three units of the Bolivian state oil corporation (YPFB) involved in hydrocarbon exploration, production, and transportation were capitalized, facilitating the construction of a gas pipeline to Brazil. The government has a long-term sales agreement to sell 30 million cubic metres a day (MMcmd) of natural gas to Brazil through 2019. The Brazil pipeline carried about 21 MMcmd in 2000. Bolivia has the second-largest natural gas reserves in South America, and its current domestic use and exports to Brazil account for just a small portion of its potential production. Natural gas exports to Argentina resumed in 2004 at four MMcmd.\nIn April 2000 violent protests over plans to privatize the water utility in the city of Cochabamba led to nationwide disturbances. The government eventually cancelled the contract without compensation to the investors, returning the utility to public control. The foreign investors in this project pursued an investment dispute case against Bolivia for its actions. A similar situation occurred in 2005 in the cities of El Alto and La Paz.\nProtest and widespread opposition to exporting gas through Chile led to the resignation of President Sanchez de Lozada in October 2003. The government held a binding referendum in 2004 on plans to export natural gas and on hydrocarbons law reform. By May 2005, the carbons law draft was being considered by the Senate.\nAccording to the data of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, as well as several international Institutes such as ECLAC, during the period 2006 to 2019 (period of the presidency of Evo Morales and Alvaro Garcia Linera) the economy of Bolivia quadrupled from a value of 9,573 billion dollars to 42,401\u00a0billion dollars, this is due in large part to the policy of nationalization of Natural Resources, the stability of the exchange rate, the incentive of the domestic market, strong public investment in infrastructure and industrialization of natural resources such as gas and lithium. Similarly, according to studies by the World Bank and ECLAC, during the period 2006\u20132019, Bolivia experienced a marked reduction in poverty and extreme poverty, resulting in a reduction of the population living in extreme poverty from 38.2% to 15.2%. In terms of HDI, according to the UNDP World Human Development Report, Bolivia in 2018 for the first time became classified as a \"high human development Country\", reaching an HDI indicator of 0.703 and rising to the 114th position of 189 countries and territories.\nMacroeconomy.\nMain indicators.\nBolivia's 2016 gross domestic product referred to PPP totaled $78.35\u00a0billion and in the official exchange $35.69\u00a0billion. Its standard of living, as measured in GDP in PPP per capita was US$7,191. Economic growth was about 5.2% a year and inflation was 4.5% in 2012. Bolivia experienced a budget surplus of about 1.5% of GDP in 2012. Expenditures were nearly US$12.2\u00a0billion while revenues amounted to about US$12.6\u00a0billion. The government runs surplus accounts since 2005.\nThe Bolivian currency is the boliviano (ISO 4217: BOB; symbol: Bs.) One boliviano is divided into 100 centavos. The boliviano replaced the Bolivian peso at a rate of one million to one in 1987 after many years of rampant inflation. At that time, 1 new boliviano was roughly equivalent to 1 U.S. dollar. At the end of 2011 the boliviano was only worth around 0.145 U.S. Dollar. Annual interest rates in 2010 had decreased steadily to 9.9 percent from more than 50 percent before 1997.\nBolivia's human development index was reported at 0.675, comprising a health index of 0.740, an education index of 0.743 and a GNI index of 0.530, ranking within the group of medium human development. \"Between 1980 and 2012 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)'s HDI rose by 1.3% annually from 0.489 to 0.675 today, which gives the country a rank of 108 out of 187 countries with comparable data. The HDI of Latin America and the Caribbean as a region increased from 0.574 in 1980 to 0.741 today, placing Bolivia (Plurinational State of) below the regional average.\"\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023 (with IMF staff estimates for 2024\u20132028). Inflation below 5% is in green. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSectors.\nPrimary sector.\nAgriculture and forestry.\nAgriculture, forestry, and fishing accounted for 14 percent of Bolivia's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2003, down from 28 percent in 1986. Combined, these activities employ nearly 44 percent of Bolivia's workers. Most agricultural workers are engaged in subsistence farming\u2014the dominant economic activity of the highlands region. Agricultural production in Bolivia is complicated by both the country's topography and climate. High elevations make farming difficult, as do the El Ni\u00f1o weather patterns and seasonal flooding. Bolivia's agricultural GDP continues to rise but has attained only a rather modest average growth rate of 2.8 percent annually since 1991.\nBolivia's most lucrative agricultural product continues to be coca, of which Bolivia is currently the world's third largest cultivator after Colombia and Peru, with an estimated 29,500 hectares under cultivation in 2007, slightly higher than the previous year. Bolivia is the third-largest producer of cocaine, a drug produced from coca, estimated at 120 metric tons potential pure cocaine in 2007 and a transit country for Peruvian and Colombian cocaine destined illegally for the U.S., Europe, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Paraguay. The Bolivian government, in response to international pressure, worked to restrict coca cultivation. However, eradication efforts have hampered by the lack of a suitable replacement crop for rural communities that have cultivated coca for generations. The Morales government turned back some of the results which was obtained in previous years.\nSince 2001 Bolivia's leading legal agricultural export has been soybeans. Additionally, cotton, coffee, and sugarcane have been viable exports for Bolivia. For domestic consumption, corn, wheat, and potatoes are the crops of choice of Bolivian farmers. Despite its vast forests, Bolivia has only a minor timber industry. In 2003 timber accounted for only 3.5 percent of export earnings. The Forestry Law of 1996 imposed a tax on sawn lumber and consequently cut Bolivian lumber exports significantly. The tax was used to establish the Forestry Stewardship Council, which has been only minimally successful in forest restoration efforts and eliminating illegal logging. With increased efficiency, Bolivia could likely expand the profitability of its forest resources, while still protecting them from overexploitation. Bolivia has a small fishing industry that taps the country's freshwater lakes and streams. The annual catch averages about 6,000 tons.\nIn 2018, Bolivia produced 9.6 million tons of sugarcane, 2.9 million tons of soy, 1.2 million tons of maize, 1.1 million tons of potato, 1 million tons of sorghum, 700 thousand tons of banana, 541 thousand tons of rice, 301 thousand tons of wheat, in addition to smaller yields of other agricultural products, such as tangerine, cassava, orange, beans, sunflower seed, cotton etc.\nAgriculture and forestry is also the lifeline for multitudes of small villages which house a majority of the population. Small village economy stumbled and dwindled from the late twentieth century due to aggravating environmental problems including deforestation and consequent soil degradation, water pollution, loss of biodiversity, and so on. Besides, political and social problems also greatly obstruct the growth of small village development: political turmoil, post-civil war predicament and burgeoning fiscal deficit have strangled most investment incentives; corruption and manipulation of water supply by foreign companies have greatly undermined the availability and efficiency of local market, leaving little profits for village farmers and producers. Furthermore, the global market poses a threat to the stability and sustainability of Bolivia's frail economy: \"a drop in export prices, reduction of informal trade\" and low-skilled over-homogenized local products have further worsened the bleak condition of Bolivia's microeconomic activities, making it almost impossible for village farms and factories to make a living from trading with the world. Dwindling profits and surging cost of production have made small village economy in Bolivia extremely vulnerable and unstable; as a result, unemployment increases and small business is on the verge of bankruptcy, which in return made government intervention very inefficient and deferred many governmental initiatives and attempts to improve the condition.\nMining.\nIn 2019, the country was the 8th largest world producer of silver; 4th largest world producer of boron; 5th largest world producer of antimony; 5th largest world producer of tin; 6th largest world producer of tungsten; 7th largest producer of zinc, and the 8th largest producer of lead.\nMining continues to be vital to Bolivia's economy. The collapse of the world tin market in the 1980s led to a restructuring of the industry. The state dramatically reduced its control and presently operates only a small portion of mining activities. Small-scale operations, often with low productivity, employ many former state miners. Natural gas has supplanted tin and silver as the country's most valuable natural commodity. A discovery in 1997 confirmed a tenfold gain in Bolivia's known natural gas reserves. Finding markets to utilize this resource, both domestically and internationally, has been slowed by a lack of infrastructure and conflicts over the state's role in controlling natural resources. Although the world tin market has re-emerged, Bolivia now faces stiff competition from Southeast Asian countries producing lower-cost alluvial tin. Gold and silver production has increased dramatically over the past decade. Annually, as of 2002 Bolivia extracted and exported more than 11,000 kilograms of gold and 461 tons of silver. Additionally, Bolivia has increased zinc production, extracting more than 100,000 tons each year. Other metals excavated include antimony, iron, and tungsten.\nMost of Bolivia's gas comes from gas fields located in San Alberto, San Antonio, Margarita, and Incahuasi. These areas are in the territory of the indigenous Guarani people, and the region is frequently viewed as a remote backwater by non-residents.\nLithium.\nAccording to the United States Geological Survey, Bolivia has 9 million tons of lithium, which can be used to make lithium batteries, used in hybrid and electric vehicles in addition to huge numbers of smaller batteries. At 14.5%, this is the second-largest known concentration of lithium in any country; Argentina has 14.8\u00a0million known tons of lithium, Chile has 8.5\u00a0million tons, Australia has 7.7\u00a0million tons, and the United States has 6.8\u00a0million tons. These large deposits are located in desert regions farmed by indigenous groups, who claim their share of the profits made from their natural resources. Bolivian President Evo Morales favored national, rather than foreign, ownership of natural resources, and nationalized the country's oil and natural gas reserves.\nMining the mineral deposits would involve disturbing the country's salt flats (called Salar de Uyuni), an important natural feature which boosts tourism in the region. The government does not want to destroy this unique natural landscape to meet the rising world demand for lithium.\nIn January 2013 Bolivia opened a lithium production plant in Uyuni, producing mainly potassium chloride. Also, the Bolivian government signed intentions to develop not only lithium extraction but also lithium-ion battery production with numerous countries, especially from the Asia Pacific region.\nIn 2019, Bolivia had signed a deal with German firm ACISA to develop a joint partnership with the Bolivian state-owned YLB for developing extraction and processing of lithium at Salar de Uyuni. The deal was later cancelled after long-running protests by locals over the perceived lack of local benefits and royalties of the project. Bolivia's state lithium YLB also created a joint venture together with the Chinese Xinjiang TBEA Group to explore extraction of lithium and other materials from the Coipasa and Pastos Grandes salt flats.\nIt is thought that due to the importance of lithium for batteries for electric vehicles and stabilization of electric grids with large proportions of intermittent renewables in the electricity mix, Bolivia could be strengthened geopolitically. However, this perspective has also been criticized for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production in other parts of the world.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nAnnually, manufacturing accounted for in approximately 18% of Bolivia's gross domestic product between 1995 and 2005. The share of industry as a whole (including the mining industry) to the GDP increased from 30 percent in 2000 to 37.3 percent in 2010. Most industry is a small-scale, aimed at regional markets rather than national operations. Inadequate credit options and competition from the black market have kept Bolivia's manufacturing sector from developing fully. Leading manufactured goods in Bolivia include textiles, clothing, non-durable consumer goods, processed soya, refined metals, and refined petroleum.\nProcessing of food, beverages and tobacco is the biggest sector within the manufacturing industry (39% in 2001). This sector occupies a prominent place in the manufacturing industry that is continually growing, both in production and number of businesses and jobs. In 2010 its share in exports was about 14%. Especially the soybean and its derivatives reached very large export markets in recent years. The largest factories producing soybeans, sunflower seeds, cotton and sugar from sugar cane, are mainly situated in Santa Cruz, although a large edible oil refineries operate in Cochabamba. All major cities have at least one brewery, one or more soft drink bottling plants, and one or more packaging plants for canned food.. There has been some growth in publicly owned manufacturing during the presidency of Luis Arce, with Bolivia opening an a\u00e7ai berry processing plant in 2021.\nThe textiles industry was the second largest manufacturing sector after the food industry in the 1970s and was of decreasing importance afterwards, representing progressively diminishing value of total manufacturing. But since the 1990s the textile industry has increased its growth rate. The cotton and wool industry declined at the expense of synthetic fibers. The largest concentration of textile mills are to be found in La Paz, but also in Santa Cruz and Cochabamba and to a lesser extent in Oruro.\nAnother important industry is the oil refining industry.\nServices.\nThe services industry in Bolivia remains undeveloped. Inhabiting one of the poorest countries in South America, Bolivians have weak purchasing power. The retail sector suffers from weak demand and competition with a large black market of contraband goods. U.S. companies such as McDonald's and Domino's have pulled out of Bolivia in recent years.\nBanking and finance.\nBanking in Bolivia has long suffered from corruption and weak regulation. However, a series of reforms initiated by the 1993 Banking Law and subsequent acts are gradually improving Bolivia's banking sector. Bolivia has a central bank and nine private banks. Consolidation occurred following reforms, lowering the number of private banks in Bolivia from 14 in 1995 to nine in 2003. Foreign participation and investment in Bolivian banks are allowed. About 90 percent of Bolivian bank deposits are held in U.S. dollars. The Bolivian government is trying to change this situation by taxing dollarized accounts while exempting boliviano accounts from the tax. As recently as 2002, 27 percent of all loans were non-performing, leading most foreign investors to focus their resources in the somewhat-safer venue of corporate lending. Most bank lending in 2003 went to manufacturing (24 percent), followed by property services (18 percent) and trade and retail (16 percent). Bad debt remains at a historically high level. Further reforms are necessary, including the pending act to introduce a deposit guarantee system. Bolivia's stock market expanded in 1998 to include corporate bonds, along with the money market and government bond options that had existed previously. The privatization of Bolivia's social security program has bolstered the stock market.\nTourism.\nBolivia's spectacular vistas and natural attractions have not been enough to transform the country into a major tourist destination because of its political instability and lack of first-class accommodations. Still, Bolivia's tourist industry has grown gradually over the past 15 years. In 2000 Bolivia attracted 306,000 tourists, compared with 254,000 in 1990. Tourist revenue peaked at US$179\u00a0million in 1999. Tourism in Bolivia declined following the 11 September 2001 attack on the United States, as was the case across North and South America. Since from 2001 the tourism sector, however, is strongly increasing, in fact in 2018 the number of tourists reached 1.142,000 arrivals.\nInfrastructure.\nEnergy.\nBolivia's energy needs are relatively small but growing consistently. Bolivia uses oil for the majority of its power needs, followed by natural gas and hydroelectric power.\nOil.\nBolivia has estimated oil reserves of , the fifth largest in South America. The fields are located in the east and south. The main activities in the refineries is crude oil fractioning, catalytic conversion for high octane gasoline, and refining of heavy fractions to produce lubricants. The final products are vehicle gasoline, liquid propane and butane, jet fuel, diesel oil and lubricants for use in industrial machinery. As domestic oil production is insufficient to meet domestic demand Bolivia is a net importer of oil.\nUntil recently the country's oil industry was fully controlled by the state company YPFB, established in 1936 with the mission to develop, refine and distribute oil resources. After privatization efforts in the 1990s the transport of natural gas and oil was in private hands during the 1990s while the production and refining of materials was part of risk-sharing contracts between the government and private investors. In 1999 the refineries were also completely privatized. In May 2006 president Evo Morales re-nationalized reserves, while its exploitation remained in private hands.\nNatural gas.\nThe country's natural gas reserves total according to Bolivian government figures, ranking Bolivia behind only Venezuela in terms of proven natural gas reserves in South America. Additionally, Bolivia is self-sufficient in its energy production. The sector changed significantly when the government allowed privatization in the mid-1990s. International companies quickly invested in Bolivian energy sources, particularly in natural gas, and made Bolivia into a player in the world energy market. The exportation of Bolivian energy resources, while potentially lucrative economically, has been politically hazardous. President Gonzalo S\u00e1nchez de Lozada ultimately resigned over his plan to export natural gas to the United States and Mexico in 2003.\nOn 6 June 2005, former president Carlos Mesa offered his resignation to the Bolivian Congress after months of demonstrations by Bolivia's indigenous population calling for renationalizing the natural gas and oil sectors. Mesa had increased taxation on foreign companies while still encouraging their investment in Bolivian energy development. On 1 May 2006, his successor, former president Morales, signed a decree stating that all natural gas reserves were to be nationalized, recovering ownership, possession and control of hydrocarbons. US Exxon Mobil Corporation, Petrobras, Spain's Repsol YPF, UK gas and oil producer BG Group Plc, and France's Total are the main gas companies present in the country.\nBolivia's natural gas exports bring in millions of dollars per day, in royalties, rents and taxes. From 2007 to 2017, what is referred to as the \"government take\" on gas totaled approximately $22 billion.\nElectricity.\nUntil 1994 the electricity sector was dominated by the vertically integrated public utility ENDE (\"Empresa Nacional de Electricidad\"). In 1994 the electricity sector was privatized and was unbundled into generation, transmission and distribution. The law aimed to increase efficiency in the sector, promote competition and encourage investment.\nThe supply is dominated by thermal generation (60%), while hydropower (40%) has a smaller share in its generation mix compared to other South American countries (Latin America and the Caribbean, or LAC, average hydropower capacity is 51%). The electricity coverage in rural areas is with 30% among the lowest in Latin America and improving it represents a major challenge in the future and requires the joint efforts from both the public and private sectors. Like in other countries, Bolivia's electricity sector consists of a National Interconnected System (SIN) and off-grid systems (known as the \"Aislado\").\nLabor and welfare.\nThe economic downturn of the late 1990s, coupled with privatization and austerity efforts led by President Mesa, resulted in significant unemployment. Although the Bolivian government does not keep unemployment statistics, outside experts estimated unemployment to be between 8 and 10 percent of the population, as of 2006. Underemployment of Bolivia's workforce of nearly 4 million is also widespread. As a result of the lack of formal employment opportunities, nearly 65 percent of the urban workforce was self-employed in 2002.\nLabor unions have a strong history in Bolivia, and many workers in the formal sector belong to unions. The larger unions, such as the Bolivian Labor Federation and the Trade Union Federation of Bolivian Mine Workers, have been successful in rallying workers to countless strikes and work stoppages. Nevertheless, working conditions for most Bolivian workers are difficult.\nThese conditions are even more critical as far as the informal sector is concerned. In fact, Bolivia has been listed in the 2014 U.S. Department of Labor's report on child labor and forced labor among the 74 countries where instances of such practices have been observed. According to the \"List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor\" issued under this report, Bolivia resorts to these practices in the agricultural sector as well as in the mining industry until this day. The DOL has also reported that \"The [Bolivian] Government's National Plan to Eradicate Child Labor expired in 2010 and has not been updated.\"\nForeign economic relations.\nForeign exchange reserves.\nThe amount in reserve currencies and gold held by Bolivia's Central Bank advanced from 1.085 billion US dollars in 2000, under Hugo Banzer Suarez's government, to 15.282 billion US dollars in 2014 under Evo Morales' government. By 2022, a large part of the currency reserves had been used up, at which point they still stood at just under US$3.8 billion. In the course of 2023, they fell to less than US$500 million, with the country facing a liquidity crisis.\nTrade agreements.\nBolivia's trade with neighboring countries is growing, in part because of several regional preferential trade agreements it has negotiated. Bolivia was a founding member of the Andean Group, a South American organization designed to promote trade among Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela. Subsequently renamed the Andean Community, the organization has succeeded in increasing intra-South American trade. Trade among member countries rose from US$3.6\u00a0billion in 1991 to US$10.3\u00a0billion in 2003. Bolivia also belongs to the Common Market of the South (Mercado Com\u00fan del Sur\u2014Mercosur). Bolivia became an associate member in March 1997 to open investment opportunities with the founding Mercosur countries (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay), as well as other Mercosur associate members (Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela). The agreement provides for the gradual creation of a free trade area covering at least 80% of the trade between the parties over a 10-year period, though economic crises in the region have derailed progress at integration. The U.S. Andean Trade Preference and Drug Enforcement Act (ATPDEA) allows (allowed?) numerous Bolivian products to enter the United States free of duty on a unilateral basis, including alpaca and llama products and, subject to a quota, cotton textiles. Bolivia conducted more than US$1\u00a0billion in trade with Mercosur countries in 2003. As a result of negotiations initiated in 1999 on a possible South American Free Trade Area (SAFTA), Mercosur and the Andean Community of Nations announced in December 2004 that they would merge, creating a Union of South American Nations modeled after the European Union.\nImports and exports.\nBolivian tariffs are low; however, manufacturers complain that the tax-rebate program that allows some companies to claim refunds of import taxes on capital equipment is inefficient, with many companies now owed millions of dollars by the Bolivian Government, which can take years to recover.\nBolivian imports of goods were valued at about US$6.52 billion in 2020, while service imports were valued at about US$2.55 billion in 2019.\nBolivia enjoyed an estimated $500 million goods trade surplus in 2020. Leading sources of Bolivian imports include China, Brazil, Chile, Peru, and Argentina, with its top imports refined petroleum, cars, pesticides, delivery trucks, and raw iron bars.\nBolivian exports of goods and services in 2020 stood at US$7.02 billion compared with US$1.9 billion in 2003.\nIncreased production of hydrocarbons, especially natural gas, led Bolivia's trade upturn in 2004. A 20-year supply contract with Brazil for natural gas, ending in 2019, the necessary capital to increase production. In 2004 export revenues for natural gas topped US$619 million. Bolivia also exported significant quantities of petroleum. Beyond hydrocarbons, other significant exports included zinc, soya, iron ore, and tin. In 2001 Brazil overtook the United States as Bolivia's primary export outlet. Switzerland, Venezuela, and Colombia are also important export partners. Bolivia has actively sought to foster economic connections in South America after long relying on the United States as its primary trade partner.\nThe United States remains one of Bolivia's largest trading partners; however, it faded greatly on Brazil benefit in 2012. In 2002, the United States exported $283 million of merchandise to Bolivia and imported $162 million. Bolivia's major exports to the United States are tin, gold, jewelry, and wood products. Its major imports from the United States are computers, vehicles, wheat, and machinery. A Bilateral Investment Treaty between the United States and Bolivia came into effect in 2001, however the Treaty was terminated by the government of Bolivia in 2012.\nBy 2004 Bolivia had become the market leader in the export of brazil nuts, with thousands of local people involved in collecting the pods in Bolivian Amazonia.\nBalance of trade.\nBolivia had an estimated trade surplus of more than US$1.6\u00a0billion in 2011. This figure represents a marked change in Bolivia's economic balance sheet. Bolivia reached a peak trade deficit of US$888\u00a0million in 1998 before increased hydrocarbon exports radically altered the situation.\nBolivia had a large negative balance of payments for 2002\u23afUS$317\u00a0million. However, this situation has been remedied by the vast increase in export revenue. Estimates for the balance of payments for 2004 show a record surplus of US$126\u00a0million. Bolivia's external debt totaled an estimated US$5.7\u00a0billion in 2004. The International Monetary Fund has assisted Bolivia in paying down this debt. In 1995 the United States, among other countries, reduced Bolivia's debt by two-thirds.\nForeign investment.\nForeign investment in Bolivia was buoyed in 1995 by privatization. Investment in mining and natural gas extraction increased, as did investment in the banking sector. However, the economic decline of the late 1990s, along with political unrest, caused foreign investors to pull out of Bolivia once again. In 2000 foreign investors contributed US$736\u00a0million to the Bolivian economy. In 2002 this total fell to US$676\u00a0million.\nThe Government of Bolivia remains heavily dependent on foreign assistance to finance development projects. At the end of 2002, the government owed $4.5\u00a0billion to its foreign creditors, with $1.6\u00a0billion of this amount owed to other governments and most of the balance owed to multilateral development banks. Most payments to other governments have been rescheduled on several occasions since 1987 through the Paris Club mechanism. External creditors have been willing to do this because the Bolivian Government has generally achieved the monetary targets set by International Monetary Fund programs since 1987, though economic problems in recent years have undercut Bolivia's normally good track record. Rescheduling agreements granted by the Paris Club have allowed the individual creditor countries to apply very soft terms to the rescheduled debt. As a result, some countries have forgiven substantial amounts of Bolivia's bilateral debt. The U.S. Government reached an agreement at the Paris Club meeting in December 1995 that reduced by 67% Bolivia's existing debt stock. The Bolivian Government continues to pay its debts to the multilateral development banks on time. Bolivia is a beneficiary of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) and Enhanced HIPC debt relief programs, which by agreement restricts Bolivia's access to new soft loans. Bolivia was one of three countries in the Western hemisphere selected for eligibility for the Millennium Challenge Account and is participating as an observer in free trade agreement negotiations. Bolivia enjoys some financial assistance programs run by the World Bank and Microenterprise Development programs provided by Five Talents International.\nMutun iron ore project.\nIn 2007, India's third-largest steel manufacturer, Jindal Steel and Power Limited, signed a contract with the Bolivian government to exploit the Mutun iron ore deposit, considered to be one of the largest in the world. According to the contract, Jindal would invest US$1.5\u00a0billion initially and an additional US$2.5\u00a0billion over the next eight years. This is the single largest investment by an Indian firm in Latin America. Jindal Steel will set up an integrated 1.7 MTPA steel plant, a 6 MTPA sponge iron plant, a 10 MTPA iron ore pellet plant and a 450 MW power plant. By September 2011, Jindal had obtained clearance for the project from the EIA and had hired an engineering consultant for FEED work. The project is expected to create 6,000 jobs directly and another 15,000 indirectly.\nAs of June 2011, Jindal had invested only US$20\u00a0million on the project due to considerable delay by Bolivian authorities in issuing land for the project and due to inability of the Bolivian government to commit 8 million cubic meters of natural gas per day for the power plant and ore smelting process. In 2012 Jindal exited Bolivia, prompting Bolivia to seize the bond. In 2014, international arbitration awarded Jindal $22.5 Million due to Bolivia's seizure of the bond.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69015", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69015", "title": "Telecommunications in Bolivia", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Bolivia includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nTelephones.\nThe Bolivian National Telecommunications Company was privatized in 1995 but re-nationalized in 2007; the primary trunk system is being expanded and employs digital microwave radio relay; some areas are served by fiber-optic cable; system operations, reliability, and coverage have steadily improved. Most telephones are concentrated in La Paz, Santa Cruz, and other capital cities; mobile-cellular telephone use expanding rapidly and, in 2011, teledensity reached about 80 per 100 persons.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet. The Bolivian constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press. Although the government generally respects these rights, in at least two cases in 2012, the government used the anti-racism law to restrict both rights. Some senior government officials also verbally harassed members of the press corps. Bolivian law prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence and the government generally respects these prohibitions, but there have been allegations that the government does not always respect the law. Defamation remains a criminal offence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69016", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69016", "title": "Transport in Bolivia", "text": " \nTransport in Bolivia is mostly by road. The railways were historically important in Bolivia, but now play a relatively small part in the country's transport system. Because of the country's geography, aviation is also important.\nRailways.\n\"Total:\"\n3,504\u00a0km (single track)\n\"Narrow gauge (metre gauge):\"\nLight Rail.\nThe first light rail network in Bolivia, the Mi Tren in Cochabamba, began construction in 2017 and was initially intended to be completed by 2020. However, it was delayed in 2019 and came online in 2022.\nCable Car.\nBolivia is home to Mi Telef\u00e9rico, the world's first urban transit network to use cable cars as the primary mode of transportation. This system services the twin cities of El Alto and La Paz, and increased physical and social mobility within Bolivia.\nRoadways.\nBolivia as of 2004 has 62,479\u00a0km of road distance, of which 3,749\u00a0km (including 27\u00a0km of expressways) is paved and 58,730\u00a0km is unpaved.\nRoad construction in Bolivia is difficult due to its geography and lack of resources to completely develop an advanced road network. However, it maintains a small network of 4-lane freeways which are the following:\nThe main national roads are:\nThe Interoceanic Highway is an important highway that connects the Amazonian tripoint border region of Brazil, Peru and Bolivia to the Pacific Ocean. Bolivia's northernmost capital, Cobija, headquarters a free economic zone that uses the Interoceanic Highway to import and export most of its products.\nWaterways.\n10,000\u00a0km of commercially navigable waterways (2007)\nMerchant marine.\nThere is a total of 23 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT) in Bolivia.Ships by type as below: (2008)\nAirports.\nThere are 1,009 airports in Bolivia as of 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69017", "revid": "50872733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69017", "title": "Armed Forces of Bolivia", "text": "Combined military forces of Bolivia\nThe Bolivian Armed Forces (Spanish: \"Fuerzas Armadas de Bolivia\") are the military of Bolivia. The Armed Forces of Bolivia are responsible for the defence, both of external and internal, of Bolivia and they are constituted by Bolivian Army, the Bolivian Air Force and the Bolivian Navy. All these institutions depend on the Ministry of Defence of this country.\nIn addition to the Bolivian Army, the Bolivian Air Force and the Bolivian Navy, the Bolivian National Police, although dependent on the Ministry of Government in times of peace, is part of the reserves of the Armed Forces according to the Organic Law of the Armed Forces of this nation, together with other reserve bodies such as the SAR-FAB emergency and rescue units.\nFigures on the size and composition of the armed forces of Bolivia vary considerably, with rare official data available. It is estimated, however, that the three main forces (army, navy and air force) add up to a total of between 40,000 to 70,000 troops, while the Bolivian police would be around 40,000 troops.\nHigh Command of the Armed Forces of Bolivia.\nThe roles and tenure of the High Command are described in the Organic Law of the Armed Forces (LOFA) which states that the hierarchy is subordinate to and appointed by the President of Bolivia with the Minister of Defense acting as an intermediary between the President and the Armed Forces. Article 172 of the 2009 Constitution states that amongst the President's duties are \"To designate and substitute the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and the Commanders of the Army, the Air Force and the Navy.\"\nThe current positions, appointed by interim president Jeanine \u00c1\u00f1ez Ch\u00e1vez on 13 Nov 2019 are as follows:\nArticle 100 of the LOFA also states that these positions, and several others such as Chief of Police and Head of the Presidential, may be held \"only once during the military career and for a time no greater than two years\". This results in a fairly high turnover in the Bolivian High Command with continued service being prohibited by law. The last changes in High Command, under the previous President Evo Morales, occurred on 24 Dec 2018, 11 Dec 2017, 29 Dec 2016, 30 Dec 2015, 18 Dec 2014, 13 Dec 2013 and 3 Dec 2012.\nAttempts to increase the maximum length of service for members of the High Command (and other positions) were made, unsuccessfully, under the Morales administration who wished to increase it to between 3 and 5 years.\n\"See full article: Bolivian Army.\"\nArmy.\nThe Bolivian Army (\"Ej\u00e9rcito de Bolivia\", EB) is the land branch of the armed forces of Bolivia. Together with the Bolivia army and air force Bolivia, is responsible for protecting Bolivia of internal, external threats and ensure the independence of this country. The Bolivian Army has around 55,500 men. There are six military regions (regiones militares\u2014RMs) in the army. The Army is organized into ten divisions. The Army maintains a small fleet of utility aircraft, primarily to support headquarters.\nCombat units directly under the Army general command.\nSpecial forces command.\nThe Special Forces command controls the following units:\nArmy aviation command.\nArmy aviation company 291 (La Paz), army aviation company 292 (Santa Cruz)\nRegional.\nThe Bolivian Army has six military regions (regiones militares\u2014RMs) covering the various Departments of Bolivia:\nArmy divisions.\nThe army is organized into ten territorial divisions plus a mechanized division, each of which, with the exception of Viacha, occupy a region generally corresponding to the administrative departments, with some overlapping. These and their respective divisional headquarters and constituent units are:\nRI: infantry regiment RC: cavalry regiment RA: artillery regiment Bat.Ing.: battalion engineer\nArmy organized has ten divisions controlling the following units:\nThe Army maintains a small fleet of utility aircraft, primarily to support headquarters.\nUniforms.\nArmy officers, NCOs, and enlisted personnel generally wear gray or, for tropical areas, gray-green service uniforms. Army fatigue uniforms are olive green, and combat uniforms are of US woodland pattern camouflage. The standard headgear for enlisted personnel is the beret bearing the national colors of red, yellow and green. Paratroops \"(paracaidistas)\" were distinguished by black berets, and Special Forces by green berets.\n\"See full article: Bolivian Air Force.\"\nAir Force.\nThe Bolivian air force (\"Fuerza A\u00e9rea Boliviana\", FAB) is the air branch of the armed forces of Bolivia. The Bolivian Air Force has nine air bases, located at La Paz, Cochabamba, Santa Cruz, Puerto Su\u00e1rez, Tarija, Villamontes, Cobija, Riberalta, and Robor\u00e9.\nMajor commands included the following:\n*Tactical air group 62 (air base Riberalta): squadron 620\n*Air group 64: squadron (air base Cobija) 640\n*Transport air group 72 (air base Trinidad) : squadron 720\n\"See full article: Bolivian Navy.\"\nNavy.\nThe Bolivian Naval Force (\"Fuerza Naval Boliviana\" in Spanish), formerly Bolivian Navy (\"Armada Boliviana\") is a naval force about 5,000 strong in 2008. Although Bolivia has been landlocked since the War of the Pacific in 1879, Bolivia established a River and Lake Force (Fuerza Fluvial y Lacustre) in January 1963 under the Ministry of National Defense. It consisted of four boats supplied from the United States and 1,800 personnel recruited largely from the army. Bolivia's naval force was renamed the Bolivian Naval Force (Fuerza Naval Boliviana) in January 1966, but it also has been called the Bolivian Navy (Armada Boliviana). It became a separate branch of the armed forces in 1963. Bolivia has large rivers that are tributaries to the Amazon which are patrolled to prevent smuggling and drug trafficking. There is also a Bolivian Naval presence on Lake Titicaca, the highest navigable lake in the world, across which runs along the Peruvian frontier.\nLandlocked Bolivia has not become reconciled with the loss of its coast to Chile, and the Navy exists to keep the hope of recovering its coast alive by cultivating a maritime consciousness. The Bolivian Navy takes part in many parades and government functions, but none more so than the \"D\u00eda Del Mar\" (Day of the Sea) in which Bolivia, every year, asks for the coast territories lost to Chile during the War of the Pacific (fought between Peru and Bolivia against Chile) from 1879 to 1884. This is still a sore point for Bolivia, influencing many modern-day political actions and trade decisions.\nDistricts.\nThe Navy is organized into ten naval districts, with flotilla headquarters in Guaqui, Guayaramer\u00edn, Puerto Su\u00e1rez, Riberalta, and San Pedro de Tiquina, and bases in Puerto Busch, Puerto Horquilla, Puerto Villarroel, Trinidad, and Rurrenabaque.\nNaval vessels include several dozen boats, dozen or more of which are for riverine patrol, including the piranias, and riders, which are powerful river boats. In addition, Bolivia has several seagoing vessels, including the \"Santa Cruz de la Sierra\" (PR-51), and several flagged ships that sail with the permission of the \"Capitanias Navales\" Naval Registration Office. The \"Libertador Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\", a ship acquired from Venezuela, use to navigate from its home port in Rosario, Argentina on the River Paran\u00e1. In 1993, the Navy was formally renamed the \"Naval Force\" (\"Fuerza Naval\") and moved with the Bolivian Army under a single military authority.\nMost of the officers are often educated in the Naval Academy where they graduate with a BS in Military and Naval Science, diploma accredited by the Military University and then they do other studies at the bachelor's degree and master's level. Argentina has their Naval Military Group in Bolivia advising at the highest level in naval strategy and tactics. Many Bolivian officers practice ocean sailing in Argentinean big naval ships. The Bolivian Navy has several Special Forces units to address both internal and external conflicts.\n The Bolivian Naval Force covers the extensive river and lake Bolivian territory divided between the following functions Naval Districts, note that the names of these units are derived from the basin or region where they operate:\nMarine corps.\nThe Marine component of the FNB originated with the creation of the Marine Battalion Almirante Grau in the early 1980s. This unit of 600 men is based on Tiquina naval base on Lake Titicaca. Later changes name to Marine Battalion Independence, based in Chua (Not to be confused with the Independence RI17 EB).At present this battalion maintains a similar number of troops including premilitares. Staff of this unit is part of Task Force Blue Devils or are stationed in various naval bases. There are currently seven infantry battalions which are distributed as follows:\nNaval Military Police.\nThis specialty is essentially similar to its counterpart in the Army, carrying out operations such as Important Persons Protection (IPP) Physical Security (SEF) or Patrol Facility (PAT), with additions such as signals or naval protocol. There Naval detachments of PM in all district headquarters or FNB Naval Area. But only have the following units at the Battalion:\nStrength.\nBoats.\nThe Bolivian Navy has a total of 173 vessels, mostly stationed on Lake Titicaca:\nNaval aviation.\nBolivia's navy operates one utility aircraft for the use of headquarters.\nConscription.\nSince 1904 military service has been compulsory for all fit males between the ages of eighteen and forty-nine. In practice, however, budgetary limitations strictly limited the number of eligible men conscripted, and those traditionally tended to be mostly Indians. Beginning in 1967, conscripts were legally held on active duty for up to two years, but funds seldom permitted even a full year's service. Noncommissioned officers (NCOs) and warrant officers, all of whom were volunteers, generally were drawn from mixed-blood cholos (those of Spanish and Indian descent). In the late 1980s, the service obligation was one year, and conscripts had to be at least nineteen years of age. The FF.AA. commander reported in early 1989 that the largest percentage of conscripts came from the middle class. One explanation for this change could have been the flocking of youths to the lucrative coca paste-making business. Military authorities in the Cochabamba area in particular began to experience growing difficulty in enlisting volunteers in the mid-1980s. Consequently, the military reportedly was resorting to pressganging eighteen-year-olds off the city streets to fill their annual quotas.\nTraining installations.\nTraining installations include the Garras International Antinarcotics Training School (\"Escuela Garras del Valor\") is a military training facility located in Bolivia, which trains military and law enforcement personnel from Bolivia and other Latin American countries in counternarcotics, intelligence, and counterinsurgency techniques.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69018", "revid": "50872733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69018", "title": "Foreign relations of Bolivia", "text": " \nBolivia traditionally has maintained normal diplomatic relations with all hemispheric states except Chile. Foreign relations are handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, headed by the Chancellor of Bolivia, Rogelio Mayta.\nOverview.\nRelations with Chile, strained since Bolivia's defeat in the War of the Pacific (1879\u20131883) and its loss of the coastal province of Atacama, were severed from 1962 to 1975 in a dispute over the use of the waters of the Lauca River. Relations were resumed in 1975 but broken again in 1978 over the inability of the two countries to reach an agreement that solved the Atacama border dispute, which might have granted Bolivia a sovereign access to the sea. In the 1960s, relations with Cuba were broken by the Bolivian dictatorship following Castro's rise to power but resumed under the Paz Estenssoro Administration in 1985, which came to power through democratic elections.\nBolivia pursues a foreign policy with a heavy economic component. Bolivia has become more active in the Organization of American States (OAS), the Rio Group, and in MERCOSUR, with which it signed an association agreement in 1996. Bolivia promotes its policies on sustainable development and the empowerment of indigenous people.\nBolivia is a member of the United Nations and some of its specialized agencies and related programs; OAS; Andean Community; Intelsat; Non-Aligned Movement; International Parliamentary Union; Latin American Integration Association ALADI; World Trade Organization; Rio Treaty; Rio Group; and Uruguay, Paraguay, Bolivia (, restarted in 1993). As an outgrowth of the 1994 Summit of the Americas, Bolivia hosted a hemispheric summit conference on sustainable development in December 1996. A First Ladies' hemispheric summit was also hosted by Bolivia that same month.\nThe GeGaLo Index of gains and losses after energy transition ranks Bolivia 128th out of 156 countries. It is thus among the countries that will lose strength on the international stage if a global transition to renewable energy is carried out and there is no longer demand for Bolivian oil and gas. It is estimated to experience the third largest loss of all Latin American countries (after Colombia and Venezuela).\nUnited Nations involvement.\nBolivia, being one of the founding members of the United Nations, has frequently been involved with the Intergovernmental Organisation . In November 2008, the Bolivian contingent of UN peacekeeping troops with the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was relocated to safety, as at least one other regional state was also reviewing its own mission's security. The country had a detachment of 130 soldiers that was working in Bukavu, but was moved to a location near Goma. Bolivia currently serves as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, with a two-year term ending in 2018. While a member of the Security Council, Bolivia strongly criticized United States President Donald Trump's decision to move the United States' Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, and called for a public meeting of the Security Council to respond to the decision. The Bolivian delegation also joined Russia in casting a negative vote for the renewal of the OPCW-UN Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria, citing technical concerns about the Mechanism.\nDuring the United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-11/1, on March 2, 2022, Bolivia voted to abstain, along with 34 other nations.\nInternational disputes.\nBolivia has wanted a sovereign corridor to the South Pacific Ocean since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in 1884; dispute with Chile over Rio Lauca water rights.\nSince the accession of Carlos Mesa to the Presidency, Bolivia has pressed its demands for a corridor to the Pacific. In March 2004, Mesa announced that the government would stage a series of public rallies across the country and in Bolivian embassies abroad in remembrance of those who died in the War of the Pacific, and to call for Chile to grant Bolivia a seacoast. Mesa made this demand a cornerstone of his administration's policy.\nPresident Evo Morales maintained a hard position on this issue of which the symbolic importance is underlined by the fact that Bolivia also still has a navy, despite it not currently having access to the sea. In October 2018, the ICJ (International Court of Justice), ruled against Bolivia in a case that would determine whether or not Bolivia could force Chile to negotiate access to the sea. However, the ICJ did state that cooperation was desirable if workable solutions are to be found.\nIllicit drugs.\nBolivia is the world's third-largest cultivator of coca (after Peru and Colombia) with an estimated under cultivation in 1999, a 45% decrease in overall cultivation of coca from 1998 levels; intermediate coca products and cocaine exported to or through Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile to the United States and other international drug markets; alternative crop program aims to reduce illicit coca cultivation.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Bolivia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69019", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69019", "title": "Boniface, Count of Savoy", "text": "Boniface (1 December 1244\u20137 June 1263) was Count of Savoy from 1253 to 1263, succeeding his father Amadeus IV. He never married and thus left no heir. \nCareer.\nBoniface was born in Chamb\u00e9ry on 1 December 1244. \nSince he became Count of Savoy at the age of nine, he required a regency. Throughout the decade before his death, Savoy was governed through a joint regency resembling that devised for his grandfather Thomas in 1189, in which authority was shared between his mother, Cecile of Baux, and one of his uncles, Thomas II of Piedmont. Boniface's other uncles, Peter and Philip, disputed this, seeking to divide the county's many properties, but Thomas took it to arbitration per the family treaty of 1234 which had been negotiated by his brother William and won out. Peter and Philip were, however, granted compensation in return, receiving more properties within the county. When Thomas died in 1259, Cecile continued as regent in Savoy. Under her regency, Philip and Peter continued their previous work of expanding the control and influence over the County of Savoy.\nBoniface's campaigns in Flanders and Piedmont were not successful. In September 1262, Rudolf of Geneva offered homage to cousin Boniface after yet another round of the war between Peter and their kin in Geneva. On 7 July 1263 in Turin, Boniface was mortally wounded in battle and died aged 18, to be succeeded by his uncle Peter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69021", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69021", "title": "As We May Think by Vannevar Bush", "text": ""}
{"id": "69022", "revid": "1450053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69022", "title": "K\u00e1lm\u00e1n Kalocsay", "text": "Hungarian Esperantist poet, translator and editor\nK\u00e1lm\u00e1n Kalocsay (; 6 October 1891 in Aba\u00fajsz\u00e1nt\u00f3 \u2013 27 February 1976) was a Hungarian Esperantist poet, translator, and editor who significantly influenced Esperanto culture, both in its literature and in the language itself, through his original poetry and his translations of literary works from his native Hungarian and other languages of Europe. His name is sometimes Esperantized as Kolomano Kalo\u0109ajo, and some of his work was published under various pseudonyms, including \"C.E.R. Bumy, Kopar, Alex Kay, K. Stelov, Malice Pik\" and \"Peter Peneter\".\nKalocsay studied medicine and later became a surgeon and the chief infectious disease specialist at a major Budapest hospital. He learned both Esperanto and its breakaway dialect Ido in his adolescence, but became more inclined towards Esperanto after he had seen its greater literary potential. In 1921 his first original collection of poems, \"Mondo kaj Koro\" (\u201cWorld and heart\u201d) was published. A further decade passed before the appearance of his collection \"Stre\u0109ita Kordo\" (\u201cA taut string\u201d), which many Esperantists consider one of the finest collections of original Esperanto poetry, and \"Rimportretoj\" (\u201cPortraits in rhyme\u201d), witty poems in rondel style about various people then prominent in the Esperanto movement. In 1932, under the pseudonym Peter Peneter, he published \"Sekretaj Sonetoj\" (\u201cSecret sonnets\u201d), a book of erotic verse.\nIn addition to being a prolific author of Esperanto works, Kalocsay guided the Esperanto literary world through a magazine and publishing house called \"Literatura Mondo\" (\u201cLiterary world\u201d). A group of writers who coalesced around this magazine during the 1920s and 1930s were known as the \"Budapest school\" (\"Budape\u015dta skolo\").\nWorks of Kalocsay about literary and linguistic theory include the expansive \"Plena Gramatiko de Esperanto\" (\u201cComplete grammar of Esperanto\u201d) and \"Parnasa Gvidlibro\" (\u201cHandbook of Parnassus\u201d), a work on Esperanto poetics co-authored with Gaston Waringhien, and an academic style guide for Esperanto, \"Lingvo \u2013 Stilo \u2013 Formo\" (\u201cLanguage, style and form\u201d). Kalocsay also co-compiled the two-volume \"Enciklopedio de Esperanto\" (\u201cEncyclop\u00e6dia of Esperanto\u201d).\nMuch was written about Kalocsay by his literary executor , after whose death the estate passed to the Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library."}
{"id": "69024", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69024", "title": "Baffin Island", "text": "Largest Arctic island in Nunavut, Canada\nBaffin Island (formerly Baffin Land), in the Canadian territory of Nunavut, is the largest island in Canada, the second-largest island in the Americas (behind Greenland), and the fifth-largest island in the world. Its area is (slightly smaller than Thailand) with a population density of ; the population was 13,039 according to the 2021 Canadian census; and it is located at . It also contains the city of Iqaluit (with a population of around 7,000), which is the capital of Nunavut.\nName.\nThe Inuktitut name for the island is , which means \"very big island\" ( \"island\" + \"very big\") and in Inuktitut syllabics is written as . This name is used for the administrative region the island is part of (Qikiqtaaluk Region), as well as in multiple places in Nunavut and the Northwest Territories, such as some smaller islands: Qikiqtaaluk in Baffin Bay and Qikiqtaaluk in Foxe Basin. Norse explorers are believed to have referred to it as (\"stone land\").\nIn 1576, English seaman Martin Frobisher, the namesake of Frobisher Bay, made landfall on the island, naming it \"Queen Elizabeth's Foreland\". The island is named after English explorer William Baffin, who, in 1616, came across the island while trying to discover the Northwest Passage.\nIt was also formerly known as James Island.\nGeography.\nIqaluit, the capital of Nunavut, is located on the southeastern coast. Until 1987, the town was called Frobisher Bay, after the English name for Frobisher Bay on which it is located, named for Martin Frobisher. That year, the community voted to restore the Inuktitut name.\nTo the south lies Hudson Strait, separating Baffin Island from mainland Quebec. South of the western end of the island is the Fury and Hecla Strait, which separates the island from the Melville Peninsula on the mainland. To the east are Davis Strait and Baffin Bay, with Greenland beyond. Prince Regent Inlet and the Gulf of Boothia separate the island from the Somerset Island and Boothia Peninsula, respectively. The Foxe Basin, with the Prince Charles Island, is in the southwest. In the north, the Lancaster Sound separates it from the Devon Island and the rest of the Queen Elizabeth Islands.\nThe Baffin Mountains run along the northeastern coast of the island and are a part of the Arctic Cordillera. The highest peak is Mount Odin, with an elevation of at least , although some sources say . Another peak of note is Mount Asgard, located in Auyuittuq National Park, with an elevation of . Mount Thor, with an elevation of , is said to have the greatest purely vertical drop (a sheer cliff face) of any mountain on Earth, at .\nThe two largest lakes on the island lie in the south-central part of the island: Nettilling Lake () and Amadjuak Lake () further south.\nHistory.\nBaffin Island has been inhabited for over 3,000 years, first by the pre-Dorset, followed by the Dorset, and then by the Thule people, ancestors of the Inuit, who have lived on the island for the last thousand years. The Thule people genetically and culturally completely replaced the Dorset people some time after 1300\u00a0CE.\nIn about 986, Erik Thorvaldsson, known as Erik the Red, formed three settlements near the southwestern tip of Greenland. In late 985 or 986, Bjarni Herj\u00f3lfsson, sailing from Iceland to Greenland, was blown off course and sighted land southwest of Greenland. Bjarni appears to be the first European to see Baffin Island, and the first European to see North America beyond Greenland. About 15 years later the Norse Greenlanders, led by Leif Erikson, a son of Erik the Red, started exploring new areas around the year 1000. Baffin Island is thought to be Helluland, and the archaeological site at Tanfield Valley is thought to have been a trading post. The \"Saga of Erik the Red\", 1880 translation into English by J. Sephton from the original Icelandic :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn September 2008, the \"Nunatsiaq News\", a weekly newspaper, reported that Patricia Sutherland, who worked at the Canadian Museum of Civilization, had found archaeological remains of yarn and cordage [string], rat droppings, tally sticks, a carved wooden Dorset culture face mask depicting Caucasian features, and possible architectural remains, which indicated that European traders and possibly settlers had been on Baffin Island not later than 1000\u00a0CE. What the source of this Old World contact may have been is unclear and controversial; the newspaper article states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dating of some yarn and other artifacts, presumed to be left by Vikings on Baffin Island, have produced an age that predates the Vikings by several hundred years.\nSo, as Sutherland said, if you believe that spinning was not an indigenous technique that was used in Arctic North America, then you have to consider the possibility that as \"remote as it may seem,\" these finds may represent evidence of contact with Europeans prior to the Vikings' arrival in Greenland.\nSutherland's research eventually led to a 2012 announcement that whetstones had been found with remnants of alloys indicative of Viking presence. In 2018, Michele Hayeur Smith of Brown University, who specialises in the study of ancient textiles, wrote that she does not think the ancient Arctic people, the Dorset and Thule, needed to be taught how to spin yarn: \"It's a pretty intuitive thing to do.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...the date received on Sample 4440b from Nanook clearly indicates that sinew was being spun and plied at least as early, if not earlier, than yarn at this site. We feel that the most parsimonious explanation of this data is that the practice of spinning hair and wool into plied yarn most likely developed naturally within this context of complex, indigenous, Arctic fiber technologies, and not through contact with European textile producers. [...] Our investigations indicate that Paleoeskimo (Dorset) communities on Baffin Island spun threads from the hair and also from the sinews of native terrestrial grazing animals, most likely musk ox and arctic hare, throughout the Middle Dorset period and for at least a millennium before there is any reasonable evidence of European activity in the islands of the North Atlantic or in the North American Arctic.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A long-running debate disputes whether the Vikings taught indigenous peoples in the Canadian Arctic how to spin yarn when the invaders arrived in the region around 1,000 years ago. The team found that some of the spun yarn dates back at least 2,000 years, long before the Vikings arrived in the area. This shows that the indigenous peoples in the Canadian Arctic developed yarn-spinning technologies without any help from the Vikings, the scientists said.\u2014\u200a\nWilliam W. Fitzhugh, director of the Arctic Studies Center at the Smithsonian Institution, and a senior scientist at the National Museum of Natural History, wrote that there is insufficient published evidence to support Sutherland's claims, and that the Dorset were using spun cordage by the 6th century.\nIn 1992, Elizabeth Wayland Barber wrote that a piece of three-ply yarn that dates to the Paleolithic era, that ended about 10,000 BP, was found at the Lascaux caves in France. This yarn consisted of three s-twist strands that were z-plied, much like the way a three-ply yarn is made now, the Baffin Island yarn was a simple two-ply yarn. The eight sod buildings and artifacts found in the 1960s at L'Anse aux Meadows, located on the northern tip of Newfoundland Island, remains the only confirmed Norse site in North America outside of those found in Greenland.\nAdministration.\nBaffin Island is part of the Qikiqtaaluk Region.\nDemographics.\nThe population of Baffin Island at the 2021 Canadian census was 13,039 giving a population density of . The population accounts for 67.37 per cent of the 19,355 people in the Qikiqtaaluk Region, 56.51 per cent of the population of the Arctic Archipelago, and 35.38 per cent of the population of Nunavut.\nAs of the 2016 Canadian census the majority, 74.06 per cent, were Indigenous peoples and 25.83 per cent were non-Indigenous. This compares to 88.85 per cent and 14.12 per cent Indigenous and non-Indigenous people for Nunavut as a whole. This lower percentage of Indigenous peoples on Baffin Island results from Iqaluit being 59.29 per cent Indigenous and 40.65 per cent non-Indigenous. Of the total population 72.17 per cent are Inuit, 0.92 per cent are First Nations, and 0.73 per cent are M\u00e9tis. Except for a few First Nations people in Arctic Bay all non-Inuit Indigenous peoples live in Iqaluit.\nThe hamlets of Kinngait (population: 1,396) and Qikiqtarjuaq (population: 593) do not lie on Baffin Island proper. Kinngait is situated on Dorset Island, which is located a few kilometres from the south eastern tip of the Foxe Peninsula. Similarly, Qikiqtarjuaq is situated on Broughton Island, which is located near the northern coast of the Cumberland Peninsula.\nThe Mary River Mine, an iron ore mine with an estimated 21-year life, at Mary River, may include building a railway and a port to transport the ore. This may create a temporary mining community there.\nWildlife.\nBaffin Island is home to the Isulijarniq Migratory Bird Sanctuary and the Bowman Bay Wildlife Sanctuary.\nThe Isulijarniq Migratory Bird Sanctuary, named for J. Dewey Soper, is located on the western side of Baffin Island from Bowman Bay to the Koukdjuak River. It is an area that was classified a wetland of international importance via the Ramsar Convention on May 24, 1982. It is home of the world's largest goose colony and supports a large number of barren-ground caribou.\nThe Bowman Bay Wildlife Sanctuary is also located on the western side of Baffin Island near Bowman Bay in the Great Plain of the Koukdjuak. It is and is classified as Category IV (Habitat/Species Management Area) under the International Union for Conservation of Nature.\nBaffin Island has both year-round and summer visitor wildlife. On land, examples of year-round wildlife are barren-ground caribou, polar bear, Arctic fox, red fox, Arctic hare, lemming, and Baffin Island wolf.\nBarren-ground caribou herds migrate in a limited range from northern Baffin Island down to the southern part in winter, even to the Frobisher Bay peninsula, next to Resolution Island, then migrating back north in the summer. In 2012, a survey of caribou herds found that the local population was only about 5,000, a decrease of as much as 95% from the 1990s.\nArctic hares are found throughout Baffin Island. Their fur is pure white in winter and moults to a scruffy dark grey in summer. Arctic hares and lemmings are an important food source for Arctic and red foxes and Arctic wolves.\nLemmings are also found throughout the island and are a major food source for foxes, wolves and the snowy owl. In the winter, lemmings dig complicated tunnel systems through the snow drifts to get to their food supply of dry grasses and lichens.\nPredators.\nPolar bears can be found all along the coast of Baffin Island but are most prevalent where the sea ice takes the form of pack ice, where their major food sources\u2014ringed seals (jar seal) and bearded seals\u2014live. Polar bears mate approximately every year, bearing one to three cubs around March. Female polar bears may travel inland to find a large snow bank where they dig a den in which to spend the winter and later give birth. The polar bear population here is one of 19 genetically distinct demes of the circumpolar region.\nRed foxes can be found predominantly in the southernmost areas of Baffin Island, away from the harshest of winter weather, though some individuals may forage and explore elsewhere. The Arctic foxes can usually be found where polar bears venture on the fast ice close to land in their search for seals. Arctic foxes are scavengers and often follow polar bears to get their leavings. They also are known to take ground-nesting birds and their eggs and chicks, such as ducks, geese, ptarmigan, seagulls, shorebirds and even snowy owls, on occasion. On Baffin Island, Arctic foxes are sometimes trapped by Inuit, but there is no longer a robust fur industry.\nThe Arctic wolf and the Baffin Island wolf, a grey wolf subspecies, are also year-round residents of Baffin Island. Unlike the grey wolf in southern climes, Arctic wolves often have smaller social networks, due to the barren landscape and minimal resources, thus resulting in unique hierarchies when compared with wolves found further south. For example, Arctic wolves often do not hunt in packs, although a male-female pair may hunt together.\nBirds.\nNesting birds are summer land visitors to Baffin Island. Baffin Island is one of the major nesting destinations from the Eastern and Mid-West flyways for many species of migrating birds. Waterfowl include eiders, Canada goose, snow goose, cackling goose, and brant goose (brent goose). Shore birds include the phalarope, various waders (commonly called sandpipers), murres including Br\u00fcnnich's guillemot, and plovers. Gull species also nest on Baffin Island and they include Sabine's gull, glaucous gull, herring gull and ivory gull.\nLong-range travellers include the Arctic tern, which migrates from Antarctica every spring. The varieties of water birds that nest here include coots, loons, mallards, and many other duck species.\nMarine mammals.\nIn the water (and under the ice), the main year-round species is the ringed seal subspecies, the Arctic ringed seal. It lives offshore within of land. In winter, it makes a number of breathing holes in the ice, up to thick. It visits each one often to keep the hole open and free from ice. In March, when a female is ready to whelp, she will enlarge one of the breathing holes that has snow over it, creating a small \"igloo\" where she whelps one or two pups. Within three weeks the pups are in the water and swimming. In summer, some ringed seals keep to a narrow territory about along the shoreline but may move out into the open water. In the spring they spend more time on the surface of the ice.\nSummer visitors.\nWater species that visit Baffin Island in the summer are:\nHarp seals (or saddle-backed seals), which migrate from major breeding grounds off the coast of Labrador and the southeast coast of Greenland to Baffin Island for the summer. Migrating at speeds of , they all come up to breathe at the same time, then dive and swim up to before surfacing again. They migrate in large pods consisting of a hundred or more seals to within of the shoreline, which they then follow, feeding on crustaceans and fish.\nWalruses, which do not migrate far off land in the winter. They merely follow the fast ice, or ice that is solidly attached to land, and stay ahead of it as the ice hardens further and further out to sea. As winter progresses, they will always remain where there is open water free of ice. When the ice melts, they move in to land and can be found basking on rocks close to shore. One of the largest walrus herds can be found in the Foxe Basin on the western side of Baffin Island.\nBeluga or white whales migrate along the coast of Baffin Island; some head north to the feeding grounds in the Davis Strait between Greenland and Baffin Island, or into the Hudson Strait or any of the bays and estuaries in between. Usually travelling in pods of two or more, they can often be found very close to shore ( or less). They come up to breathe every 30 seconds or so as they make their way along the coastline eating crustaceans.\nNarwhals, which are known for the males' long, spiralling single tusk, can also be found along the coast of Baffin Island in the summer. Much like their beluga cousins, they may be found in pairs or even in a large pod of ten or more males, females and newborns. They also can be often found close to the shoreline, gracefully pointing their tusks skyward as they come up for air.\nThe largest summer visitor to Baffin Island is the bowhead whale. Found throughout the Arctic range, one group of bowhead whales is known to migrate to the Foxe Basin, a bay on the western side of Baffin Island.\nClimate.\nBaffin Island lies in the path of a generally northerly airflow all year round, so, like much of northeastern Canada, it has an extremely cold climate. This brings very long, cold winters and foggy, cloudy summers, which have helped to add to the remoteness of the island. Spring thaw arrives much later than normal for a position straddling the Arctic Circle: around early June at Iqaluit in the south-east but around early- to mid-July on the north coast where glaciers run right down to sea level. Snow, even heavy snow, can occur at any time of the year, although it is least likely in July and early August. Average annual temperatures at Iqaluit are around , compared with around in Reykjav\u00edk, which is at a similar latitude.\nSea ice surrounds the island for most of the year and only disappears completely from the north coast for short, unpredictable periods from mid- to late June until the end of September.\nMost of Baffin Island lies north of the Arctic Circle\u2014all communities from Pangnirtung northwards have polar night in winter and midnight sun in summer. The eastern community of Clyde River has twilight instead of night from April 26 until May 13, continuous sunlight for 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 months from May 14 to July 28, then twilight instead of night from July 29 until August 16. This gives the community just over 3&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 months without true night. In the winter, the sun sets on November 22 and does not rise again until January 19 of the next year. Pond Inlet has civil twilight from December 16 to December 26. However, there is twilight for at least 4 hours per day, unlike places such as Eureka.\nLike most of Nunavut and the Canadian Arctic, Baffin Island has a tundra climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"ET\"), although the highest ice caps have an ice cap climate (\"EF\"). The sea is frozen for most of the year, and only a few months are above freezing. There can be seasonal lag in spring.\nThe Barnes Ice Cap, in the middle of the island, has been retreating since at least the early 1960s, when the Geographical Branch of the then Department of Mines and Technical Surveys sent a three-man survey team to the area to measure isostatic rebound and cross-valley features of the Isortoq River. Although in the 1970s parts of Baffin Island failed to have the usual ice-free period in the summer.\nClimate tables from south to north\nEconomic resources.\nThe Hall Peninsula of southern Baffin Island includes the Chidliak Kimberlite Province, which had been found to include kimberlite pipes of diamond-bearing kimberlite.\nThe Mary River iron ore mine began operating in 2015, and shipped 4.2 million tonnes of iron ore in 2023.\nIn popular culture.\n\"The White Dawn\" is a 1974 film set on and filmed on Baffin Island. All performers except three Hollywood actors were Inuit who spoke their own language.\nThe opening scene of the 1977 James Bond film, \"The Spy Who Loved Me\", featuring a cliff jump and parachute drop on skis, was filmed at Mount Asgard in Auyuittuq National Park on Baffin Island.\nThe Polar Star Couloir, on Mount Beluga in the Kangiqtualuk Uqquqti (Sam Ford Fjord) area near Clyde River, is listed in \"Fifty Classic Ski Descents of North America\" as a backcountry skiing feature.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69025", "revid": "784045880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69025", "title": "Palindromes", "text": ""}
{"id": "69028", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69028", "title": "Thomas, Count of Flanders", "text": "Count of Flanders from 1237 to 1244\nThomas II (c. 1199 \u2013 7 February 1259) was the Lord of Piedmont from 1233 to his death, Count of Flanders \"jure uxoris\" from 1237 to 1244, and regent of the County of Savoy from 1253 to his death, while his nephew Boniface was fighting abroad. He was the son of Thomas I of Savoy and Margaret of Geneva.\nCareer.\nThomas was born in Montm\u00e9lian. He started his career in the church as a canon at Lausanne and became pr\u00e9v\u00f4t of Valence by 1226. In 1233, when Thomas I of Savoy died, Thomas, being a younger son, inherited only the lordship of Piedmont, which he later raised to the status of a county.\nIn 1235, when Thomas left his ecclesiastical career, he sought to fully divide his lands from the County of Savoy. His elder brother, Amadeus IV, negotiated with him to grant Thomas additional lands within the county, but that all lands would stay part of the county. Further, Thomas was encouraged like his other brothers to expand his holdings outside of Savoy.\nIn 1234, Thomas and his brother William escorted his niece, Margaret of Provence to her wedding with Louis IX of France. While Thomas hoped to stay with her at the French court, the king's mother, Blanche of Castile, wanted greater control over the new queen, and so dismissed all who came with her before the couple even reached Paris.\nCount of Flanders.\nAt the urging of Louis IX of France, Thomas married Joanna, Countess of Flanders and Hainaut, widow of Ferdinand, Count of Flanders and daughter of the Latin Emperor Baldwin I, in 1237.\nHis loyalties as Count of Flanders were divided between the kings of France and England. In 1239, Thomas travelled to England to pay homage to Henry III, King of England. While there, his niece, Eleanor of Provence, gave birth to Edward. After recognizing Henry as his suzerain, Thomas received an annual stipend of 500 marks. He returned to visit the family around Easter of 1240 and was given a gift which Henry III of England extracted from the lands of Simon de Montfort.\nThe count and countess were very generous toward local churches, and Thomas often followed his wife's lead on such matters. Thomas also understood the needs of the emerging merchant class, and worked to provide better rights for them. This included granting new charters and restructuring the governance in key cities such as Damme and Bruges.\nIn July 1243, Thomas and his brother Amadeus were ordered by Enzo of Sardinia to join in a siege of Vercelli, which had recently switched allegiances from the Empire to the Pope. Not only was the attack on the city unsuccessful, but the brothers were excommunicated for it. When the brothers wrote to the new Pope Innocent IV to appeal, he granted their request, and further indicated that Thomas would be protected from excommunication without papal authorization.\nThomas and Joanna had no issue and she died in 1244.\nLater years.\nIn 1255, Thomas was protecting his territories in the Piedmont region against the town of Asti. In a battle at Moncalieri, he was taken prisoner and held in Turin. The two cities were seeking to force Thomas to acknowledge their independence from Savoy control. In response, Pope Alexander IV placed an interdict against Turin and Asti, and King Henry III of England imprisoned all Lombards in his kingdom. Louis IX of France arrested 150 Asti merchants at the urging of his wife (and Thomas's niece) Margaret. Beatrice of Savoy did the same in her territories in Provence. Thomas's brothers, Peter and Philip led an army down from Savoy in 1256, and were able to force a negotiated settlement by the end of the year. In that settlement, the cities were recognized as independent, though they did not achieve the territorial or economic benefits they were originally seeking.\nAlthough he was the next brother of Amadeus IV, he never became the Count of Savoy because he predeceased his nephew, Boniface, who himself died without sons to succeed him. Thomas did act as regent for Boniface during the early years of his reign. Although Thomas left sons, upon Boniface's death the remaining uncles, younger brothers of Thomas, ruled the County of Savoy. Thomas's eldest son and heir Thomas III thought it to be an injustice and unsuccessfully claimed Savoy. However, it so happened that Philip I, the last surviving brother of Thomas, made Thomas' younger son Amadeus his heir in Savoy, leaving the elder son, Thomas, and the genealogically senior line descending from him out of the Savoy succession.\nIssue.\nIn 1252, Thomas married Beatrice Fieschi, who died on 15 July 1283, only daughter of Tedisio Fieschi, Count of Lavagna, by first wife Vigolan di Capo Corso, half-sister of Pope Adrian V and paternal niece of Pope Innocent IV. Thomas and Beatrice had six children:\nHe also had at least three illegitimate children\ua789 \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69034", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69034", "title": "Bluff (poker)", "text": "Tactic in poker and other card games\nIn the card game of poker, a bluff is a bet or raise made with a hand which is not thought to be the best hand. \"To bluff\" is to make such a bet. The objective of a bluff is to induce a fold by at least one opponent who holds a better hand. The size and frequency of a bluff determines its profitability to the \"bluffer\". By extension, the phrase \"calling somebody's bluff\" is often used outside the context of poker to describe situations where one person demands that another proves a claim, or proves that they are not being deceptive.\nPure bluff.\nA pure bluff, or stone-cold bluff, is a bet or raise with an inferior hand that has little or no chance of improving. A player making a pure bluff believes they can win the pot only if all opponents fold. The pot odds for a bluff are the ratio of the size of the bluff to the pot. A pure bluff has a positive expectation (will be profitable in the long run) when the probability of being called by an opponent is lower than the pot odds for the bluff.\nFor example, suppose that after all the cards are out, a player holding a busted drawing hand decides that the only way to win the pot is to make a pure bluff. If the player bets the size of the pot on a pure bluff, the bluff will have a positive expectation if the probability of being called is less than 50%. Note, however, that the opponent may also consider the pot odds when deciding whether to call. In this example, the opponent will be facing 2-to-1 pot odds for the call. The opponent will have a positive expectation for calling the bluff if the opponent believes the probability the player is bluffing is at least 33%.\nSemi-bluff.\nIn games with multiple betting rounds, to bluff on one round with an inferior or drawing hand that might improve in a later round is called a semi-bluff. A player making a semi-bluff can win the pot two different ways: by all opponents folding immediately or by catching a card to improve the player's hand. In some cases a player may be on a draw but with odds strong enough that they are favored to win the hand. In this case their bet is not classified as a semi-bluff even though their bet may force opponents to fold hands with better current strength.\nFor example, a player in a stud poker game with four spade-suited cards showing (but none among their downcards) on the penultimate round might raise, hoping that their opponents believe the player already has a flush. If their bluff fails and they are called, the player still might be dealt a spade on the final card and win the showdown (or they might be dealt another non-spade and try to bluff again, in which case it is a \"pure bluff\" on the final round rather than a semi-bluff).\nBluffing circumstances.\nBluffing may be more effective in some circumstances than others. Bluffs have a higher expectation when the probability of being called decreases. Several game circumstances may decrease the probability of being called (and increase the profitability of the bluff):\nThe opponent's current state of mind should be taken into consideration when bluffing. Under certain circumstances external pressures or events can significantly impact an opponent's decision making skills.\nOptimal bluffing frequency.\nIf a player bluffs too infrequently, observant opponents will recognize that the player is betting for value and will call with very strong hands or with drawing hands only when they are receiving favorable pot odds. If a player bluffs too frequently, observant opponents \"snap off\" their bluffs by calling or re-raising. Occasional bluffing disguises not just the hands a player is bluffing with, but also their legitimate hands that opponents may think they may be bluffing with. David Sklansky, in his book \"The Theory of Poker\", states \"Mathematically, the optimal bluffing strategy is to bluff in such a way that the chances against your bluffing are identical to the pot odds your opponent is getting.\"\nOptimal bluffing also requires that the bluffs must be performed in such a manner that opponents cannot tell when a player is bluffing or not. To prevent bluffs from occurring in a predictable pattern, game theory suggests the use of a randomizing agent to determine whether to bluff. For example, a player might use the colors of their hidden cards, the second hand on their watch, or some other unpredictable mechanism to determine whether to bluff.\nThe purpose of optimal bluffing frequencies is to make the opponent (mathematically) indifferent between calling and folding. Optimal bluffing frequencies are based upon game theory and the Nash equilibrium, and \"assist\" the player using these strategies to become unexploitable. By bluffing in optimal frequencies, you will typically end up breaking even on your bluffs (in other words, optimal bluffing frequencies \"are not\" meant to generate positive expected value from the bluffs alone). Rather, optimal bluffing frequencies allow you to gain \"more\" value from your value bets, because your opponent is indifferent between calling or folding when you bet (regardless of whether it's a value bet or a bluff bet).\nBluffing in other games.\nAlthough bluffing is most often considered a poker term, similar tactics are useful in other games as well. In these situations, a player makes a play that should not be profitable unless an opponent misjudges it as being made from a position capable of justifying it. Since a successful bluff requires deceiving one's opponent, it occurs only in games in which the players conceal information from each other. In games like chess and backgammon, both players can see the same board and so should simply make the best legal move available. Examples include:\nArtificial intelligence.\nEvan Hurwitz and Tshilidzi Marwala developed a software agent that bluffed while playing a poker-like game. They used intelligent agents to design agent outlooks. The agent was able to learn to predict its opponents' reactions based on its own cards and the actions of others. By using reinforcement neural networks, the agents were able to learn to bluff without prompting.\nEconomic theory.\nIn economics, bluffing has been explained as rational equilibrium behavior in games with information asymmetries. For instance, consider the hold-up problem, a central ingredient of the theory of incomplete contracts. There are two players. Today player A can make an investment; tomorrow player B offers how to divide the returns of the investment. If player A rejects the offer, they can realize only a fraction x&lt;1 of these returns on their own. Suppose player A has private information about x. Goldl\u00fccke and Schmitz (2014) have shown that player A might make a large investment even if player A is weak (i.e., when they know that x is small). The reason is that a large investment may lead player B to believe that player A is strong (i.e., x is large), so that player B will make a generous offer. Hence, bluffing can be a profitable strategy for player A.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69035", "revid": "41263835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69035", "title": "Thoth", "text": "Ancient Egyptian deity of the Moon, learning, writing\nThoth (from , borrowed from , , the reflex of \"[he] is like the ibis\") is an ancient Egyptian deity. In art, he was often depicted as a man with the head of an ibis or a baboon, animals sacred to him. His feminine counterpart is Seshat, and his wife is Ma'at. He is the god of the Moon, wisdom, knowledge, writing, hieroglyphs, science, magic, art and judgment.\nThoth's chief temple was located in the city of Hermopolis ( , Egyptological pronunciation: Khemenu, ). Later known as in Egyptian Arabic, the Temple of Thoth was mostly destroyed before the beginning of the Christian era. Its very large pronaos was still standing in 1826, but was demolished and used as fill for the foundation of a sugar factory by the mid-19th century.\nThoth played many vital and prominent roles in Egyptian mythology, such as maintaining the universe, and being one of the two deities (the other being Ma'at) who stood on either side of Ra'ssolar barque. In the later history of ancient Egypt, Thoth became heavily associated with the arbitration of godly disputes, the arts of magic, the system of writing, and the judgment of the dead.\nName.\nThe Egyptian pronunciation of \"\u1e0f\u1e25wty\" is not fully known, but may be reconstructed as *\"\u1e0fi\u1e25aut\u012b,\" perhaps pronounced * or *. This reconstruction is based on the Ancient Greek borrowing ' () or ' and the fact that the name was transliterated into Sahidic Coptic variously as \u2c91\u2c9f\u2c9f\u2ca9\u2ca7 \"Thoout\", \u2c91\u2cb1\u2c91 \"Th\u014dth\", \u2c91\u2c9f\u2c9f\u2ca7 \"Thoot\", \u2c91\u2c81\u2ca9\u2ca7 \"Thaut\", \"Taauto\"s (\"\u03a4\u03b1\u03b1\u03c5\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2\"), \"Thoor\" (\"\u0398\u03c9\u03c9\u03c1\"), as well as Bohairic Coptic \u2c91\u2cb1\u2c9f\u2ca9\u2ca7 \"Th\u014dout\". These spellings reflect known sound changes from earlier Egyptian such as the loss of \"\u1e0f\" palatalization and merger of \"\u1e25\" with \"h\" i.e. initial \"\u1e0f\u1e25 &gt; th &gt; t\u02b0\". The loss of pre-Coptic final \"y/j\" is also common. Following Egyptological convention, which eschews vowel reconstruction, the consonant skeleton \"\u1e0f\u1e25wty\" would be rendered \"Djehuti\" and the god is sometimes found under this name. However, the Greek form \"Thoth\" is more common.\nAccording to Theodor Hopfner, Thoth's Egyptian name written as \"\u1e0f\u1e25wty\" originated from \"\u1e0f\u1e25w\", claimed to be the oldest known name for the ibis, normally written as \"hbj\". The addition of \"-ty\" denotes that he possessed the attributes of the ibis. Hence Thoth's name would mean \"He who is like the ibis\", according to this interpretation.\nOther forms of the name \"\u1e0f\u1e25wty\" using older transcriptions include \"Jehuti, Jehuty, Tahuti, Tehuti, Zehuti, Techu,\" or \"Tetu\". Multiple titles for Thoth, similar to the pharaonic titulary, are also known, including \"A\", \"Sheps\", \"Lord of Khemennu\", \"Asten\", \"Khenti\", \"Mehi\", \"Hab\", and \"A'an\".\nIn addition, Thoth was also known by specific aspects of himself, for instance the Moon god Iah-Djehuty (\"j3\u1e25-\u1e0f\u1e25w.ty)\", representing the Moon for the entire month. The Greeks related Thoth to their god Hermes due to his similar attributes and functions. One of Thoth's titles, \"Thrice great\", was translated to the Greek (\"\"), making Hermes Trismegistus.\nDepictions.\nThoth has been depicted in many ways depending on the era and on the aspect the artist wished to convey. Usually, he is depicted in his human form with the head of a green ibis. In this form, he can be represented as the reckoner of times and seasons by a headdress of the lunar disk sitting on top of a crescent moon resting on his head. When depicted as a form of Shu or Ankher, he was depicted to be wearing the respective god's headdress. Sometimes he was also seen in art to be wearing the Atef crown or the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. When not depicted in this common form, he sometimes takes the form of the ibis directly.\nHe also appears as a dog-faced baboon or a man with the head of a baboon when he is A'an, the god of equilibrium. In the form of A'ah-Djehuty, he took a more human-looking form. These forms are all symbolic and are metaphors for Thoth's attributes. Thoth is often depicted holding an ankh, the Egyptian symbol for life.\nAttributes.\nThoth's roles in Egyptian mythology were many. He served as scribe of the gods, credited with the invention of writing and Egyptian hieroglyphs. In the underworld, Duat, he appeared as an ape, Aani, the god of equilibrium, who reported when the scales weighing the deceased's heart against the feather, representing the principle of Maat, was exactly even.\nThe ancient Egyptians regarded Thoth as One, self-begotten, and self-produced. He is the master of both physical and moral (i.e. divine law), making proper use of Ma'at. He is credited with making the calculations for the establishment of the heavens, stars, Earth, and everything in them.\nThe Egyptians credited him as the author of all works of science, religion, philosophy, and magic. The Greeks further declared him the inventor of astronomy, astrology, the science of numbers, mathematics, geometry, surveying, medicine, botany, theology, civilized government, the alphabet, reading, writing, and oratory. They further claimed he is the true author of every work of every branch of knowledge, human and divine.\nMythology.\nThe Greek philosopher Plutarch credits Thoth with the creation of the 365-day calendar. Originally, according to the myth, the year was only 360\u00a0days long and Nut was sterile during these days, unable to bear children. Thoth gambled with the Moon for nd of its light ( = 5), or 5\u00a0days, and won. During these 5\u00a0days, Nut and Geb gave birth to Osiris, Set, Isis, and Nephthys.\nIn the central Osiris myth, Thoth gives Isis the words to restore her husband, allowing the pair to conceive Horus. Following a battle between Horus and Set, Thoth offers counsel and provides wisdom.\nHistory.\nThoth is a Moon god. The Moon not only provides light at night, allowing time to still be measured without the Sun, but its phases and prominence gave it a significant importance in early astrology/astronomy. The perceived cycles of the Moon also organized much of Egyptian society's rituals and events, both civil and religious. Consequently, Thoth gradually became seen as a god of wisdom, magic, and the measurement and regulation of events and of time. He was thus said to be the secretary and counselor of the Sun god Ra, and with Ma'at (truth/order) stood next to Ra on the nightly voyage across the sky.\nThoth became credited by the ancient Egyptians as the inventor of writing (hieroglyphs), and was also considered to have been the scribe of the underworld. For this reason, Thoth was universally worshipped by ancient Egyptian scribes. Many scribes had a painting or a picture of Thoth in their \"office\". Likewise, one of the symbols for scribes was that of the ibis.\nIn art, Thoth was usually depicted with the head of an ibis, possibly because the Egyptians saw the curve of the ibis' beak as a symbol of the crescent moon. Sometimes, he was depicted as a baboon holding up a crescent moon.\nDuring the Late Period of ancient Egypt, a cult of Thoth gained prominence due to its main center, Khmun (Hermopolis Magna), also becoming the capital. Millions of dead ibis were mummified and buried in his honor.\nThoth was inserted in many tales as the wise counselor and persuader, and his association with learning and measurement led him to be connected with Seshat, the earlier deification of wisdom, who was said to be his daughter, or variably his wife. Thoth's qualities also led to him being identified by the Greeks with their closest matching god Hermes, with whom Thoth was eventually combined as Hermes Trismegistus, leading to the Greeks' naming Thoth's cult center as Hermopolis, meaning \"city of Hermes\".\nIn the Papyrus of Ani copy of the Egyptian Book of the Dead the scribe proclaims \"I am thy writing palette, O Thoth, and I have brought unto thee thine ink-jar. I am not of those who work iniquity in their secret places; let not evil happen unto me.\" Plate XXIX Chapter CLXXV (Budge) of the Book of the Dead is the oldest tradition said to be the work of Thoth himself.\nThere was also an Egyptian pharaoh of the Sixteenth dynasty named Djehuty (Thoth) after him, and who reigned for three years.\nPlato mentions Thoth (as \u0398\u03b5\u1f7a\u03b8, \"Theuth\") in his dialogue \"Phaedrus\". He uses the myth of Thoth to demonstrate that writing leads to laziness and forgetfulness. In the story, Thoth remarks to King Thamus of Egypt that writing is a wonderful substitute for memory. Thamus remarks that it is a remedy for reminding, not remembering, with the appearance but not the reality of wisdom. Future generations will hear much without being properly taught and will appear wise but not be so.\nArtapanus of Alexandria, an Egyptian Jew who lived in the third or second century BC, euhemerized Thoth-Hermes as a historical human being and claimed he was the same person as Moses, based primarily on their shared roles as authors of texts and creators of laws. Artapanus's biography of Moses conflates traditions about Moses and Thoth and invents many details. Many later authors, from late antiquity to the Renaissance, either identified Hermes Trismegistus with Moses or regarded them as contemporaries who expounded similar beliefs.\nArchaeology.\nEgypt's Minister of Tourism and Antiquities announced the discovery of the collective graves of senior officials and high clergies of the god Thoth in Tuna el-Gebel in Minya in January 2020. An archaeological mission headed by Mostafa Waziri reported that 20 sarcophagi and coffins of various shapes and sizes, including five anthropoid sarcophagi made of limestone and carved with hieroglyphic texts, as well as 16 tombs and five well-preserved wooden coffins were unearthed by their team.\nModern cultural references.\nThoth has been seen as a god of wisdom and has been used in modern literature, especially since the early 20th century when ancient Egyptian ideas were quite popular.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69038", "revid": "17753739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69038", "title": "Peter II, Count of Savoy", "text": "European noble\nPeter II (c. 1203\u00a0\u2013 15 May 1268), called the Little Charlemagne, was Count of Savoy from 1263 until his death in 1268. He was also holder of the Honour of Richmond, Yorkshire in England, and the English lands of the Honour of the Eagle also known as the Honour of Pevensey and the Honour of Eu also known as the Honour of Hastings. His significant land holdings in the English County of Sussex were also marked by his holding of the wardship of John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey which brought with it lands centred upon Lewes castle. Briefly, from 1241 until 1242, castellan of Dover Castle and Keeper of the Coast (later called Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports). In 1243 he was granted land by the River Thames on the Strand near the City of London, where he built the Savoy Palace.\nBiography.\nEarly career in Savoy.\nPeter was born around 1203, possibly at Susa, Piedmont. He was likely the seventh child of Thomas I, Count of Savoy and Margaret of Geneva. It was through his sister Beatrice of Savoy and her daughters: Margaret of Provence, Queen of France, Eleanor of Provence, Queen of England, Sanchia of Provence, Queen of the Romans and Beatrice of Provence, Queen of Sicily and Naples, that the House of Savoy and Peter in particular would derive much of their career and influence.\nAs a younger son of a noble house, Peter started his career in the church, obtaining appointments in dioceses under the influence of his family. From 1226 to 1233 he was a canon at Lausanne, where he was briefly acting bishop before a new permanent bishop was named in 1231. Peter also held the offices of canon at Lyon and of provost at Aosta and Geneva, before retiring from church life in 1234. Upon the death of his father, Peter demanded substantial portions of the county from his eldest brother Amadeus. The brothers met at Chillon in 1234, where they negotiated a settlement which recognized Amadeus as the head of the house. From this, Peter received control of the key castles of the Ch\u00e2teau de Cornillon at Saint-Rambert-en-Bugey and the Ch\u00e2teau d'Angeville at what is now Hauteville-Lompnes also in Bugey. both of which helped him threaten Geneva. His brother William negotiated a marriage for him with Agnes of Faucigny, which also helped provide territory of his own, so he caused less trouble for his elder brothers. The marriage also allowed him to influence Burgundian affairs as Agnes was related to the Joinville family. This relationship brought Geoffrey de Geneville, 1st Baron Geneville, Agnes's half-brother, to England. The younger Simon de Joinville, another of Agnes's half-brothers, would provide the conduit by which Burgundian knights would serve England both in Gascony and Wales.\nHis desire to further extend his territory led him into conflict with his uncle, William II of Geneva. Around 1236, Peter was ambushed and captured by his cousin Rudolf. When the resulting conflict was concluded in 1237, Amadeus forced William to sign a treaty which required Geneva to pay 20,000 marks and the castle of Arlod. In 1240, when Peter's brother Philip was in a contested election for the Bishop of Lausanne against Jean de Cossonay, a Geneva supported candidate, Peter brought 6000 troops, though the battle did not get resolved decisively.\nHe continued using both money and force to take further control of lands surrounding Savoy. In May 1244 Rudolph III, Count of Gruy\u00e8re, surrendered Gruy\u00e8res Castle to Peter, who then gave it to William, the second son of Rudolph, with the agreement that William and his heirs would serve Peter and his family. On 29 May 1244, Cossonay similarly surrendered significant territories to Peter and Amadeus, retaining them only under the overlordship of Savoy. He continued to gain control of key towns and trade routes throughout the Pays de Vaud, often by enfeofing them to the younger sons of the previous rulers. He was responsible for the significant renovations of the Ch\u00e2teau de Chillon, and by 1253 he was the protector of Bern. One scholar suggests that French is the language of western Switzerland due partly to Peter's extensive conquests in the region.\nEnglish career.\nIn January 1236, Eleanor of Provence, Peter's niece, married King Henry III and Peter came with a number of other Savoyards. On 20 April 1240, Peter was given the Honour of Richmond by Henry III who invited him to England about the end of the year, and knighted him on 5 January 1241 when he became known popularly as Earl of Richmond although he never assumed the title, nor was it ever given to him in official documents. On 25 September 1241 he was granted the Honour of the Eagle and wardship of John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey bringing much land in Sussex and the south coast of England. His position on the south coast was further strengthened in 1249 by the Honour of Eu, also known as the Honour of Hastings. In February 1246 he was granted land between the Strand and the Thames, where Peter built the Savoy Palace in 1263, on the site of the present Savoy Hotel. It was destroyed during the Peasants' Revolt of 1381. By his will, the Honour of Richmond was left to his niece Queen Eleanor, who transferred it to the crown.\nIn 1241, Henry sent Peter to gather support for a pending invasion of Poitou. He travelled to Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy; Theobald I of Navarre; his brother Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy; and his brother-in-law Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence. In February 1242, Peter was sent into Poitou to see what support existed there for Henry. He was nearly captured there, but managed to escape. He then travelled to Provence to negotiate the marriage of his niece Sanchia of Provence to Henry's brother Richard.\nIn 1246, Peter went back to Savoy, in part to seal a marriage deal with Amadeus. In February 1247, he returned to England with Alice of Saluzzo, Amadeus's granddaughter by Beatrice. She was married to Edmund de Lacy, Baron of Pontefract that May.\nBoston (a borough by 1279), on the River Witham, had over many years become an important port for Lincoln. The town was held by the Dukes of Brittany until about 1200. In 1241, Peter obtained the manor of Boston at the same time as he had Richmond. It was restored to John I, Duke of Brittany, on Peter's death. Donington manor is also thought to have been passed from John de la Rye to Peter of Savoy about 1255, when a charter was granted for a market to be held at the manor on Saturdays. In the same year, a similar grant was made for the holding of a fair on 15 August, also to be held at the manor. A separate charter was granted to Peter on 8 April 1255 by the king to hold a market on Mondays.\nIn 1246, the king granted Peter the castle of Pevensey. Peter originally, in 1258, sided with Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, in the Second Barons' War; but sided with Eleanor of Provence, his niece and his son-in-law King Henry III of England from 1261 against Montfort.\nEnglish Reform and Second Baronial War.\nPeter of Savoy played an important role in the events which led to the Provisions of Oxford in England in 1258 which would lead to the Second Barons' War. Prior to the formal demands made in Westminster of King Henry III on 30 April 1258, a number of barons had made a solemn oath on 12 April 1258 to assist each other in supporting the reform of the realm. These oath takers would form the core of the baronial movement supporting reform, and were \u201cRichard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester; Roger Bigod, 4th Earl of Norfolk; Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester; Peter of Savoy; Hugh Bigod; John fitz Geoffrey; and Peter of Montfort.\u201d Peter of Savoy sided with the reforming barons in order to reduce the political influence of the Lusignan half brothers of King Henry III who were in the view of Peter and his niece, the Queen Eleanor of Provence exerting undue influence at court. However, Peter broke with the reformers in 1260 when Montfort had him removed from the ruling council. Thereafter Peter of Savoy spent an increasing time in Savoy until becoming Count of Savoy in 1263.\nFollowing the Battle of Evesham in 1265 Pevensey Castle and Richmond Castle were besieged by the Monfortian government. Both castles were held by Peter\u2019s constables and stewards. Pevensey Castle in particular received a resupply of men and material from Peter in Flanders. Peter and Eleanor of Provence had gathered an army in Flanders to invade England to restore King Henry III to his throne. The escape of Lord Edward and subsequent Battle of Evesham rendered the invasion unnecessary.\nCount of Savoy.\nWhen Peter's nephew Boniface, Count of Savoy, died without heirs in 1263, the question of the succession to Savoy lay unanswered. Besides Peter, there was another possible claimant, the fifteen-year-old Thomas III of Piedmont (1248\u201382), the eldest son of Peter's elder brother Thomas, Count of Flanders. Peter returned to Savoy and was recognised as count over his nephew. This led to a dispute between Savoy and Piedmont that was to outlast Peter and Thomas.\nPeter brought many ideas back from his travels around Europe to improve Savoy. He started building castles with a more round form, rather than the square which had existed to that point in Savoy. He divided the county into bailis and divided those into castellanies. He also established an office of accounts at Chamb\u00e9ry to more completely manage financial matters. He was the first count of Savoy to issue laws to cover the whole county. These statutes included the provision that his judges not delay justice which is attributable to the Magna Carta in England\nPeter came into conflict with Rudolf of Habsburg, and Henri of Raron, Bishop of Sion.\nPeter died without a male heir in 1268, at the castle of Pierre-Ch\u00e2tel, now in Virignin, and was buried in Hautecombe Abbey. His will left his English lands to Eleanor of Provence, the Queen of England, his niece, modified by a codicil which left his Sussex lands to his nephews, Amadeus and Louis. These bequests were the subject of modification by King Henry III of England who had given the Honour of Richmond to his son-in-law, John of Brittany, Earl of Richmond and the Sussex lands to the Lord Edward. But as per his will, he was succeeded as Count of Savoy by his remaining brother, Philip, former procurator and archbishop-elect of Lyon.\nMarriage and issue.\nPeter's marriage was to Agnes of Faucigny in 1236.Agnes was the daughter of Aymon II de Faucigny and B\u00e9atrice d'Auxonne. The marriage brought the House of Savoy increasing influence in Faucigny which lay south east of Geneva and had hitherto been within the sphere of influence of the Count of Geneva. It also brought influence within the Free County of Burgundy through his mother-in-law B\u00e9atrice. The subsequent marriage of B\u00e9atrice d'Auxonne to Simon de Joinville extended Peter's influence further to include their children Geoffrey de Geneville, 1st Baron Geneville, whom Peter introduced to the English court, and Simon de Joinville, the Seigneur de Gex.\nThey had one daughter, Beatrice, who inherited Faucigny from her mother. The marriage alliance with the County of Albon, also known as the Dauphin\u00e9, whilst advantageous at the time, created long term problems for the County of Savoy when Albon became a part of France. This created a French claim to Faucigny whose territory lay in the middle of Savoy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69042", "revid": "47586549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69042", "title": "Aug", "text": "Aug or AUG may refer to:\nMusic.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69045", "revid": "45445004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69045", "title": "Jan", "text": "Jan, JaN or JAN may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69046", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69046", "title": "Feb", "text": ""}
{"id": "69053", "revid": "1308415655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69053", "title": "Creosote", "text": "Tar distillation byproduct used as wood preservative\nCreosote is a category of carbonaceous chemicals formed by the distillation of various tars and pyrolysis of plant-derived material, such as wood, or fossil fuel. They are typically used as preservatives or antiseptics.\nSome creosote types were used historically as a treatment for components of seagoing and outdoor wood structures to prevent rot (e.g., bridgework and railroad ties, see image). Samples may be found commonly inside chimney flues, where the coal or wood burns under variable conditions, producing soot and tarry smoke. Creosotes are the principal chemicals responsible for the stability, scent, and flavor characteristic of smoked meat; the name is derived from gre \" \"\u03ba\u03c1\u03ad\u03b1\u03c2\" (kreas)\"\u00a0'meat' and \" \"\u03c3\u03c9\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1\" (s\u014dt\u0113r)\"\u00a0'preserver'.\nThe two main kinds recognized in industry are coal-tar creosote and wood-tar creosote. The coal-tar variety, having stronger and more toxic properties, has chiefly been used as a preservative for wood; coal-tar creosote was also formerly used as an escharotic, to burn malignant skin tissue, and in dentistry, to prevent necrosis, before its carcinogenic properties became known. The wood-tar variety has been used for meat preservation, ship treatment, and such medical purposes as an anaesthetic, antiseptic, astringent, expectorant, and laxative, though these have mostly been replaced by modern formulations.\nVarieties of creosote have also been made from both oil shale and petroleum, and are known as oil-tar creosote when derived from oil tar, and as water-gas-tar creosote when derived from the tar of water gas. Creosote also has been made from pre-coal formations such as lignite, yielding lignite-tar creosote, and peat, yielding peat-tar creosote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCreosote oils.\nThe term creosote has a broad range of definitions depending on the origin of the coal tar oil and end-use of the material.\nWith respect to wood preservatives, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) considers the term \"creosote\" to mean a pesticide for use as a wood preservative meeting the American Wood Protection Association (AWPA) Standards P1/P13 and P2. The AWPA Standards require that creosote \"shall be a pure coal tar product derived entirely from tar produced by the carbonization of bituminous coal.\"\nCurrently, all creosote-treated wood products\u2014foundation and marine pilings, lumber, posts, railroad ties, timbers, and utility poles\u2014are manufactured using this type of wood preservative. The manufacturing process can only be a pressure process under the supervision of a licensed applicator certified by the State Departments of Agriculture. No brush-on, spray, or non-pressure uses of creosote are allowed, as specified by the EPA-approved label for the use of creosote.\nThe use of creosote according to the AWPA Standards does not allow for mixing with other types of \"creosote type\" materials\u2014such as lignite-tar creosote, oil-tar creosote, peat-tar creosote, water-gas-tar creosote, or wood-tar creosote. The AWPA Standard P3 does however, allow blending of a high-boiling petroleum oil meeting the AWPA Standard P4.\nThe information that follows describing the other various types of creosote materials and its uses should be considered as primarily being of only historical value. This history is important, because it traces the origin of these different materials used during the 19th and early 20th centuries. Furthermore, it must be considered that these other types of creosotes \u2013 lignite-tar, wood-tar, water-gas-tar, etc. \u2013 are not currently being manufactured and have either been replaced with more-economical materials, or replaced by products that are more efficacious or safer.\nFor some part of their history, coal-tar creosote and wood-tar creosote were thought to have been equivalent substances\u2014albeit of distinct origins\u2014accounting for their common name; the two were determined only later to be chemically different. All types of creosote are composed of phenol derivatives and share some quantity of monosubstituted phenols, but these are not the only active element of creosote. For their useful effects, coal-tar creosote relies on the presence of naphthalenes and anthracenes, while wood-tar creosote relies on the presence of methyl ethers of phenol. Otherwise, either type of tar would dissolve in water.\nCreosote was first discovered in its wood-tar form in 1832, by Carl Reichenbach, when he found it both in the tar and in pyroligneous acids obtained by a dry distillation of beechwood. Because pyroligneous acid was known as an antiseptic and meat preservative, Reichenbach conducted experiments by dipping meat in a dilute solution of distilled creosote. He found that the meat was dried without undergoing putrefaction and had attained a smoky flavor. This led him to reason that creosote was the antiseptic component contained in smoke, and he further argued that the creosote he had found in wood tar was also in coal tar, as well as amber tar and animal tar, in the same abundance as in wood tar.\nSoon afterward, in 1834, Friedrich Ferdinand Runge discovered carbolic acid (phenol) in coal-tar, and Auguste Laurent obtained it from \"phenylhydrate\", which was soon determined to be the same compound. There was no clear view on the relationship between carbolic acid and creosote; Runge described it as having similar caustic and antiseptic properties, but noted that it was different, in that it was an acid and formed salts. Nonetheless, Reichenbach argued that creosote was also the active element, as it was in pyroligneous acid. Despite evidence to the contrary, his view held sway with most chemists, and it became commonly accepted wisdom that creosote, carbolic acid, and phenylhydrate were identical substances, with different degrees of purity.\nCarbolic acid was soon commonly sold under the name \"creosote\", and the scarcity of wood-tar creosote in some places led chemists to believe that it was the same substance as that described by Reichenbach. In the 1840s, Eugen Freiherr von Gorup-Besanez, after realizing that two samples of substances labelled as creosote were different, started a series of investigations to determine the chemical nature of carbolic acid, leading to a conclusion that it more resembled chlorinated quinones and must have been a different, entirely unrelated substance.\nIndependently, there were investigations into the chemical nature of creosote. A study by F.K. V\u00f6lkel revealed that the smell of purified creosote resembled that of guaiacol, and later studies by Heinrich Hlasiwetz identified a substance common to guaiacum and creosote that he called creosol, and he determined that creosote contained a mixture of creosol and guaiacol. Later investigations by Gorup-Besanez, A.E. Hoffmann, and Siegfried Marasse showed that wood-tar creosote also contained phenols, giving it a feature in common with coal-tar creosote.\nHistorically, coal-tar creosote has been distinguished from what was thought of as creosote proper\u2014the original substance of Reichenbach's discovery\u2014and it has been referred to specifically as \"creosote oil\". But, because creosote from coal-tar and wood-tar are obtained from a similar process and have some common uses, they have also been placed in the same class of substances, with the terms \"creosote\" or \"creosote oil\" referring to either product.\nWood-tar creosote.\nWood-tar creosote is a colourless to yellowish greasy liquid with a smoky odor, produces a sooty flame when burned, and has a burned taste. It is non-buoyant in water, with a specific gravity of 1.037 to 1.087, retains fluidity at a very low temperature, and boils at 205-225\u00a0\u00b0C. In its purest form, it is transparent. Dissolution in water requires up to 200 times the amount of water as the base creosote. This creosote is a combination of natural phenols: primarily guaiacol and creosol (4-methylguaiacol), which typically constitutes 50% of the oil; second in prevalence are cresol and xylenol; the rest being a combination of monophenols and polyphenols.\nThe simple phenols are not the only active element in wood-tar creosote. In solution, they coagulate albumin, which is a water-soluble protein found in meat, so they serve as a preserving agent, but also cause denaturation. Most of the phenols in the creosote are methoxy derivatives: they contain the methoxy group linked to the benzene nucleus. The high level of methyl derivates created from the action of heat on wood (also apparent in the methyl alcohol produced through distillation) make wood-tar creosote substantially different from coal-tar creosote. Guaiacol is a methyl ether of pyrocatechin, while creosol is a methyl ether of methyl-pyrocatechin, the next homolog of pyrocatechin. Methyl ethers differ from simple phenols in being less hydrophilic, caustic, and poisonous. This allows meat to be successfully preserved without tissue denaturation, and allows creosote to be used as a medical ointment.\nBecause wood-tar creosote is used for its guaiacol and creosol content, it is generally derived from beechwood rather than other woods, since it distills with a higher proportion of those chemicals to other phenolics. The creosote can be obtained by distilling the wood tar and treating the fraction heavier than water with a sodium hydroxide solution. The alkaline solution is then separated from the insoluble oily layer, boiled in contact with air to reduce impurities, and decomposed by diluted sulfuric acid. This produces a crude creosote, which is purified by re-solution in alkali, re-precipitation with acid, then redistilled with the fraction passing over between 200\u00b0 and 225\u00b0 constituting the purified creosote.\nWhen ferric chloride is added to a dilute solution, it will turn green: a characteristic of ortho-oxy derivatives of benzene. It dissolves in sulfuric acid to a red liquid, which slowly changes to purple-violet. Shaken with hydrochloric acid in the absence of air, it becomes red, the color changing in the presence of air to dark brown or black.\nIn preparation of food by smoking, guaiacol contributes mainly to the smoky taste, while the dimethyl ether of pyrogallol, syringol, is the main chemical responsible for the smoky aroma.\nHistorical uses.\nIndustrial.\nSoon after it was discovered and recognized as the principle of meat smoking, wood-tar creosote became used as a replacement for the process. Several methods were used to apply the creosote. One was to dip the meat in pyroligneous acid or a water of diluted creosote, as Reichenbach did, or brush it over with them, and within one hour the meat would have the same quality as that of traditionally smoked preparations. Sometimes the creosote was diluted in vinegar rather than water, as vinegar was also used as a preservative. Another was to place the meat in a closed box, and place with it a few drops of creosote in a small bottle. Because of the volatility of the creosote, the atmosphere was filled with a vapour containing it, and it would cover the flesh.\nThe application of wood tar to seagoing vessels was practiced through the 18th century and early 19th century, before the creosote was isolated as a compound. Wood-tar creosote was found not to be as effective in wood treatments, because it was harder to infuse the creosote into the wood cells, but still experiments were done, including by many governments, because it proved to be less expensive on the market.\nMedical.\nEven before creosote as a chemical compound was discovered, it was the chief active component of medicinal remedies in different cultures around the world.\nIn antiquity, pitches and resins were used commonly as medicines. Pliny mentions a variety of tar-like substances being used as medicine, including \"cedria\" and \"pissinum\". \"Cedria\" was the pitch and resin of the cedar tree, being equivalent to the oil of tar and pyroligneous acid which are used in the first stage of distilling creosote. He recommends cedria to ease the pain in a toothache, as an injection in the ear in case of hardness of hearing, to kill parasitic worms, as a preventive for infusion, as a treatment for phthiriasis and porrigo, as an antidote for the poison of the sea hare, as a liniment for elephantiasis, and as an ointment to treat ulcers both on the skin and in the lungs. He further speaks of cedria being used as the embalming agent for preparing mummies. \"Pissinum\" was a tar water that was made by boiling cedria, spreading wool fleeces over the vessels to catch the steam, and then wringing them out.\nThe \"Pharmacop\u00e9e de Lyon\", published in 1778, says that cedar tree oil is believed to cure vomiting and help medicate tumors and ulcers. Physicians contemporary to the discovery of creosote recommended ointments and pills made from tar or pitch to treat skin diseases. Tar water had been used as a folk remedy since the Middle Ages to treat affections like dyspepsia. Bishop Berkeley wrote several works on the medical virtues of tar water, including a philosophical work in 1744 titled \"Siris: a chain of philosophical reflexions and inquiries concerning the virtues of tar water, and divers other subjects connected together and arising one from another\", and a poem where he praised its virtues. Pyroligneous acid was also used at the time in a medicinal water called \"Aqua Binelli\" (Binelli's water), a compound which its inventor, the Italian Fedele Binelli, claimed to have hemostatic properties in his research published in 1797. These claims have since been disproven.\nGiven this history, and the antiseptic properties known to creosote, it became popular among physicians in the 19th century. A dilution of creosote in water was sold in pharmacies as \"Aqua creosoti\", as suggested by the previous use of pyroligneous acid. It was prescribed to quell the irritability of the stomach and bowels and detoxify, treat ulcers and abscesses, neutralize bad odors, and stimulate the mucous tissues of the mouth and throat. Creosote in general was listed as an irritant, styptic, antiseptic, narcotic, and diuretic, and in small doses when taken internally as a sedative and anaesthetic. It was used to treat ulcers, and as a way to sterilize the tooth and deaden the pain in case of a tooth-ache.\nCreosote was suggested as a treatment for tuberculosis by Reichenbach as early as 1833. Following Reichenbach, it was argued for by John Elliotson and Sir John Rose Cormack. Elliotson, inspired by the use of creosote to arrest vomiting during an outbreak of cholera, suggested its use for tuberculosis through inhalation. He also suggested it for epilepsy, neuralgia, diabetes, and chronic glanders. The idea of using it for tuberculosis failed to be accepted. Use for this purpose was dropped, until the idea was revived in 1876 by British doctor G. Anderson Imlay, who suggested it be applied locally by spray to the bronchial mucous membrane. This was followed up in 1877 when it was argued for in a clinical paper by Charles Bouchard and Henri Gimbert. Germ theory had been established by Pasteur in 1860, and Bouchard, arguing that a bacillus was responsible for the disease, sought to rehabilitate creosote for its use as an antiseptic to treat it. He began a series of trials with Gimbert to convince the scientific community, and claimed a promising cure rate. A number of publications in Germany confirmed his results in the following years.\nLater, a period of experimentation with different techniques and chemicals using creosote in treating tuberculosis lasted until about 1910, when radiation therapy seemed more promising. Guaiacol, instead of a full creosote solution, was suggested by Hermann Sahli in 1887. He argued it had the active chemical of creosote and had the advantage of being of definite composition and having a less unpleasant taste and odor. A number of solutions of both creosote and guaiacol appeared on the market, such as \"phosphotal\" and \"guaicophosphal\", phosphites of creosote and guaiacol; \"eosot\" and \"geosot\", valerinates of creosote and guaicol; \"phosot\" and \"taphosot\", phosphate and tannophospate of creosote; and \"creosotal\" and \"tanosal\", tannates of creosote. Creosote and eucalyptus oil were also a remedy used together, administered through a vaporizor and inhaler. Since then, more effective and safer treatments for tuberculosis have been developed.\nIn the 1940s, Canadian-based Eldon Boyd experimented with guaiacol and a recent synthetic modification\u2014glycerol guaiacolate (guaifenesin)\u2014on animals. His data showed that both drugs were effective in increasing secretions into the airways in laboratory animals, when high-enough doses were given.\nCurrent uses.\nIndustrial.\nWood-tar creosote is to some extent used for wood preservation, but it is generally mixed with coal-tar creosote, since the former is not as effective. Commercially available preparations of \"liquid smoke\", marketed to add a smoked flavour to meat and aid as a preservative, consist primarily of creosote and other constituents of smoke. Creosote is the ingredient that gives liquid smoke its function; guaicol lends to the taste and the creosote oils help act as the preservative. Creosote can be destroyed by treatment with chlorine, either sodium hypochlorite, or calcium hypochlorite solutions . The phenol ring is essentially opened, and the molecule is then subject to normal digestion and normal respiration.\nMedical.\nThe guaifenesin developed by Eldon Boyd is still commonly used today as an expectorant, sold over the counter, and usually taken by mouth to assist the bringing up of phlegm from the airways in acute respiratory tract infections. Guaifenesin is a component of Mucinex, Robitussin DAC, Cheratussin DAC, Robitussin AC, Cheratussin AC, Benylin, DayQuil Mucous Control, Meltus, and Bidex 400.\nSeirogan is a popular Kampo medicine in Japan, used as an anti-diarrheal, and has 133\u00a0mg wood creosote from beech, pine, maple or oak wood per adult dose as its primary ingredient. Seirogan was first used as a gastrointestinal medication by the Imperial Japanese Army in Russia during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 to 1905.\nCreomulsion is a cough medicine in the United States, introduced in 1925, that is still sold and contains beechwood creosote. Beechwood creosote is also found under the name \"kreosotum\" or \"kreosote\".\nCoal-tar creosote.\nCoal-tar creosote is greenish-brown liquid, with different degrees of darkness, viscosity, and fluorescence depending on how it is made. When freshly made, the creosote is a yellow oil with a greenish cast and highly fluorescent, and the fluorescence is increased by exposure to air and light. After settling, the oil is dark green by reflected light and dark red by transmitted light. To the naked eye, it generally appears brown. The creosote (often called \"creosote oil\") consists almost wholly of aromatic hydrocarbons, with some amount of bases and acids and other neutral oils. The flash point is 70\u201375\u00a0\u00b0C and burning point is 90\u2013100\u00a0\u00b0C, and when burned it releases a greenish smoke. The smell largely depends on the naphtha content in the creosote. If there is a high amount, it will have a naphtha-like smell, otherwise it will smell more of tar.\nIn the process of coal-tar distillation, the distillate is collected into four fractions; the \"light oil\", which remains lighter than water, the \"middle oil\" which passes over when the light oil is removed; the \"heavy oil\", which sinks; and the \"anthracene oil\", which when cold is mostly solid and greasy, of a buttery consistence. Creosote refers to the portion of coal tar which distills as \"heavy oil\", typically between 230 and 270\u00a0\u00b0C, also called \"dead oil\"; it sinks into water but still is fairly liquid. Carbolic acid is produced in the second fraction of distillation and is often distilled into what is referred to as \"carbolic oil\".\nCommercial creosote contains substances from six groups. The two groups occur in the greatest amounts and are the products of the distillation process\u2014the \"tar acids\", which distill below 205\u00a0\u00b0C and consist mainly of phenols, cresols, and xylenols, including carbolic acid\u2014and aromatic hydrocarbons, which divide into naphthalenes, which distill approximately between 205 and 255\u00a0\u00b0C, and constituents of an anthracene nature, which distill above 255\u00a0\u00b0C. The quantity of each varies based on the quality of tar and temperatures used, but generally, the tar acids won't exceed 5%, the naphthalenes make up 15 to 50%, and the anthracenes make up 45% to 70%. The hydrocarbons are mainly aromatic; derivatives of benzene and related cyclic compounds such as naphthalene, anthracene, phenanthrene, acenaphthene, and fluorene. Creosotes from vertical-retort and low temperature tars contain, in addition, some paraffinic and olefinic hydrocarbons. The tar-acid content also depends on the source of the tar\u2014it may be less than 3% in creosote from coke-oven tar and as high as 32% in creosote from vertical retort tar. All of these have antiseptic properties. The tar acids are the strongest antiseptics but have the highest degree of solubility in water and are the most volatile; so, like with wood-tar creosote, phenols are not the most valued component, as by themselves they would lend to being poor preservatives. In addition, creosote contains several products naturally occurring in coal\u2014nitrogen-containing heterocycles, such as acridines, carbazoles, and quinolines, referred to as the \"tar bases\" and generally make up about 3% of the creosote\u2014sulfur-containing heterocycles, generally benzothiophenes\u2014and oxygen-containing heterocycles, dibenzofurans. Lastly, creosote contains a small number of aromatic amines produced by the other substances during the distillation process and likely resulting from a combination of thermolysis and hydrogenation. The tar bases are often extracted by washing the creosote with aqueous mineral acid, although they're also suggested to have antiseptic ability similar to the tar acids.\nCommercially used creosote is often treated to extract the carbolic acid, naphthalene, or anthracene content. The carbolic acid or naphthalene is generally extracted to be used in other commercial products. In the early 20th century, American-produced creosote oils typically had low amounts of anthracene and high amounts of naphthalene, because when forcing the distillate at a temperature that produces anthracene the soft pitch will be ruined and only the hard pitch will remain; this ruined it for use in roofing purposes (which was common before widespread availability of cheap oil bitumen) and only left a product which wasn't commercially useful.\nHistorical uses.\nIndustrial.\nThe use of coal-tar creosote on a commercial scale began in 1838, when a patent covering the use of creosote oil to treat timber was taken out by inventor John Bethell. The \"Bethell process\"\u2014or as it later became known, the full-cell process\u2014involves placing wood to be treated in a sealed chamber and applying a vacuum to remove air and moisture from wood \"cells\". The wood is then pressure-treated to imbue it with creosote or other preservative chemicals, after which vacuum is reapplied to separate the excess treatment chemicals from the timber. Alongside the zinc chloride-based \"Burnett process\", use of creosoted wood prepared by the Bethell process became a principal way of preserving railway timbers (most notably railway sleepers) to increase the lifespan of the timbers, and avoiding having to regularly replace them.\nBesides treating wood, it was also used for lighting and fuel. In the beginning, it was only used for lighting needed in harbour and outdoor work, where the smoke that was produced from burning it was of little inconvenience. By 1879, lamps had been created that ensured a more complete combustion by using compressed air, removing the drawback of the smoke. Creosote was also processed into gas and used for lighting that way. As a fuel, it was used to power ships at sea and blast furnaces for different industrial needs, once it was discovered to be more efficient than unrefined coal or wood. It was also used industrially for the softening of hard pitch, and burned to produce lamp black. By 1890, the production of creosote in the United Kingdom totaled approximately 29,900,000 gallons per year.\nIn 1854, Alexander McDougall and Robert Angus Smith developed and patented a product called McDougall's Powder as a sewer deodorant; it mainly consisted of carbolic acid derived from creosote. McDougall, in 1864, experimented with his solution to remove entozoa parasites from cattle pasturing on a sewage farm. This later led to widespread use of creosote as a cattle wash and sheep dip. External parasites would be killed in a creosote diluted dip, and drenching tubes would be used to administer doses to the animals' stomachs to kill internal parasites.\nCreosoted wood blocks were a common road-paving material in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but ultimately fell out of favor because they did not generally hold up well enough over time.\nTwo later methods for creosoting wood were introduced after the turn of the century, referred to as empty-cell processes, because they involve compressing the air inside the wood so that the preservative can only coat the inner cell walls rather than saturating the interior cell voids. This is a less effective, though usually satisfactory, method of treating the wood, but is used because it requires less of the creosoting material. The first method, the \"R\u00fcping process\" was patented in 1902, and the second, the \"Lowry process\" was patented in 1906. Later in 1906, the \"Allardyce process\" and \"Card process\" were patented to treat wood with a combination of both creosote and zinc chloride. In 1912, it was estimated that a total of 150,000,000 gallons were produced in the US per year.\nMedical.\nCoal-tar creosote, despite its toxicity, was used as a stimulant and escharotic, as a caustic agent used to treat ulcers and malignancies, cauterize wounds, and prevent infection and decay. It was particularly used in dentistry to destroy tissues and arrest necrosis.\nCurrent uses.\nIndustrial.\nCoal-tar creosote is the most widely used wood treatment today; both industrially, processed into wood using pressure methods such as \"full-cell process\" or \"empty-cell process\", and more commonly applied to wood through brushing. In addition to toxicity to fungi, insects, and marine borers, it serves as a natural water repellent. It is commonly used to preserve and waterproof railroad ties, pilings, telephone poles, power line poles, marine pilings, and fence posts. Although suitable for use in preserving the structural timbers of buildings, it is not generally used that way because it is difficult to apply. There are also concerns about the environmental impact of the leaching of creosote into aquatic ecosystems.\nDue to its carcinogenic character, the European Union has regulated the quality of creosote for the EU market and requires that the sale of creosote be limited to professional users. The United States Environmental Protection Agency regulates the use of coal-tar creosote as a wood preservative under the provisions of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act. Creosote is considered a restricted-use pesticide and is only available to licensed pesticide applicators.\nOil-tar creosote.\nOil-tar creosote is derived from the tar that forms when using petroleum or shale oil in the manufacturing of gas. The distillation of the tar from the oil occurs at very high temperatures; around 980\u00a0\u00b0C. The tar forms at the same time as the gas, and once processed for creosotes contains a high percentage of cyclic hydrocarbons, a very low amount of tar acids and tar bases, and no true anthracenes have been identified. Historically, this has mainly been produced in the United States on the Pacific coast, where petroleum has been more abundant than coal. Limited quantities have been used industrially, either alone, mixed with coal-tar creosote, or fortified with pentachlorophenol.\nWater-gas-tar creosote.\nWater-gas-tar creosote is also derived from petroleum oil or shale oil, but by a different process; it is distilled during the production of water gas. The tar is a by-product resulting from enrichment of water gas with gases produced by thermal decomposition of petroleum. Of the creosotes derived from oil, it is practically the only one used for wood preservation. It has the same degree of solubility as coal-tar creosote and is easy to infuse into wood. Like standard oil-tar creosote, it has a low amount of tar acids and tar bases, and has less antiseptic qualities. Petri dish tests have shown that water-gas-tar creosote is one-sixth as anti-septically effective as that of coal-tar.\nLignite-tar creosote.\nLignite-tar creosote is produced from lignite rather than bituminous coal, and varies considerably from coal-tar creosote. Also called \"lignite oil\", it has a very high content of tar acids, and has been used to increase the tar acids in normal creosote when necessary. When it has been produced, it has generally been applied in mixtures with coal-tar creosote or petroleum. Its effectiveness when used alone has not been established. In an experiment with southern yellow pine fence posts in Mississippi, straight lignite-tar creosote was giving good results after about 27 years exposure, although not as good as the standard coal-tar creosote used in the same situation.\nPeat-tar creosote.\nThere have also been attempts to distill creosote from peat-tar, although mostly unsuccessful due to the problems with winning and drying peat on an industrial scale. Peat tar by itself has in the past been used as a wood preservative.\nHealth effects.\nAccording to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), eating food or drinking water contaminated with high levels of coal-tar creosote may cause a burning in the mouth and throat, and stomach pains. ATSDR also states that brief direct contact with large amounts of coal-tar creosote may result in a rash or severe irritation of the skin, chemical burns of the surfaces of the eyes, convulsions and mental confusion, kidney or liver problems, unconsciousness, and even death. Longer direct skin contact with low levels of creosote mixtures or their vapours can result in increased light sensitivity, damage to the cornea, and skin damage. Longer exposure to creosote vapours can cause irritation of the respiratory tract.\nThe International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has determined that coal-tar creosote is probably carcinogenic to humans, based on adequate animal evidence and limited human evidence. The animal testing relied upon by IARC involved the continuous application of creosote to the shaved skin of rodents. After weeks of creosote application, the animals developed cancerous skin lesions and in one test, lesions of the lung. The United States Environmental Protection Agency has stated that coal-tar creosote is a probable human carcinogen based on both human and animal studies. As a result, the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set a permissible exposure limit of 0.2 milligrams of coal-tar creosote per cubic meter of air (0.2\u00a0mg/m3) in the workplace during an 8-hour day, and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requires that spills or accidental releases into the environment of one pound (0.454\u00a0kg) or more of creosote be reported to them.\nThere is no unique exposure pathway of children to creosote. Children exposed to creosote probably experience the same health effects seen in adults exposed to creosote. It is unknown whether children differ from adults in their susceptibility to health effects from creosote.\nA 2005 mortality study of creosote workers found no evidence supporting an increased risk of cancer death, as a result of exposure to creosote. Based on the findings of the largest mortality study to date of workers employed in creosote wood treating plants, there is no evidence that employment at creosote wood-treating plants or exposure to creosote-based preservatives was associated with any significant mortality increase from either site-specific cancers or non-malignant diseases. The study consisted of 2,179 employees at eleven plants in the United States where wood was treated with creosote preservatives. Some workers began work in the 1940s to 1950s. The observation period of the study covered 1979\u20132001. The average length of employment was 12.5 years. One third of the study subjects were employed for over 15 years.\nThe largest health effect of creosote is deaths caused by residential chimney fires due to chimney tar (creosote) build-up. This is entirely unconnected with its industrial production or use.\nBuild-up in chimneys.\nBurning wood and fossil fuels in the absence of adequate airflow (such as in an enclosed furnace or stove), causes incomplete combustion of the oils in the wood, which are off-gassed as volatiles in the smoke. As the smoke rises through the chimney it cools, causing water, carbon, and volatiles to condense on the interior surfaces of the chimney flue. The black oily residue that builds up is referred to as creosote, which is similar in composition to the commercial products by the same name, but with a higher content of carbon black.\nOver the course of a season creosote deposits can become several inches thick. This creates a compounding problem, because the creosote deposits reduce the draft (airflow through the chimney) which increases the probability that the wood fire is not getting enough air for complete combustion. Since creosote is highly combustible, a thick accumulation creates a fire hazard. If a hot fire is built in the stove or fireplace, and the air control left wide open, this may allow hot oxygen into the chimney where it comes in contact with the creosote which then ignites\u2014causing a chimney fire. Chimney fires often spread to the main building because the chimney gets so hot that it ignites any combustible material in direct contact with it, such as wood. The fire can also spread to the main building from sparks emitting from the chimney and landing on combustible roof surfaces. In order to properly maintain chimneys and heaters that burn wood or carbon-based fuels, the creosote buildup must be removed. Chimney sweeps perform this service for a fee.\nRelease into environment.\nEven though creosote is pressurized into the wood, the release of the chemical \u2013 and resulting marine pollution \u2013 occurs due to many different events: During the lifetime of the marine piling, weathering occurs from tides and water flow which slowly opens the oily outer coating and exposes the smaller internal pores to more water flow. Frequent weathering occurs daily, but more severe weather, such as hurricanes, can cause damage or loosening of the wooden pilings. Many pilings are either broken into pieces from debris, or are completely washed away during these storms. When the pilings are washed away, they come to settle on the bottom of the body of water where they reside, and then they leach chemicals into the water slowly over a long period of time. This long-term secretion is not normally noticed because the piling is submerged beneath the surface, hidden from sight.\nThe creosote is mostly insoluble in water, but the lower-molecular-weight compounds will become soluble the longer the broken wood is exposed to the water. In this case, some of the chemicals become water-soluble and further leach into the aquatic sediment while the rest of the insoluble chemicals remain together in a tar-like substance. Another source of damage comes from wood-boring fauna, such as shipworms and \"Limnoria\". Though creosote is used as a pesticide preservative, studies have shown that Limnoria is resistant to wood preservative pesticides and can cause small holes in the wood, through which creosote can then be released.\nChemical reactions with sediment and organisms.\nOnce the soluble compounds from the creosote preservative leach into the water, the compounds begin reacting with the external environment or are consumed by organisms. The reactions vary depending on the concentration of each compound that is released from the creosote, but major reactions are outlined below:\nAlkylation.\nAlkylation occurs when a molecule replaces a hydrogen atom with an alkyl group that generally comes from an organic molecule. Alkyl groups that are found naturally occurring in the environment are organometallic compounds. Organometallic compounds generally contain a methyl, ethyl, or butyl derivative which is the alkyl group that replaces the hydrogen. Other organic compounds, such as methanol, can provide alkyl groups for alkylation. Methanol is found naturally in the environment in small concentrations, and has been linked to the release from biological decomposition of waste and even a byproduct of vegetation. The following reactions are alkylations of soluble compounds found in creosote preservatives with methanol.\nm-Cresol.\nThe diagram above depicts a reaction between m-cresol and methanol where a c-alkylation product is produced. The c-alkylation reaction means that instead of replacing the hydrogen atom on the -OH group, the methyl group (from the methanol) replaces the hydrogen on a carbon in the benzene ring. The products of this c-alkylation can be in either a para- or ortho- orientation on the molecule, as seen in the diagram, and water, which is not shown. Isomers of the dimethylphenol (DMP) compound are the products of the para- and ortho-c-alkylation. Dimethylphenol (DMP) compound is listed as an aquatic hazard by characteristic, and is toxic with long lasting effects.\nPhenol.\nThis diagram shows an o-alkylation between phenol and methanol. Unlike the c-alkylation, the o-alkylation replaces the hydrogen atom on the -OH group with the methyl group (from the methanol). The product of the o-alkylation is methoxybenzene, better-known as anisole, and water, which is not shown in the diagram. Anisole is listed as an acute hazard to aquatic life with long-term effects.\nBioaccumulation.\nBioaccumulation is the process by which an organism takes in chemicals through ingestion, exposure, and inhalation. Bioaccumulation is broken down into bioconcentration (uptake of chemicals from the environment) and biomagnification (increasing concentration of chemicals as they move up the food chain). Certain species of aquatic organisms are affected differently from the chemicals released from creosote preservatives. One of the more studied organisms is a mollusk. Mollusks attach to the wooden, marine pilings and are in direct contact with the creosote preservatives. Many studies have been conducted using polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), which are low molecular hydrocarbons found in some creosote-based preservatives. In a study conducted from Pensacola, Florida, a group of native mollusks were kept in a controlled environment, and a different group of native mollusks were kept in an environment contaminated with creosote preservatives. The mollusks in the contaminated environment were shown to have a bioaccumulation of up to ten times the concentration of PAH than the control species. The intake of organisms is dependent on whether the compound is in an ionized or an un-ionized form. To determine whether the compound is ionized or un-ionized, the pH of the surrounding environment must be compared to the pKa or acidity constant of the compound. If the pH of the environment is lower than the pKa, then the compound is un-ionized which means that the compound will behave as if it is non-polar. Bioaccumulation for un-ionized compounds comes from partitioning equilibrium between the aqueous phase and the lipids in the organism. If the pH is higher than the pKa, then the compound is considered to be in the ionized form. The un-ionized form is favored because the bioaccumulation is easier for the organism to intake through partitioning equilibrium. The table below shows a list of pKas from compounds found in creosote preservatives and compares them to the average pH of seawater (reported to be 8.1).\nEach of the compounds in the table above is found in creosote preservatives; all are in the favored un-ionized form. In another study, various species of small fish were tested to see how the exposure time to PAH chemicals affected the fish. This study showed that an exposure time of 24\u201396 hours on various shrimp and fish species affected the growth, reproduction, and survival functions of the organisms for most of the compounds tested.\nBiodegradation.\nIt can be seen in some studies that biodegradation accounts for the absence of creosote preservatives on the initial surface of the sediment. In a study from Pensacola, Florida, PAHs were not detected on the surface on the aquatic sediment, but the highest concentrations were detected at a depth of 8-13 centimeters. A form an anaerobic biodegradation of m-cresol was seen in a study using sulfate-reducing and nitrate-reducing enriched environments. The reduction of m-cresol in this study was seen in under 144 hours, while additional chemical intermediates were being formed. The chemical intermediates were formed in the presence of bicarbonate. The products included 4-hydroxy-2-methylbenzoic acid and acetate compounds. Although the conditions were enriched with the reducing anaerobic compounds, sulfate and nitrate reducing bacteria are commonly found in the environment. For further information, see sulfate-reducing bacteria. The type of anaerobic bacteria ultimately determines the reduction of the creosote preservative compounds, while each individual compound may only go through reduction under certain conditions. BTEX is a mixture of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene, that was studied in the presence of four different anaerobic-enriched sediments. Though the compound, BTEX, is not found in creosote preservatives, the products of creosote preservatives' oxidation-reduction reactions include some of these compounds. For oxidation-reduction reactions, see the following section. In this study, it was seen that certain compounds such as benzene were only reduced under sulfate-enriched environments, while toluene was reduced under a variety of bacteria-enriched environments, not just sulfate. The biodegradation of a creosote preservative in an anaerobic enrichment depends not only on the type of bacteria enriching the environment, but also the compound that has been released from the preservative. In aerobic environments, preservative compounds are limited in the biodegradation process by the presence of free oxygen. In an aerobic environment, free oxygen comes from oxygen saturated sediments, sources of precipitation, and plume edges. The free oxygen allows for the compounds to be oxidized and decomposed into new intermediate compounds. Studies have shown that when BTEX and PAH compounds were placed in aerobic environments, the oxidation of the ring structures caused cleavage in the aromatic ring and allowed for other functional groups to attach. When an aromatic hydrocarbon was introduced to the molecular oxygen in experimental conditions, a dihydrodiol intermediate was formed, and then oxidation occurred transforming the aromatic into a catechol compound. Catechol allows for cleavage of the aromatic ring to occur, where functional groups can then add in an ortho- or meta- position.\nOxidation-reduction.\nEven though many studies conduct testing under experimental or enriched conditions, oxidation-reduction reactions occur naturally and allow for chemicals to go through processes such as biodegradation, outlined above. Oxidation is defined as the loss of an electron to another species, while reduction is the gaining of an electron from another species. As compounds go through oxidation and reduction in sediments, the preservative compounds are altered to form new chemicals, leading to decomposition. An example of the oxidation of p-cresol and phenol can be seen in the figures below:\np-Cresol.\nThis reaction shows the oxidation of p-cresol in a sulfate-enriched environment. P-cresol was seen to be the easiest to degrade through the sulfate-enriched environment, while m-cresol and o-cresol where inhibited. In the chart above, p-cresol was oxidized under an anaerobic sulfate reducing condition and formed four different intermediates. After the formation of the intermediates, the study reported further degradation of the intermediates leading to the production of carbon dioxide and methane. The p-hydroxylbenzyl alcohol, p-hydroxylbenzaldehye, p-hyrdoxylbenzoate, and benzoate intermediates all are produced from this oxidation and released into the sediments. Similar results were also produced by different studies using other forms of oxidation such as: iron-reducing organisms, Copper/Manganese Oxide catalyst, and nitrate- reducing conditions.\nPhenol.\nThis reaction shows the oxidation of phenol by iron and peroxide. This combination of iron, which comes from iron oxide in the sediment, and the peroxide, commonly released by animals and plants into the environment, is known as the Fenton Reagent. This reagent is used to oxidize phenol groups by the use of a radical hydroxide group produced from the peroxide in the p-benzoquinone. This product of phenol's oxidation is now leached into the environment while other products include iron(II) and water. P-benzoquinone is listed as being a very toxic, acute environmental hazard.\nEnvironmental hazards.\nSediment.\nIn aquatic sediments, several reactions can transform the chemicals released by the creosote preservatives into more dangerous chemicals. Most creosote preservative compounds have hazards associated with them before they are transformed. Cresol (m-, p-, and o-), phenol, guaiacol, and xylenol (1,3,4- and 1,3,5-) all are acute aquatic hazards prior to going through chemical reactions with the sediments. Alkylation reactions allows for the compounds to transition into more toxic compounds with the addition of R-groups to the major compounds found in creosote preservatives. Compounds formed through alkylation include: 3,4-dimethylphenol, 2,3-dimethylphenol, and 2,5-dimethylphenol, which are all listed as acute environmental hazards. Biodegradation controls the rate at which the sediment holds the chemicals, and the number of reactions that are able to take place. The biodegradation process can take place under many different conditions, and vary depending on the compounds that are released. Oxidation-reduction reactions allow for the compounds to be broken down into new forms of more toxic molecules. Studies have shown oxidation-reduction reactions of creosote preservative compounds included compounds that are listed as environmental hazards, such as p-benzoquinone in the oxidation of phenol. Not only are the initial compounds in creosote hazardous to the environment, but the byproducts of the chemical reactions are environmental hazardous as well.\nOther.\nFrom the contamination of the sediment, more of the ecosystem is affected. Organisms in the sediment are now exposed to the new chemicals. Organisms are then ingested by fish and other aquatic animals. These animals now contain concentrations of hazardous chemicals which were secreted from the creosote. Other issues with ecosystems include bioaccumulation. Bioaccumulation occurs when high levels of chemicals are passed to aquatic life near the creosote pilings. Mollusks and other smaller crustaceans are at higher risk because they are directly attached to the surface of wood pilings that are filled with creosote preservative. Studies show that mollusks in these environments take on high concentrations of chemical compounds which will then be transferred through the ecosystem's food chain. Bioaccumulation contributes to the higher concentrations of chemicals within the organisms in the aquatic ecosystems.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69055", "revid": "43", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69055", "title": "Poker bluff", "text": ""}
{"id": "69056", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69056", "title": "Shi hao", "text": ""}
{"id": "69058", "revid": "48576020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69058", "title": "List of countries and dependencies by population", "text": "This is a list of countries and dependencies by population. It includes sovereign states, inhabited dependent territories and, in some cases, constituent countries of sovereign states, with inclusion within the list being primarily based on the ISO standard ISO 3166-1. For instance, the United Kingdom is considered a single entity, while the constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands are considered separately. In addition, this list includes certain states with limited recognition not found in ISO 3166-1. Also given in a percentage is each country's population compared with the world population, which the United Nations estimated at 8.232 billion as of 2025.\nMethod.\nFigures used in this chart are based on the most up-to-date estimates or projections by the national census authority, where available, and are usually rounded off.\nWhere updated national data are not available, figures are based on the estimates or projections for 2024 by the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.\nBecause the compiled figures are not collected at the same time in every country, or at the same level of accuracy, the resulting numerical comparisons may create misleading conclusions. Furthermore, the addition of figures from all countries may not equal the world total.\nAreas that form integral parts of sovereign states, such as the countries of the United Kingdom, are counted as part of the sovereign states concerned. Not included are other entities that are not sovereign states, such as the European Union, and independent territories that do not have permanent populations, such as the Chagos Archipelago and various countries' claims to Antarctica.\nSovereign states and dependencies by population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNote: A numbered rank is assigned to the 193 member states of the United Nations, plus the two observer states to the United Nations General Assembly. Dependent territories and constituent countries that are parts of sovereign states are not assigned a numbered rank. In addition, sovereign states with limited recognition are included, but not assigned a number rank.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69059", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69059", "title": "PC clone", "text": ""}
{"id": "69060", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69060", "title": "Hydroelectric", "text": ""}
{"id": "69061", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69061", "title": "United States of America/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "69062", "revid": "147617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69062", "title": "Amalgams", "text": ""}
{"id": "69066", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69066", "title": "US Census", "text": ""}
{"id": "69079", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69079", "title": "Ammonium", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nAmmonium is a modified form of ammonia that has an extra hydrogen atom. It is a positively charged (cationic) molecular ion with the chemical formula or . It is formed by the addition of a proton (a hydrogen nucleus) to ammonia (). Ammonium is also a general name for positively charged (protonated) substituted amines and quaternary ammonium cations (), where one or more hydrogen atoms are replaced by organic or other groups (indicated by R). Not only is ammonium a source of nitrogen and a key metabolite for many living organisms, but it is an integral part of the global nitrogen cycle. As such, human impact in recent years could have an effect on the biological communities that depend on it.\nAcid\u2013base properties.\nThe ammonium ion is generated when ammonia, a weak base, reacts with Br\u00f8nsted acids (proton donors):\nThe ammonium ion is mildly acidic, reacting with Br\u00f8nsted bases to return to the uncharged ammonia molecule:\nThus, the treatment of concentrated solutions of ammonium salts with a strong base gives ammonia. When ammonia is dissolved in water, a tiny amount of it converts to ammonium ions:\nThe degree to which ammonia forms the ammonium ion depends on the pH of the solution. If the pH is low, the equilibrium shifts to the right: more ammonia molecules are converted into ammonium ions. If the pH is high (the concentration of hydrogen ions is low and hydroxide ions is high), the equilibrium shifts to the left: the hydroxide ion abstracts a proton from the ammonium ion, generating ammonia.\nFormation of ammonium compounds can also occur in the vapor phase; for example, when ammonia vapor comes in contact with hydrogen chloride vapor, a white cloud of ammonium chloride forms, which eventually settles out as a solid in a thin white layer on surfaces.\nSalts and characteristic reactions.\nAmmonium cation is found in a variety of salts such as ammonium carbonate, ammonium chloride, and ammonium nitrate. Most simple ammonium salts are very soluble in water. An exception is ammonium hexachloroplatinate, the formation of which was once used as a test for ammonium. The ammonium salts of nitrate and especially perchlorate are highly explosive, in these cases, ammonium is the reducing agent.\nIn an unusual process, ammonium ions form an amalgam. Such species are prepared by the addition of sodium amalgam to a solution of ammonium chloride. This amalgam eventually decomposes to release ammonia and hydrogen.\nTo find whether the ammonium ion is present in the salt, first, the salt is heated in presence of alkali hydroxide releasing a gas with a characteristic smell, which is ammonia.\n \"heat\"\u2192 \nTo further confirm ammonia, it is passed through a glass rod dipped in an solution (hydrochloric acid), creating white dense fumes of ammonium chloride.\nAmmonia, when passed through (copper(II) sulfate) solution, changes its color from blue to deep blue, forming Schweizer's reagent.\nAmmonia or ammonium ion when added to Nessler's reagent gives a brown color precipitate known as the iodide of Million's base in basic medium.\nAmmonium ion when added to chloroplatinic acid gives a yellow precipitate of ammonium hexachloroplatinate(IV).\nAmmonium ion when added to sodium cobaltinitrite gives a yellow precipitate of ammonium cobaltinitrite.\nAmmonium ion gives a white precipitate of ammonium bitartrate when added to potassium bitartrate.\nStructure and bonding.\nThe lone electron pair on the nitrogen atom (N) in ammonia, represented as a line above the N, forms a coordinate bond with a proton (). After that, all four bonds are equivalent, being polar covalent bonds. The ion has a tetrahedral structure and is isoelectronic with methane and the borohydride anion. In terms of size, the ammonium cation (\"r\"ionic\u00a0=\u00a0175\u00a0pm) resembles the caesium cation (\"r\"ionic\u00a0=\u00a0183\u00a0pm).\nOrganic ions.\nThe hydrogen atoms in the ammonium ion can be substituted with an alkyl group or some other organic group to form a substituted ammonium ion (IUPAC nomenclature: aminium ion). Depending on the number of organic groups, the ammonium cation is called a primary, secondary, tertiary, or quaternary. Except the quaternary ammonium cations, the organic ammonium cations are weak acids.\nAn example of a reaction forming an ammonium ion is that between dimethylamine, , and an acid to give the dimethylammonium cation, :\nQuaternary ammonium cations have four organic groups attached to the nitrogen atom, they lack a hydrogen atom bonded to the nitrogen atom. These cations, such as the tetra-\"n\"-butylammonium cation, are sometimes used to replace sodium or potassium ions to increase the solubility of the associated anion in organic solvents. Primary, secondary, and tertiary ammonium salts serve the same function but are less lipophilic. They are also used as phase-transfer catalysts and surfactants.\nAn unusual class of organic ammonium salts is derivatives of amine radical cations, such as tris(4-bromophenyl)ammoniumyl hexachloroantimonate.\nBiology.\nBecause nitrogen often limits net primary production due to its use in enzymes that mediate the biochemical reactions that are necessary for life, ammonium is utilized by some microbes and plants. For example, energy is released by the oxidation of ammonium in a process known as nitrification, which produces nitrate and nitrite. This process is a form of autotrophy that is common amongst \"Nitrosomonas\", \"Nitrobacter\", \"Nitrosolobus\", and \"Nitrosospira\", amongst others.\nThe amount of ammonium in soil that is available for nitrification by microbes varies depending on environmental conditions. For example, ammonium is deposited as a waste product from some animals, although it is converted into urea in mammals, sharks, and amphibians, and into uric acid in birds, reptiles, and terrestrial snails. Its availability in soils is also influenced by mineralization, which makes more ammonium available from organic nitrogen sources, and immobilization, which sequesters ammonium into organic nitrogen sources, both of which are mitigated by biological factors.\nConversely, nitrate and nitrite can be reduced to ammonium as a way for living organisms to access nitrogen for growth in a process known as assimilatory nitrate reduction. Once assimilated, it can be incorporated into proteins and DNA.\nAmmonium can accumulate in soils where nitrification is slow or inhibited, which is common in hypoxic soils. For example, ammonium mobilization is one of the key factors for the symbiotic association between plants and fungi, called mycorrhizae. However, plants that consistently utilize ammonium as a nitrogen source often must invest into more extensive root systems due to ammonium's limited mobility in soils compared to other nitrogen sources.\nHuman impact.\nAmmonium deposition from the atmosphere has increased in recent years due to volatilization from livestock waste and increased fertilizer use. Because net primary production is often limited by nitrogen, increased ammonium levels could impact the biological communities that rely on it. For example, increasing nitrogen content has been shown to increase plant growth, but aggravate soil phosphorus levels, which can impact microbial communities.\nMetal.\nThe ammonium cation has very similar properties to the heavier alkali metal cations and is often considered a close equivalent. Ammonium is expected to behave as a metal ( ions in a sea of electrons) at very high pressures, such as inside giant planets such as Uranus and Neptune.\nUnder normal conditions, ammonium does not exist as a pure metal but does as an amalgam (alloy with mercury).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69080", "revid": "13668448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69080", "title": "Royal Canadian Mounted Police", "text": "Federal police service of Canada\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP; , GRC) is the national police service of Canada. The RCMP is an agency of the Government of Canada; it also provides police services under contract to 11 provinces and territories (all but Ontario and Quebec), over 150 municipalities, and 600 Indigenous communities. The RCMP is commonly known as the Mounties in English (and colloquially in French as ).\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police was established in 1920 with the amalgamation of the Royal North-West Mounted Police and the Dominion Police. Sworn members of the RCMP have jurisdiction as peace officers in all provinces and territories of Canada. Under its federal mandate, the RCMP is responsible for enforcing federal legislation; investigating inter-provincial and international crime; border integrity; overseeing Canadian peacekeeping missions involving police; countering terrorism both inside and outside the country; managing the Canadian Firearms Program, which licenses and registers firearms and their owners; and for the Canadian Police College, which provides police training to Canadian and international police services. Policing in Canada is considered to be a constitutional responsibility of provinces; however, the RCMP provides local police services under contract in all provinces and territories except Ontario and Quebec. Despite its name, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police are no longer an actual mounted police service, and horses are used only at ceremonial events and certain other occasions.\nThe Government of Canada considers the RCMP to be an unofficial national symbol, and in 2013, 87 per cent of Canadians interviewed by Statistics Canada said that the RCMP was important to their national identity.\nHistory.\nEarly history (1920\u20131970).\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police was formed in 1920 by the amalgamation of two separate federal police services: the Royal North-West Mounted Police (RNWMP), which had been responsible for colonial policing in the Canadian West, but by 1920 was becoming \"rapidly obsolete;\" and the Dominion Police, which was responsible for federal law enforcement, intelligence, and parliamentary security. The new police service inherited the paramilitary, frontline policing-oriented culture that had governed the RNWMP, which had been modelled after the Royal Irish Constabulary, but much of the RCMP's local policing role had been superseded by provincial and municipal police services.\nIn 1928, the federal government authorized the RCMP to enter into heavily subsidized contracts with provinces and municipalities, enabling the service to return to its roots in local policing. The federal government paid 60 per cent of the policing costs, while provinces and municipalities paid the remaining 40 per cent. By 1950, eight of the ten Canadian provinces had disbanded their provincial police services in favour of subsidized RCMP policing.\nAs part of its national security and intelligence functions, the RCMP infiltrated ethnic or political groups considered to be dangerous to Canada. These included the Communist Party of Canada (founded in 1921) and a variety of Indigenous, minority cultural, and nationalist groups. The service was also deeply involved in immigration matters, and was responsible for deporting suspected radicals. The RCMP paid particular attention to nationalist and socialist Ukrainian groups and the Chinese community, which was targeted because of disproportionate links to opium dens. Historians estimate that Canada deported two per cent of its Chinese community between 1923 and 1932, largely under the provisions of the \"Opium and Narcotics Drugs Act\". The first Mountie to go undercover was Frank Zaneth who under the code name Operative Number 1 infiltrated various \"radical\" groups along with the Mafia.\nIn 1932, RCMP members killed Albert Johnson, the Mad Trapper of Rat River, after a shoot-out. Johnson had been the subject of a dispute with local Indigenous trappers\u2014he had reportedly destroyed their traps, harassed them verbally, and on one occasion, pointed a firearm at them\u2014and, when confronted with a search warrant, opened fire on RCMP officers, wounding one. Also in 1932, the Customs Preventive Service (CPS), a branch of the Department of National Revenue, was folded into the RCMP at the request of RCMP leadership.\nIn 1935, the RCMP, acting as the provincial police service for Saskatchewan (but against the wishes of the Saskatchewan government) and in collaboration with the Regina Police Service, attempted to arrest organizers of the On-to-Ottawa Trek in the Germantown neighbourhood's market square by kettling around 300 rally-goers, sparking the Regina Riot. One city police officer and one protester were killed. The trek, which had been organized to call attention to conditions in relief camps, consequently failed to reach Ottawa, but nevertheless had political reverberations. That same year, three RCMP members, acting under contract as provincial police officers, were killed in Saskatchewan and Alberta during an arrest and subsequent pursuit.\nDuring the interwar period, the RCMP employed special constables to assist with strikebreaking. For a brief period in the late 1930s, a volunteer militia group, the Legion of Frontiersmen, was affiliated with the RCMP. Many members of the RCMP belonged to this organization, which was prepared to serve as an auxiliary police service.\nIn 1940, the RCMP schooner \"St. Roch\" facilitated the first effective patrol of Canada's Arctic territory. It was the first vessel to navigate the Northwest Passage from west to east, taking two years, the first to navigate the passage in one season (from Halifax to Vancouver in 1944), the first to sail either way through the passage in one season, and the first to circumnavigate North America (1950).\nIn 1941, two African-Canadian men from Nova Scotia applied to join the RCMP. The commissioner at the time, Stuart Wood, allegedly allowed them to sit for entrance tests in the hopes that they could be definitively refused entry to the service as \"their colour would raise the question of policy.\" Both men ultimately passed the requisite tests, but neither was given an offer of employment.\nIn the wake of the 1945 defection of Soviet cipher clerk Igor Gouzenko, who revealed that the Soviet Union was spying on Western nations, the RCMP separated its units responsible for domestic intelligence and counter-espionage from the Criminal Investigation Branch to the new Special Branch, formed in 1950. The branch changed names twice: in 1962, to the Directorate of Security and Intelligence; and in 1970 to the Security Service. On April 1, 1949, Newfoundland and Labrador joined in Confederation with Canada, and the Newfoundland Ranger Force amalgamated with the RCMP.\nIn June 1953, the RCMP became a full member of the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol). In 1969, the RCMP hired its first black police officer, Hartley Gosline.\nLate 20th century.\nOn July 4, 1973, during a visit to Regina, Saskatchewan, Queen Elizabeth II approved a new badge for the RCMP. The force subsequently presented the sovereign with a tapestry rendering of the new design.\nIn 1978, the RCMP formed 31 part-time emergency response teams across the country to respond to serious incidents requiring a tactical police response.\nIn 1986, in the wake of the 1985 Turkish embassy attack in Ottawa and the bombing of Air India Flight 182, the Canadian government directed the RCMP to form the Special Emergency Response Team (SERT), a full-time counter-terrorism unit.\nIn the early 1990s, journalists at the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's \"The Fifth Estate\" opened an investigation into rumours that a senior RCMP officer in the Criminal Intelligence Service (CISC) was on the payroll of a Montreal-based organized crime group, and in 1992, aired an episode identifying Inspector Claude Savoie, then the assistant director of the CISC, as the leak, citing evidence that connected him to Allan Ronald Ross, an Irish-Canadian drug lord, and Sidney Leithman, a prominent lawyer associated with Montreal's organized crime network. Shortly after the episode aired, and minutes before being interviewed by detectives with the RCMP's professional standards unit, Savoie committed suicide in his Ottawa office. One of Savoie's subordinates, Portuguese-Canadian constable Jorge Leite, was found guilty of corruption and breach of trust by a Portuguese court about his work with Savoie.\nIn 1993, the SERT was disbanded and its counter-terrorism duties transferred to the Canadian Forces, in the newly formed Joint Task Force 2 (JTF2). JTF2 inherited some equipment and the SERT's former training base near Ottawa.\nIn 1995 the Personal Protection Group (PPG) of the RCMP was created at the behest of Jean Chr\u00e9tien after the break-in by Andr\u00e9 Dallaire at the prime minister's official Ottawa residence, 24 Sussex Drive. The PPG is a 180-member group responsible for VIP security details, chiefly the prime minister and the governor general.\nIn 1998, the RCMP, with the permission of the owners AEC, bombed an oil well shed as part of a 'dirty tricks' campaign during a dispute between AEC and Wiebo Ludwig.\nRCMP Security Service (1950\u20131984).\nThe RCMP Security Service (RCMPSS) was a specialized political intelligence and counterintelligence branch with national security responsibilities following revelations of illegal covert operations relating to the Quebec separatist movement. As a result, the RCMPSS was replaced by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) in 1984, and is statutorily independent of the RCMP.\nIn the late 1970s, revelations surfaced that the RCMP Security Service had in the course of their intelligence duties engaged in crimes such as burning a barn and stealing documents from the separatist Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois. This led to the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Certain Activities of the RCMP, better known as the \"McDonald Commission\", named for the presiding judge, Justice David Cargill McDonald. The commission recommended that the service's intelligence duties be removed in favour of the creation of a separate intelligence agency, CSIS. The RCMP and CSIS nonetheless continue to share responsibility for some law enforcement activities in the contemporary era, particularly in the anti-terrorism context.\n21st century.\nDue to 9/11, the RCMP Sky Marshals, which is charged with security on passenger aircraft, was inaugurated in 2002.\nFour RCMP officers were fatally shot during the Mayerthorpe tragedy in Northern Alberta in March 2005. It was the single largest multiple killing of RCMP officers since the killing of three officers in Kamloops, British Columbia, by a mentally ill assailant in June 1962. Before that, the RCMP had not incurred such a loss since the North-West Rebellion. One result was that on 21 October 2011 Commissioner William J.\u00a0S. Elliott announced that RCMP officers would have the C8 rifle at their disposal, where in the past they had been limited to sidearms. One of the main conclusions from the fatality inquiry that led to this result was the fact that the officers who were involved in the events did not have the appropriate weapons to face someone with a semi-automatic rifle.\nIn 2006, the United States Coast Guard's Ninth District and the RCMP began a program called \"Shiprider\", in which 12 Mounties from the RCMP detachment at Windsor and 16 U.S. Coast Guard boarding officers from stations in Michigan ride in each other's vessels. The intent was to allow for seamless enforcement of the international border.\nOn December 6, 2006, RCMP Commissioner Giuliano Zaccardelli resigned after admitting that his earlier testimony about the Maher Arar case was inaccurate. The RCMP's actions were scrutinized by the Commission of Inquiry into the Actions of Canadian Officials in Relation to Maher Arar. In the aftermath of the Arar affair, the commission of inquiry recommended that the RCMP be subject to greater oversight from a review board with investigative and information-sharing capacities. Following the commission of inquiry's recommendations, the Harper government tabled amendments to the RCMP Act to create the Civilian Review and Complaints Commission.\nIn the wake of the 2007 Robert Dzieka\u0144ski taser incident at the Vancouver International Airport, two officers were found guilty of perjury to the Braidwood Inquiry and sentenced to jail for their actions. They appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada but were unsuccessful.\nIn July 2007, two RCMP officers were shot and succumbed to their injuries in the Spiritwood Incident near Mildred, Saskatchewan.\nBy the end of 2007, the RCMP was named Newsmaker of the Year by The Canadian Press.\n2010s.\nThe RCMP mounted the Queen's Life Guard in May 2012 during celebrations of Queen Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee.\nOn June 3, 2013, the RCMP's A Division was renamed the \"National Division\" and tasked with handling corruption cases \"at home and abroad\".\nIn June 2014, three RCMP officers were murdered during the Moncton shooting. A review from retired assistant commissioner Alphonse MacNeil in May 2015 issued 64 recommendations, while the RCMP was charged with violating the Canada Labour Code (CLC) for the slow roll-out of the C8 carbine, which had been recommended by the 2011 Elliott inquiry. The RCMP issued the first carbines in 2013, and with 12,000 members across the country had, as of May 2015, only purchased 2,200. At the CLC trial the Crown argued that the then newly-retired head of the RCMP Bob Paulson had \"played the odds\" with officer safety and it proved fatal. One result of the CLC trial was the conviction of the organization that had been led by Paulson for close to seven years.\nIn October 2016, the RCMP issued an apology for harassment, discrimination, and sexual abuse of female officers and civilian members. Additionally, they set aside a $100 million fund to compensate these victims. Over 20,000 current and past female employees who were employed after 1974 are eligible.\nIn January 2019 of that year, the RCMP enforced an injunction against the Wet\u2019suwet\u2019en first nation, raiding the Unist\u2019ot\u2019en Camp and arresting 14 people. This sparked widespread protests and solidarity actions across Canada after reports surfaced of the use of violence by the RCMP.\n2020s.\nIn February 2020, The RCMP again enforced the injunction, leading to further arrests and escalating tensions. Rail blockades and other disruptions occurred across the country in support of the Wet\u2019suwet\u2019en. There was widespread condemnation across Canada of the surveillance tactics employed by the RCMP. During one protest, two journalists were arrested by the RCMP during the protests, prompting an investigation by the federal government. The RCMP was further criticized when video footage of officers breaking into the homes of Wet'suwet'en community members and pointing weapons at peaceful protesters surfaced on youtube. In audio recordings played in the BC supreme court, RCMP officers referred to First Nations opposed to gas pipelines as \"orcs\" and \"ogres\".\nOn March 10, 2020, Chief Allan Adam of the Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation was arrested by two RCMP officers in Fort McMurray, Alberta. After several minutes of Chief Adam yelling and posturing at officers, the officers tackled him and punched him in the head whilst struggling with him on the ground. Chief Adam was later charged with resisting arrest and assaulting a peace officer, but the charges were subsequently dropped. After watching the video of the arrest, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said, \"[w]e have all now seen the shocking video of Chief Adam's arrest and we must get to the bottom of this\". Following the revelation of Chief Adam's arrest\u2014as well as several other recent instances in which RCMP officers had assaulted or killed Indigenous people\u2014RCMP Commissioner Brenda Lucki stated, after initially demurring on the question, that systemic racism exists in the RCMP: \"I do know that systemic racism is part of every institution, the RCMP included\", she said. One day earlier, Trudeau had also stated that \"[s]ystemic racism is an issue right across the country, in all our institutions, including in all our police services, including in the RCMP.\"\nRCMP Constable Heidi Stevenson was killed while responding to the Wortman killing spree that left 23 dead in Nova Scotia in April 2020. The political furor that followed engulfed Commissioner Brenda Lucki and her minister, Public Safety Minister Bill Blair. The RCMP was strongly criticized for its response to the attacks, the deadliest rampage in Canadian history, as well as their lack of transparency in the criminal investigation. CBC News' television program \"The Fifth Estate\" and online newspaper \"Halifax Examiner\" analyzed the timeline of events, and both observed a myriad of failures and shortcomings in the RCMP response. A criminologist criticized the RCMP's response as \"a mess\" and called for an overhaul in how the agency responds to active shooter situations, after they had failed to properly respond to other such incidents in the past.\nIn the early 2020s, several governments, politicians, and scholars recommended terminating the RCMP's contract policing program. Public Safety Minister Marco Mendicino was mandated to conduct a review of RCMP contract policing when he took office in 2022.\nIn June 2021, Privacy Commissioner of Canada Daniel Therrien found that the RCMP had broken Canadian privacy law through hundreds of illegal searches using Clearview AI.\nIn February 2022, four men were arrested near Coutts, Alberta, for their roles in an alleged conspiracy to kill RCMP officers during the Canada convoy protest.\nOn September 19, 2022, the RCMP led the procession through London, England, following the state funeral of Queen Elizabeth II due to the long-standing special relationship with the Queen.\nIn 2023, the Mass Casualty Commission recommended that the RCMP replace its Depot-based training regime with a more intensive university-style program and that the federal public safety minister review the RCMP's involvement in contract policing. Later that year, the force established a new direct-entry program for federal policing candidates. Those recruited for the program will be required to complete a shorter, more focused 14-week training curriculum in Ottawa before being posted to a federal policing position. As of 2024, the implementation is suspended due to concerns raised by unions.\nIn the early 2020s, the cities of Surrey, British Columbia, and Grande Prairie, Alberta, both established independent municipal police forces to replace the RCMP. In the wake of these decisions, and similar moves by the governments of Alberta and Saskatchewan to establish supplementary provincial police services to support (and, according to some critics, eventually replace) the RCMP, Commissioner Mike Duheme indicated that the RCMP was learning how to better manage transitions to local policing from contract policing. Similar transitions have been proposed, debated, or approved in some Alberta First Nations, rural Manitoba, and rural New Brunswick.\nResponse to protests.\nPolicing by the RCMP and other public and private security has been central to disputes over land claims and assertions of sovereignty over land use by Indigenous peoples in Canada (First Nations and Metis). Recent notable confrontations over rights to self-determination of land use have precipitated around opposition to pipeline infrastructure through traditional and ancestral lands of Indigenous peoples. Recent scholarship highlights how the policing of anti-pipeline movements (e.g. against the Coastal GasLink pipeline or the Dakota Access pipeline in North Dakota, USA) can serve to actively enforce the violation of Indigenous rights and perpetuate Canada\u2019s fossil fuel dependency and the country\u2019s contribution to the climate crisis.\nThe Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) gained access to internal police documents exposing \u201c[a]n RCMP national security unit monitored First Nations-led anti-pipeline activism for \u2018potential threats to the energy, transportation and banking sectors between 2021 and 2022.\u201d This unit, named the Community-Industry Response Group (C-IRG), was formed in 2016, originally to secure the Coastal GasLink pipeline project, a pipeline carrying natural gas from gas plays in Northeastern BC to the BC coast transiting through Wet'suwet'en and other First Nations territories, much of which remains unceded.\nSurveillance by the RCMP and CSIS has also played a critical role in suppressing civil society, notably environmental activists. The financial expense incurred to the public for these policing efforts are significant\u2014internal RCMP accounting shows that the C-IRG unit spent almost $50M on policing pipeline, logging standoffs in BC in its first five years of operations. This spending comprised approximately $3.5M, $27.6M, and $18.7M policing the Trans Mountain Expansion pipeline, CoastalGas Link pipeline, and Fairy Creek logging blockage, respectively.\nPolicing targets.\nLand defence.\nNorthern Gateway Pipeline.\nAn Access to Information request revealed documents containing requests by the National Energy Board to the RCMP and CSIS to monitor and report on advocacy groups who opposed pipeline projects. According to the records, a member of CSIS or RCMP allegedly infiltrated a community organizing meeting and wrote a report on their findings sharing with Enbridge \u2014 the company that owns the Northern Gateway pipeline project \u2014 as well as other prominent oil and gas industry leaders part of Natural Resources Canada. The BC Civil Liberties Association launched two formal complaints regarding \u201cimproper surveillance\u201d on civilian advocacy groups, claiming the act unconstitutional and illegal to surveil such \u201cpeaceful democratic activities.\u201d\nTrans Mountain Pipeline.\nProject Sitka was a coordinated intelligence effort to compile names of Indigenous and non-Indigenous activists who may use \"unlawful tactics\" in Indigenous resistance protests. The initiative was concluded in 2015 but was revived in 2016 after the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion's approval. The RCMP instructed officers to \"provide any updates to Project Sitka's list of disruptive and volatile subjects from respective divisions.\"\nThe RCMP spent around $3.5M policing protests around the Trans Mountain Expansion pipeline project.\nTiny House Warriors \u2014 a group of Indigenous activists who erected small houses along the pipeline's right of way \u2014 were attacked by a group of masked assailants who destroyed ritual installations, physically attacked activists, and stole and drove one of the activists cars into their protest house. A prominent spokesperson for the Tiny House Warriors, Kanahus Manuel, who was based about 175 kilometres northeast of Kamloops and whose car was used by assailants to attempt to demolish her house, told the Tyee that she was convinced \"there was not even any attempt by the RCMP to look for these guys.\"\nCoastal Gas Link pipeline.\nOn December 14, 2018, a provincial court granted TransCanada (now TC Energy) an injunction to proceed with construction efforts of their Coastal Gas Link pipeline \u2014 a 670\u00a0km long pipeline that would pass through the Wet\u02bcsuwet\u02bcen Nation. At the time, the Unist\u02bcot\u02bcen Camp blockade was actively protesting the development. A new checkpoint was set up on land of the Gitim\u02bcten (Gitimd\u02bcen), one of the five clans of the Wet\u02bcsuwet\u02bcen Nation, to continue blocking access to the construction site.\nOn January 7, 2018, the RCMP conducted a militarized raid on the Gitim'ten checkpoint, arresting 14 people. Investigations revealed that prior to the raid, RCMP commanders had instructed and encouraged violence, \"lethal overwatch\" (a term to deploy lethal force), and that arrests were necessary to \"sterilize the site.\"\nAfter the violent evictions, and surveillance recorded of Indigenous land defenders, the United Nations' Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination published a letter calling for more information on the ceasing of construction of the Trans Mountain Pipeline and the Coastal Gas Link Pipeline due to the related harms caused to the Secw\u00e9pemc and Wet\u02bcsuwet\u02bcen peoples.\nA report by Amnesty International detailed widespread \"intimidation and harassment\" of Wet\u02bcsuwet\u02bcen people by the RCMP when acting to protect the CoastalGas Link's construction.\nGlobal Summits.\nSeveral global summits where protests erupted decrying global injustices suffered violent repression by RCMP and local police forces. The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) 3rd Summit of the Americas hosted in Quebec City from April 20 to 22, 2001 faced massive protests, referred to as the Quebec City (or A20) protests. Police liberally fired tear gas and rubber bullets and deployed water cannons to attack and disperse the crowd. On November 13, 2003, the complaint's chairwoman Shirley Heafey argued that \"RCMP members used excessive and unjustified force in releasing tear gas to move the protesters when a more measured response could have been attempted first.\"\nOther summits where the RCMP played a role in a controversial police response to protests include the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America (SPP) summit in Montebello, Quebec in August 2007, where masked protesters believed to be undercover police incited violence. There was also what was then named the \"largest-ever police spy operation\" aimed at activists organizing the 2010 G20 Summit protests in Toronto, Ontario. It was revealed via Freedom of Information requests that \"at least 12 undercover officers infiltrated groups\" spanning Vancouver, southern Ontario, Toronto, Montreal, and Ottawa, in one of the largest-ever such operations internal to Canada.\nRole in the colonization of Canada.\nAs the federal police service of the Government of Canada, the RCMP has had an expansive and controversial role in the colonization of Canada. One of the RCMP's two preceding agencies\u2014the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP)\u2014had enjoyed a relatively positive relationship with the Indigenous peoples of Canada, buoyed by their role in restoring order to the Canadian West, which had been disrupted by immigrant settlement, and the stark contrast between Canadian policy and the ongoing American Indian Wars in the late 19th century. After the signing of the Numbered Treaties between 1871 and 1899, however, the service generally failed to provide Indigenous communities with police services equal to those provided to non-Indigenous communities.\nAmerican historian Andrew Graybill argued the RCMP historically resembled the Texas Rangers in many ways: each protected the established order by confining and removing Indigenous peoples; tightly controlling the mixed-blood peoples (the African Americans in Texas and the M\u00e9tis in Canada); assisting the large-scale ranchers against the small-scale ranchers and farmers who fenced the land; and breaking the power of labor unions that tried to organize the workers of industrial corporations.\nFrom 1920 (1933, with respect to the \"Indian Act\") to 1996, RCMP officers served as truant officers for Indian residential schools, including through the transition of students from federal residential to provincial day schools after 1948, assisting principals, staff, Indian agents, relatives, and members of the communities in bringing truant children to the schools, sometimes by force, as per the \"Indian Act\", and as was common for truant non-Indigenous children through the same period. Marcel-Eug\u00e8ne LeBeuf stated in his report for the RCMP that records and oral histories indicate the force \"was responding, in its most traditional police role, to a request to protect children\" and that abuses within the residential school system were largely unreported to the RCMP at the time.\nDuring the federal government's imposition of municipal-style elected councils on First Nations people, the RCMP raided the government buildings of particularly resistant traditional hereditary chiefs' councils and oversaw the subsequent council elections\u2014the Six Nations of the Grand River Elected Council was originally referred to as the \"Mounties Council\" as a result of the RCMP's involvement in its installation.\nRole in land disputes.\nIn 1995, the RCMP intervened in the Gustafsen Lake standoff between the armed Ts'peten Defenders, occupying what they claimed was unceded Indigenous land, and armed ranchers, who owned the land and had previously allowed Indigenous people to use part of it on the condition they not erect permanent structures. The RCMP's response included 400 tactical assault team members, five helicopters, two surveillance planes, and nine Bison armoured personnel carriers on loan from the Canadian Army and sparked international controversy over the RCMP's use of unusually broad press exclusion zones. One of the members of the Ts'peten Defenders was later granted political asylum in the United States after an Oregon judge found that the RCMP's reporting of the incident\u2014marked by an RCMP member's off-hand comment to media that \"smear campaigns are [the RCMP's] specialty\"\u2014amounted to a \"disinformation campaign.\"\nBetween January 2019 and March 2020, the RCMP spent $13 million policing and periodically enforcing injunctions against Indigenous protesters blocking the construction of a pipeline across what the protesters asserted was unceded Wet'suwet'en territory. Wet'suwet'en hereditary chiefs Na'moks and Woos complained about the armed RCMP presence, as the police moved down the road, kilometre-by-kilometre, over days, dismantling fortified checkpoints and making arrests. The RCMP's enforcement of a court injunction against the occupiers in 2020 sparked international controversy and protests. As of 2022, sporadic occupations and protests have continued at the site. There have also been attacks on infrastructure and work camps, allegedly by outside groups unaffiliated with Wet'suwet'en and other local people.\nWomen in the RCMP.\nIn the 1920s, Saskatchewan provincial pathologist Frances Gertrude McGill began providing forensic assistance to the RCMP in their investigations. She helped establish the first RCMP forensic laboratory in 1937, and later was its director for several years. In addition to her forensic work, McGill also provided training to new RCMP and police recruits in forensic detection methods. Upon her retirement in 1946, McGill was appointed honorary surgeon to the RCMP and continued to act as a dedicated consultant for the service up until her death in 1959.\nOn May 23, 1974, RCMP Commissioner Maurice Nadon announced that the RCMP would accept applications from women as regular members of the service. Troop 17 was the first group of 32 women at Depot in Regina on September 16, 1974, for regular training. This first all-female troop of 30 women graduated from Depot on March 3, 1975.\nAfter initially wearing different uniforms, female officers were finally issued the standard RCMP uniforms. Now all officers are identically attired, with two exceptions. The ceremonial dress uniform, or \"walking-out order\", for female members has a long, blue skirt and higher-heeled slip-on pumps plus a small black clutch purse (however, in 2012 the RCMP began to allow women to wear trousers and boots with all their formal uniforms). The second exception is the official maternity uniform for pregnant female officers assigned to administrative duties.\nThe following years saw the first women attain certain positions. \nOrganization.\nNational.\nThe RCMP is organized under the authority of the \"Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act\" (\"RCMP Act\"), an act of the Parliament of Canada. Under sections 3 and 4 of the \"RCMP Act\", the RCMP is a police service for Canada; namely, a federal police service. However, section 20 of the \"RCMP Act\" provides that the RCMP may be used for law enforcement in provinces or municipalities if certain conditions are met. As explained by Justice Ivan Rand of the Supreme Court of Canada, \"what is set up is a police service for the whole of Canada to be used in the enforcement of the laws of the Dominion, but at the same time available for the enforcement of law generally in such provinces as may desire to employ its services.\"\nUnder section 5 of the \"RCMP Act\", the agency is headed by the commissioner of the RCMP, who, under the direction of the minister of public safety and emergency preparedness, has the control and management of the service and all matters connected therewith. The RCMP is provided with a senior executive committee (SEC) which{ The commissioner is assisted by deputy commissioners in charge of Contract and Indigenous Policing, Federal Policing, and Specialized Policing Services. The commanding officers of K Division and E Division are also named deputy commissioners.\nDivisions.\nThe RCMP divides the country into divisions for command purposes. In general, each division is coterminous with a province (for example, C Division in Quebec). The province of Ontario, however, is divided into two divisions: National Division (National Capital Region) and O Division (rest of the province). There is one additional division, Depot Division, which comprises the RCMP Academy in Regina and the Police Dog Service Training Centre in Innisfail. The RCMP National Headquarters are in Ottawa, Ontario, established in 1920.\nSome historical divisions are no longer in use.\nDetachments.\nA detachment is a section of the RCMP that polices a local area. Detachments vary greatly in size.\nThe largest RCMP detachment is in Burnaby, British Columbia. Previously, Surrey, British Columbia, once had the largest detachment with over a thousand employees. However, amid criticism over gang violence and growing debate during the 2018 civic election, the municipal Surrey Police Service eventually assumed jurisdiction, ending Surrey's RCMP policing contract that had been in place since 1951.\nConversely, detachments in small, isolated rural communities have as few as three officers. The RCMP formerly had many single-officer detachments in these areas, but in 2012 the RCMP announced that it was introducing a requirement that detachments should have at least three officers.\nAs of 2022, several large Indigenous communities do not have RCMP detachments and are instead served by detachments in much smaller non-Indigenous communities.\nPersonal Protection Group.\nThe Personal Protection Group (PPG) is a 180-member group responsible for security details for the monarch, other members of the royal family, and other VIPs. It was created after the 1995 break-in at 24 Sussex Drive. There are three units within the PPG: The Governor General's Protection Detail and the Prime Minister's Protection Detail provide bodyguards for the safety of the governor general of Canada and the prime minister of Canada, respectively, in Canada and abroad. These units are based in Ottawa, the former with operations at Rideau Hall (the monarch's and governor general's official residence in the capital) and the latter at 24 Sussex Drive (the prime minister's official residence) and Harrington Lake (the prime minister's retreat), near Chelsea, Quebec. The Very Important Persons Security Section provides security details to VIPs (including the chief justice of Canada, federal ministers other than the prime minister, and diplomats) and others under the direction of the minister of public safety.\nInternational.\nThe RCMP International Operations Branch (IOB) assists the Liaison Officer (LO) Program to deter international crime relating to Canadian criminal laws. The IOB is a section of the International Policing, which is part of the RCMP Federal and International Operations Directorate. Thirty-seven liaison officers are placed in 23 other countries and are responsible for organizing Canadian investigations in other countries, developing and maintaining the exchange of criminal intelligence, especially national security with other countries, to assist in investigations that directly affect Canada, to coordinate and assist RCMP officers on foreign business and to represent the RCMP at international meetings.\nLiaison officers are in:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe RCMP also provides law enforcement training overseas in Iraq and other Canadian peacekeeping missions. The RCMP has been involved in training and logistically supporting the Haitian National Police since 1994, a controversial matter in Canada considering allegations of widespread human rights violations on the part of the HNP. Some Canadian activist groups have called for an end to the RCMP training.\nPersonnel.\nAs of \u00a0, 2019[ [update]], the RCMP employed 30,196 men and women, including police officers, civilian members, and public service employees.\nActual personnel strength by ranks:\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) compensates its officers based on a tiered pay scale that reflects their rank and years of service. Entry-level constables begin with a starting salary of $71,191 per year, with incremental raises leading to higher earnings as they gain experience:\nRCMP Corporal salary: As of 2025, corporals in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police earn a base salary between $121,691 (Step 1) and $126,311 (Step 2) per year.\nRegular members.\nThe term \"regular member\", or RM, originates from the \"RCMP Act\" and refers to the 18,988 regular RCMP officers who are trained and sworn as peace officers, and include all the ranks from constable to commissioner. They are the police officers of the RCMP and are responsible for investigating crime and have the authority to make arrests. RMs operate in over 750 detachments, including 200 municipalities and more than 600 Indigenous communities. RMs are normally assigned to general policing duties at an RCMP detachment for a minimum of three years. These duties allow them to experience a broad range of assignments and experiences, such as responding to emergency (9-1-1) calls, foot patrol, bicycle patrol, traffic enforcement, collecting evidence at crime scenes, testifying in court, apprehending criminals and plain clothes duties. Regular members also serve in over 150 different types of operational and administrative opportunities available within the RCMP, these include major crime investigations, emergency response, forensic identification, forensic collision reconstruction, international peacekeeping, bike or marine patrol, explosives disposal, and police dog services. Also included are administrative roles including human resources, corporate planning, policy analysis, and public affairs.\nAuxiliary constables and other staff members.\nBesides the regular RCMP officers, several types of designations exist which give them assorted powers and responsibilities over policing issues.\nPresently, there are:\nCommunity constables (CC).\nA designation introduced in 2014 as a replacement for the community safety officers and Indigenous community constables pilot programs. Community constables are armed, paid members holding the rank of special constables, with peace officer power. They are to provide a bridge between the local citizens and the RCMP using their local and cultural knowledge. They are mostly focused on crime prevention, liaisons with the community, and providing resources in the event of a large-scale event.\nReserve constables (R/Cst.).\nA program reinstated in 2004 in British Columbia, it was later expanded to cover all of Canada to allow for retired, regular RCMP members and other provincially trained officers to provide extra manpower when shortages are identified. R/Cst. are appointed under Section 11 of the \"Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act\" as paid part-time, armed officers with the same powers as regular members. However, they are not allowed to carry service-issued sidearms and use of force options unless they are called upon to duty. They generally carry out community policing roles but may also be called upon if an emergency occurs.\nAuxiliary constables (A/Cst.).\nVolunteers within their community, appointed under provincial police acts. Auxiliary constables are not police officers and can not identify themselves as such. However, they are given peace officer powers when on duty with a regular member (RM). Their duties consist mainly of assisting RMs in routine events, for example, cordoning off crime scene areas, crowd control, participating in community policing, and assistance during situations where regular members might be overwhelmed with their duties (e.g., keeping watch of a backseat detainee while an RM interviews a victim). They are identified by the wording \"RCMP Auxiliary\" on cars, jackets, and shoulder flashes.\nSpecial constables (S/Cst.).\nEmployees of the RCMP have varied duties depending on where they are deployed but are often given this designation because of the expertise they possess that needs to be applied in a certain area. For example, an Indigenous person might be appointed a special constable to assist regular members as they police an Indigenous community where English is not well understood, and where the special constable speaks the language well.\nThey still perform this role today in many isolated northern communities and the RCMP has 122 special constables who are active, and they are drawn almost entirely from the same Indigenous communities that they serve. From the early years of policing in northern Canada, and well into the 1950s, local Indigenous people were hired by the RCMP as special constables and were employed as guides to obtain and care for sled dog teams. Many of these former special constables still reside in the north to this day and are still involved in the regimental functions of the RCMP. Most pilots for RCMP aircraft, such as fixed-wing planes or helicopters, are special constables.\nCivilian criminal investigators (CCI).\nCCIs were implemented in 2021. They are civilian unarmed staff members, with limited peace officer status and are restricted from making physical arrests. CCIs have backgrounds in computer science or financial markets and are involved in specialized investigations. They participate in interviews, the preparation of court documents, and the searching of scenes.\nCivilian members of the RCMP.\nWhile not delegated the powers of police officers, they are instead hired for their specialized scientific, technological, communications, and administrative skills. Since the RCMP is a multi-faceted law enforcement organization with responsibilities for federal, provincial, and municipal policing duties, it offers employment opportunities for civilian members as professional partners within Canada's national police service. Civilian members represent approximately 14 percent of the total RCMP employee population and are employed within RCMP establishments in most geographical areas of Canada. The following is a list of the most common categories of employment that may be available to interested and qualified individuals.\nPublic service employees.\nAlso referred to as public servants, PSes, or PSEs, they provide much of the administrative support for the RCMP in the form of detachment clerks and other administrative support at the headquarters level. They are not police officers, do not wear a uniform, have no police authority, and are not bound by the \"RCMP Act\".\nMunicipal employees.\nAbbreviated as \"ME\" they are found in RCMP detachments where a contract exists with a municipality to provide front-line policing. MEs are not employees of the RCMP but are instead employed by the local municipality to work in the RCMP detachment. They conduct the same duties that a PSE would and are required to meet the same reliability and security clearance to do so. Many detachment buildings house a combination of municipally and provincially funded detachments, and therefore there are often PSEs and MEs found working together in them.\nRanks.\nThe rank system of the RCMP is partly a result of their origin as a paramilitary service. Upon its founding, the RCMP adopted the rank insignia of the Canadian Militia (which in turn came from the British Army). As in the military, the RCMP also has a distinction between commissioned and non-commissioned officers. The non-commissioned ranks are mostly based on military ranks (apart from constable). Non-commissioned officer ranks above staff sergeant resemble those that formerly existed in the Canadian Army, but have since been replaced by warrant officers. The commissioned officer ranks, by contrast, use a set of non-military titles that are often used in Commonwealth police services. The number of higher ranks like chief superintendent and deputy commissioner have been added on and increased since the formation of the service, while the lower commissioned rank of sub-inspector has been dropped.\nThe numbers are current as of April 1, 2019:\nThese are the official abbreviations for the commissioned and non-commissioned officers in the RCMP.\nThe inspector ranks and higher ranks are commissioned ranks and are appointed by the Governor-in-Council. Depending on the badges and dresses which are worn on the shoulder as slip-ons, on shoulder boards, or directly on the epaulettes. The lower ranks are non-commissioned officers, and the insignia continues to be based on pre-1968 Canadian Army patterns. Since 1990, the non-commissioned officers' insignias &amp; insignias have been embroidered on the epaulette slip-ons. Non-commissioned rank badges are worn on the right sleeve of the scarlet/blue tunic and blue jacket. Constables wear no rank insignia. There are also 122 special constables, as well as a varying number of reserve constables, auxiliary constables, and students who wear identifying insignia.\nThe star, or \"pip\", used in the insignia of commissioned officers represents the military Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath. The order's motto (, 'three joined in one', referring to the holy trinity) is inscribed in a band in the middle of it. The three crowns inset in the centre not only represent the Christian Trinity but also the three former kingdoms that became the United Kingdom. The RCMP formerly had subaltern (junior officer) ranks that were indicated by one \"pip\" for a sub-inspector (equivalent to an army second lieutenant) to three \"pips\" for an inspector (equivalent to an army captain). A reorganization in 1960 changed the insignia to three \"pips\" for sub-inspectors and a crown for inspectors, making the latter a field officer rank. The rank of sub-inspector was abolished in 1990, leaving the RCMP with no subaltern ranks.\nA royal crown is used in the regimental cap badge and the insignia of senior commissioned officers. In 1955 St. Edward's Crown replaced the Tudor Crown. Although Queen Elizabeth II adopted the redesign of the heraldic crown in 1953, it took some time to design, approve, and manufacture the new insignia.\nThe crossed Mameluke sabre and baton is the insignia for general officers. In the RCMP it designates the commissioner (equivalent to an army general) and their subordinate deputy commissioners (equivalent to army lieutenant-generals). The assistant commissioners use the crown-over-three-pips insignia of an army brigadier.\nThe brass shoulder title pin on the epaulettes was changed from \"RCMP\" to \"GRC-RCMP\" in 1968. ( stands for , the RCMP's French-language title). This was due to a 1968 ruling stating that all statutes had to be published bilingually in both English and French. As a law enforcement agency, the RCMP had to use ranks and titles in both languages. This was later reinforced by the \"Official Languages Act\" (1969) .\nHonorary positions and the role of the Royal Family..\nSeveral members of the Canadian royal family hold honorary titles in the RCMP. These roles are comparable to the colonel-in-chief and honorary colonel positions in the Canadian Army, serving as promoters of the service's identity, traditions, and history, as well as making occasional visits to operational units. The commissioner-in-chief of the RCMP receives information and updates on important activities and serve as an advisor to the force's commanding officer; although, they do not play an operational role with the service.\nIn addition to members of the Canadian Royal Family holding these positions, as federal law enforcement officers all members of the RCMP swear allegiance to the Monarch of Canada, currently King Charles III.\nCommissioner in chief.\nThe commissioner-in-chief is the most senior honorary and ceremonial leadership position in the RCMP; it is held by Charles III, King of Canada, who was bestowed the role prior to his coronation in 2023.\nThe role was established as a separate role for the Canadian monarch from that of honorary commissioner in 2012. The first holder was Queen Elizabeth II, who was bestowed the title in celebration of her diamond jubilee. The role was created to show and maintain the close link between the Canadian monarch and the RCMP. The role has no day-to-day operational function, but the commissioner-in-chief receives regular updates on the important activities of the RCMP, as well as promoting the Mounted Police both in Canada and abroad, and visiting RCMP events. Upon appointment the commissioner-in-chief is presented with a Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer's sword, bearing the Canadian coat of arms and the royal cypher.\nBefore the creation of commissioner in chief, the role of honorary commissioner was usually held by periodically by the Canadian monarchs and heirs apparent. Since 2023 the role of honorary commissioner has not been in use.\nHonorary deputy commissioner.\nHonorary deputy commissioners are honorary positions held by senior members of the Canadian Royal Family, whose role is also to show the connection of the Royal Family and the RCMP.\nThe current honorary deputy commissioners are Anne, Princess Royal, and Edward, Duke of Edinburgh.\nEquipment and vehicles.\nLand fleet.\nThe RCMP Land Transport Fleet inventory includes:\nMarine craft.\nThe RCMP polices Canadian Internal Waters, including the territorial sea and contiguous zone as well as the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence Seaway; such operations are provided by the RCMP's Federal Services Directorate and include enforcing Canada's environment, fisheries, customs, and immigration laws. In provinces and municipalities where the RCMP performs contract policing, the service polices freshwater lakes and rivers.\nTo meet these challenges, the RCMP operates the Marine Division, with five Robert Allan Ltd.\u2013designed high-speed catamaran patrol vessels; \"Inkster\" and the \"Commissioner\"-class \"Nadon\", \"Higgitt\", \"Lindsay\" and \"Simmonds\", based on all three coasts and manned by officers specially trained in maritime enforcement. \"Inkster\" is based in Prince Rupert, BC, \"Simmonds\" is stationed on Newfoundland's south coast, and the rest are on the Pacific Coast. \"Simmonds\"' livery is unique, in that it sports the RCMP badge, but is otherwise painted with Canadian Coast Guard colours and the marking \"Coast Guard Police\". The other four vessels are painted with blue and white RCMP colours.\nThe RCMP operates 377 smaller boats, defined as vessels less than long, at locations across Canada. This category ranges from canoes and car toppers to rigid-hulled inflatables and stable, commercially built, inboard-outboard vessels. Individual detachments often have smaller high-speed rigid-hulled inflatable boats and other purpose-built vessels for inland waters, some of which can be hauled by road to the nearest launching point.\nAircraft fleet.\nAs of February 2023, the RCMP had 35 police aircraft (9 helicopters and 26 fixed-wing aircraft) registered with Transport Canada and operate as ICAO airline designator SST, and telephony STETSON. All aircraft are operated and maintained by the Air Services Branch.\nWeapons and intervention options.\nPast weapons and intervention options.\nPistols.\nDue to procurement problems with the Beaumont\u2013Adams revolvers, constables sometimes carried their sidearms chambered in a standard service calibre.\nCeremonial weapons and symbols of office.\nIn 1973, Wilkinson Sword produced several commemorative swords to celebrate the RCMP centennial. None of these swords was ever used ceremonially and were strictly collectables. Wilkinson Sword also made a commemorative centennial tomahawk and miniature \"letter opener\" models of their centennial swords. During the same year, Winchester Repeating Arms Company produced an RCMP commemorative centennial version of their Model 94 rifle in .30-30 Winchester, with a round barrel. The receiver, buttplate, and forend cap (on the musket-style forend) were plated in gold. Commemorative medallions were embedded in the right-hand side of the stock, with an \"MP\" engraving. There was engraving on the barrel and receiver indicating the rifle was a centennial commemorative edition. Sights were open notch rear, with a flip-up rear ladder, graduated to . Two versions were produced, 9500 with serial numbers beginning \"RCMP\" for commercial sale, and 5000 with the prefix \"MP\" sold only to serving RCMP members. In addition, ten presentation models were produced, serially RCMP1P to RCMP10P.\nUniform.\nOperational uniform.\nRCMP officers on frontline police duties wear grey shirts with RCMP shoulder flashes, navy blue pants with gold trouser piping, bulletproof vests, and a peaked cap with a solid gold band. High-ranking officers wear white shirts. A tie can be worn with a long-sleeved shirt for occasions such as testifying in court. In colder weather, members may wear heavier boots, winter coats, wool toques, or uniquely, muskrat fur caps.\nIn 1990, Baltej Singh Dhillon became the RCMP's first Sikh officer to be allowed to wear a turban instead of the traditional campaign hat. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Sikh, Muslim, and other bearded officers were initially assigned to administrative duties before being permitted to attend calls for service with low viral transmission risks after officer outcry. The beards required as part of the Sikh practice of kesh and worn by some Muslim men prevented respirator masks from properly sealing around the mouth and nose, reducing their effectiveness. As of 2019, all RCMP officers, regardless of religious belief, are allowed to wear full beards or braided hair below their collar. Officers may also wear a ballcap in place of the traditional peaked cap.\nDress uniform.\nRCMP officers are equipped with a dress uniform, popularly known as the \"blue serge\", for performing certain formal duties, such as media relations or parliament testimony. It consists of a navy blue dress jacket with epaulets and brass buttons, a white shirt, a navy blue tie, navy blue pants with gold trouser piping, and a peaked cap with a solid gold band. Shoulder flashes are not worn.\nCeremonial uniform.\nFor most formal and ceremonial duties, RCMP wears the internationally-famous Red Serge. It has a high collared scarlet tunic, which was developed by the North-West Mounted Police and coloured red to distinguish it from blue American military uniforms, midnight blue breeches with yellow trouser piping, an oxblood Sam Browne belt with white sidearm lanyard and matching oxblood riding boots, brown felt campaign hat with a \"Montana crease\" (pinched symmetrically at the four corners), and oxblood gloves. Since 1990, identical ceremonial uniforms have been worn by both men and women.\nDecorations.\nMembers receive a clasp and service badge star for every five years of service. The King of Canada also awards the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Long Service Medal to members who have completed 20 years of service. A clasp is awarded for each successive 5 years to 40 years. Members also receive a service badge star for each five years of service, which is worn on the left sleeve. There are specialist insignia for positions such as first aid instructor and dog handler, a fingerprint insignia for forensic identification specialists, and pilot's wings worn by aviators. Sharpshooter badges for proficiency in pistol or rifle shooting are each awarded in two grades. Sharpshooter badges and service badge stars are sewn onto the left sleeve of the red serge.\nTartan.\nThe RCMP has since 1998 had its own distinctive tartan. The creation of the tartan was the result of a committee created in the early 1990s to create a tartan by its 125th anniversary. Upon approval from Commissioner Phillip Murray, the tartan was registered with the Scottish Tartans Society and presented to the agency by Anne, Princess Royal during her royal visit to Canada in 1998. The tartan appeared for the first time by an RCMP pipe band at the Royal Nova Scotia International Tattoo in July and August 1998.\nMilitary status.\nMilitary unit\nAlthough the RCMP is a civilian police service, in 1921, following the service of many of its members during the First World War, King George V awarded the service the status of a regiment of dragoons, entitling it to display the battle honours it had been awarded.\nService in wartime.\nThe RCMP predecessor, the North-West Mounted Police, were involved in several battles during the North-West Resistance in 1885. During the Second Boer War, members of the NWMP were given leaves of absence to join the 2nd Battalion, Canadian Mounted Rifles (CMR) and Strathcona's Horse. The service raised the Canadian Mounted Rifles, mostly from NWMP members, for service in South Africa. For the CMR's distinguished service there, King Edward VII honoured the NWMP by changing the name to the \"Royal Northwest Mounted Police\" (RNWMP) on June 24, 1904.\nDuring the First World War, the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP) conducted border patrols, surveillance of enemy aliens, and enforcement of national security regulations within Canada. However, RNWMP officers also served overseas. On August 6, 1914, a squadron of volunteers from the RNWMP was formed to serve with the Canadian Light Horse in France. In 1918, two more squadrons were raised, A Squadron for service in France and Flanders and B Squadron for service in the Canadian Siberian Expeditionary Force.\nIn September 1939, at the outset of the Second World War, the Canadian Army had no military police. Five days after war was declared the Royal Canadian Mounted Police received permission to form a provost company of service volunteers. It was designated \"No. 1 Provost Company (RCMP)\", and became the Canadian Provost Corps. Six months after war was declared its members were overseas in Europe and served throughout the Second World War as military police.\nRCMP members were embedded with several military units in Afghanistan during the War in Afghanistan from 2001\u201314. The RCMP was a member agency of the Afghan Threat Finance Cell, a multi-agency intelligence organization formed in 2008.\nHonours.\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police were accorded the status of a regiment of dragoons in 1921. As a cavalry regiment, the RCMP was entitled to wear battle honours for its war service as well as carry a guidon, with its first guidon presented in 1935. The second guidon was presented in 1973, and the third in 2023.\nBattle honours\nThe RCMP also carries the honorary distinctions for the Canadian Provost Corps (Military Police), presented September 21, 1957, at a Parliament Hill ceremony for contributions to the corps during the Second World War. The honorary distinction was recognized on the guidon presented in 2023 with its inclusion among other RCMP battle honors.\nPublic perception.\nThe Mounties have been immortalized as symbols of Canadian culture in numerous Hollywood Northwestern movies and television series, which often feature the image of the Mountie as square-jawed, stoic, and polite, yet with a steely determination and physical toughness that sometimes appears superhuman. The RCMP's motto is the French phrase, , variously translated into English as \"Defending the Law\", \"Maintain the right\", and \"Uphold the right\". The Hollywood saying that they 'always get their man' derives ultimately from the words \"They fetch their man every time\" occurring in a report made at Fort Benton regarding an incident at Fort Macleod in 1877, when two Mounties, notwithstanding the loss of their horses, managed to capture three whisky smugglers. \nDepictions in media.\nIn 1912, Ralph Connor's \"Corporal Cameron of the North-West Mounted Police: A Tale of the MacLeod Trail\" appeared, and became an international best-selling novel. Mounties fiction became a popular genre in both pulp magazines and book form. Among the best-selling authors who specialized in tales of the Mounted Police were James Oliver Curwood, Laurie York Erskine, James B Hendryx, T Lund, Harwood Steele (the son of Sam Steele), and William Byron Mowery.\nIn other media, a famous example is the radio and television series, \"Sergeant Preston of the Yukon.\" Dudley Do-Right (of \"The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show\") is a 1960s example of the comic aspect of the Mountie myth, as is Klondike Kat, from Total Television. The Broadway musical and Hollywood movie \"Rose-Marie\" is a 1930s example of its romantic side. A successful combination was a series of \"Renfrew of the Royal Mounted\" boy's adventure novels written by Laurie York Erskine beginning in 1922 and running to 1941. In the 1930s Erskine narrated a \"Sgt Renfrew of the Mounties\" radio show and a series of films with actor-singer James Newill playing Renfrew were released between 1937 and 1940. In 1953 portions of the films were mixed with new sequences of Newill for a \"Renfrew of the Mounted\" television series.\nBruce Carruthers (1901\u20131953), a former Mounted Police corporal (1919\u20131923), served as an unofficial technical advisor to Hollywood in many films with RCMP characters. They included \"Heart of the North\" (1938), \"Susannah of the Mounties\" (1939), \"Northern Pursuit\" (1943), \"Gene Autry and The Mounties\" (1951), \"The Wild North\" (1952), and \"The Pony Soldier\" (1952).\nContemporary culture.\nIn 1959, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation aired \"R.C.M.P.\", a half-hour dramatic series about an RCMP detachment keeping the peace and fighting crime. Filmed in black and white, in and around Ottawa by Crawley Films, the series was co-produced with the BBC and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and ran for 39 episodes. It was noted for its pairing of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois and Anglo officers.\nCanadians also poke fun at the RCMP with Sergeant Renfrew and his faithful dog Cuddles in various sketches produced by the \"Royal Canadian Air Farce\" comedy troupe. On \"That '70s Show\" Mounties were played by SCTV alumni Joe Flaherty and Dave Thomas. The British have also exploited the myth: the BBC television series \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" featured a group of Mounties singing the chorus in \"The Lumberjack Song\" in the lumberjack sketch. The 1972\u201390 CBC series \"The Beachcombers\" features a character named Constable John Constable who attempts to enforce the law in the town of Gibsons, British Columbia. In comic books, the Marvel Comics characters of Alpha Flight are described on several occasions as \"RCMP auxiliaries\", and two of their members, Snowbird and the second Major Mapleleaf are depicted as serving members of the service. In the latter case, due to trademark issues, Major Mapleleaf is described as a \"Royal Canadian Mountie\" in the opening roll call pages of each issue of \"Alpha Flight\" he appears in.\nCharles Bronson and Lee Marvin starred in the 1981 movie \"Death Hunt\" that fictionalized the RCMP pursuit of Albert Johnson. British comedian Tony Slattery appeared as 'Malcolm the Mountie' in a series of UK TV adverts for Labatt's in the early 1990s. In the early 1990s, Canadian professional wrestler Jacques Rougeau utilized the gimmick of \"The Mountie\" while wrestling for the WWF. He typically wore the Red Serge to the ring and carried a shock stick as an illegal weapon. As his character was portrayed as an evil Mountie, the RCMP ultimately won an injunction preventing Rougeau from wrestling as this character in Canada, though he was not prevented from doing so outside the country. He briefly held the Intercontinental Championship in 1992.\nThe 1998 swan song of Nick Berry's time on UK drama \"Heartbeat\" features his character, Sergeant Nick Rowan, transferring to Canada and taking the rank of constable in the Mounties. The special telemovie was titled \"Heartbeat: Changing Places.\" The 1994\u201398 TV series \"Due South\" pairs Mountie Constable Benton Fraser with streetwise American detective Ray Vecchio cleaning up the streets of Chicago. It mainly derives its entertainment from the perceived differences in attitude and culture between these two countries' police services. Fraser is depicted as honest and polite to a fault, even refusing to carry a loaded sidearm when \"assisting\" Detective Vecchio but is almost superhuman in his abilities for thwarting crime, especially while wearing the Red Serge uniform. A pair of Mounties staff the RCMP detachment in the fictional town of Lynx River, Northwest Territories, in the CBC series \"North of 60.\" The series, which aired from 1992 to 1998, is about events in the mostly Indigenous community, but the Mounties feature prominently in each episode. Another TV series from the 1990s, \"Bordertown\" features an NWMP corporal paired with a U.S. marshal securing law and order on a frontier U.S.\u2013Canada border town. In the ABC TV mini-series \"Answered by Fire\", at least three Mounties are featured. Mounties also appear in the TV series \"When Calls the Heart\" (Hallmark Channel).\nThe 1987 Brian De Palma film \"The Untouchables\" features cooperation between the Treasury Department task force, led by Eliot Ness, and the Mounties against liquor smuggling across the Canada\u2013United States border. The 1995 album \"C'est Cheese\" by Canadian musical comedy group The Arrogant Worms includes \"The Mountie Song\", which tells the story of a dissatisfied Mountie. In his 1999, album \"Soiree\" Newfoundland musician A. Frank Willis included \"Savage Cop in Savage Cove\" which was based on a true story and went on to become a big hit.\nMerchandise and trademarks.\nThere are products and merchandise that are made in the image of the RCMP, like Mountie statues or hats. Before 1995, the RCMP had little control over these products. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police received an international license on April 1, 1995, requiring those who use the RCMP to pay a licensing fee. Proceeds from the fees are used for community awareness programs. Those that do not pay the licensing fee are legally unable to use the name of the RCMP or their correct uniforms, though a film such as \"Canadian Bacon\" used the name \"Royal Mounted Canadian Police\" and the character in the \"Dudley Do-Right\" film did not wear accurate insignia.\nThrough a master licensing agreement (MLA) with the RCMP, the RCMP Foundation is responsible for managing the commercial use of the RCMP name, image, and protected marks. The foundation issues selected companies a royalty-based agreement allowing them to produce and market high-quality official RCMP merchandise. Walt Disney Co. (Canada) Ltd. was contracted to aid in the initial set up of the licensing program, but Disney never owned or controlled any of the RCMP's protected marks. Following the expiration of the Disney contract in 2000, all responsibilities and activities were taken over by the executive director and his staff, reporting to the foundation president and board of directors. In 2007, through a decree signed by Commissioner Beverley Busson, the operating name was changed to the \"Royal Canadian Mounted Police Foundation\".\nPublic relations program.\nRCMP community relationship-building programs include the Musical Ride. The Musical Ride is an equestrian showcase of RCMP riders, that performs across Canada each year from May to October. The RCMP Sunset Ceremony () has taken place every summer since 1989 at the Musical Ride Centre in Ottawa, with it in recent years featuring the Ottawa Police Service Pipe Band and the Governor General's Foot Guards Band. The RCMP National Ceremonial Troop is a unit that serves as dismounted version of the Musical Ride as well as a drill team. Individual divisions also have their ceremonial troops.\nThe RCMP Heritage Centre is a multi-million-dollar museum designed by Arthur Erickson that opened in May 2007 in Regina, Saskatchewan, at the RCMP Academy, Depot Division. It replaced the old RCMP museum and is designed to celebrate the role of the service in Canada's history.\nBands.\nThere are eight regional RCMP pipe bands across Canada that act as \"garrison bands\" for the provincial division, and attend parades, police ceremonies, and public events. The first of these bands were established in 1992 in Alberta. The following are the locations of the regional volunteer pipe bands:\nBefore 1994, the RCMP also operated the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Band () was the RCMP's central musical ensemble. It was considered one of the best professional bands assembled in Canada. Although it was an official regimental band, the members worked in the band as a secondary job. It is generally considered to have begun in 1938, though various police bands in the RCMP flourished at the time, leading the Canadian government approving the creation of a full-time central band in December 1958, with its headquarters in the capital of Ottawa. Appearances made by the band included Expo 86 and the Commonwealth Conference in Vancouver, the Calgary Winter Olympics in 1988, as well as the visits of Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Queen Elizabeth II in 1990.\nIt was dissolved in 1994 due to government budget cuts. In its 55-year existence, it operated as a voluntary regimental band, with its members working with it as a secondary job apart from their other duties in the RCMP. Members of the band wore the RCMP's Red Serge as part of their full dress uniform and adopted drill seen in Canadian military bands and bands in the British Army. Its longest-serving director was Superintendent Edwin Joseph Lydall, who served from 1948 to 1968.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69081", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69081", "title": "RCMP", "text": ""}
{"id": "69082", "revid": "1879095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69082", "title": "Mounties", "text": ""}
{"id": "69084", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69084", "title": "North West Mounted Police", "text": ""}
{"id": "69085", "revid": "32579849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69085", "title": "Mountie", "text": ""}
{"id": "69086", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69086", "title": "Mercator Projection", "text": ""}
{"id": "69088", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69088", "title": "The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends", "text": "American animated television series\nThe Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends (commonly referred to as simply Rocky and Bullwinkle) is an American animated television series that originally aired from November 19, 1959, to June 27, 1964, on the ABC and NBC television networks. Produced by Jay Ward Productions, the series is structured as a variety show, with the main feature being the serialized adventures of the two title characters, the anthropomorphic flying squirrel Rocket J. (\"Rocky\") Squirrel and moose Bullwinkle J. Moose. The main antagonists in most of their adventures are the two Russian-like spies Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale, both working for the Nazi-like dictator Fearless Leader. Supporting segments include \"Dudley Do-Right\" (a parody of old-time melodrama), \"Peabody's Improbable History\" (a dog named Mr. Peabody and his boy Sherman traveling through time), and \"Fractured Fairy Tales\" (classic fairy tales retold in comic fashion), among others. \nThe current blanket title was imposed for home video releases more than 40 years after the series originally aired and was never used when the show was televised; television airings of the show were broadcast under the titles of Rocky and His Friends from 1959 to 1961 on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons on ABC (and again in Canada in 1963), The Bullwinkle Show from 1961 to 1964 on Sunday evening and then late Sunday afternoon on NBC, and The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show (or The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle) as repeats from 1964-73 on Sunday mornings on ABC and in syndication following this.\n\"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" is known for quality writing and wry humor. Mixing puns, cultural and topical satire, and self-referential humor, it appealed to adults as well as children. It was also one of the first cartoons whose animation was outsourced; storyboards were shipped to Gamma Productions, a Mexican studio also employed by Total Television. The art has a choppy, unpolished look and the animation is extremely limited even by television animation standards at the time, yet the series has long been held in high esteem; some critics described the series as a well-written radio program with pictures.\nThe show was shuffled around several times during its run, airing in afternoon, prime time, and Saturday-morning cartoon timeslots, and was influential to other animated series from \"The Simpsons\" to \"Rocko's Modern Life\". Segments from the series were later recycled in the \"Hoppity Hooper\" show. There have been numerous feature film adaptations of the series' various segments, such as the 2000 film \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle\", which blended live action and computer animation; and the 1999 live-action film \"Dudley Do-Right\". Both films received poor reviews and were financially unsuccessful. By contrast, an animated feature film adaptation of the \"Peabody's Improbable History\" segment, \"Mr. Peabody &amp; Sherman\", was released to positive reviews in 2014, but was also financially unsuccessful. A rebooted animated series also based on \"Peabody's Improbable History\", \"The Mr. Peabody &amp; Sherman Show\", debuted on Netflix in October 2015 and ran to April 2017.\nAnother reboot animated series based on the main and final segments, \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle\" premiered on Amazon Prime Video on May 11, 2018. In 2013, \"Rocky and His Friends\" and \"The Bullwinkle Show\" were ranked the sixth-greatest television cartoon of all time by \"TV Guide\".\nBackground.\nThe idea for the series came from Jay Ward and Alex Anderson, who previously collaborated on \"Crusader Rabbit\", based upon the original property \"The Frostbite Falls Revue\". This original show never got beyond the proposal stage. It featured a group of forest animals running a television station. The group included Rocket J. Squirrel (Rocky), Oski Bear, Canadian Moose (Bullwinkle), Sylvester Fox, Blackstone Crow, and Floral Fauna. The show in this form was created by Alex Anderson. (The bear and fox characters would later be retooled for Ward's next series, \"Hoppity Hooper\".) Bullwinkle's name came from the name of a car dealership in Berkeley, California, called Bullwinkel Motors. Anderson changed the order of the last two letters of the name and gave the name to his moose.\nWard wanted to produce the show in Los Angeles, but Anderson lived in the San Francisco Bay Area and did not want to relocate. As a result, Ward hired Bill Scott as head writer and co-producer at Jay Ward Productions, and he wrote the \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" features. Ward was joined by writers Chris Hayward and Allan Burns; they eventually became known for creating \"The Munsters\" with Burns going to co-create \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\". In a 1982 interview, Scott said, \"I got a call from Jay asking if I'd be interested in writing another series, an adventure script with a moose and a squirrel. I said, 'Sure.' I didn't know if I could write an adventure with a moose and a squirrel, but I never turned down a job.\"\nProduction.\nThe series began with the pilot \"Rocky the Flying Squirrel\". Production began in February 1958 with the hiring of voice actors June Foray, Paul Frees, Bill Scott, and William Conrad. Eight months later, General Mills signed a deal to sponsor the cartoon program, under the condition that the show be run in a late-afternoon time slot, when it could be targeted toward children. Subsequently, Ward hired the rest of the production staff, including writers and designers. However, no animators were hired. Ad executives at Dancer, Fitzgerald and Sample, the advertising agency for General Mills, set up an animation studio in Mexico called Gamma Productions S.A. de C.V., originally known as Val-Mar Animation. This outsourcing of the animation for the series was considered financially attractive by primary sponsor General Mills, but caused endless production problems. In a 1982 interview by animation historian Jim Korkis, Bill Scott described some of the problems that arose during production of the series:\nWe found out very quickly that we could not depend on Mexican studios to produce anything of quality. They were turning out the work very quickly and there were all kinds of mistakes and flaws and boo-boos... They would never check... Mustaches popped on and off Boris, Bullwinkle's antlers would change, colors would change, costumes would disappear... By the time we finally saw it, it was on the air.\nPonsonby Britt was the credited\u2014but fictional\u2014executive producer of \"The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show\", as well as \"Fractured Flickers\", \"Hoppity Hooper\", and \"George of the Jungle\". In 1959, TV-network executives insisted that its producers under contract must submit official biographies citing their past awards and accomplishments. Ward and Scott, feeling that their own biographies were unimpressive, invented the name \"Ponsonby Britt, Limited\" as their executive producer. The billing was updated in 1967 to \"Ponsonby Britt OBE\" (Officer of the Order of the British Empire). Britt's \"official\" biography was used in press releases.\nNetwork television: 1959\u20131973.\nThe show was broadcast for the first time on November 19, 1959, on the ABC television network, under the title \"Rocky and His Friends\", twice a week, on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons, following \"American Bandstand\" at 4:30\u00a0p.m. ET, where it was the highest-rated daytime network program. The show moved to the NBC network starting September 24, 1961, broadcast in color, and first appeared on Sundays at 7:00\u00a0p.m., just before \"Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color\". \"Bullwinkle\"'s ratings suffered as a result of airing opposite perennial favorite \"Lassie\". A potential move to CBS caused NBC to reschedule the show to late Sunday afternoons (5:30\u00a0p.m.) and early Saturday afternoons in its final season. NBC canceled the show in the summer of 1964. It was shopped to ABC, but they were not interested. However, reruns of episodes were aired on ABC's Sunday morning schedule at 11:00\u00a0a.m. until 1973, at which time the series went into syndication.\nAn abbreviated 15-minute version of the series ran in syndication in the 1960s under the title \"The Rocky Show\". This version was sometimes shown in conjunction with \"The King and Odie\", a 15-minute version of Total Television's \"King Leonardo and His Short Subjects\". \"The King and Odie\" was similar to \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" in that it was sponsored by General Mills and animated by Gamma Productions.\n\"The Bullwinkle Show\" returned to network television during the 1981-1982 season, when NBC aired it at 12:30\u00a0p.m. ET Saturday afternoons. These were rebroadcasts of the original 35mm network prints as Jay Ward produced them, without the Total Television fillers added to the 16mm syndication prints.\nSyndication.\nReruns of the show aired on ABC from 1964 to 1973 and from 1981 to 1982 on NBC. On cable, the series had extended runs on Nickelodeon (1992\u20131996), Cartoon Network (1996\u20132003) and Boomerang (mid 2000s). Since the late 2000s, The Program Exchange has typically only licensed the series for short-term runs; nationally, the series has seen limited airings on WGN America (2009), VH1 Classic (2012), and Boomerang (2013). Since The Program Exchange's demise, the series has resurfaced over-the-air on MeTV Toons as of 2024, airing under the title \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends\" for the first time on American television, however the series' broadcast on the station has been paused since January 2025 per request of WildBrain, after the rights reverted from them over to the Jay Ward Estate.\n\"The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show\" remained in syndicated reruns and was still available for local television stations through The Program Exchange as late as 2016; WBBZ-TV, for instance, aired the show in a strip to counterprogram 10 PM newscasts in the Buffalo, New York, market during the summer 2013 season. The underlying rights were then owned by WildBrain, who acquired the licensing, production, and distribution rights to Ward's library in 2022. They expired, however, in 2025, with them currently being reverted to the Jay Ward Estate. These rights were previously held by Universal Pictures, which acquired the library of predecessor companies DreamWorks Animation and Classic Media in 2016 (coinciding with The Program Exchange's shutdown), and who in turn with copyright holder Ward Productions formed the joint venture Bullwinkle Studios, which managed the Rocky and Bullwinkle properties. Despite the move, Universal still owns the rights to the co-productions Ward produced with DreamWorks.\nSponsor General Mills retained all United States television rights to the series. Two packages, each containing different episodes, are available. The syndicated version of \"The Bullwinkle Show\" contains 98 half-hour shows (#801\u2013898). The first 78 comprise the Rocky and Bullwinkle story lines from the first two seasons of the original series (these segments originally aired under the \"Rocky and His Friends\" title). Other elements in the half-hour shows (\"Fractured Fairy Tales\", \"Peabody's Improbable History\", \"Dudley Do-Right of the Mounties\", \"Aesop and Son\", and short cartoons including \"Bullwinkle's Corner\" and \"Mr. Know-It-All\") sometimes appear out of the original broadcast sequence. The final 20 syndicated \"Bullwinkle Show\" episodes feature later \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" story lines (from \"Bumbling Bros. Circus\" through the end of the series, minus \"Moosylvania\") along with \"Fractured Fairy Tales\", \"Bullwinkle's Corner\", and \"Mr. Know-It-All\" segments repeated from earlier in the syndicated episode cycle. Originally, many syndicated shows included segments of Total Television's \"The World of Commander McBragg\", but these cartoons were replaced with other segments when the shows were remastered in the early 1990s. A package, promoted under the \"Rocky and His Friends\" name but utilizing \"The Rocky Show\" titles, features story lines not included in the syndicated \"Bullwinkle Show\" series.\nThe most recently syndicated \"Rocky and His Friends\" package retains the 15-minute format, consisting of 156 individual episodes, but like \"The Bullwinkle Show\", the content differs from the versions syndicated in the 1960s. The various supporting segments, including \"Fractured Fairy Tales\" (91), \"Peabody's Improbable History\" (91), and \"Aesop and Son\" (39) segments are syndicated as part of \"Tennessee Tuxedo and His Tales\", and 38 of the 39 \"Dudley Do-Right\" cartoons are syndicated as part of \"Dudley Do Right \"(sic)\" and Friends\". Syndicated versions of the shows distributed outside of the United States and Canada combine the various segments under the package title \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends\"; it is this version of the show that is represented on official DVD releases through DreamWorks Classics and the official online version sold at websites such as Amazon Video.\nCharacters.\nThe lead characters and heroes of the series were Rocket \"Rocky\" J. Squirrel, a flying squirrel (who anchored the perspective of the show's younger audience), and his best friend Bullwinkle J. Moose, a dimwitted but good-natured moose (who carried a bulk of the adult humor with his spontaneous puns). Both characters lived in the fictional town of Frostbite Falls, Minnesota, which was purportedly based on the real city of International Falls, Minnesota. The scheming villains in most episodes were the fiendish spies Boris Badenov (a pun on Boris Godunov) and Natasha Fatale (a pun on femme fatale), forever attempting to \"catch Moose and Squirrel\". Other characters included Fearless Leader, the dictator of the fictitious nation of Pottsylvania and Boris and Natasha's superior; Gidney &amp; Cloyd, little green men from the Moon who were armed with scrooch guns; Captain Peter \"Wrongway\" Peachfuzz, the incompetent Ed Wynn-esque captain of the S.S. \"Andalusia\"; various U.S. government bureaucrats and politicians (such as Senator Fussmussen, a recurring character who opposed admitting Alaska and Hawaii to the Union on the grounds of his own xenophobia); and the inevitable onlookers, Edgar and Chauncy.\nStructure.\nWhen first shown on NBC, the cartoons were introduced by a Bullwinkle puppet, voiced by Bill Scott, who would often lampoon celebrities, current events, and especially Walt Disney, whose program \"Wonderful World of Color\" was next on the schedule. Compared with the dim-witted and lovable moose that most fans of the series would grow up with, in this short-lived version Bullwinkle was portrayed as a sarcastic smart-aleck. On one occasion, \"Bullwinkle\" encouraged children to pull the tuning knobs off their television sets (\"It's loads of fun, and that way, you'll be sure to be with us next week!\"). The network received complaints from parents of an estimated 20,000 child viewers who actually did so. Bullwinkle told the children the following week to put the knobs back on with glue \"and make it stick!\" The puppet sequence was dropped altogether. Scott later re-used the puppet for a segment called \"Dear Bullwinkle,\" where letters written for the show were read and answered humorously. Four episodes of \"Dear Bullwinkle\" are on the Season 1 DVD.\nEach episode is composed of two \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" cliffhanger shorts that stylistically emulated early radio and film serials. The plots of these shorts would combine into story arcs spanning numerous episodes. The first and longest story arc was \"Jet Fuel Formula\" consisting of 40 shorts (20 episodes). Stories ranged from seeking the missing ingredient for a rocket fuel formula, to tracking the monstrous whale \"Maybe Dick\", to an attempt to prevent mechanical metal-munching moon mice from devouring the nation's television antennas. Rocky and Bullwinkle frequently encounter the two Pottsylvanian nogoodniks, Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale. In each adventure, the title characters stumble into an absurd situation, which leads to a sequence of further absurd situations.\nAt the end of most episodes, the narrator, William Conrad, would announce two humorous titles for the next episode that typically were puns of each other (and usually related more to the current predicament than to the plot of the next episode). For example, during an adventure taking place in a mountain range, the narrator would state, \"Be with us next time for 'Avalanche Is Better Than None,' or 'Snow's Your Old Man.'\" Such a 'This' or 'That' title announcement was borrowed from \"The Adventures of Sam Spade\" radio shows produced in 1946\u20131950. The narrator frequently spoke with the characters, thus breaking the fourth wall.\nEpisodes were introduced with one of four opening sequences:\nEpisodes ended with a bumper sequence in which a violent lightning storm destroys the landscape, appearing to engulf Rocky and Bullwinkle in the destruction and accompanied by dramatic piano music. The music would become more lighthearted, and the ground would scroll upward while the outlines of the heroes gradually appeared. We then see a smiling sun overlooking a barren field which rapidly fills with sunflowers until Rocky and Bullwinkle finally sprout from the ground.\nSupporting features.\nThe \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" shorts serve as \"bookends\" for popular supporting features, including:\nSome later syndication prints of \"The Bullwinkle Show\" include short segments of \"The World of Commander McBragg\": a tale-spinning windbag regaling a skeptical friend with exaggerated feats of heroism. These short features were never part of the Bullwinkle canon. They were actually prepared for \"Tennessee Tuxedo and His Tales\" (and later shown on \"The Underdog Show\"). Although the shorts were animated by the same company, Gamma Productions of Mexico, they were produced for Total Television, rather than Ward Productions. These segments were packaged with pre-1990 syndicated versions of \"The Bullwinkle Show\" and appear in syndicated episodes of \"The Underdog Show\", \"Dudley Do-Right and Friends\", and \"Uncle Waldo's Cartoon Show\". Since 1990, this feature has been deleted from the Bullwinkle library and has never been included in Bullwinkle home videos.\nRevival attempts.\nThere were a few attempts to revive \"Rocky &amp; Bullwinkle\" throughout the 1970s. A revival in 1981 parodied the Super Bowl. A script was written, storyboards were produced, the NBC network gave it a green light, but the project was canceled because of objections from the NFL (actual team owners were parodied, the Super Bowl championship was lampooned as the \"Stupor Bowl\", and Boris was fixing the game).\nAnother revival attempt took place at Disney in the mid-1980s, back when the company was distributing the show on VHS. Developed by Tad Stones and Michael Peraza Jr., the revival was named \"The Secret Adventures of Bullwinkle\" and would have been a modern take on the old Bullwinkle show, with the return of characters like Mr. Peabody and Sherman and Dudley Do-Right and would have featured new segments like \"Fractured Scary Tales\", a parody of horror films, and a new \"Mr. Know It All\" skit that, among other things, had Bullwinkle programming a VCR. Before the two presented their pitch, they discovered Disney did not own the \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" franchise, and the concept was abandoned.\nHome media.\nThe program debuted on home video with two compilation CED Videodiscs released by RCA during the format's rise in the early 1980s, featuring complete, uncut story arcs and accompanying alternating segments and bumpers. Volume 1 contained the complete story for \"Wossamotta U\", while volume 2 contained \"Goof Gas Attack\" and \"The Three Mooseketeers\".\nBuena Vista Home Video released the show on VHS, Betamax and LaserDisc in the early 1990s, under the title \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle\". These are presented differently from when broadcast. Two \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" chapters were sometimes edited together into one (removing the \"titles\" for the next chapters as well as part of the recap at the beginning of the next), usually showing the storyline in four or five chapters per video. For example, the 12-episode \"Wossamotta U\" adventure is reduced to five episodes, and runs about seven minutes shorter. The \"Bullwinkle Show\" closing was used on these.\nThe first eight videos were released under the \"Classic Stuff\" banner, with covers and titles being parodies of famous paintings or painters. Four more videos were released under the \"Funny Stuff\" banner but, unlike the first eight, these were not numbered, the video titles matched the title of the featured \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" storyline, and the covers represented scenes from shows (such as Bullwinkle pulling a rhino out of a hat as the cover for \"Painting Theft\" (the change in the banner might have been due to a video magazine publishing a letter criticizing the editing).\nIn 2002, Jay Ward Productions established a partnership with Classic Media called Bullwinkle Studios. From 2003 to 2005, the partnership produced DVDs of the first three seasons of the series, which were renamed (for legal reasons) \"Rocky &amp; Bullwinkle &amp; Friends\". Releases then stalled until 2010, when season 4 was released, in part to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the series. The complete series was released on January 4, 2011, marking the debut of season 5 on DVD. A standalone release of season 5 was released on March 29, 2011. The DVDs for the first three seasons were distributed by Sony Wonder, while seasons 4, 5, and Complete Series sets are currently distributed by Vivendi Entertainment. The complete series was re-released on DVD again on March 12, 2019, by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment, to celebrate the show's 60th anniversary.\nThe DVD releases differ somewhat from the originals. The original opening bumpers as seen on the network run were restored, but the title of the show was replaced with the name \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends\" (never used during the show's original run, and only on international broadcasts from 1997) and a modern logo with styling inconsistent with the rest of the animation (pictured) somewhat clumsily inserted into the original bumpers. A William Conrad sound-alike (Keith Scott) was used to announce the new title, which some viewers found jarring. In addition, a semi-transparent \"R&amp;B\" logo appears for five seconds at the beginning of each segment in the lower right-hand corner. Some segments were moved from their position in the original episodes. Also, the season 5 shows on DVD recycle supporting features found on the DVDs for the first four seasons. Mathematically, this makes sense, since the total number of supporting features (assuming two used per show) exactly equals the number of shows created during the first four seasons. The first set, most of the second set, and the fifth season set use the second opening and closing used for the \"Rocky and His Friends\" broadcast, while the last two story arcs in the second set, as well as the third- and fourth-season sets, use the original opening and closing from the \"Rocky and His Friends\" broadcast. Frank Comstock's musical themes are replaced on the sets with Fred Steiner's music produced for \"The Bullwinkle Show\" due to copyright issues regarding the former's music cues. These remasters are the first time a few of these music cues from Fred Steiner have been heard in the series. In addition, the first four season sets include optional Spanish-language audio tracks.\nIn 2005, Classic Media released a series of \"best of\" DVD compilations of popular segments of the series: two volumes of \"The Best of Rocky and Bullwinkle\", plus the single-volume \"The Best of Boris and Natasha\", \"The Best of Mr. Peabody and Sherman\", \"The Best of Fractured Fairy Tales\", and \"The Best of Dudley Do-Right\". These compilations contain episodes from the entire run of the show.\nOn October 30, 2012, Classic Media released a DVD called \"The Complete Fractured Fairy Tales\", which includes all 91 \"Fractured Fairy Tales\" segments.\nOn May 14, 2019, Universal Pictures Home Entertainment released a 2-disc DVD called \"Mr. Peabody &amp; Sherman: The Complete Collection\", which includes all 91 \"Peabody's Improbable History\" segments.\nDuring the time the show was available on Hulu (it was offered as a free series before it went to a subscription-only model), the DVD versions of the episodes were used instead of the syndication prints.\nGray market releases.\nYears after the Buena Vista VHS releases ended, another series of \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\" VHS tapes were released, both separately and as a boxed set. These videos included \"Upsidaisium\", \"The Last Angry Moose\", \"Metal-Munching Mice\", \"Much Mud\", and \"Rue Britannia\". However, these were released through GoodTimes Home Video and were not authorized by Ward Productions. The copies used were from 16\u00a0mm \"Bullwinkle Show\" prints. Some other companies also released unauthorized editions of \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\", including Nostalgia Family Video, which also released all 98 of \"The Bullwinkle Show\" package shows via 16\u00a0mm \"Bullwinkle Show\" prints, and Bridgestone Multimedia, which released eight episodes as \"Rocky and his Friends\" using an old broadcast 16\u00a0mm print.\nThe copyright status of these 98 episodes (along with some episodes of \"Hoppity Hooper\") is disputed. As of 2017, the copyright is generally recognized as valid, and attempts to post the gray-market releases on video sites have historically been greeted with DMCA take down notices.\nReboots.\nOn April 12, 2018, it was announced that a reboot of the series from DreamWorks Animation would premiere on Amazon Prime Video on May 11, 2018. The series is executive produced by Scott Fellows and Tiffany Ward (the daughter of Jay). The cast includes Tara Strong as Rocky, Brad Norman as Bullwinkle, Ben Diskin as Boris, Rachel Butera as Natasha, Piotr Michael as Fearless Leader, and Daran Norris as the Narrator.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69089", "revid": "30608830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69089", "title": "Katherine Swynford", "text": "Wife of John of Gaunt (c. 1349 \u2013 1403)\nKatherine Swynford, Duchess of Lancaster (born Katherine de Roet, c.\u20091349 \u2013 10 May 1403) was the third wife of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, the fourth (but third surviving) son of King Edward III.\nDaughter of a knight from Hainaut, Katherine, whose name is also spelled \"Katharine\" or \"Catherine\", was brought up at the English royal court, later found herself in the service of Blanche of Lancaster, the first wife of John of Gaunt. At that time, she was married to Hugh Swynford (or de Swynford), one of the Duke's knights. After the death of the Duchess, Katherine became the lady-in-waiting of her daughters, and also took care of them.\nAfter the death of Hugh Swynford, she became a member of the household of the Duke's new wife, Constance of Castile, and she was given management of the estates of her deceased husband in Lincolnshire: Coleby and Kettlethorpe. She soon became the mistress of John of Gaunt. From this connection, at least four children were born, who received the surname Beaufort after one of their father's French estates. Those four children were later recognized and legitimized by the Church.\nIn addition, Gaunt gave his mistress several estates, and also provided her with a generous allowance. Since the relationship between Katherine and John of Gaunt caused public condemnation, in 1381 the Duke was forced to break their relationship. Katherine then settled in a rented house in Lincoln.\nDespite the formal break, Katherine's relationship with her former lover and the rest of his family continued to be quite cordial. In 1387, she was made a Lady of the Garter by King Richard II, and shortly thereafter she became a member of the household of Mary de Bohun, wife of Henry Bolingbroke, eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt, who later became King of England under the name of Henry IV.\nIn the early 1390s, the love affair between Katherine and John of Gaunt resumed, and after the death of his second wife, the Duke unexpectedly married his mistress in 1396, which caused discontent among the English nobility. However, in the same year, a papal bull was received, recognizing the marriage as valid, and all the children born from the connection were legitimised. After the death of the Duke in 1399, Katherine retired to her rented house in Lincoln, where she died four years later. She was buried at Lincoln Cathedral.\nKatherine and John of Gaunt's descendants, the Beaufort family, played a major role in the Wars of the Roses. Henry VII, who became King of England in 1485, derived his claim to the throne from his mother, Margaret Beaufort, who was a great-granddaughter of Gaunt and Swynford. His legal claim to the throne, therefore, was through a cognatic and previously illegitimate line. Henry VII's first action was to declare himself king \"by right of conquest\" retroactively from 21 August 1485, the day before his army defeated King Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth. \nThrough her son, John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset, and her daughter, Joan Beaufort, Countess of Westmorland, Katherine became the ancestor of all English (and later British) kings since Edward IV.\nFamily.\nKatherine's father was Paon de Roet, a herald and, later, knight (who was \"probably christened as Gilles\"), who came to England in the entourage of Philippa of Hainaut, who married King Edward III. His origin is not documented. Payne's family nickname was Roe (French: \"Ro\u00ebt\"). On this basis, it has been suggested that he was related to the powerful family of the Lords of Le Roeulx, who owned a lordship in the County of Hainaut, whose name was spelled differently: \"Rouet\", \"Ro\u00eblt\", \"Ruet\". The origin of this genus has been traced back to Charlemagne. Their possessions were mainly concentrated around the city of Le R\u0153ulx, located 8 miles northeast of Mons. They also included the towns of Roux (located 40 miles east of Mons) and (20 miles south). However, according to the historian Alison Weir, there is reason to doubt this version of Paon's origin: the chronicler Jean Froissart, who himself was from Hainaut, was most likely well aware of his origin, but does not write anything about his nobility. As Paon's father, he points to a certain Jean de Ro\u00ebt (died 1305), son of Huon de Ro\u00ebt. Froissart gives no titles for any of them. At the same time, Weir notes that this version cannot be completely discarded: Paon de Roet could indeed come from a younger line of the Le Roeulx family, since the spelling of the generic names Roeulx and Ro\u00ebt are quite similar and they could well be interchangeable. In addition, the name Gilles, which Paon received at baptism, was quite common in the family of the Lords of Le Roeulx.\nAdditional evidence of the possible relationship of Paon de Roet with the Lords of Le Roeulx is the heraldic similarity of the coats of arms of Paon and the Le Roeulx family. The coat of arms of the city of Le R\u0153ulx is a golden lion on a green field with a wheel in its paw, which is a play on words: in French, \"roue\" means wheel. The same theme was adopted by Paon's family: the coat of arms of his daughter, Katherine Swynford, was three gold wheels on a red field, however, judging by the heraldic emblems on the vestments given to her by Lincoln Cathedral, on her coat of arms until 1396, when she married John of Gaunt, there were three simple silver wheels; she probably inherited this coat of arms from her father.\nBased on the description of his epitaph, Paon was King of Arms of Aquitaine for a time. In England, he was in the service of Queen Philippa. After the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War in 1340, he took part in the early stages of the English army, including fighting at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy and the siege of Calais. Not later than 1349, Paon returned to Hainaut, where he served Margaret II, Countess of Hainaut, sister of Queen Philippa.\nThere is no reliable information regarding Katherine's mother. According to some reports, Paon de Roet was married twice. It has been suggested that one of his wives was a relative of Queen Philippa, but there is no documentary evidence for this version. Alison Weir believes that two children were born from Paon's first wife: the eldest daughter, Isabel (also called Elizabeth) \u2014who later became in the Noble canoness of the very influential Saint Waltrude Collegiate Church in Mons (which, according to Weir, is evidence of Paon's close connection with the ruling family of Hainaut)\u2014, and a son, Walter. The mother of Katherine and another daughter, Philippa (who married the famous English poet Geoffrey Chaucer), was, according to Weir, Paon's second wife.\nLife.\nBirth and early years.\nKatherine's year of birth is not documented. In 1631, John Weever claimed that she was the eldest of Paon de Roet's daughters, but that would make her at least 28 years old at the time of her first marriage, which is much older than the typical age girls married. Alison Weir believes that Weever did not know about the existence of Elizabeth de Roet and the other two daughters. The author of the article of Katherine Swynford in the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" believes that she was born around 1350, with which Weir agrees. They calculate the possible year of her birth based on the fact that Katherine married for the first time around 1362/1363 and gave birth to her first child around 1363/1364, and the canonical age at which a girl could marry and have marital relations with her husband, in that time was 12 years old. Weir further clarifies that Katherine was most likely born in 1349. She was probably named after St. Catherine of Alexandria whose cult at that time was gaining strength.\nKatherine's birthplace is sometimes called Picardy, with which Alison Weir does not agree. This error, in her opinion, arises from the fact that some historians confuse Philippa de Roet, Katherine's sister, who was in the service of Queen Philippa, with certain Philippa Picard, but these are completely different personalities. Katherine was probably born in the County of Hainaut, as indicated by the account of the chronicler Jean Froissart, who calls her a \"resident\" from there, and the chronicler Henry Knighton, who calls her \"a certain foreigner\". It is possible that Katherine's birthplace was her father's possessions, located near Mons.\nIn 1351, her father was in the service of Margaret II, Countess of Hainaut, whose position was rather precarious. In 1350 she renounced her claims to the Counties of Holland and Zeeland in favor of her second son, William, hoping to keep Hainaut under her rule. However, in the spring of 1351, William also captured Hainaut, Margaret II's supporters were expelled, their castles were destroyed, and their positions were transferred to others. In December, Margaret II, hoping to enlist the support of her brother-in-law King Edward III, fled to England, among others Paon de Roet accompanied her. Given the uncertainty in Hainaut, he probably took his entire family with him \u2014his wife (if she was still alive) and children, except for Elizabeth, who remained in her abbey.\nSoon Margaret II agreed with her son. Under the terms of the agreement, Hainaut was returned to her. William himself arrived in England at the beginning of 1352, where he married Maud of Lancaster, a close relative of King Edward III. In March, Margaret II returned to Hainaut, accompanied by Paon de Roet. However, after August 1352, his references completely disappear from contemporary sources. Alison Weir believes that he died in early 1355, since it was then that his son Walter moved from the service of the Countess of Hainaut to the service of Edward the Black Prince, the eldest son and heir of King Edward III and Queen Philippa of Hainaut.\nPaon de Roet's daughters probably remained in England in the care of Queen Philippa, a \"noble and kind woman\", who at that time was over 40 years old. She herself was the mother of 12 children, the youngest of which, Thomas of Woodstock, was born in 1355. In addition, she had several other children from noble families in her upbringing. The Queen was interested in literature and art, was engaged in charity work, \"she was a generous, kind, wise and humbly pious lady\". Although many young girls were often sent to monasteries for education and training in good behavior and domestic skills, there is no evidence that Katherine was ever in a monastery. Her upbringing at the royal court is confirmed by Jean Froissart's report, which indicates that she was brought up at princely courts from her youth, as well as a reference in John of Gaunt's register to Katherine's nurse named Agnes Bonsergent, who was most likely appointed by the Queen to care for the young girl. At the same time, the Queen knew Dutch and Anglo-Norman language, which was the official language of the English court at this time. It soon began to be supplanted by English, which began to be used at court in 1362, and in the English Parliament in 1363, and literary works began to be created in it. However, the Norman dialect of French continued to be used by the English nobility in everyday life and for letters until the beginning of the 15th century. Apparently, Katherine also learned English, since she was the mistress of the Kettlethorpe estate for a long time, and the husband of her sister Philippa was Geoffrey Chaucer, who wrote his works in English.\nThe older children of King Edward III and Queen Philippa were much older than Katherine, but she was probably brought up with their younger children, Mary and Margaret. Jean Froissart reports that Katherine's tutor in her youth was Blanche of Lancaster, a close relative of the King and the bride of his third surviving son, John of Gaunt. At the same time, Blanche herself was brought up by Queen Philippa and was about 8 years older than Katherine. There is evidence that Katherine and Blanche of Lancaster were close friends. Apparently, the girl received a very good education, as evidenced by the fact that at the age of about 23 she was entrusted with the care of the daughters of Blanche of Lancaster, who grew up as highly cultured and educated girls. Although Katherine by origin did not belong to the highest nobility, her upbringing at the royal court opened up great prospects for her. In addition, probably through her upbringing, she acquired a certain piety and housekeeping skills, which in the future helped her effectively manage the knightly estates that were transferred to her. Also, she may have learned from the queen to be generous and diplomatic, which would come in handy later. Froissart reports that Katherine from her youth \"knew court etiquette perfectly\", in addition, she was a fairly skilled rider, as evidenced by the fact that she kept a dozen of her horses in the stables of John of Gaunt, and also once accompanied him during a horse ride on his estates. Since her daughter, Joan Beaufort, and both daughters of Blanche of Lancaster, whom she raised, were literate, it seems that Katherine was literate and could read and possibly write.\nFirst marriage.\nIn the 1360s, Katherine was in the service of Blanche of Lancaster, who by that time had become the wife of John of Gaunt. Jean Froissart mentions that Katherine was in the service of Blanche's family in her youth, but does not mention how old she was then. Gaunt's wife had her own household, independent of her husband, which had its own staff of officers, servants and ladies. The first record of Katherine in this new capacity dates to 24 January 1365, when she is mentioned as a servant. However, John of Gaunt's journals for an earlier period have not been preserved, and it is possible that her employment began at an earlier date. Blanche gave birth to her first daughter in March 1360, and she lived in the household of her mother-in-law, queen Phillipa, during her pregnancy. It is possible that Queen Philippa transferred Katherine to the service of Blanche at this time, and she probably accompanied Blanche to Leicester Castle for the confinement. Katherine's duties would have been to help care for the newborn, possibly to rock the baby. Such work was often entrusted to young girls of the age of Katherine, who at that time was about 10 years old. \nAt this time, Katherine herself married. This early marriage was probably arranged by John of Gaunt himself at the behest of his wife. Her first husband, Sir Hugh Swynford, descendant from an ancient English family, was a professional soldier and a tenant of the Duke of Lancaster. At first, he served the Black Prince, who probably knighted him. In 1361, he moved to the service of John of Gaunt, in the same year inheriting his ancestral domains after the death of his father. For a long time, it was believed that the marriage was concluded around 1366-1367; however, Alison Weir does not agree with this. Weir posits that Katherine's eldest daughter in 1368 was old enough to be placed in the chambers of the daughters of the Duke of Lancaster. In addition, there are indications that another daughter was born in this marriage, who became a nun in 1377, and the earliest age at which this is possible was 13-14 years. On this basis, Weir considers that the marriage took place in 1361 or 1362. Katherine was definitely married by 24 January 1365 when, in the register of the Bishop of Lincoln, John Bokyngham, she is referred to as \"Katherine Swynford\". The marriage may have been celebrated in one of the Duke of Lancaster's residences, possibly the chapel of Savoy Palace.\nAlthough some researchers wrote that Katherine got married in an old aristocratic house, this is not true. Despite the fact that the Swynford family were quite an ancient and branched family, whose representatives had possessions in Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, Essex and Suffolk, they were not aristocrats, but ordinary landowners, and never rose above the knightly rank. Hugh was not particularly rich, he owned only two estates in Lincolnshire \u2014\nColeby and Kettlethorpe, and none of them were profitable enough, and they were acquired by his father relatively recently. His main income came from the salary for his service with the Duke of Lancaster.\nHugh lived mainly on the estate of Kettlethorpe, located 12 miles west of Lincoln, that became the main residence of Katherine for many subsequent years. For 40 years she was called \"Lady Kettlethorpe\". The size of the estate was about 3,000 acres, most of which fell on the forest. It also included the villages of Lauterton, Newton-on-Trent and Fenton. Another Swynford estate, Colby, located seven miles south of Lincoln, was divided into two equal parts, each of which was about 90 acres of land and 15 acres of pasture. In 1367, the southern part of the estate generated an income of 54 shillings and 4d, with the rent paid to John of Gaunt as Earl of Richmond being 2 shillings. The other part of it belonged to the King and made up half of the knight's fief. In 1361, it did not bring much income, since the land was barren, and the dovecote and mill lay in ruins; its cost was 37 shillings and 10 pence \u2014a third of the amount once paid by Hugh's father for its purchase.\nAlthough Hugh Swynford was quite poor, he was able to receive a knighthood and provide his wife with a social position. It is not known how happy the marriage was, although, according to Alison Weir, it is unlikely that Katherine experienced warm or lasting feelings for her husband, due to her later connection with John of Gaunt. Hugh Swynford was often absent, participating in various military campaigns. When she married, Katherine became quite active in managing the estate of Kettlethorpe.\nFrom her marriage, Katherine gave birth to several children. The eldest was probably a daughter, Blanche. In 1368 she was old enough to be placed in the chambers of the daughters of John of Gaunt, probably as a playmate. Alison Weir dates her birth to 1363. The origin of Blanche was recorded in 1396 by John of Gaunt, who, submitting a petition to the Pope for permission to marry Katherine, indicated that he was the godfather of her daughter, \u201cborn from another man\u201d, adding that he did not advertise this fact. Some researchers have suggested that the Duke was the real father of Katherine's daughter, and this was why he kept the fact that he was the godfather a secret. However, Weir pointed out that the real father could not be the godfather for his own daughter. At the same time, John of Gaunt himself directly indicated that he was not her father, and it is unlikely that he would lie to the Pope, putting himself at risk. Considering that he recognized four children born by Katherine from their love affair without any problems, there was no problem for him to recognize another daughter. Therefore, the father of the indicated daughter (by whom, apparently, Blanche was meant) was precisely Hugh Swynford. The girl was probably named after the Duke's wife; she later enjoyed the patronage of Gaunt: in 1375 he granted Katherine custody of the heir Sir Robert Deincourt, who was betrothed to Blanche. Weir also suggested that Duchess Blanche herself could have been the godmother of Katherine's daughter, which is why the girl could have been placed in her daughters' chambers.\nThe next daughter, Margaret, was born about 1364, and in 1377 she became a nun at Barking Abbey. Thomas Stapleton in 1846 also hypothesized that another daughter, Dorothy, who married Thomas Thymelby of Pulham near Horncastle (died 1390), Sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1380, could have been born in this marriage. Although a number of researchers reject this statement, indicating that the name Dorothy was not used in England until the 16th century, however, Alison Weir indicates that there are cases of its use in medieval England, and the image of St. Dorothea of Caesarea, known in England since the time of the Anglo-Saxon conquest, is often found on stained-glass windows, especially at the end of the 14th-15th centuries. Weir admits that the unusual choice of name could be associated with her birth on the saint's memorial day \u2013 6 February. In addition, Weir points out that in the church at Irnham on the tombs and stained glass windows there are coats of arms of several prominent Lincolnshire families related by marriage, including Swynford and Thymelby. In her opinion, Dorothy could have been born around 1366. It is possible that other children who died in infancy could have been born in the marriage.\nLike many other families in the service of John of Gaunt, Katherine and her husband often lived at the ducal court, and specially appointed officials managed their estates in their absence. At the same time, Hugh Swynford spent a significant part of his married life in various foreign military campaigns of the Duke in France and Spain. In particular, he participated in the military campaigns of 1366 and 1370. Most likely, Katherine continued to serve the Duchess between births, and her growing children could be brought up together with the children of the Ducal couple.\nKatherine's main duty at the ducal court was probably the care of the ducal children. Of the seven children born in the marriage of John of Gaunt and Blanche of Lancaster, only three survived to adulthood: two daughters, Philippa (later Queen consort of Portugal) and Elizabeth (by her three marriages Countess of Pembroke, Duchess of Exeter and Lady Cornwall), and one son, Henry Bolingbroke, who later became King of England under the name of Henry IV.\nShortly before 21 January 1365, John Bokyngham, Bishop of Lincoln, conferred on Katherine the privilege of privately church worship whenever she visited Leicester, which, according to Alison Weir, indicates that she was not only devout, but also a quite important and respected parishioner. In addition, to perform worship, she needed a chapel, a prayer house or a separate room, as well as a portable altar. However, Weir believes that it is unlikely that Katherine enjoyed such privilege in 1365.\nIn November 1366, Hugh Swynford traveled to Aquitaine to join John of Gaunt's military expedition to Castile. Katherine, who was expecting a child, remained to serve Duchess Blanche, who was also pregnant. By Christmas, the Duchess had settled in her husband's Bolingbroke Castle, where she gave birth to a son, Henry, in April. In mid-February 1367, Katherine moved to Lincoln, where on 24 February she gave birth to a son, . He was baptized at St. Margaret's Church of Lincoln Cathedral and named after his and one of his godparents, Canon Thomas Sutton.\nBlanche of Lancaster, wife of John of Gaunt, died on 12 September 1368 at Tutbury Castle, Staffordshire. It is not known whether Katherine was present, but she, along with other ladies from the household of the late Duchess, accompanied the funeral cortege with her remains, who went south, and may have attended her funeral in London, at St. Paul's Cathedral. The death of the Duchess of Lancaster brought about major changes in Katherine's life. Usually, after the death of a noble lady, her household was dismissed. However, John of Gaunt had three small children to take care of. Katherine, who seemed to be highly regarded in the Duke's household, got along well with the children. Therefore, it has been suggested that she remained in the nursery. Although there are statements that she was their governess at this point, Alison Weir indicates that other noble ladies performed these functions. In 1369, John of Gaunt appointed Alice FitzAlan, Lady Holland (cousin of the late Duchess) as the children's governess, with a salary of \u00a366 13s 4d per year. She performed these duties until November 1371. In addition, in 1370, the Duke granted Eileen, the wife of his squire Edward Herberge, a pension of \u00a3100 for \"the diligence and good service she has rendered to our dear daughter Philippa\". Weir believes that Eileen Gerberge was a trusted lady who was present at the time of the Duchess's death and was then appointed to look after Philippa. She was later assigned to the service of Gaunt's second wife.\nFrom 1368 until at least September 1369, Blanche Swynford, Katherine's eldest daughter, lived in the ducal household as a lady-in-waiting to Philippa and Elizabeth, daughters of John of Gaunt. Since the registers of the Duke's household for the years 1369\u20131372 have not been preserved, it is not known how long she remained in this capacity after 1369. There is no evidence that her mother lived at this time in the ducal house. Alison Weir suggests that Katherine, who had her own family, lived at that time in her estate of Kettlethorpe.\nIn August\u2013September 1369, Hugh Swynford, as part of the army of John of Gaunt, participated in a military campaign in France, where the Hundred Years' War resumed; he returned to England probably in November. On 14 August of that year, Queen Philippa died. On 1 September, King Edward III ordered that mourning clothes be provided to his family and the servants of the late Queen. This included clothing for Blanche Swynford, \"damuselle of the daughters of the Duke of Lancaster\", which, according to Weir, indicates that the Queen showed concern for Katherine and her family until the end of her life. It is likely that she, being a pupil of the Queen, was present on 29 January 1370 at her solemn funeral in Westminster Abbey, after which she returned to Kettlethorpe.\nIn 1370 Hugh Swynford again went on a military expedition with the Duke of Lancaster, this time to Aquitaine. When John of Gaunt, who had married Constance of Castile in the autumn of 1371, returned to England, Hugh no longer accompanied him. Probably due to illness, Katherine's husband died in Aquitaine on 13 November 1371.\nMistress of the Duke of Lancaster.\nKatherine's position after the death of her husband was not the best, since his financial condition was poor, and she had several small children to care for. But the Duke of Lancaster came to her aid. Although no documentary evidence of Katherine's presence in the household of the new Duchess before March 1373 has survived, there are facts that, according to Alison Weir, indicate that John of Gaunt accepted Katherine into the service of his new wife, possibly in the same quality, as with the late Duchess Blanche. In the spring of 1372 John of Gaunt and the King helped her financially; and in the summer of the same year, Katherine was present at the birth of the first child by Duchess Constance, a daughter called Catherine. There is also documentary evidence that in the same year, Philippa Chaucer, Katherine's sister, was in the service of the Duchess. In addition, the fact that it was Katherine who was chosen to inform the King about the birth of his new granddaughter speaks of the position she occupied.\nThe Duke's new wife settled into Hertford Castle in early 1372, and Gaunt's three children from his first marriage were also sent there. Katherine and her sister also resided there, becoming members of the Duchess Constance's household. It can be assumed that Katherine's duties included looking after the Duke's children, who she knew well.\nIt is not established when exactly Katherine became John of Gaunt's mistress. Jean Froissart wrote that the love affair began during the lifetime of Blanche of Lancaster and Hugh Swynford, but he sometimes made mistakes in his chronicle (in particular, he pointed out that Katherine gave birth to three children from John of Gaunt, although there were four of them). Therefore, according to Alison Weir, his testimony cannot be considered reliable, because the people who provided him with information could be wrong. Also, some later studies indicate that the love affair between Katherine and John of Gaunt began during the life of her first husband, and her eldest son Thomas Swynford was \"a child from two fathers\", but this seems unlikely to modern researchers. In the document of the grant of an annuity to Katherine Swynford by King Richard II dated 7 June 1392, it is indicated that her first-born son with the Duke of Lancaster, John Beaufort, was 21 years old. Based on this, he must have been born between June 1371 and June 1372. However, Alison Weir doubts that he could have been born at this time, as from June 1370 to November 1371 the Duke was in Aquitaine, where in September 1371 he married Constance of Castile. Although it is possible that Katherine could have joined her husband in Aquitaine, Weir considers this unlikely as wives rarely accompanied their husbands to war. In addition, someone had to manage the estates in England and take care of small children during Gaunt's absence. In a petition to the Pope dated 1 September 1396, John of Gaunt indicates that the affair began when he was married to Constance of Castile, and Katherine was free from marriage. Therefore the affair, according to him, began after the death of Katherine's husband. Based on this, Weir concludes that most likely the love affair began in the late autumn of 1372, when there was a significant increase in Katherine's social status in the Lancastrian household.\nDue to Hugh Swynford's heir, Thomas, being a minor at the time of his father's death, the family estates usually passed into the custody of the overlord, in this case the King and Duke of Lancaster. However, they quickly took measures to improve the financial situation of Hugh's widow, which was unusual for that time, and was explained, apparently, because the affair between Katherine and John of Gaunt had already begun. The first documentary evidence is a gift of \u00a310 made by the Duke at the Savoy Palace on 1 May 1372 \"to our very dear damoiselle Katherine de Swynford\". On 15 May, he generously increased her annuity from the Duchy of Lancaster from 20 to 50 marks \"for the good and pleasant services she rendered to our dear companion [Blanche] ... and for the very great love which our companion rendered to Katherine.\" On 8 June King Edward III, probably at the suggestion of his son, ordered his escheator to transfer her widow's share to Katherine, provided that she would give her word not to remarry without the consent of the King; she entered into her possession on 26 June, when she took the oath, and on 20 June, the Duke gave her custody of all the possessions that her son was supposed to inherit. As a result, Katherine, until her son attained his legal majority of age, received the management of the estate of Kettlethorpe, as well as a third of the estate of Colby.\nThe inquisition post mortem for the succession of Hugh Swynford took place on 24 June in Lincolnshire and 25 July 1372 at Navenby. As a result, Thomas Swynford was recognized as his father's heir, but it was noted that the estates of Kettlethorpe and Colby were in poor condition and were worth almost nothing. The King and the Duke of Lancaster again came to the aid of Katherine. As a result, on 12 September, in exchange for \u00a320, which she had to pay to the treasury, Katherine was given the remaining 2/3 of the Colby estate, as well as the right to arrange the marriage of her son Thomas.\nKatherine most probably attended Duchess Constance at the birth of her daughter on 31 March 1373, as she conveyed the news of this birth to King Edward III, for which he awarded her 20 marks. This happened, according to Alison Weir, in the summer of 1372. However, after her own pregnancy became apparent, Katherine most likely returned to Kettlethorpe.\nBetween 1373 and 1381, Katherine bore at least four children to the Duke of Lancaster: three sons and a daughter. The dates of their births are not mentioned in the documents, however, the researchers calculated the possible years of birth based on indirect data. The eldest of these was John, who was probably born in the winter of 1372\u20131373. Alison Weir believes that Katherine's eldest son from her affair may have been the child for whose baptism rich cloths were sent to Lincoln in February 1373. He received his name in honor of his father, and also received the surname Beaufort (which was worn by the rest of the children of Katherine and John of Gaunt). It is associated with the Beaufort Castle in Champagne, which went to the duke as part of the Lancastrian inheritance. However, it is possible that this could have been a compliment to Roger de Beaufort, brother of Pope Gregory XI, who was a prisoner of Gaunt in the 1370s and with whom he later maintained close diplomatic contacts. Old studies claimed that all of Katherine's children were born in Beaufort Castle, but this information is false: John of Gaunt never visited it, and in 1369 he sold the domain. According to Weir, John was most likely born in Lincoln, and his childhood years were spent in Kettlethorpe, since John of Gaunt tried not to advertise the affair with Katherine.\nBy 31 March 1373, Katherine returned to Savoy Palace, where John of Gaunt lived at that time. Henry Knighton, writing his chronicle after 1378, indicates that Katherine served in the household of Duchess Constance, but none of the Duke's grants made to his mistress during this period state that they were given for service to his wife. Although Katherine appears to have occasionally visited the Duchess, she was not her lady-in-waiting. John of Gaunt found another post for her, appointing her mistress as the governess to Philippa and Elizabeth, his daughters from his first marriage. It is possible that Katherine also took care of his son Henry for some time, until another tutor was appointed to him in 1374. The exact date of Katherine's appointment to this position is unknown. In 1368\u20131372, the daughters of John of Gaunt, judging by the surviving news, had other governesses. Alison Weir believes that the appointment took place in the spring of 1373 \u2014after the birth of Katherine's son John Beaufort. She had enough skills to care for children. In addition to her own, Katherine apparently helped in the care of the ducal children during the life of Duchess Blanche. Although the position itself was essentially a ploy so that the Duke could see his mistress, there is evidence that Katherine spent quite a lot of time with the Duke's daughters. Having received official status, she received a legitimate reason for living in the ducal household.\nIt is likely that by 1373, the Castilian ladies of his wife knew that the Duke had a mistress, as a result of which, angry because of their gossip, John of Gaunt sent them to Nuneaton Priory. By the end of 1374 the ladies, weary of the monastic regime, begged to be allowed to leave Nuneaton, but their request was only granted in 1375, when the Duke allowed them to settle in Leicester with some of his trusted vassals. He later arranged marriages for some of the ladies. Apparently, Duchess Constance also knew about her husband's affair, but for her the return of the Castilian throne was much more important.\nIn the summer of 1373, John of Gaunt was preparing for a new military expedition to France. There is evidence that Katherine at that time visited the Duke at the Northbourn estate, where she was from 27 June to 16 July. Most likely, there she complained to John of Gaunt that her allowance was not paid on time; as a result, on 27 June he wrote an angry letter to John de Stafford ordering that the annuity promised to her be paid without delay to \"the dear and beloved Madame Katherine de Swynford\". It is probable that after this she returned to Kettlethorpe, since the Duke promised to send her venison and firewood there. She later moved to Tutbury Castle, where John's wife and four legitimate children were to live during his absence from England.\nOn 12 September 1374, Katherine may have been present, along with John of Gaunt, who had returned from France, at a memorial ceremony in honor of the late Duchess Blanche, held at St. Paul's Cathedral, although there is no documentary evidence of this. On 26 September, the duke, while at Savenby, ordered John de Stafford to pay Katherine a gift of \u00a325. By 1376, she was in charge of the household of Gaunt's daughters, who were also given their own rooms and wardrobes.\nKatherine probably celebrated Christmas of 1375 with John of Gaunt at Eltham Palace, and on 1 January 1376 the Duke granted his mistress the lucrative wardship of the heir Sir Robert Deincourt, and the right to marry him with Blanche Swynford, Katherine's eldest daughter from her first marriage, who was approaching the marriageable age of 12 years. It is likely that John of Gaunt planned the marriage of Blanche with the young heir, but there was no evidence of her future fate, from which Alison Weir concluded that Blanche Swynford died young, before the wedding took place. Robert himself, having become an adult, in the years 1387\u20131392 requested his inheritance. On 2 January the Duke, who went to Hertford Castle, instructed to pay Katherine 1 mark, and also appointed her an annual annuity of 50 marks, possibly due to the fact that she was again pregnant. On 14 January John of Gaunt ordered that a barrel of the best Gascon wine be sent to Katherine, who had returned to Kettlethorpe.\nKatherine spent the summer of 1375 in Kenilworth and at that time, according to Alison Weir, she gave birth to her second son from John of Gaunt. She probably went to Lincoln to give birth, since in August the Duke ordered that the local midwife be rewarded. Also on 24 July, John of Gaunt ordered that 60 oak trees be sent to Kettlethorpe to renovate Katherine's estate. In the same year, she was paid 100 marks. Also, according to the order of the Duke, which may date back to 1375 or 1377, Katherine was presented with tenement houses on the east bank of the River Witham in the Lincolnshire port of Boston, formerly owned by Geoffrey de Sutton. These included the estate of Gisors Hall, which included a house with two hectares of land, a garden and outbuildings, which was allocated by John of Gaunt from the County of Richmond until 1372. Later Gisors Hall was bequeathed by Katherine to her son Thomas Beaufort.\nThe second son of Katherine and John of Gaunt seems to have been Henry Beaufort, who was named probably after Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster. Although it has been hypothesized that the future Cardinal was the youngest of Katherine's sons, since in 1398 he was called a \"boy\" when he was appointed Bishop of Lincoln, but, according to Alison Weir, this epithet was simply a derisive comment on Henry's elevation to the bishopric at the age of 23. The 17th-century genealogist Francis Sanford lists the Cardinal as the second son, and he is also listed second in the Beaufort list of the Papal bull for their legitimization of 1397.\nIn August 1375, Katherine accompanied John of Gaunt on his trip to Leicester. It is possible that it was then that the mayor of Leicester, William Ferrour, spent 16 shillings to present wine as a gift to \"Lady Katherine Swynford, mistress of the Duke of Lancaster\". The record of this payment is dated 1375\u20131376 and is the first documentary evidence that John of Gaunt's love affair became public. Anthony Goodman suggests that this news indicates that Katherine usurped the rightful place of the Duchess of Lancaster, but Alison Weir does not agree with this; according to her, Katherine avoided involvement in politics and tried to keep a low profile, since very few cases are known when she used her position. In addition, she apparently maintained her status as a widow. In September, Katherine returned to Kettlethorpe.\nOn 25 July 1376, John of Gaunt granted Katherine Swynford, who was probably again pregnant, custody and right of marriage over Bertram de Soneby's heiress. By 1376\u20131377 is the first recorded payment for the cost of the wardrobe and chambers of Philippa of Lancaster in the amount of \u00a350, paid to Katherine. Also by order of the Duke, she was to be paid \u00a3100 in equal installments at Easter and St. Michael's to cover expenses for which she was to account. It is probable that during the meeting of the Good Parliament and the turbulent events that followed, Katherine took care of John of Gaunt's daughters, possibly living in the Savoy Palace.\nIt is likely that John of Gaunt's legitimate children perceived his illegitimate children as brothers and sisters, possibly including Katherine's children from her first marriage in the family circle. According to the surviving information, Katherine and John were good and caring parents. So the \"Anonymous Chronicle\" reports that Katherine \"loved the Duke of Lancaster and the children born from him\".\nIn 1376, at the request of Gaunt, the Pope granted Katherine permission to have a portable altar in her residence in the Diocese of Lincoln.\nAt the end of 1376, Katherine disappears from the sources; it is likely that this is due to the birth of her third child by John of Gaunt, which occurred in early 1377. Perhaps that is why on 25 February 1377, the King allowed his son to give his mistress the estates of Gringley and Whitley (Nottinghamshire), which brought an annual income of \u00a3150. Also, the Duke at the same time sent Katherine a barrel of wine as a gift. Sydney Armitage-Smith, author of a study on John of Gaunt, suggested that Thomas Beaufort, the youngest of the sons of John of Gaunt and Katherine, was born in early 1377, but Alison Weir believes that, most likely, their only daughter Joan Beaufort was born then. She was probably named in honor of the Dowager Princess of Wales, Joan of Kent. The child's birthplace may have been Kettlethorpe, but it is possible that both Joan and Thomas were born at Pleshey Castle in Essex. Anthony Goodman, who adhered to the traditional date of Joan's birth (1379), believed that since John of Gaunt was hated in England, and anyone who was dear to him was at risk, Katherine was taken to Pleshey Castle, which at that time belonged to Joan Fitzalan, Dowager Countess of Hereford. She was a close relative of the Duke's first wife through her mother. In addition, in 1376 her daughter Eleanor de Bohun married Thomas of Woodstock, John of Gaunt's younger brother. In favor of this birthplace of Katherine's younger children, the fact that Joan Fitzalan was the godmother of Thomas Beaufort, and later he was taken into the house of the Countess's youngest daughter, Mary de Bohun (later wife of Henry Bolingbroke, John of Gaunt's only surviving legitimate son), testifies in favor of this place of birth. Alison Weir also adheres to the same version of Joan's birthplace. Historians suggest that Katherine and John of Gaunt may have had other children who did not survive infancy.\nAfter receiving Gringley (located 12 miles northwest of Kettlethorpe) and Wheatley (3 miles south of Greenley and 9 miles northwest of Kettlethorpe), which the King confirmed on 4 March 1377, Katherine became a reasonably wealthy woman. In addition, in the same year, John of Gaunt granted her two more estates in Lincolnshire \u2013 Waddington (5 miles south of Lincoln) and Wellingore (12 miles south of Lincoln).\nFormal break with John of Gaunt.\nIn June 1377, King Edward III died. It is possible that Katherine, who was the governess of the late monarch's granddaughters, was in London during this period, but it is unlikely that she often saw the Duke busy preparing for the coronation of his infant nephew and new King Richard II. Although John of Gaunt was not officially a member of the regency council, but among his 12 lords there were 5 of his supporters, so he could influence decisions. Already on 20 July, the young King confirmed the grant to Katherine Swynford of the Gringley and Wheatley estates, and on 24 July the Duke again presented her with oaks for the repair of Kettlethorpe.\nThe first public appearance of John of Gaunt with Katherine Swynford, which made their affair explicit, is in March 1378. Thomas Walsingham wrote in his \"Chronicle\" that the Duke, \"casting aside every shame of man and the fear of God, allowed himself to be seen riding through the Duchy with his concubine, a certain Katherine Swynford\". Further, the chronicler reports that the people were indignant and despaired because of such scandalous behavior. In his opinion, it was because of Katherine, whom he called \"a witch and a whore\", that \"the most terrible curses and vile insults began to circulate against the Duke\". Walsingham's account is the first mention of the name of the Duke's mistress in chronicles. In the future, a negative attitude towards Katherine is also found in the messages of some other chroniclers. Even Henry Knighton, pro-Lancastrian, did not approve of Gaunt's mistress: \"a certain foreigner Katherine Swynford lived in his wife's house, whose relationship with him was very suspicious\". In addition, the chronicler points out that the love affair disturbed members of the Duke's family, who feared its consequences. John of Gaunt himself in 1381 said that clerics and servants repeatedly warned him about the detrimental effect of his connection with Katherine on his reputation, but he ignored them.\nIn April 1378, Katherine probably returned to Kettlethorpe, where she received occasional visits from the Duke. In addition, during this period, her sister, Philippa Chaucer, settled on the estate. In later years, Katherine seems to have used some of her income to buy small plots of land in nearby villages, expanding her holdings in Kettlethorpe and Colby.\nOn 20 January 1381, the Duke gave Katherine the custody of the lands and wardship of the heiress of the late Alice de Thorsby, a member of his household. These properties were located about twelve miles west of Kettlethorpe. In return, she was to provide all the services \"due and customary\". However, the next day this condition about services was removed. According to Alison Weir, this award is connected with the birth this month of their last known child, Thomas Beaufort.\nJohn of Gaunt's love affair with Katherine Swynford caused public condemnation. Modern chroniclers, who called him a bigamist, condemned the fact that the income of the Duke's mistress was greater than that of his wife. Walsingham relates that after the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, the Duke \"blamed himself for the death of [those] who had been overthrown by unholy violence\" and \"reproached himself for his connection with Katherine Swynford, or rather forswearing her\". As a result, in July, John of Gaunt was forced to officially announce his intention to part with his mistress and reconcile with his wife. Katherine resigned her position as governess and left the Lancaster household in September, receiving an annuity of \u00a3200. She settled in Lincoln, renting for 50 shillings per year a house in Minster Yard formerly occupied by the Chancellors of Lincoln Cathedral. She remained in this residence until at least 1393.\nLady Kettlethorpe.\nHowever, the break was only formal. Katherine's relationship with John of Gaunt and the rest of his family continued to be quite cordial. In 1382 she and her daughter Joan Beaufort visited Mary de Bohun, the wife of Henry Bolingbroke, who was expecting a child. The Duke continued to provide for her and their children, and when John of Gaunt himself needed money, Katherine lent him money, for example in 1386, when she helped the Duke to finance his Castilian expedition. In 1387 she received a New Year's gift from Mary de Bohun. In the early 1390s, she often visited the court of John of Gaunt, where a stable and a dozen horses were allocated for her convenience. In addition, in 1382, the Duke placed Thomas Swynford, Katherine's son from her first marriage, in the retinue of Henry Bolingbroke. At the same time, apparently, until at least 1389, John of Gaunt kept his promise and did not enter into a love relationship with his former mistress, especially since during this period he was mostly outside of England.\nOn 20 October 1383 King Richard II, who apparently sympathized with Katherine, granted her the right to fence 300 acres of land and forest on the estate of Kettlethorpe, and in April 1387, he made her a Lady of the Order of the Garter, which during this period was considered the highest honor an Englishwoman could receive. According to Alison Weir, this was a tacit recognition of Katherine's special relationship with John of Gaunt. In addition, it is possible that in this way the King tried to enlist the support of his uncle against the opposition that existed at court, dissatisfied with the sovereign's dependence on favorites. In August 1388 a new set of clothing made of scarlet wool was paid for by the King for Katherine, and in the same year she arrived at Windsor Castle to participate, along with 10 other ladies of the Order, in a large feast hosted by King Richard II on St. George's Day.\nOn Christmas Day of 1387, Katherine agreed, along with her daughter Joan Beaufort, to become part of the household of Mary de Bohun. As a result, she took a place of honor in the royal court. It is likely that her duties included looking after their rapidly growing family, starting with the infant Henry of Monmouth (future King Henry V).\nIn November 1389, John of Gaunt returned to England after a three-year absence. Although there are no records of Katherine during this period, and she herself seems to have spent most of her time in Lincolnshire, there is much evidence that the Duke at this time began to plan for the future of his illegitimate children. The second son, Henry Beaufort, destined for the service of the church, began to receive church benefices from January 1390. The eldest son, John Beaufort, who \"was a great favorite of his father\", in the spring of 1390 took part in a large jousting tournament at Saint-Inglevert near Calais, after which he began to participate in military campaigns. Also in December 1390, the King authorized the Duke to grant a number of estates in Northamptonshire to John Beaufort. Around 1392, John of Gaunt arranged the marriage of his daughter Joan Beaufort to Robert Ferrers of Wem, and before 28 September 1397 the Duke also orchestrated the wedding of John Beaufort with Margaret Holland, uterine niece of King Richard II.\nApparently, in 1391, relations between Katherine and John of Gaunt resumed, after which she again began to occupy an important place in his life. It is possible that they received this opportunity due to the fact that at that time the Duke's wife began to live separately from her husband. However, during this period, Katherine did not live permanently with Gaunt, continuing at least until 1393 to rent a house in Lincoln. It is possible that they again became lovers, but at the same time they tried to behave cautiously.\nDuchess of Lancaster.\nOn 24 March 1394, Constance of Castile, 2nd wife of John of Gaunt, died. Apparently, after that, the Duke decided to marry Katherine. In addition to the feelings that he had for his long-term mistress, most likely, in this way he also wanted to legitimize his children.\nAlthough Thomas Walsingham argued that the planned marriage came as a surprise to the King, Alison Weir notes that this is unlikely. The marriage itself took place at Lincoln Cathedral on 13 January 1396. After that, Katherine became the Duchess of Lancaster and for some time the first lady of the Kingdom, since the first wife of King Richard II had died by that time, and he entered into a second marriage in November. To emphasize her status and smooth out memories of the past, she made her coat of arms instead of the silver rings depicted on the coat of arms of de Roet family, the three wheels of St. Catherine \u2013her patroness, who was associated with royalty and virtue. After the wedding, the ducal couple made a short trip to the north, after which, by 23 January, they settled for some time in Pontefract Castle.\nThis marriage caused alarm at the royal court and general disapproval, for it was considered a . For the first time in her new status, Katherine apparently appeared at court in April 1396 at the celebration of St. George's Day. John of Gaunt's brother, Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, and his wife, Eleanor de Bohun, were most outraged. At the same time, the ducal couple did not have any document allowing the marriage \u2013only the oral permission of the Pope, so there were fears that the marriage could be challenged and annulled. Therefore, the Duke wrote to the Pope, asking for apostolic permission. In anticipation, the couple settled in Ely Place in London. On 16 May John of Gaunt appointed \u00a3600 per year for the maintenance of his wife. In addition, the new Duchess had her own wardrobe and household.\nOn 1 September 1396 Pope Boniface IX declared the marriage of John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford as valid by a bull. In addition, he legitimized their children born before marriage \u2013the Beauforts. This news seems to have reached England before 7 October, when the ducal couple sailed from England to Calais, where a lavish ceremony took place on 4 November, as a result of which King Richard II married Princess Isabella of France, daughter of King Charles VI. According to Jean Froissart, it was Katherine who until the end of the summer \"was the companion of the young Queen of England\", probably becoming her companion immediately after the marriage. The King, Queen and their retinue returned to England on 12 November and the next day they solemnly entered London.\nThe legitimization of the Beauforts had a beneficial effect on their later careers. In addition, shortly after the return of John of Gaunt and Katherine to England, their widowed daughter, Joan Beaufort, was married to Ralph Neville, 4th Baron Neville de Raby, a powerful northern noblemen. In February 1397, King Richard II confirmed the Beauforts' legitimation by a decree during a meeting of the English Parliament. In addition, on 10 February John Beaufort received the title of Earl of Somerset, and the next day, the King approved joint ownership of John of Gaunt and his wife for estates in Yorkshire, Norfolk and Sussex, which the Duke received in 1372 in exchange for the Earldom of Richmond. Katherine retained control over them even after the death of her husband. Also, a number of awards were made to the youngest son, Thomas Beaufort, and Henry Beaufort became a Deacon and Chancellor of Oxford University.\nDuring the first 18 months of their marriage, Katherine was often at court, where she held a prominent position. However, little is known about how she lived in the subsequent period until the death of her husband.\nJohn of Gaunt's health declined in the last years of his life. In addition, his heir, Henry Bolingbroke, was on bad terms with King Richard II, and in September 1398 he was expelled from England by royal order, which, by all accounts, aggravated the Duke's illness. Its nature is unknown, but it has been suggested that the John of Gaunt had some kind of venereal disease. If this suspicion is correct, then, as Alison Weir points out, it is possible that Katherine could also have been infected with it.\nOn 3 February 1399, John of Gaunt, who lived at Leicester Castle, made a detailed will: according to him, furniture, jewelry and rich clothes were left to his wife. He died on the same day.\nLast years.\nImmediately after the death of the Duke, the royal escheators unlawfully took into custody all the possessions belonging to Katherine, as well as the Lancaster estates. As a result, she had to make a request to King Richard II, who on 9 March 1399 ordered the estates to be returned. Also, the sovereign confirmed to the Dowager Duchess the annual annuity of \u00a31,000, levied on the lands of the Duchy of Lancaster, which her husband assigned to her. At the same time, on 18 March, without any legal pretext, the King announced that he was replacing the 10-year exile of Henry Bolingbroke with a life sentence, and would confiscate those possessions that he was supposed to inherit. Although King Richard II did not grieve very much about the death of his uncle, he allowed Katherine to keep the lands she received as a dowry, and in May, when his royal escheators seized the lands that belonged to her before her marriage, he ordered them to be returned. After that, the Dowager Duchess tried to keep aloof and did not protest against the confiscation of the Lancastrian inheritance. Not wanting to live on one of her estates, Katherine left for Lincoln. She passed custody of Kettlethorpe and Colby to her son, Thomas Swynford, and for housing she rented a house in Minster Yard, which she rented until her death.\nThere are few references to Katherine in the last years of her life. In the autumn of 1399, Henry Bolingbroke invaded England and deposed King Richard II, crowned himself as Henry IV. Katherine's children, the Beauforts and Thomas Swynford, and her son-in-law Ralph Neville supported the usurpation of the throne. The new king officially began to call his stepmother \"the Mother of the King.\" However, apparently, Katherine led a quiet life in Lincoln, not taking any part in the political life of the Kingdom.\nOn 12 February 1400, King Henry IV granted Katherine the estate of Laughton en le Morthen near Tickhill in Yorkshire. Around this time he also gave her \u00a3200 per year from the lands of Huntingdonshire and an annual income of 700 marks from the estate of Lincolnshire, and confirmed the annuity of \u00a31,000 assigned to her by his father. As a result, she became quite a rich woman. It is also known that Katherine owned houses in Lincoln, Boston, Grantham and King's Lynn and had business dealings with merchants from some of these cities. It is possible that the Dowager Duchess had long-standing commercial interests in the wool trade, as it is known that she had property inherited from her father in Hainaut, a major center for the wool trade. Alison Weir believes that, perhaps, by investing money in such enterprises, Katherine tried to expand the Swynford inheritance.\nDeath and burial.\nKatherine Swynford died on 10 May 1403 at Lincoln. She was buried at Lincoln Cathedral in the choir of angels. The chest of her tombstone was made of Purbeck marble, had a stucco plinth and a lid. Heraldic shields surrounded by garters were depicted on it. The tombstone was crowned with a brass canopy, on which Katherine herself was depicted in a widow's wimple, and above it rose a vaulted canopy with trefoil arches. Francis Thynne, a Lancastrian antiquary and officer of arms at the College of Arms, about 1600 copied an epitaph which said: \u201cHere lies Lady Katherine, Duchess of Lancaster, wife of the very noble and very gracious Prince John, Duke of Lancaster, son of the very noble King Edward III, who died 10 May in the year of grace 1403, whose soul God will have mercy and pity. Amen\".\nHer daughter, Joan Beaufort, was buried next to her mother. In her will, she requested that her mother's burial site be expanded and enclosed, if the Dean and Chapter would not object. Three years before her death (28 November 1437) Joan received permission from King Henry VI to establish a chapel with two chaplains to serve daily at the altar in front of her mother's grave. She was also allowed to use the \"advowson\" (patronage) of Welton Church in Howdenshire, formerly owned by Durham Priory, but transferred to the Neville family in the 1380s. It is likely that the new chapel was to replace the one founded at Lincoln Cathedral by John of Gaunt in 1398, however it is unknown if this was done. It has not been determined whether the surviving tomb was built after the death in 1403 of Katherine Swynford or after Joan Beaufort's death in 1440; given that Joan's will expressed a desire to enclose her mother's grave, it is most likely that the wrought iron screen was created around 1440. Originally, Joan's remains were located side by side with her mother.\nThe chapel existed until the middle of the 16th century, services in it were abolished during the reign of King Edward VI. Her possessions, valued at \u00a313.6 and 6 pence, included two bowls, two silver vessels (for holding Holy water and Eucharist wine), a silver Pax and a silver bell. The burials of Joan Beaufort and Katherine Swynford, standing side by side, were described at the beginning of the 16th century by the royal antiquarian John Leland. Around 1640, William Dugdale carefully sketched the graves.\nIn 1644, during the English Civil War, both burials were partially destroyed by the Roundheads during the sacking of Lincoln Cathedral. As a result, copper images and tablets were torn off, and the masonry of the chapel was badly damaged. By 1672, the tomb boxes were in their present position, and the canopy was clumsily restored. In the 19th century, a \"Gothic\" restoration of monuments was planned, but it was eventually abandoned. Although there are claims that the tombs are now empty and that the remains of Katherine and Joan were pulled out by the Roundheads, they are most likely unsubstantiated, as there is no evidence that the bodies were disturbed. They are probably still under the floor of the tomb.\nCurrently, both burials stand close to each other with a short side. Katherine's tomb has indentations showing where armorial shields were previously located. From the chapel, which once housed the tombs, only a carefully restored canopy, east and west pilasters and a wrought iron grating on a pedestal have survived.\nAftermath.\nAfter the ascension to the English throne of John of Gaunt's heir Henry IV, Katherine Swynford's children from John of Gaunt played a prominent role in English politics. On 9 February 1407, the King confirmed the legitimation of his half-sibilings the Beauforts, but specifically stipulated by a clause ('excepta dignitate regali') that they did not have any rights to the English throne, although modern scholarship disputes the authority of a monarch to alter an existing parliamentary statute on his own authority, without the further approval of Parliament. \nKatherine's granddaughter, Cecily Neville (daughter of Joan Beaufort and her second husband Ralph Neville, 1st Earl of Westmorland), became the wife of Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York; from this marriage were born, among others, Kings Edward IV and Richard III. Another granddaughter, Joan Beaufort (daughter of John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset) married King James I of Scotland and became the ancestor of the succeeding Scottish monarchs from the House of Stuart. Another descendant of Katherine, Margaret Beaufort (granddaughter of John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset), became the mother of King Henry VII, the progenitor of the House of Tudor. He justified his right to the throne precisely by his descent from the House of Beaufort. In consequence, Katherine Swynford became in the direct ancestor of all subsequent Kings and Queens of England (and then Great Britain).\nThe Beauforts themselves played a prominent role during the Wars of the Roses. Although after the death in 1471 of Edmund Beaufort, styled 4th Duke of Somerset, the family died out in the male line, but a side branch remained, the ancestor of which was Charles Somerset, 1st Earl of Worcester, the illegitimate son of Henry Beaufort, 3rd Duke of Somerset. It still exists today, with the head being the Duke of Beaufort, created in 1682 by King Charles II in recognition of his \"most conspicuous descent from King Edward III by John Beaufort, eldest son of John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford\".\nThomas [II] Swynford, Katherine's son from her first marriage, made a career at the court of King Henry IV, who made him a number of awards. In late 1399 \u2013 early 1400, he was one of the jailers of the deposed King Richard II at Pontefract Castle and, according to the chronicler Adam of Usk, was the main culprit in his death, starving him to death. In 1406, Thomas [II] entered the service of his half-brother Thomas Beaufort. In 1411 he tried to obtain his maternal grandfather's estate in Hainaut, but it is not known whether his efforts were successful. Towards the end of his life, Thomas [II] was forced to hand over his estates to trustees and died virtually landless on 2 April 1432. His heir, Thomas [III] Swynford, survived his father for a few years and died in 1440, leaving an underage son, Thomas [IV] (1435 \u2013 3 May 1498). In 1468, he gave Kettlethorpe and Colby to his uncle William Swynford, who died no later than 1483, after which the estates returned to Thomas [IV]. He died without heirs in 1498, and with him the male line of descendants of Hugh Swynford and Katherine died out. The Swynford ancestral domains of Kettlethorpe and Colby were eventually inherited by the descendants of Margaret Swynford, sister of Thomas [IV], by her marriage to Thomas Pouncefot.\nKatherine's older brother, Walter de Roet (born no later than 1338\u20131340), since May 1355 was in the service of Edward the Black Prince, King Edward III's heir. It is possible that in 1356 he participated in the Battle of Poitiers, but after this mention of him disappears. Alison Weir suggests that he could have died in battle. In any case, Walter predeceased Katherine, leaving no heirs; that is why his nephew Thomas [II] Swynford claimed his possessions in Hainaut in 1411.\nAppearance.\nAn epitaph on John of Gaunt's tomb, destroyed in the Great Fire of London in 1666, described Katherine as \"extraordinarily beautiful and feminine\". At the same time, the epitaph itself was created during the restoration of the tomb by King Henry VII, a descendant of Katherine and John of Gaunt, who sought to restore the good reputation of his ancestor. It is possible that he emphasized beauty because Katherine was mostly remembered for it; it is possible that such a record was in Katherine's original tomb.\nThere are no lifetime portraits of Katherine. The only image close to her lifetime was a rough sketch made by William Dugdale in the 17th century from a now lost copper image from her tomb in Lincoln Cathedral. However, it is not a portrait, it is a formalized drawing of a woman wearing the wimple of a widow. Also in Canterbury Cathedral are two tiny carved heads no larger than a walnut, made around 1400. They are sometimes considered to be images of John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford, but this identification, according to Alison Weir, is rather doubtful. Although two of the sons of John of Gaunt were buried in the cathedral, this happened after the creation of the carvings.\nWhile John of Gaunt's face was long and lean, with an aquiline nose (a distinctive feature inherited by some of his descendants), Katherine's children had round or oval faces, a trait which Alison Weir believes they may have inherited from their mother.\nThe frontispiece to an early 15th-century manuscript of the epic poem \"Troilus and Criseyde\" by Geoffrey Chaucer depicts the poet reading it to the royal court of King Richard II. The identities of the courtiers depicted in the illustration are the subject of controversy among researchers. One of the courtiers depicted is probably John of Gaunt. It has been suggested that one of the seated women, dressed in a flowing blue dress with dangling sleeves (known as houppelande), with a wide collar trimmed with white cloth, and a golden belt, is Katherine Swynford. She has a round face with a high forehead and blond hair braided high above each temple, wrapped in a ribbon around the crown of her head. However, this hypothesis has problems. The poem was probably written between 1385 and 1388. However, the manuscript itself was created only at the beginning of the 15th century, so it must depict the ladies of the court, who played an important role at the end of the reign of King Richard II. According to Alison Weir, a woman in a blue dress is too young to be Katherine. The researcher suggested that it could be her daughter Joan Beaufort, since she looks like her image in her tomb. Next to this figure is a lady wearing a tight blue dress trimmed with gold trimmed ermine, who is traditionally identified with Joan of Kent, mother of King Richard II, but she died in 1385. Weir thinks that lady might be Katherine Swynford. In the 15th century this manuscript belonged to Anne Neville, Countess of Stafford, daughter of Joan Beaufort; it is possible that it was made specifically for her, who later bequeathed it to her own daughter.\nIf Alison Weir's identification is correct, Katherine was a fair-haired and buxom woman with a narrow waist and wide hips. She had a long neck, a round face with a high forehead. Her hair is elegantly combed up and pinned up under a golden crown, hinting at her high position.\nPersonality.\nThe monastic chroniclers, who were shocked by John of Gaunt's association with Katherine Swynford, mostly criticised her harshly. That being said, neither Thomas Walsingham nor the author of the Anonymous Chronicle likely encountered her personally. At the same time, the chronicler Henry of Knighton was a monk at Leicester Abbey who was patronized by John of Gaunt and who may have met Katherine, does not report anything wrong about her. Based on fragmentary sources, Alison Weir concludes that Katherine was \"an attractive, charming and sympathetic woman, quite pious\". Her long affair with John of Gaunt likely suggests that she remained faithful to him, but she may also have been assertive and ambitious while enjoying material possessions. However, according to Weir, most likely Katherine was not guided by selfish considerations: despite long separations, social ostracism and denigration by society, her love for the Duke has stood the test of time. In addition, she obviously had a strong character, prudence, tact and was quite wise. Katherine valued family ties and she was not indifferent to the opinions of others.\nThe respect that Katherine enjoyed in the royal family probably indicates that she was quite skilled in court duties, had exquisite taste, was sociable, polite, literate, intelligent and, most likely, was a good conversationalist.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Katherine Swynford was three gold wheels on a red field, however, judging by the heraldic emblems on the vestments given to her by Lincoln Cathedral, her coat of arms until 1396, when she married John of Gaunt, had three simple silver wheels; she probably inherited this coat of arms from her father.\nAfter her marriage with the Duke of Lancaster in 1396, Katherine change her coat of arms, adding three gold Catherine wheels (\"roet\" means \"little wheel\" in Old French) on a red field. The wheel emblem shows Katherine's devotion to her patron saint, Catherine of Alexandria, also known as \"Saint Catherine of the Wheel\", who was also associated with royalty and virtue. In addition, judging by the seal of Katherine, created around 1397 after her marriage, her coat of arms not only depicted three silver wheels on a red background but combined with the coat of arms of her husband, representing the heads of three golden boars on a black chevron on a silver field. This coat of arms is not found anywhere else.\nIn history and art.\nAnil de Silva, author of a study on John of Gaunt, believes that Katherine could be the prototype for the beautiful Virginia, the heroine of \"The Physician's Tale\", which is part of Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Canterbury Tales\".\nDuring the Wars of the Roses in the 1470s, the exiled Henry, Earl of Richmond, whose mother belonged to the House of Beaufort, became the Lancastrian pretender to the throne. Although Henry IV deprived the Beauforts of the right to the throne, their rights at that time began to be taken quite seriously. After Richard III became king in 1483, he publicly declared that Henry had no right to the throne, since the Beauforts were descended from \"double adultery\" (from the connection of John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford), which was accepted by many as a fact. But after the Earl of Richmond became King of England under the name of Henry VII, the notoriety of Katherine Swynford faded. At the same time, she is practically not mentioned in the chronicles of the Tudor era and did not appear in the royal family tree. When in 1520 a theatrical performance was given in Leadenhall in honor of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, an actor portraying John of Gaunt (of whom the Emperor himself was a descendant), sat near a tree from which many branches grew, representing the many Kings and Queens who were his descendants. However, Katherine, who was the ancestor of some of them, was not mentioned.\nFor centuries, Katherine Swynford was treated with disdain, considered immoral, and seldom mentioned as the progenitor of the House of Tudor. Interest in her arose in 1954, when the biographical novel of the American writer Anya Seton, \"Katherine\" was published. As noted by the British writer Philippa Gregory, it is considered Seton's most famous work. The novel tells in sufficient detail the biography of Katherine, and Seton collected materials for the novel for four years, traveling all over England. However, as Alison Weir (on which the novel had a huge impact) notes, this work is primarily a novel about the ideal romantic heroine \u2013 beautiful, sensual and loving, and Seton gave Katherine many moral, emotional, and psychological qualities and cultural aspects from her own life. The release of Seton's novel made the public empathize with this heroine and treat her more sympathetically. Later, the novel was repeatedly reprinted. In 2003 it was ranked 95th in the BBC's \"The Big Read\" survey. \nJeannette Lucraft's biographical novel \"Katherine Swynford: The History of a Medieval Mistress\" was published in 2006. The biography of Katherine was studied in detail by the historian Alison Weir, who published the work \"Katherine Swynford: The story of John of Gaunt and his Scandalous Duchess\" in 2007.\nIssue.\nKatherine's children by Sir Hugh Swynford were:\nKatherine's children by John of Gaunt were:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69092", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69092", "title": "Cavalier (disambiguation)", "text": "A cavalier was a supporter of the Royalist cause during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms.\nCavalier or Cavelier may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69093", "revid": "49394694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69093", "title": "Roundhead", "text": "Parliament supporter in the English Civil War\nThe Parliamentarians, commonly called Roundheads by their enemies, were the supporters of the Parliament of England during the English Civil War (1642\u20131651). They fought against King Charles I of England and his supporters, known as the Cavaliers or Royalists, who claimed rule by absolute monarchy and the principle of the divine right of kings. The goal of the Roundheads was to give to Parliament the supreme control over executive administration of England.\nBeliefs.\nMost Roundheads sought constitutional monarchy in place of the absolute monarchy sought by Charles; however, at the end of the English Civil War in 1649, public antipathy towards the king was high enough to allow republican leaders such as Oliver Cromwell to abolish the monarchy completely and establish the Commonwealth of England.\nThe Roundhead commander-in-chief of the first Civil War, Thomas Fairfax, remained a supporter of constitutional monarchy, as did many other Roundhead leaders such as Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester, and Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of Essex; however, this party was outmanoeuvred by the more politically adept Cromwell and his radicals, who had the backing of the New Model Army and took advantage of Charles' perceived betrayal of England in his alliance with the Scottish against Parliament.\nEngland's many Puritans and Presbyterians were almost invariably Roundhead supporters, as were many smaller religious groups such as the Independents. However, a number of Roundheads were members of the Church of England, as were most Cavaliers. Roundhead political factions included the proto-anarchist/socialist Diggers, the diverse group known as the Levellers and the apocalyptic Christian movement of the Fifth Monarchists.\nOrigins and background of the term.\nSome Puritans (but by no means all of them) wore their hair closely cropped round the head or flat. This created an obvious contrast between them and the men of courtly fashion, who wore long ringlets. During the war and for a time afterwards, \"Roundhead\" was a term of derision, and in the New Model Army it was a punishable offence to call a fellow soldier a Roundhead. This contrasted with \"Cavalier\", a word used to describe supporters of the Royalist cause, but which also started out as a pejorative term. The first proponents used it to compare members of the Royalist party with Spanish \"Caballeros\" who had abused Dutch Protestants during the reign of Elizabeth I. However, unlike Roundhead, Cavalier was later embraced by those who were the target of the epithet and used by them to describe themselves.\n\"Roundheads\" appears to have been first used as a term of derision toward the end of 1641, when the debates in Parliament in the Clergy Act 1640 were causing riots at Westminster. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition quotes a contemporary authority's description of the crowd that gathered there: \"They had the hair of their heads very few of them longer than their ears, whereupon it came to pass that those who usually with their cries attended at Westminster were by a nickname called \"Roundheads\"\". The demonstrators included London apprentices, for whom Roundhead was a term of derision, because the regulations which they had agreed to included a provision for closely cropped hair.\nAccording to John Rushworth, the word was first used on 27 December 1641 by a disbanded officer named David Hide. During a riot, Hide is reported to have drawn his sword and said he would \"cut the throat of those round-headed dogs that bawled against bishops\"; however, Richard Baxter ascribes the origin of the term to a remark made by Queen Henrietta Maria, the wife of Charles I, at the trial of Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford, earlier that year. Referring to John Pym, she asked who the roundheaded man was. The principal advisor to Charles II, Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon, remarked on the matter, \"and from those contestations the two terms of \"Roundhead\" and \"Cavalier\" grew to be received in discourse,\u00a0... they who were looked upon as servants to the king being then called \"Cavaliers\", and the other of the rabble contemned and despised under the name of \"Roundheads\".\"\nAfter the Anglican Archbishop William Laud made a statute in 1636 instructing all clergy to wear short hair, many Puritans rebelled to show their contempt for his authority and began to grow their hair even longer (as can be seen on ) though they continued to be known as Roundheads. The longer hair was more common among the \"Independent\" and \"high-ranking\" Puritans, which included Cromwell, especially toward the end of the Protectorate, while the \"Presbyterian\" faction, and the military rank and file, continued to reject long hair. By the end of that period, some Independent Puritans were again derisively using the term Roundhead to refer to the Presbyterian Puritans.\n\"Roundhead\" remained in use to describe those with republican tendencies until the Exclusion Crisis of 1678\u20131681, when the term was superseded by \"Whig\", initially another term with pejorative connotations. Likewise, during the Exclusion Bill crisis, the term \"Cavalier\" was replaced with \"Tory\", an Irish term introduced by their opponents that was also initially a pejorative term.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69097", "revid": "44555953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69097", "title": "North-West Rebellion", "text": "1885 resistance against Canada\nThe North-West Rebellion (), was an armed rebellion of M\u00e9tis under Louis Riel and an associated uprising of Cree and Assiniboine mostly in the District of Saskatchewan, against the Canadian government. Important events included the Frog Lake incident, and the capture of Batoche.\nThe North-West Rebellion began in March 1885 after Louis Riel returned from political exile in the U.S. With the assistance of M\u00e9tis leader Gabriel Dumont, Riel declared a provisional government on March 18, and rebel territory was carved out. As government forces responded, fighting broke out, with the last shooting over by the end of June. \nRebel forces included roughly 250 M\u00e9tis and 250 First Nations men, largely Cree and Assiniboine, who were led by Big Bear and Poundmaker and other First Nations chiefs. A non-Indigenous man, Honor\u00e9 Jackson, served as Riel's secretary. Defence of the government of Canada depended on a force of 5,500 men, including North-West Mounted Police, armed loyal residents of the North-West Territories, and Canadian militia units from Ontario and Quebec, brought west by train.\nRiel's rebels seized many small settlements in what is now the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, including Fort Carlton, Fort Pitt, Battleford and Frog Lake. They won victories at Duck Lake and Fish Creek. But overwhelming government forces and a critical shortage of supplies wore down the rebels. Government forces finally quashed the rebellion by winning the Battle of Batoche. \nCree and Assiniboine fighters suffered from the same imbalance and, despite achieving limited victories at Cut Knife, Frenchman's Butte and Loon Lake, surrendered in June and early July. Following the defeat of Indigenous forces, several chiefs were put on trial, found guilty and served prison time. Eight Indigenous men were hanged in Canada's largest mass hanging, for murders committed outside the military conflict. Following the end of the Rebellion, Louis Riel was captured, put on trial, and convicted of treason. Despite pleas for clemency from many across Canada, he was hanged.\nNomenclature.\nThe conflict is referred to by several names, including the \"North-West Rebellion\", the \"North-West Resistance\", the \"1885 Resistance\", the \"Northwest Uprising\", the \"Saskatchewan Rebellion\", and the \"Second Riel Rebellion\". The conflict, grouped with the Red River Rebellion, is collectively referred to as the \"Riel Rebellions\".\nThe terms \"rebellion\" and \"resistance\" can be used almost synonymously. Academics state the use of one term or the other changes the perspective of how a conflict is understood. Indigenous studies scholars and many historians refer to Indigenous uprisings in reaction to European colonization as resistances\u2014Indigenous nations self-governed the land before the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) and then the Canadian government exerted its sovereignty over it. Use of the term resistance has spread to several organizations and publications - \"Canadian Geographic\", \"The Canadian Encyclopedia\", and the Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan.\nBackground.\nAfter the Red River Rebellion of 1869\u20131870, many M\u00e9tis moved from Manitoba to the Fort Carlton region of the North-West Territories, where they founded the Southbranch settlements of Fish Creek, Batoche, St. Laurent, St. Louis, and Duck Lake on or near the South Saskatchewan River. In 1882, surveyors began dividing the land in the newly formed District of Saskatchewan according to the Dominion Land Survey's square township system. The established M\u00e9tis farms were laid out in the seigneurial system, narrow strips stretching up from a river. The M\u00e9tis were familiar with this system from their French-Canadian culture. After the experience of the 1869 Red River rebellion, surveyors were allowed to make exceptions to the standard survey practice, to accommodate pre-existing riverlot farms within two kilometres of a river. But that was scant consideration of the old-time communities. Outside accepted riverlot groupings, the survey imposed a standard grid on the land, allocating particular numbered sections in each township to the HBC and the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR).\nThe 36 families of the St. Louis settlement found, after the Dominion Land Survey was done, that the Crown had sold their farms and the village site, which included a church and a school (in Township 45, Range 7 west of the 2nd Meridian of the Dominion Land Survey), to the Prince Albert Colonization Company. The families feared the loss of their homes and farms, which, now that the buffalo herds were gone, was their primary source of sustenance.\nIn 1884, the M\u00e9tis in the Southbranch settlements (including many Anglo-M\u00e9tis) sent a delegation to ask Louis Riel to return from the United States, where he had fled after the Red River Rebellion, to appeal to the government on their behalf. He came and sent an appeal to the government. The government gave a vague response. The following year, on March 8, 1885, Riel and other prominent M\u00e9tis at Batoche passed a 10-point \"Revolutionary Bill of Rights\" that asserted M\u00e9tis rights of possession to their farms and demanded, among other things, that the government establish an office dealing with land issues in the North-West.\nOn March 18, 1885, Riel, Gabriel Dumont, Honor\u00e9 Jackson (a.k.a. Will Jackson), and others took the seminal step of setting up the Provisional Government of Saskatchewan, believing they could influence the federal government in the same way as they had in 1869.\nBut much had changed since the Red River Rebellion. A railway had been completed across the prairies in 1883, though sections were not yet completed north of Lake Superior in Northern Ontario and in the Rockies. Even in its uncompleted state, the CPR eased the transit of government troops to Qu'Appelle. Qu'Appelle was more than from Toronto and in direct line from Batoche.\nThe North-West Mounted Police (NWMP), created in 1874, served as an armed force as well. Its local detachments provided government presence at some trouble spots, at least potentially protected vulnerable settlements, and also provided guidance and local knowledge to the neophyte Ontario and Quebec militia troops.\nAs violence broke out, it became clear that English-speaking settlers on the prairies and the great majority of First Nations did not support Riel. Catholic officials saw as heresy Riel's claim that God had sent him back to Canada as a prophet, and they tried to minimize his support. Catholic priest Albert Lacombe worked to obtain assurances from Crowfoot that his Blackfoot warriors would not participate in a conflict.\nThe First Nations were also frustrated at conditions at the time. By the end of the 1870s, the stage was set for discontent among the Indigenous people of the prairies: fur-animals and bison were scarce (causing enormous economic and food supply difficulties) and, in an attempt to assert control over Indigenous population, federal government officials sometimes held back rations, violating the terms of the treaties it had signed just prior.\nFirst Nations' dissatisfaction with the treaties and rampant poverty spurred Cree chief Big Bear to embark on a diplomatic campaign to renegotiate the terms of the treaties. (The timing of this campaign coincided with widespread frustration among M\u00e9tis but it seems the Cree and M\u00e9tis did not act in unison.)\nSome Cree took violent action in the spring of 1885, when the rebellion of Riel and the M\u00e9tis was happening at same time, but at least one researcher states that they were almost certainly unrelated. In both the Frog Lake Massacre and the Looting of Battleford, small dissident groups of Cree men revolted against white authorities, ignoring the leadership of Big Bear and Poundmaker. Although he quietly signalled to Ottawa that these two incidents were the result of desperate and starving people and were, as such, unrelated to the ongoing M\u00e9tis rebellion, Edgar Dewdney, the lieutenant governor of the North-West Territories, publicly claimed that the Cree and the M\u00e9tis had joined forces.\nDemographics.\nThe 1885 census of Assiniboia, Saskatchewan and Alberta reported a total population of 48,362. Of this, 20,170 people (about 40 percent) were Status Indians.\nThe District of Saskatchewan, part of the North-West Territories in 1885, was divided into three sub-districts and had a population of 10,595. To the east, the Carrot River sub-district with 1,770 people remained quiet. The Prince Albert sub-district in the centre of the district had a population of 5,373 which included the Southbranch settlements with about 1,300. The South branch settlement was the centre of Louis Riel's Provisional Government of Saskatchewan during the conflict. To the west, the Battleford sub-district where the Cree uprising of people in bands led by Poundmaker and Big Bear occurred, had 3,603 people.\nThe largest settlement and the capital of the district was Prince Albert with about 800 people followed by Battleford with about 500 people who were \"divided about equally between French, M\u00e9tis and English\".\nThe M\u00e9tis population in Saskatchewan in 1885 was about 5,400. A majority tried to stay neutral in the dispute with the national government, as the priests recommended. About 350 armed men supported Riel. A smaller number opposed him, led by Charles Nolin. In addition, he had the support of a small number of members of First Nations. Riel's supporters included the older, less assimilated M\u00e9tis, often with close associations with the First Nations population. Many moved back and forth into First Nations communities and preferred to speak Indigenous languages more than French. Riel's opponents were younger, better educated M\u00e9tis; they wanted to be more integrated into Canadian society, not to set up a separate domain as Riel promised.\nThe course of the rebellion and its suppression.\nOn March 18, 1885, Riel, Gabriel Dumont, Honor\u00e9 Jackson (a.k.a. Will Jackson), and others set up the Provisional Government of Saskatchewan. Riel had been invited in to lead the movement but he turned it into a military action with a heavily religious tone, thereby alienating the Catholic clergy, the whites, nearly all of the First Nations, and most of the M\u00e9tis. He had a force of a couple hundred M\u00e9tis and a smaller number of First Nations at Batoche in May, confronting isolated groups of armed settlers, HBC trading posts and NWMP detachments, and two small militia units at Winnipeg.\nReports of the provisional government were discredited at Ottawa and at first thought to be a device of the Liberal party, but on March 23 Prime Minister Macdonald publicly confirmed the news of the rebellion. Immediately the federal government sent Major General Frederick Middleton, the commander of the Canadian Militia, to Winnipeg, where a militia unit, the 90th Winnipeg Rifles, and a militia artillery unit, the Winnipeg Field Battery, already existed. Eventually, over a period of many weeks, Middleton brought 3,000 troops to the West, and incorporated another 2,000, mostly English-Canadian volunteers, and 500 North-West Mounted Police into his force. They were formed into three columns that independently marched north from the line of the CPR. \nHearing that rebels had seized Duck Lake, a settlement near Batoche, a force of 90 Prince Albert Volunteers and North-West Mounted Police, led by their superintendent Leif Newry Fitzroy Crozier, set off from Fort Carlton on March 26 to confront the rebels. They were stopped and turned back by 150 to 200 M\u00e9tis and Aboriginal fighters, under the command of Gabriel Dumont, in the Battle of Duck Lake.\nOn March 30, a group of armed Cree, short of food due to declining bison populations, approached Battleford. The inhabitants fled to the nearby North-West Mounted Police post at Fort Battleford. The Cree then took food and supplies from the abandoned stores and houses.\nIn March, Fort Carlton was destroyed by fire accidentally as it was being evacuated.\nGovernment mobilization.\nAfter the declaration of a provisional government, lawlessness in the Batoche area and the Battle at Duck Lake, the government immediately commenced the mobilization of some of Canada's ill-equipped part-time militia units (the Non-Permanent Active Militia), as well as the units of cavalry, artillery and infantry regulars that made up the tiny Permanent Active Militia, Canada's almost-nonexistent regular army.\nBy March 30, after hasty mobilization in Toronto, two trains containing the 10th Royal Grenadiers and Queen's Own Rifles militia battalions were ready to leave Toronto. Other militia units, the 9th Voltigeurs from Quebec City and the 65th Mount Royal Rifles from Montreal, were also quickly mobilized. Soon every major city in the East was the scene of embarkation for inexperienced young militiamen cheered by immense crowds.\nMany of the soldiers suffered from the winter weather during the transit to the trouble spot. The militia struggling westward had to contend with the many large breaks in the CPR line in northern Ontario. They marched through snow or were carried in exposed sleighs. They rode on rustic railway flatcars over the completed stretches of track, which did not shelter them from the cold. During the campaign the troops dealt with snow, muskeg and black mud.\nEnlistment and popular engagement in the suppression of the rebellion rose after several non-combatants were killed at Frog Lake. On April 2, at Frog Lake, District of Saskatchewan (now in Alberta) a Cree raiding party led by Cree war chief Wandering Spirit, attacked local officials in the small settlement. Wandering Spirit's men were angered by what seemed to be unfair treaties and the withholding of vital provisions by the Canadian government, and also by the dwindling buffalo population, their main source of food. The attack was made against the leadership of Big Bear, following the arrival of news of the M\u00e9tis victory at Duck Lake. Gathering the white settlers in the area into or near the local church, they killed Thomas Quinn, the town's Indian agent, after a disagreement broke out. The Cree then killed eight more and took three hostages. When the conflict was over, the government hanged Wandering Spirit and several others for what they had done at Frog Lake.\nThe Canadian Militia was commanded by Major General Frederick Middleton, who had had previous experience imposing imperial rule over the Maori and Indian Mutineers. Middleton assembled a force that detrained from CPR trains at Qu'Appelle and then moved north toward Batoche. His column left from Qu'Appelle on April 6 and arrived at Batoche a month later, on the way fighting the Battle of Fish Creek 26\u00a0km from Batoche.\nMeanwhile, a force commanded by William Otter detrained at Swift Current and proceeded north to restore order at Battleford, fighting the Battle of Cut Knife on the way\nOther forces were formed in the West. The Alberta Field Force led by Thomas Bland Strange, assembled at Calgary, moved north on the Calgary and Edmonton Trail to secure Edmonton from attack, then went down the North Saskatchewan River to secure Victoria Settlement, recapture Fort Pitt, then moved overland in pursuit of Big Bear's band.\nApril\u2013May M\u00e9tis and First Nations victories.\nOn April 15, 200 Cree fighters descended on Fort Pitt. They intercepted an NWMP scouting party, killing Constable Cowan, wounding another, and captured a third. Surrounded and outnumbered, garrison commander Inspector Francis Dickens, son of the famous author, negotiated with the attackers and capitulated. Big Bear allowed the remaining police officers to leave safely. Inspector Dickens and his officers reached safety at Battleford six days later. The Cree fighters kept the townspeople as hostages, taking them to their camp at Frog Lake, and after a second raid in May, destroyed the fort. (A militia patrol at Fort Pitt on May 25 encountered a Native man named Ma-ma-nook, a resident of Saddle Lake who was well known in Edmonton, wearing Cowan's tunic and carrying his rifle. The patrol killed him when he did not stop at their command.)\nCree insurgents looted Hudson's Bay Company posts at Lac la Biche and Green Lake on April 26. The HBC post at Lac La Biche was pillaged. Fort Victoria (Pakan) was attacked but the attack was thwarted.\nBy April 24, Middleton's column had made a gradual but unopposed advance to Fish Creek only 26\u00a0km from Batoche. That day 200 M\u00e9tis achieved a remarkable victory over Middleton's column numbering 900 soldiers. The reversal, though not decisive enough to alter the outcome of the war, temporarily halted the advance of Middleton's column toward Batoche. That was where the M\u00e9tis made their final stand two weeks later.\nOtter's column, working toward Battleford, meanwhile also suffered a setback. The column, led by Lieutenant Colonel William Otter, attacked a sleeping Cree encampment on Cut Knife Hill 45\u00a0km northwest of Battleford on May 2. Cree fighters under war chief Fine-Day successfully held off the soldiers in the Battle of Cut Knife. Despite its use of a Gatling gun, Otter's flying column of militia was forced to retreat. Big Bear did not fight in the battle and personally prevailed on the Cree fighters not to harass the retreating Canadian troops. Fine-Day was affiliated with the chief Poundmaker, who surrendered to government troops later that same month.\nEnding the M\u00e9tis uprising.\nOn May 12, Middleton's force captured Batoche itself. The greatly outnumbered but well-entrenched M\u00e9tis fighters ran out of ammunition after three days of battle and siege. The M\u00e9tis resorted to firing sharp objects and small rocks from their guns. They were finally killed or dispersed when Canadian soldiers advanced on their own and overran the M\u00e9tis fighters in their rifle pits.\nRiel surrendered on May 15. Gabriel Dumont and other participants in the uprising escaped across the border to the Montana Territory of the United States. The defeat of the M\u00e9tis and Riel's capture led to the collapse of the Provisional Government.\nEnding the Cree uprising.\nBut the capture of Batoche did not end the separate conflict with the Cree insurgents.\nOtter's column recovered from its defeat at Cut Knife Hill (today's Poundmaker Hill) and pressed on to secure Battleford from additional Cree raids. Poundmaker and several of the chiefs loyal to him marched into Battleford and surrendered on May 26.\nOn May 14 Major General Thomas Bland Strange led the Alberta Field Force, a mixed force of militia and an NWMP detachment from Calgary, eastwards down the North Saskatchewan, toward the scene of unrest. Part of his force was on barges; the rest on foot or horseback on shore. Conditions were unpleasant as it was cold and snowy. By May 25 the force was at Fort Pitt and Frog Lake. On May 28, the force came into contact with Big Bear's band who had been holding a Thirst Dance on a hill north of Fort Pitt, camped with hostages from Frog Lake and Fort Pitt. The soldiers advanced to attack, but fighters in the band won a battle at Frenchman's Butte, 43\u00a0km northeast of Lloydminster, at the end of May. Big Bear's band pushed off to the north, and NWMP Major Sam Steele's mounted scouts followed the trail. Small battles took place when Strange's scouts journeyed to where Big Bear's soldiers had trenches between Frenchman's Butte and the Red Deer River, and again at Horse Lake, about 30 kilometres from Ft. Pitt.\nAt Loon Lake, about 60\u00a0km northeast of Frenchman's Butte, on June 3, the scouts and Big Bear's band fought in the last armed engagement of the 1885 rebellion. That day Steele's scouts, numbering 65, caught up to Big Bear's force. Big Bear's fighters were almost out of ammunition. They released their hostages and fled across the lake at Steele Narrows, after a short exchange of fire, having suffered four shot and six drowned while trying to reach an island.\nDemoralized, defenceless, and with no hope of relief after Poundmaker's surrender, most of Big Bear's fighters surrendered over the next few weeks. On July 2 Big Bear voluntarily surrendered to NWMP Sargeant Smart, stationed at an NWMP post near the destroyed Fort Carlton.\nAftermath.\nThe conflict was Canada's first independent military action. It cost about $5\u00a0million. Although it lost the Conservative Party most of its support in Quebec, at least temporarily, it secured anglophone control of the Prairies (following the Rebellion, no First Nations politician became premier until Wab Kinew in 2023). It also demonstrated the Canadian government was capable of decisive action.\nFor reason perhaps outside the context of the rebellion, the Liberal party remained popular on the Prairies at least among M\u00e9tis and among the wave of immigrants that soon came to the Prairies. However, treaty Indians did not get the vote until much later.\nThe trial of Louis Riel occurred shortly after the rebellion, where he was found guilty of high treason, and hanged. His trial and execution sparked a national controversy between English and French Canada.\nPoundmaker and Big Bear were sentenced to prison.\nEight others were hanged in the largest mass hanging in Canadian history. These men, found guilty of murder outside of the military conflict, were Wandering Spirit, (Kapapamahchakwew) a Plains Cree war chief, Little Bear (Apaschiskoos), Walking the Sky (AKA Round the Sky), Bad Arrow, Miserable Man, Iron Body, Ika (AKA Crooked Leg) and Man Without Blood, for murders committed at Frog Lake and at Battleford (the murders of Farm Instructor Payne and Battleford farmer Barney Tremont).\nSettlers and former Native fighters came in conflict when settlers sought to reclaim looted property after the rebellion was quashed. Several Natives were killed in a confrontation at Battleford in late June.\nThe Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) played a key role in the government's response to the conflict, as it was able to transport federal troops to the area quickly. While it had taken three months to get troops to the Red River Rebellion, the government was able to move forces in nine days by train in response to events in the North-West Territories. The successful operation increased political support for the floundering and incomplete railway, which had been close to financial collapse. The government authorized enough funds to finish the line. Thus, Prime Minister John A. Macdonald realized his National Dream of linking Canada across the continent.\nThe government addressed the critical food shortage of the Cree and Assiniboine by sending food and other supplies.\nAfter the fighting, new Territorial Council ridings were created, although still only covering specific areas of concentrated settlement. The North-West Territories election of 1885 was held. The Scrip Commission was dispatched to the District of Saskatchewan and to present-day Alberta to address M\u00e9tis land claims.\nThe Saskatchewan M\u00e9tis requested land grants; the government granted these to all by the end of 1887. The government resurveyed the official surveys to allow pre-existing M\u00e9tis riverlots in accordance with their wishes. In 1888 Dominion Land Survey officials resurveyed townships in Range 42, 43, 44, and 45, land along the South Saskatchewan River that was historically M\u00e9tis land. Portions of these townships were divided into riverlots. This new survey recognized the M\u00e9tis' long-standing land use and addressed a key grievance of the local M\u00e9tis.https:// The M\u00e9tis did not understand the long term value of their new land, however, and sold much of it to speculators who later resold it to farmers.\nThose who served with the Militia and NWMP during the conflict received the North West Canada Medal, established in September 1885.\nThe cause of the rebellion was soon subject of debate. Macdonald's government came in for heavy criticism.\nDuring the 1887 federal election, members of Sir Wilfrid Laurier's Liberal Party told the House of Commons that federal surveyors had \"mishandled western settlement\" and blamed the \"poor administration of Metis land claims\" for the 1885 rebellion. The federal Minister of the Interior investigated and had land surveyor William Pearce submit a report explaining the work of the surveyors.\nInternational reaction.\nWhile the conflict was ongoing, the American and British press took note of the actions of both the M\u00e9tis and the Canadian Government. Some newspapers, such as the \"Times\" and \"Guardian\", wrote approvingly of the actions taken by the Canadian government.\nLong-term consequences.\nThe French language and Catholic religion faced increasing marginalisation in both Saskatchewan and Manitoba, as exemplified by the emerging controversy surrounding the Manitoba Schools Question. Many M\u00e9tis were forced to live on undesirable land, or in temporary locations such as road allowances, or in the shadow of Indian reserves (M\u00e9tis did not have treaty status, like Treaty Indians did, so did not have any official right to land).\nRiel's trial and Macdonald's refusal to commute his sentence caused lasting resentment in Quebec, and led to a fundamental francophone distrust of anglophone politicians. French Canada felt it had been unfairly targeted.\nMemory.\nIn the spring of 2008, Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport Minister Christine Tell proclaimed in Duck Lake, that \"the 125th commemoration, in 2010, of the 1885 Northwest Rebellion is an excellent opportunity to tell the story of the prairie M\u00e9tis and First Nations peoples' struggle with Government forces and how it has shaped Canada today.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBATOCHE. In 1872, Xavier Letendre dit Batoche founded a village at this site where M\u00e9tis freighters crossed the South Saskatchewan River. About 50 families had claimed the river lots in the area by 1884. Widespread anxiety regarding land claims and a changing economy provoked a resistance against the Canadian Government. Here, 300 M\u00e9tis and Indians led by Louis Riel and Gabriel Dumont fought a force of 800 men commanded by Major-General Middleton between May 9 and 12, 1885. The resistance failed but the battle did not mean the end of the community of Batoche.\nHistoric Sites and Monuments board of Canada.\nBatoche, where the M\u00e9tis Provisional Government had been formed, has been declared a National Historic Site. Batoche marks the site of Gabriel Dumont's grave site, Albert Caron's House, Batoche school, Batoche cemetery, Letendre store, Dumont's river crossing, Gari\u00e9py's crossing, Batoche crossing, St. Antoine de Padoue Church, M\u00e9tis rifle pits, and RNWMP battle camp.\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police training depot at Regina was established in 1874, and still survives. The RCMP chapel, a frame building built in 1885, is still standing. It was used to jail prisoners taken when the rebellion collapsed.\nOne of three Territorial Government Buildings still stands on Dewdney Avenue in the city of Regina. It was the site of Riel's trial, and where the drama the \"Trial of Louis Riel\" is still performed. Following the May trial, Riel was hanged November 16, 1885, at the North-West Mounted Police barracks in Regina. The RCMP Heritage Centre, in Regina, opened in May 2007. The M\u00e9tis brought his body to Saint-Vital, his mother's home, now the Riel House National Historic Site, and then interred it at the Saint-Boniface Basilica in Manitoba, his birthplace, for burial. Highway 11, stretching from Regina to just south of Prince Albert, has been named \"Louis Riel Trail\" by the province; the roadway passes near locations of the conflict.\nFort Carlton Provincial Historic Site has been rebuilt as it had been ravaged by three separate fires. Big Bear (Mistahimaskwa) used the site in his initial negotiations for Treaty Six in about 1884, and finally, the following year he surrendered here after his engagement at Steele Narrows (Battle of Loon Lake).\nThe Prince Albert blockhouse was employed by the North-West Mounted Police on evacuating from Fort Carlton after the first fire.\nDuck Lake is home to the Duck Lake Historical Museum and the Duck Lake Regional Interpretive Centre, and murals that present the history of the conflict in the area. The Battle of Duck Lake, the Duck Lake Massacre, and a buffalo jump are all located here. The \"First Shots Cairn\" was erected on Saskatchewan Highway 212 as a landmark commemorating the scene of the first shots in the Battle of Duck Lake. Our Lady of Lourdes Shrine at St. Laurent north of Duck Lake is a local pilgrimage site.\nThe Battle of Fish Creek National Historic Site, the name has been changed to Tourond's Coulee / Fish Creek National Historic Site to preserve the battlefield of April 24, 1885, at \"la coul\u00e9e des Tourond\", Madame Tourond's home, early Red River cart Fish Creek Trail and the site of Middleton's camp and graveyard.\nThe Marr Residence is a municipal heritage property of Saskatoon which served as a field hospital for wounded soldiers during the conflict.\nFort Otter was constructed at Battleford's government house at the capital of the North-West Territories. Poundmaker was arrested at Fort Battleford and sentenced to prison. Eight First Nations men were hanged, five for murders in the Frog Lake Massacre, two for murders in the Battleford area, and one for the murder of a Mountie at Fort Pitt on April 15. Fort Battleford has been declared a national historic site of Canada to commemorate its role as military base of operations for Cut Knife Hill and Fort Pitt, as a refuge for 500 settlers, and as battlefield itself (the Siege of Battleford).\nFort Pitt, the scene of the Battle of Fort Pitt, is a provincial park and national historic site where a National Historic Sites and Monuments plaque designates where Treaty Six was signed.\nFrog Lake Massacre National Historic Site of Canada, at Frog Lake, Alberta, is the location of a Cree uprising that occurred in the District of Saskatchewan, North-West Territories.\nFrenchman Butte, a national historic site of Canada, is the location of the 1885 battle between Cree and Canadian troops of Strange's Alberta Field Force.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Cut Knife Battlefield. Named after Chief Cut Knife of the Sarcee in an historic battle with the Cree. On 2nd May 1885, Lt. Col. W. D. Otter led 325 troops composed of North-West Mounted Police, \"B\" Battery, \"C\" Company, Foot Guards, Queen's Own and Battleford Rifles, against Cree and Assiniboine under Poundmaker and Fine Day. After an engagement of six hours, the troops retreated to Battleford.\"\nNational Historic Sites and Monuments Board\nAt Cutknife are the world's largest tomahawk, the Poundmaker Historical Centre and Big Bear monument/cairn, which was erected by the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada. There is also now, in the correct location, a cairn erected upon Cut Knife Hill, which is the viewing site of the Poundmaker Battle site and Battle River valley.\nThe Narrows between Makwa Lake and Sanderson Bay, in the Makwa Lake Provincial Park, was the site of the last engagement of the conflict, the Battle of Loon Lake. Steele Narrows Provincial Historic Park conserves the lookout point of a Cree burial ground.\nFort Ethier, a two-story log blockhouse built by Strange's Alberta Field Force in its march north to Edmonton, still stands near Wetaskiwin.https://\nThe members of the Canadian Militia are commemorated through a number of memorials in Canada, including the North-West Rebellion Monument in Queen's Park, in Toronto, Ontario, and The Volunteer Monument in Winnipeg, Manitoba. A statue for Wm. B. Osgoode and John Rogers, who fell in action at Cutknife Hill, also stands at the Cartier Square Drill Hall, in Ottawa, Ontario.\nHistoriography.\nArthur Silver Morton, the University of Saskatchewan's first librarian, compiled many of the original manuscripts, transcripts, and photographs related to the 1885 conflict that were made available in 1995 as part of project funded by Industry Canada in 1995.\nCanadian historian George Stanley conducted research on the 1885 conflict and Louis Riel in the 1930s while completing his postgraduate degrees at Oxford University, where he published his 1936 book \"The Birth of Western Canada: A History of The Riel Rebellion\". For more than five decades Stanley's 1936 \"The Birth of Western Canada\" was reprinted and used as a textbook. Stanley's 1936 book and the 1972 book published by his student Desmond Morton\u2014\"The last war drum: the North West campaign of 1885\" informed North-West Rebellion encyclopedia entries in the \"Canadian Encyclopedia\" and \"Encyclopedia Britannica\". Stanley focused on the racial aspects of the rebellion. He demonstrated empathy with the plight of the M\u00e9tis and First Nations, although in hindsight his work would now be described by many as both \"racist and close-minded\". Until the early 2000s, Stanley's served as the foundational textbook providing the accepted narrative on the events.\nThe next major academic work to treat the \"rebellion as a whole\" since Stanley's, was the 1984 publication \"Prairie Fire: The 1885 North-West Rebellion\" by historian Bob Beal and journalist Rod Macleod. They downplayed the event as local with \"no real legacy of bitterness in the West\". They describe it as an incident during the white settlers' occupation of the North-West Territories and government's imposition of their laws on the indigenous population.\nOn the centenary of the conflict, a conference entitled \"1885 and After: Native Society in Transition\" was held in May at the University of Saskatchewan. During the centenary, a number of articles and books were published on the topic including the five-volume \"The Collected Writings of Louis Riel\" by Stanley, Raymond Huel, Gilles Martel, and University of Calgary-based political scientist, Thomas Flanagan, and Flanagan's \"Riel and the Rebellion: 1885 Reconsidered.\" Flanagan spent much of his academic career focusing on issues related to the M\u00e9tis and Louis Riel. Since the 1970s Tom Flanagan published numerous scholarly studies \"debunking the heroism of M\u00e9tis icon Louis Riel, arguing against native land claims, and calling for an end to aboriginal rights.\"\nIn his 1987 publication \"Footprints in the Dust\", Douglas Light focused on the local history of the region incorporating M\u00e9tis and First Nation perspectives on events including accounts of everyday life. This was described as a \"valuable and distinctive contribution to rebellion historiography\".\nAt the University of Saskatchewan, Alan Anderson prepared a report on French settlements in Saskatchewan that informed relevant content in the online \"Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan,\" published in 2006 by the University of Regina's Canadian Plains Research Center.\nJ.R.Miller's 1989 \"Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens\" was described in a 2021 \"British Journal of Canadian Studies\" article as the \"first overall survey of Aboriginal\u2013newcomer history in Canada\". Miller \"consistently highlighted the Aboriginal perspective\". By 2018, when the book was reprinted for the fourth time, the relationships between Indigenous peoples and settlers had evolved further driven by priorities, economic opportunities, collective action on the part of Indigenous communities, and changes in governments at the federal, provincial and territorial levels. Miller says that early relations between Indigenous people and Euro-Canadians were characterized by a mutuality and collaboration, with each remaining autonomous, especially in trading relationships and as military allies. Miller says that this mutuality \"held good for far longer than white historiography has tended to see. The mutuality collapsed through competition for resources particularly as agricultural settlers arrived in increasing numbers. In his chapter on the rebellion, Miller says that the way histories about the conflict have been written are based on \"a great deal of misunderstanding and myth-making\" and that there was no Indian rebellion in 1885.\nLawrence J. Barkwell's 2005 book \"Batoche 1885: The Militia of the Metis Liberation Movement\" was his first publication of biographies of participants in the M\u00e9tis resistance. Barkwell is also the author of the 2011 305-page book \"Veterans and Families of the 1885 Northwest Resistance\". He updated his \"1885 Northwest Resistance Movement Biographies\" in 2018 which lists the men and women who participated in the 1885 Northwest Resistance. Barwell's research, which is published by the Gabriel Dumont Institute\u2014an affiliate of the University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina\u2014\"provides a more human face\" to the 1885 Resistance.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69099", "revid": "19357523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69099", "title": "List of political parties in Poland", "text": "This article provides a list of political parties in Poland, both current and historical, dating back to the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. It includes parties that functioned in an independent Polish state, and does not cover party-like associations active during the partitions of Poland.\nPolitical parties in Poland trace their origins to the Great Sejm of the late 18th century. The Patriotic Party (Polish: \"Stronnictwo Patriotyczne\") is generally considered the first political party in the country, although the earlier Familia faction (1731\u20131795) has also been described as a proto-party. Following the restoration of Polish independence in November 1918, the Second Polish Republic adopted a party-based parliamentary system modeled on Western democracies, while also building on domestic political traditions. Despite the May Coup of 1926 and the subsequent establishment of the Sanation regime, political parties continued to operate, albeit under increasingly centralized and authoritarian control.\nDuring the Second World War, the Provisional Government of the Republic of Poland was formed in 1944 under the State National Council, led by the Polish Workers' Party. This government transitioned into the Provisional Government of National Unity in 1945, and subsequently into the Polish People\u2019s Republic in 1952. In the People\u2019s Republic, multiple parties existed within the Sejm, but these operated under the control of umbrella organizations created by the ruling Party, effectively reducing them to satellite parties.\nThe collapse of communist rule in 1989 and the transition to liberal democracy in the early 1990s led to the emergence of numerous new political parties. These included both serious contenders and satirical groups, such as the Polish Beer-Lovers\u2019 Party. The early post-communist period was marked by highly fragmented elections. In response, electoral reforms introduced prior to the 1993 parliamentary elections established thresholds of 5% for individual parties and 8% for coalitions at the national level (with exemptions for ethnic minority parties). These thresholds significantly reduced the success of minor parties and prevented independent candidates from entering the Sejm.\nIn the early years of the Third Republic, the left wing of Polish politics was dominated by former communists who had moderated their positions toward social democracy. In recent decades, however, the Polish left has been represented mainly by parties unconnected to the communist era and linked to the new left across Europe, often reflecting trends seen across the European Union. At the same time, centrist and neoliberal groups such as Civic Platform have positioned themselves as center-left alternatives with success. The right wing, initially composed of parties rooted in the Solidarity movement, has also undergone significant change. While many of its early leaders, including former president Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, have distanced themselves from current right-wing platforms, modern conservative politics in Poland have increasingly aligned with European and global trends in populism and nationalism. This has resulted in a divide between economically populist but socially conservative groups, such as Law and Justice (\"Prawo i Sprawiedliwo\u015b\u0107\", PiS), and economically libertarian but equally conservative groups, such as Confederation (\"Konfederacja\"). Contemporary debates within the right often center on issues such as the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the presence of Ukrainian immigrants in Poland.\nA general public disillusionment with politics and political elites has shaped party branding in recent decades. As a result, most major political organizations avoid the term \"party\" in their names, preferring alternatives such as \"union,\" \"platform,\" \"league,\" or \"alliance,\" which are considered less directly associated with politics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69100", "revid": "1319943234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69100", "title": "Henry Beaufort", "text": "English bishop (1375\u20131447)\nHenry Beaufort (c. 1375 \u2013 11 April 1447) was an English Catholic prelate and statesman who held the offices of Bishop of Lincoln (1398), Bishop of Winchester (1404) and cardinal (1426). He served three times as Lord Chancellor and played an important role in English politics. \nBeaufort was a member of the royal House of Plantagenet, being the second son of the four legitimised children of John of Gaunt (third son of King Edward III) by his mistress (later wife) Katherine Swynford.\nLife.\nBeaufort is often claimed to have been born at Beaufort, an English domain in France, but England, John of Gaunt specifically, had already lost that land holding, which had come to him through his grandmother Blanche of Artois. He was educated for a career in the Church. After his parents were married in early 1396, Henry, his two brothers and one sister were declared legitimate by Pope Boniface IX and legitimated by Act of Parliament on 9 February 1397, but they were barred from the succession to the throne.\nOn 27 February 1398, he was nominated Bishop of Lincoln, and on 14 July 1398, he was consecrated. After Henry of Bolingbroke deposed Richard II and took the throne as Henry IV in 1399, he made Bishop Beaufort Lord Chancellor of England in 1403, but Beaufort resigned in 1404 when he was appointed Bishop of Winchester on 19 November.\nBetween 1411 and 1413, Bishop Beaufort was in political disgrace for siding with his nephew, the Prince of Wales, against the king, but when King Henry IV died and the prince became King Henry V, he was made Chancellor once again in 1413, but he resigned the position in 1417. Pope Martin V offered him the rank of Cardinal, but King Henry V would not permit him to accept the offer.\nHenry V died in 1422, two years after he had married Catherine of Valois, daughter of King Charles VI, who had disowned his son Charles in favour of Henry in the Treaty of Troyes. Henry and Catherine's infant son Henry VI, the Bishop's great-nephew, succeeded Henry as King of England, and, in accordance with the Treaty, succeeded Charles as King of France. Bishop Beaufort and the child king's other uncles formed the Regency government, and in 1424, Beaufort became Chancellor once more, but was forced to resign in 1426 because of disputes with the king's other uncles, in particular Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester.\nPope Martin V finally appointed Beaufort as Cardinal in 1426. In 1427, he made him the Papal Legate for Germany, Hungary and Bohemia, and directed him to lead the fourth \"crusade\" against the Hussites heretics in Bohemia. Beaufort's forces were routed by the Hussites at the Battle of Tachov on 4 August 1427.\nAfter the capture of Joan of Arc in 1431, legend has it that Beaufort was present to observe some of the heresy trial sessions presided over by Bishop Pierre Cauchon of Beauvais. However, the full record of the trial, which lists all those who took part in her trial on a daily basis shows that he was not there. His sole appearance is on the day of her abjuration (26 May 1431). The formal record does not include Beaufort's presence at her execution but legend has it that he wept as he viewed the horrible scene as she was burned at the stake. This legend derives from what is now known as the Rehabilitation Trial of Joan of Arc which culminated in an examination of numerous witnesses in 1455 and 1456 in which one of the 27 Articles of Enquiry was that Joan had died in \"such a manner as to draw from all those present, and even from her English enemies, effusions of tears.\" A number of witnesses at this re-trial inferred or declared his presence including one of the original trial judges, one Andre Marguerie, Canon of Rouen, who asserted that Beaufort had reprimanded his chaplain for complaining that the Bishop of Beauvais's sermon was too favourable to Joan. However, it is not clear to which sermon Marguerie was referring.\nIn a spirit of contrition and reconciliation, in 1922 a statue of Joan of Arc (carved under the supervision of Sir Ninian Comper) was placed beside the entrance to the Lady Chapel in Winchester Cathedral diagonally facing Cardinal Beaufort's tomb and chantry chapel.\nBeaufort continued to be active in English politics for years, fighting with the other powerful advisors to the king. He died on 11 April 1447.\nAffair and daughter.\nWhen Henry was Bishop of Lincoln, he had an illegitimate daughter, Jane Beaufort, with an unknown woman, sometimes thought to be the daughter of Alice Cherleton, Baroness Cherleton: \"Henry fathered an illegitimate daughter, Jane Beaufort, in 1402, who some make Alice's daughter. Both Jane and her husband, Sir Edward Stradling, were named in Cardinal Beaufort's will. Their marriage about 1423 brought Sir Edward into the political orbit of his shrewd and assertive father-in-law, to whom he may have owed his appointment as chamberlain of South Wales in December 1423, a position he held until March 1437\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69101", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69101", "title": "Hubble space telescope", "text": ""}
{"id": "69103", "revid": "50469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69103", "title": "Xfce", "text": "Desktop environment\nXfce (pronounced as four individual letters, ) is a free and open-source desktop environment for Linux and other Unix-like operating systems.\nXfce aims to be fast and lightweight while still visually appealing and easy to use. The desktop environment is designed to embody the traditional Unix philosophy of modularity and re-usability, as well as adherence to standards; specifically, those defined at freedesktop.org.\nFeatures.\nUser experience.\nXfce is a highly modular desktop environment, with many software repositories separating its components into multiple packages. The built-in settings app offers options to customize the GTK theme, the system icons, the cursor, and the window manager. Additionally, Xfce provides a fully GUI-based system for modifying the desktop's status bar and system tray.\nPerformance.\nXfce is a lightweight desktop environment which omits many of the visually appealing features (such as animations) present in other desktop environments such as KDE Plasma and GNOME. These omissions allow Xfce to run much more smoothly on low-end personal computers.\nHistory.\nOlivier Fourdan started the Xfce project in late 1996 as a Linux version of the Common Desktop Environment (CDE), a Unix desktop environment that was initially proprietary and later released as free software. \nThe name was originally written as XFce, as an abbreviation of XForms Common Environment, which referred to the XForms library. However, Xfce has been transformed and is now based entirely on the Xfce Toolkit (GTK). The name was kept, now with lowercase f, but the abbreviation no longer means anything.\nThe first Xfce release was in early 1997. However, over time, Xfce diverged from CDE and now stands on its own. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The name Xfce originally stood for \u201cXForms Common Environment\u201d, but since then Xfce has been rewritten twice and doesn't use the XForms toolkit anymore. The name survived, but it is no longer capitalized as \u201cXFCE\u201d and is no longer an abbreviation for anything (although suggestions have been made, such as \u201cX Freakin' Cool Environment\u201d).\u2014\u200a The Slackware Linux distribution has nicknamed Xfce the \"Cholesterol Free Desktop Environment\", a loose interpretation of the initialism.\nMascot.\nPer the FAQ, the logo of Xfce is \"a mouse, obviously, for all kinds of reasons like world domination and monsters and such.\" In the \"SuperTuxKart\" game, in which various open source mascots race against each other, the mouse is said to be a female named \"Xue\".\nEarly versions.\nXfce began as a simple project created with XForms. Olivier Fourdan released the program, which was just a simple taskbar, on SunSITE.\nFourdan continued developing the project and in 1998, Xfce 2 was released with the first version of Xfce's window manager, Xfwm. He requested the project be included in Red Hat Linux, but it was refused due to its XForms basis. Red Hat accepted only open-source software released under a GPL- or BSD-compatible license, whereas, at the time, XForms was closed-source and free only for personal use. For the same reason, Xfce was not in Debian before version 3, and Xfce 2 was distributed only in Debian's contrib repository.\nIn March 1999, Fourdan began a complete rewrite of the project based on GTK, a non-proprietary toolkit then rising in popularity. The result was Xfce 3.0, licensed under the GPL. As well as being based completely on free software, it gained GTK drag-and-drop support, native language support, and improved configurability. Xfce was uploaded to SourceForge.net in February 2001, starting with version 3.8.1.\nXfce 4.0 - 4.10.\nIn version 4.0.0, released 25 September 2003, Xfce was upgraded to use the GTK 2 libraries.\nChanges in 4.2.0, released 16 January 2005, included a compositing manager for Xfwm which added built-in support for transparency and drop shadows, as well as a new default SVG icon set.\nIn January 2007, Xfce 4.4.0 was released. This included the Thunar file manager, a replacement for Xffm. Support for desktop icons was added. Also, various improvements were made to the panel to prevent buggy plugins from crashing the whole panel, as well as support for multiple panels; previous versions of Xfce could only support one panel in addition to Xftaskbar4 and Xfce4-iconbox. These tools were made available as panel plugins in this version.\nIn February 2009, Xfce 4.6.0 was released. This version had a new configuration backend, a new settings manager and a new sound mixer, as well as several significant improvements to the session manager and the rest of Xfce's core components.\nIn January 2011, Xfce 4.8.0 was released. This version included changes such as the replacement of ThunarVFS and HAL with GIO, udev, ConsoleKit and PolicyKit, and new utilities for browsing remote network shares using several protocols including SFTP, SMB, and FTP. Window clutter was reduced by merging all Thunar file progress dialog boxes into a single dialog. The panel application was also rewritten for better positioning, transparency, and item and launcher management. 4.8 also introduced a new menu plugin to view directories. The 4.8 plugin framework remains compatible with 4.6 plugins. The display configuration dialog in 4.8 supports RandR 1.2, detecting screens automatically and allowing users to pick their preferred display resolution, refresh rate, and display rotation. Multiple displays can be configured to either work in clone mode, or be placed next to each other. Keyboard selection was revamped to be easier and more user-friendly. Also, the manual settings editor was updated to be more functional.\nThe 4.8 development cycle was the first to use the new release strategy formed after the \"Xfce Release and Development Model\" developed at the Ubuntu Desktop Summit in May 2009. A new web application was employed to make release management easier, and a dedicated Transifex server was set up for Xfce translators. The project's server and mirroring infrastructure was also upgraded, partly to cope with anticipated demand following the release announcement for 4.8.\nXfce 4.10, released 28 April 2012, introduced a vertical display mode for the panel and moved much of the http:// to an online wiki. The main focus of this release was on improving the user experience.\nModern Xfce.\nXfce 4.12 was released on 28 February 2015, two years and ten months later, contrary to mass Internet speculation about the project being \"dead\". The target of 4.12 was to improve user experience and take advantage of technologies introduced in the interim. New window manager features include an Alt+Tab dialog, and smart multi-monitor handling. Also, a new power management plugin for the panel's notification area was introduced, as well as a re-written text editor and an enhanced file manager. Xfce 4.12 also started the transition to GTK 3 by porting application and supporting plugins and bookmarks. With 4.12, the project reiterated its commitment to Unix-like platforms other than Linux by featuring OpenBSD screenshots.\nXfce 4.13 is the development release during the transition of porting components to be fully GTK3-compatible, including xfce-panel and xfce-settings.\nThe planned release of Xfce 4.14 was announced in April 2016 and was officially released on 12 August 2019. The main goals of the release included porting the remaining core components from GTK 2 to GTK 3; replacing the dependency on dbus-glib with GDBus, GNOME's implementation of the D-Bus specification; and removing deprecated widgets. Major features were postponed for a later 4.16 release. The minimum GTK 3 version was bumped from 3.14 to 3.22.\nXfce 4.16 was released on 22 December 2020. Some notable changes in this release include new icons with a more consistent color palette; improved interfaces for changing system settings; various panel improvements like animations for hiding, a new notification plugin with support for both legacy SysTray and modern StatusNotifier items, and better support for dark themes; and more information included in the About dialog.\nXfce 4.18 was released on 15 December 2022. This release mainly focused on new features and improvements to the Thunar file manager including an image preview sidebar, split view, recursive file searching, better mime type handling, per-file color highlighting, undoing up to 10 actions, a recently opened files location, restoring open tabs on startup, and a customizable toolbar. Other changes include a keyboard shortcut editor and merging the date and time plugins.\nXfce 4.20 was released on 15 December 2024. This release mainly focused on restructuring preparing Xfce components for Wayland support. As of this release, almost all Xfce components support Wayland and can be used on Wayland via a compatible compositor such as labwc or Wayfire, as Xfwm 4.20 and Xfdashboard 4.20 do not have complete Wayland support yet. As such, the Wayland session of Xfce 4.20 is considered experimental and only recommended for advanced users.\nSoftware components.\nApplications developed by the Xfce team are based on GTK and self-developed Xfce libraries. Other than Xfce itself, there are third-party programs which use the Xfce libraries.\nDevelopment framework.\nXfce provides a development framework which contains the following components:\nOne of the services provided to applications by the framework is a red banner across the top of the window when the application is running with root privileges, warning the user that they could damage system files.\nXfce Panel.\nXfce Panel is a highly configurable taskbar with a rich collection of plug-ins available for it.\nMany aspects of the panel and its plug-ins can be configured easily through graphical dialogs, but also by GTK style properties and hidden Xfconf settings.\nXfce Terminal.\nA terminal emulator is provided as part of the Xfce project, but it can be used in other X Window System environments as well. It supports tabs, customizable key bindings, colors, and window sizes. It was designed to replace GNOME Terminal, which depends on the GNOME libraries. Like GNOME Terminal, though, it is based on the VTE library. Xfce Terminal can be configured to offer a varying background color for each tab. It can also be used as a drop-down terminal emulator, similar to Guake or Tilda.\nXfwm.\nXfwm is a window manager, supporting custom themes. Starting with version 4.2, Xfwm integrates its own compositing manager. Work on porting Xfwm to Wayland is planned for a future release, presumably 4.22.\nCatfish.\nA file searching tool, able to perform in-name and in-text matching, as well searching by file type and last modified time. It is also capable of performing indexing by using an mlocate database.\nThunar.\nThunar is the default file manager for Xfce, replacing Xffm. It resembles GNOME's Nautilus, and is designed for speed and a low memory footprint, as well as being highly customizable through plugins. Xfce also has a lightweight archive manager called Xarchiver, but this is not part of the core Xfce 4.4.0. More recently, \"Squeeze\" has been started as an archive manager designed to integrate better into the Xfce desktop, and though no releases have been made since 2008, the git repository of squeeze has been active and this version is more feature-rich than the last stable release.\nOrage.\nStarting with version 4.4, Xfcalendar was renamed to \"Orage\" (French for \"thunderstorm\") and several features were added. Orage has alarms and uses the iCalendar format, making it compatible with many other calendar applications, e.g. vdirsyncer to sync via CalDAV. It also includes a panel clock plugin and an international clock application capable of simultaneously showing clocks from several different time zones. With Xfce 4.16, and the dropping of GTK2 support for panel plugins, orage was replaced with DateTime plugin.\nMousepad.\nMousepad is the default text editor for Xfce in some Linux distributions, including Xubuntu. Mousepad aims to be an easy-to-use and fast editor, meant for quickly editing text files, not a software development environment or an editor with a large plugin ecosystem. It does offer tabbed files, syntax highlighting, parentheses matching and indentation features commonly found in software editors. It closely follows the GTK-system release cycle. It originated as a fork of Leafpad, was developed by Erik Harrison and Nick Schermer, but has since been rewritten from scratch.\nParole.\n\"Parole\" is a simple media player based on the GStreamer framework. It is designed with simplicity, speed and resource usage in mind, and is part of the Xfce Goodies and uses at least three libraries from the Xfce project (libxfce4ui, libxfce4util, and libxfconf).\nIt is similar to \"GNOME Videos\", but it has some advantages and disadvantages compared to it:\nRistretto.\nAn image viewer (supporting slideshow mode). Ristretto can operate on folders of images, and display their thumbnails in addition to the active image.\nXfburn.\nA CD/DVD optical disc authoring software. Starting with the 4.12 release of Xfce, Xfburn is also able to burn Blu-ray discs.\nXfce Screensaver.\nA screen saver and session-locking program first packaged with the 4.14 release of Xfce. It uses screensaver themes compatible with Xscreensaver. Although forked from MATE Screensaver, it depends only on Xfce libraries.\nProducts and distributions using Xfce.\nXfce is included as one of the graphical user interfaces on the Pandora handheld gaming system.\nIt is the default desktop environment in the following Linux distributions:\nIt is also included as a standard desktop option on FreeBSD and derivatives such as GhostBSD, and in many other Linux distributions not listed above, including Arch Linux, Debian, Gentoo, Ubuntu, openSUSE, Fedora, Linux Mint, Slackware, Mageia, OpenMandriva, Solus OS, and Zorin OS. Kali Linux also uses Xfce as the desktop environment when running on the ARM platform. Debian makes a separate netinstall CD available that installs Xfce as the default desktop environment. In 2013, Debian briefly made it the default environment, replacing GNOME.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69105", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69105", "title": "Suriname/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "69106", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69106", "title": "Suriname/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "69107", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69107", "title": "Suriname/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "69109", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69109", "title": "Suriname/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "69110", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69110", "title": "Suriname/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "69111", "revid": "49622229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69111", "title": "So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish", "text": "1984 book by Douglas Adams\nSo Long, and Thanks for All the Fish is the fourth book of the \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" \"trilogy of six books\" written by Douglas Adams. Its title is the message left by the dolphins when they departed Planet Earth just before it was demolished to make way for a hyperspace bypass, as described in \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". A song of the same name was featured in the 2005 film adaptation of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\".\nPlot summary.\nWhile hitchhiking through the galaxy, Arthur Dent is dropped off on a planet in a rainstorm. He appears to be in England on Earth, even though he had seen the planet destroyed by the Vogons. He has been gone for several years, but only a few months have passed on Earth. He hitches a lift with a man named Russell and his sister Fenchurch (nicknamed \"Fenny\"). Russell explains that Fenny, who is sitting in a drugged state in the back seat of the car, became delusional after worldwide mass hysteria, in which everyone hallucinated \"big yellow spaceships\" (the Vogon destructor ships that \"demolished\" the Earth). Arthur becomes curious about Fenchurch, but he is dropped off before he can ask more questions. Inside his inexplicably undamaged home, Arthur finds a gift-wrapped bowl inscribed with the words \"So long and thanks for all the fish\", into which he puts his Babel Fish. Arthur thinks that Fenchurch is somehow connected to him and to the Earth's destruction. He still has the ability to fly whenever he lets his thoughts wander.\nArthur puts his life in order, and then tries to find out more about Fenchurch. He happens to find her hitchhiking and picks her up. He obtains her phone number, but shortly thereafter loses it. He discovers her home by accident when he searches for the cave in which he had lived on prehistoric Earth; Fenchurch's flat is built on the same spot. Arthur and Fenchurch find more circumstances connecting them. Fenchurch reveals that, moments before her \"hallucinations\", she had an epiphany about how to make everything right, but then blacked out. She has not been able to recall the substance of the epiphany. Eventually discovering that Fenchurch's feet do not touch the ground, Arthur teaches her how to fly. They have sex in the skies over London.\nIn her conversation with Arthur, Fenchurch learns about his adventures hitchhiking across the galaxy, and Arthur learns that all the dolphins disappeared shortly after the world hallucinations. Arthur and Fenchurch travel to California to see John Watson, an enigmatic scientist who claims to know why the dolphins disappeared. Watson has abandoned his original name in favour of \"Wonko the Sane\", because he believes that the rest of the world's population has gone mad. Watson shows them another bowl with the words \"So long and thanks for all the fish\" inscribed on it, and encourages them to listen to it. The bowl explains audibly that the dolphins, aware of the planet's coming destruction, left Earth for an alternate dimension. Before leaving, they pulled the Earth from a parallel universe into this one and transported everyone and everything onto it from the one about to be destroyed. After the meeting, Fenchurch tells Arthur that, while he lost something and later found it, she found something and later lost it. She desires that they travel to space together, and that they reach the site where God's Final Message to His Creation is written.\nFord Prefect discovers that the \"Hitchhiker's Guide\" entry for Earth has been updated to include the volumes of text that he originally wrote, instead of the previous truncated entry, \"Mostly harmless\". Curious, Ford hitchhikes across the galaxy to reach Earth. Eventually he uses the ship of a giant robot to land in the centre of London, causing a panic. In the chaos, Ford reunites with Arthur and the two of them and Fenchurch commandeer the robot's ship. Arthur takes Fenchurch to the planet where God's Final Message to His Creation is written, where they discover Marvin. Due to previous events, Marvin is now approximately 37 times older than the known age of the universe and is barely functional. With Arthur's and Fenchurch's help, Marvin reads the Message (\"We apologise for the inconvenience\"), utters the final words \"I think... I feel good about it\", and dies happily.\nStyle and themes.\nThe novel has a very different tone from the previous books in the series. It is a romance, and also moves around in time more erratically than its predecessors. It is set largely on Earth; Arthur only returns to outer space in the final chapters. The different tone also reflects the rushed nature of the writing; Adams's editor Sonny Mehta moved in with him to ensure that the book met its deadline, which had been repeatedly extended. As a result, Adams later stated that he was not entirely happy with the book, which includes several jarring authorial intrusions, which his biographer Neil Gaiman described as \"patronising and unfair\".\nThe book also reflects a significant shift in Adams's view of computers. In the previous books, computers had been portrayed quite negatively, reflecting Adams's views on the subject at the time. However, between the writing of \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" and \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\", his attitude toward technology changed considerably. Having been taken to a computer fair, he became enamored of the first model of the Macintosh, the start of a long love affair with the brand (he claimed to have bought two of the first three Macs in the UK, the other being bought by his friend Stephen Fry). In \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\", Arthur Dent purchases an Apple computer for the purpose of star mapping in order to pinpoint the location of the cave he lived in on prehistoric Earth, and although Adams mocks Arthur's methodology (noting that he really has no idea of how to go about such a task), the computer itself is not disparaged, and produces the correct result despite Arthur's haphazard approach. In a later essay, Adams noted that some people had accused him of being a \"turncoat\" because of this change in his attitudes.\nLiterary significance and reception.\nIn 1993, \"Library Journal\" said that \"So Long, and Thanks for all the Fish\" was \"filled with loopy humor and pretzel logic that makes Adams' writing so delightful\". Betsy Shorb, reviewing for \"School Library Journal\", said that \"the humor is still off-the-wall but more gentle than the other books. The plot is more straight forward and slightly less bizarre than its predecessors\". Dave Langford reviewed \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\" for \"White Dwarf\" #62, and stated that \"Sequelholism has drained Adams of his high-speed inventiveness which made him famous. No doubt he'll agree with me all the way to the bank\".\nAudiobook adaptations.\nThere have been three audiobook recordings of the novel. The first was an abridged edition, recorded in the mid-1980s by Stephen Moore, best known for playing the voice of Marvin the Paranoid Android in the radio series, LP adaptations and in the TV series. In 1990, Adams himself recorded an unabridged edition, later re-released by New Millennium Audio in the United States and available from BBC Audiobooks in the United Kingdom. In 2006, actor Martin Freeman, who had played Arthur Dent in the 2005 movie, recorded a new unabridged edition of the audiobook.\nThe Quandary Phase of the radio series is drawn from \"So Long and Thanks for All the Fish\", but is not a direct audiobook reading.\nDedication.\nThe dedication thanks, among others, \"Mogens and Andy and all at Huntsham Court for a number of unstable events\". This refers to the then country hotel in Devon where Adams retreated in the summer of 1984 to work on the book but instead enjoyed drinking wine with the owners and Steve Meretzky who had joined him to work on the \"Hitchhiker's\" video game.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69112", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69112", "title": "Lindy Remigino", "text": "American sprinter (1931\u20132018)\nLindy John Remigino (June 3, 1931 \u2013 July 11, 2018) was an American track and field athlete, the 1952 Olympic 100 m champion.\nLife and career.\nRemigino was born in Elmhurst, Queens, New York. He was named after aviator Charles Lindbergh. In 1952, while at Manhattan College he won the ICAAAA 220 championship, then placed close second to Morgan State's sprinter, Art Bragg, at the United States Olympic Trials. The expected main American contender for the Olympic title, Jim Golliday, was injured and did not qualify. In Helsinki, one of the leading American sprinters, Art Bragg, was injured prior to the Games, leaving two Americans, Dean Smith and Remigino to qualify for the final.\nOut of the blocks, John Treloar took a step ahead, but Remigino the eventual Olympic champion and several more quickly picked up his pace, with Jamaica's Herb McKenley lagging well behind. By the 80 m mark, Remigino held a big lead: however, in his excitement at sight of the advancing tape, he pitched forward in a virtual lean. He therefore decelerated in the lean, and, as McKenley came quickly, at the tape no one was certain who won. The final was \"probably the closest mass finish in Olympic 100 metre history\" with the first four runners all clocking in at 10.4 seconds hand-timed (with the fifth and sixth runners only 0.1 behind in 10.5), all six finalists within 0.12 seconds electric-timed (10.79 for first, 10.91 for sixth), and a photo finish necessary to separate the winners. Across Europe that Summer, Remigino defeated McKenley several times more in the 100, while McKenley defeated the new \"World's Fastest Human\" one time in the 200 m race. In Oslo, Norway, Remigino won in 10.2 s which would have equaled the 100-meters world-record, but an out of place wind-o-meter meant the time could not be ratified. His official best time was 10.4 s.\nIn 1953, Remigino won both ICAAAA sprint championships. In 1955 he placed second to Bobby Morrow in the 100 US Nationals.\nFollowing his running career, Remigino became a coach at the Hartford High School in Connecticut.\nRemingino died on July 11, 2018, at the age of 87.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69113", "revid": "1765847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69113", "title": "Eric Brighteyes", "text": "1891 novel by H. Rider Haggard\nEric Brighteyes is an epic Viking novel by H. Rider Haggard that concerns the adventures of its eponymous principal character in 10th-century Iceland. The novel was first published in 1891 by Longmans, Green &amp; Company. It was illustrated by Lancelot Speed.\nPlot summary.\nEric Thorgrimursson, nicknamed \"Brighteyes\" for his most notable trait, strives to win the hand of his beloved, Gudruda the Fair. Her father Asmund, a priest of the old Norse gods, opposes the match, believing Eric to be a man without prospects. Deadlier by far are the intrigues of Swanhild, Gudruda's half-sister and a sorceress, who desires Eric for herself. She persuades the chieftain Ospakar Blacktooth to woo Gudruda, making the two men enemies. Battles, intrigues, and treachery follow.\nBackground.\nHaggard wrote the book in late 1888, following a visit to Iceland.\nPioneer of the Genre.\nThe novel was an early example (and Haggard's introduction implies that it was the first) of modern efforts in English at pastiching saga literature. It clearly shows the influence of the pioneering saga translations by William Morris and Eirikr Magnusson in the late 1860s.\nScience fiction historian David Pringle has stated that \"Eric Brighteyes\", with its outcast hero and emphasis on violent conflict, \"in many ways resembles a Sword &amp; Sorcery epic before its time\".\nReception.\nAnthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas praised \"Eric Brighteyes\", saying that \"nothing has been written in English that matches this complete comprehension of the blend of the fury and mysticism that was that greatest of anomalies, the Viking.\" Pamela Cleaver described \"Eric Brighteyes\" as the best of Haggard's historical novels. She stated that \"there is a wonderful atmosphere with saga overtones in this doom-laden tale.\"\nJohn Scarborough included \"Eric Brighteyes\" on a list of what he regarded as Haggard's best novels, along with \"King Solomon's Mines\", \"\", \"Cleopatra\", \"Nada the Lily\", and \"Red Eve\".\nIn The Stanley Kubrick Archive Oral History Project Web Video Series \"Finding and Developing the Story\", Kubrick's eldest daughter Katharina mentions the book as one that \"he was particularly interested in\". Anthony Frewin states the book was \"very, very dear to him\" and claims that, \"had he lived, I'm sure he would have done it\" as a film.\nPublication.\nThe novel was republished by the Newcastle Publishing Company under the title The Saga of Eric Brighteyes as the second volume of the Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library series in March 1974, and first issued as a mass market paperback by Zebra Books in 1978.\nSequel.\nA sequel, \"Eric Brighteyes #2: A Witch's Welcome\", written by Sigfriour Skaldaspillir (the pseudonym of Mildred Downey Broxon) was published in 1979.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69116", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69116", "title": "Lancelot Speed", "text": "British painter and illustrator\nLancelot Speed (13 June 1860 \u2013 31 December 1931) was a coastal painter and a British illustrator of books in the Victorian era, usually of a fantastical or romantic nature. He is probably most well known for his illustrations for Andrew Lang's fairy story books. Speed is credited as the designer of the 1916 silent film version of the novel \"\" by H. Rider Haggard, which he illustrated. He also worked on animated films for Neptune Film Company. His films include \"French's Contemptible Little Army\", the second film in the \"Bully Boy Series\".\nEarly life.\nSpeed was born in London on 13 June 1860, the youngest son of William Speed, a Queen's Counsel of the Middle Temple. He attended Rugby School. He was admitted to and matriculated from there in Easter 1881. He was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, on 27 January 1881, matriculated that Easter, and was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1885.\nIllustration.\nSpeed had no formal art training, but became an illustrator working primarily in black and white. Process engraving particularly suited his fine lines, and he was one of the earlier illustrators to benefit from the new technology.\nHe lived and worked at Southend-on-Sea, England in the latter part of his life.\nFilms.\nHe was also the director of several early British silent films.\nLancelot Speed's cartoon work is the source of the nickname for the colourful commander of the World War II Special Forces unit \"Popski's Private Army\". Lieutenant Colonel Vladimir Peniakoff, DSO MC, a Belgian of White Russian descent, was called \"Popski\" by Bill Kennedy Shaw, the Intelligence Officer of the Long Range Desert Group because his signallers had trouble with the spelling of his surname. Peniakoff earned early notoriety (and his MC) with his behind-the-lines raids to blow up German petrol dumps, transported there and back, in some exasperation, by the LRDG.\nIn the \"Pip, Squeak and Wilfred\" adventures before the start of World War II, there were two hairy characters: one was a scheming, plotting, bomb-throwing Bolshevik, and the other was his dog. The mad Russian was called \"Professor Wtzkoffski\" and the dog was called \"Popski\". These cartoon characters in the \"Daily Mirror\" were well known to all the soldiers, and in his best-selling book about his small irregular unit, \"Popski\" said, \"...I was delighted with my nickname...\".\nDeath.\nSpeed died at Deal, Kent on 31 December 1931 and was buried at Knowlton, Kent, England. His estate was valued at just over \u00a3265.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69117", "revid": "41503339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69117", "title": "IEEE 802.8", "text": "The Fiber Optic Technical Advisory Group was to create a LAN standard for fiber optic media used in token passing computer networks like FDDI. This was part of the IEEE 802 group of standards.\nThe group had given up and disbanded itself and is no longer a part of IEEE standards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69119", "revid": "1318607290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69119", "title": "List of rivers of Europe", "text": "This article lists the principal rivers of Europe with their main tributaries.\nScope.\nThe border of Europe and Asia is here defined as from the Kara Sea, along the Ural Mountains and Ural River to the Caspian Sea. While the crest of the Caucasus Mountains is the geographical border with Asia in the south, Georgia, and to a lesser extent Armenia and Azerbaijan, are politically and culturally often associated with Europe; rivers in these countries are therefore included.\nThe list is at the outset limited to those rivers that are at least 250\u00a0km long from the most distant source, have a drainage basin (catchment area, watershed) of at least , or have a mean discharge (volume, flow) of at least . Also included are a number of rivers (currently 47) that do not meet these criteria, but are very well known and/or nearly make the mark. Examples of these are the Arno, Ruhr, Saar, and Clyde. See the lists of rivers for individual countries linked to at the bottom of the page for smaller rivers.\nThe rivers are ordered from those flowing to the extreme northeast into the Arctic Ocean, following the coastline anticlockwise all the way to the southeastern coast of the Black Sea. Iceland and the British Islands are included via virtual connections with northern Norway and across the Strait of Dover and the North Channel, respectively. Finally, rivers draining into the Caspian Sea are listed from Azerbaijan to the Ural River.\nThe table can be sorted by each column. The first three columns give a ranking for (maximum) length, area and volume of those rivers flowing into the sea or an endorheic lake down to the cut-off values. No ranking of tributaries is attempted, as the concept is too contentious; for example, hydrologically the middle and upper Volga could be considered a tributary of the Kama, in which case it would be the fifth or sixth longest river in Europe. Instead it does not appear in the table at all.\nThe commercial and geopolitical importance of rivers is not ranked here. As a transportation artery, a river may unite a region commercially and economically, but major rivers, as barriers to travel, may also form political boundaries between states. The Danube, the second longest river in Europe, is notable for flowing through or past ten countries; the Rhine through or past six. The Volga, the longest river in Europe, unites a huge region of European Russia; eleven of the twenty largest cities in Russia lie on its banks. The Loire and the Po unite important regions within France and Italy respectively. The most important rivers in Europe include Rhone, Elbe, Oder, Tagus, Thames, Don and Dnieper, among others.\nCaveats.\nThe measurements shown are drawn from sources deemed most reliable, but still are often uncertain, especially when other sources disagree wildly. For example, the Siret in Romania and Ukraine is 726\u00a0km long with a basin of 44,000\u00a0km2 according to the https://, 647\u00a0km (44,811\u00a0km2) according to a Romanian management plan for the Siret basin and 559\u00a0km (47,610\u00a0km2) according to the extensive transboundary rivers study by the Economic Commission for Europe.\nLength estimates for rivers depend on a number of variables:\nThe catchment areas are more consistent between sources. However, in low relief the watershed is less obvious, while underground connections (especially in karst systems) further complicate area measurements. Unless excellent sources are available, the areas below 70\u00b0N latitude are taken from the HydroBASINS project. The http:// and https:// websites provide convenient interfaces to assess the accuracy of many of the basins. Areas for rivers above 70\u00b0N are warned and found to be less reliable.\nThe listed multiyear mean discharges are even less reliable than the lengths. Underestimates are most common, as the gauging stations are often far above the mouth, so that only a fraction of the drainage basin is represented. On the other hand, the highest volume of a river may not be at the mouth due to water loss by human usage, diversion (e.g. through distributaries), evaporation, or underground drainage.\nRivers of Europe by length.\nThe longest rivers in Europe with their approximate lengths (incomplete list):\nRivers of Europe by discharge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis is an incomplete list of the largest rivers of Europe by discharge:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSWRR = State Water Register of Russia; GSE = Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 1969\u20131978 edition; IEU = Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine."}
{"id": "69123", "revid": "51044438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69123", "title": "Forbidden City", "text": "Imperial palace complex in Beijing, China\nThe Forbidden City () is the imperial palace complex in the center of the Imperial City in Beijing, China. It was the residence of 24 Ming and Qing dynasty Emperors, and the center of political power in China for over 500 years from 1420 to 1924. The palace is now administered by the Palace Museum as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Forbidden City is arguably the most famous palace in all of Chinese history, and is the largest preserved royal palace complex still standing in the world.\nThe Forbidden City was constructed from 1406 to 1420, and was the imperial palace and winter residence of the Emperor of China from the Ming dynasty (since the Yongle Emperor) to the end of the Qing dynasty, between 1420 and 1924. The Forbidden City served as the home of Chinese emperors and their households and was the ceremonial and political center of the Chinese government for over 500 years. Since 1925, the Forbidden City has been under the charge of the Palace Museum, whose extensive collection of artwork and artifacts was built upon the imperial collections of the Ming and Qing dynasties. The Forbidden City was declared a World Heritage Site in 1987.\nThe complex claims to consist of 9,999 rooms in total, although experts have shown in recent years that the number only amounts to 8,886, covering /178-acre. The palace exemplifies the opulence of the residences of the Chinese emperor and the traditional Chinese palatial architecture, and has influenced cultural and architectural developments in East Asia and elsewhere. UNESCO recognizes it as the largest collection of preserved ancient wooden structures in the world. Since 2012, the Forbidden City has seen an average of 14 million visitors annually, and received more than 19 million visitors in 2019. In 2018, the Forbidden City's market value was estimated at US$70 billion, making it both the world's most valuable palace and the most valuable piece of real estate anywhere in the world.\nIt was included in the first list of national priority protected sites in 1961. The palace is extremely important to the Chinese public and nation, who often view it as a cultural and heavenly link to their ancestors.\nEtymology.\nThe palace gained its name from its enormous scale and severely restricted access to all but the Emperor, the Imperial family, and Eunuchs; hence the Chinese term \"Forbidden City\" emerged. The punishment for unauthorised entry to the palace was immediate execution. The common English name \"Forbidden City\" is a translation of the Chinese name \"Zijincheng\" (; lit.\u2009'Purple Forbidden City'), which first formally appeared in 1576. Another English name of similar origin is \"Forbidden Palace\", though \"city\" is much closer to the original Chinese meaning.\nThe name \"Zijincheng\" has significance on many levels. \"Zi\", or \"purple\", refers to the North Star, which in ancient China was called the \"Ziwei\" Star, and in traditional Chinese astrology was the heavenly abode of the Jade Emperor. The surrounding celestial region, the Ziwei Enclosure (), was the realm of the Jade Emperor and his family. The Forbidden City, as the residence of the terrestrial emperor, was its earthly counterpart. \"Jin\" refers to a prohibition or taboo. \"Cheng\" originally meant a castle, fortress, or fortification, but in modern Chinese, the character means city.\nToday, the site is most commonly known in Chinese as \"Gugong\" (), which means the \"Former Palace\". The museum which is based in these buildings is known as the \"Palace Museum\" ().\nIn the Ming and Qing dynasties, the Forbidden City was also known as \"Danei\" () or \"Palace City\" ().\nHistory.\nWhen the Hongwu Emperor's son Zhu Di became the Yongle Emperor, he moved the capital from Nanjing to Beijing, and construction began in 1406 on what would become the Forbidden City.\nConstruction lasted 14 years and required more than a million workers. Material used include whole logs of precious \"Phoebe zhennan\" wood () found in the jungles of south-western China, and large blocks of marble from quarries near Beijing. The floors of major halls were paved with \"golden bricks\" (), specially baked paving bricks from Suzhou.\nFrom 1420 to 1644, the Forbidden City was the seat of the Ming dynasty. In April 1644, it was captured by rebel forces led by Li Zicheng, who proclaimed himself emperor of the Shun dynasty. He soon fled before the combined armies of former Ming general Wu Sangui and Manchu forces, setting fire to parts of the Forbidden City in the process.\nBy October, the Manchus had achieved supremacy in northern China, and a ceremony was held at the Forbidden City to proclaim the young Shunzhi Emperor as ruler of all China under the Qing dynasty. The Qing rulers changed the names on some of the principal buildings to emphasise \"harmony\" rather than \"supremacy\", made the nameplates bilingual (Chinese and Manchu), and introduced shamanist elements to the palace.\nIn 1860, during the Second Opium War, Anglo-French forces took control of the Forbidden City and occupied it until the end of the war. In 1900 Empress Dowager Cixi fled from the Forbidden City during the Boxer Rebellion, leaving it to be occupied by forces of the treaty powers until the following year.\nAfter being the home of 24 emperors \u2014 14 of the Ming dynasty and 10 of the Qing dynasty \u2014 the Forbidden City ceased being the political centre of China in 1912 with the abdication of Puyi, the last Emperor of China. Under an agreement with the new Republic of China government, Puyi remained in the Inner Court, while the Outer Court was given over to public use, until he was evicted after a coup in 1924. The Palace Museum was then established in the Forbidden City in 1925. In 1933, the Japanese invasion of China forced the evacuation of the national treasures in the Forbidden City. Part of the collection returned at the end of World War II, but the other part was evacuated to Taiwan in 1948 under orders of Chiang Kai-shek, whose Kuomintang was losing the Chinese Civil War. This relatively small but high quality collection was kept in storage until 1965, when it again became public as the core of the National Palace Museum in Taipei.\nAfter the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949, some damage was done to the Forbidden City as the country was swept up in revolutionary zeal. During the Cultural Revolution, however, further destruction was prevented when Premier Zhou Enlai sent an army battalion to guard the city.\nThe Forbidden City was declared a World Heritage Site in 1987 by UNESCO as the \"Imperial Palace of the Ming and Qing Dynasties\", due to its significant place in the development of Chinese architecture and culture.\nIn the early 21st century, the Palace Museum carried out a sixteen-year restoration project to repair and restore all buildings in the Forbidden City to their pre-1911 state, with the goal that 76% of the palace would be open to the public by 2020. As a result of that project, the Shoukang Palace was officially opened to the public in 2013, after initially being displayed in its original state. A sculpture museum was opened in the Cining Palace in 2015. Also opened in 2015 were the precincts around Cining Palace, the Yanyin Building and the Donghua Gate.\nOn 5 November 2024, 100 years was marked since the expulsion of the last Emperor of China, Puyi, from the palace by republican forces, led by Feng Yuxiang.\nStructure.\nThe Forbidden City is a rectangle, measuring from north to south and from east to west. It consists of 980 surviving buildings with 8,886 bays of rooms. A common myth states that there are 9,999 rooms including antechambers, based on oral tradition, but it is not supported by survey evidence. The layout of the Forbidden City protected the imperial code of ethics as a physical installation. The courtyard was built on a massive, luxurious scale but it has the appearance of a quadrangle courtyard. The Forbidden City was designed to be the centre of the ancient, walled city of Beijing. It is enclosed in a larger, walled area called the Imperial City. The Imperial City is, in turn, enclosed by the Inner City; to its south lies the Outer City.\nThe Forbidden City remains important in the civic scheme of Beijing. The central north\u2013south axis remains the central axis of Beijing. This axis extends to the south through Tiananmen Gate to Tiananmen Square, the ceremonial centre of the People's Republic of China, and on to Yongdingmen Gate. To the north, it extends through Jingshan Park to the Drum Tower and Bell Tower. This axis is not exactly aligned north\u2013south, but is tilted by slightly more than two degrees. Researchers now believe that the axis was designed during the Yuan dynasty to be aligned with Shangdu, the other capital of their empire.\nWalls and gates.\nThe Forbidden City is surrounded by a high city wall and a deep by wide moat. The walls are wide at the base, tapering to at the top. These walls served as both defensive walls and retaining walls for the palace. They were constructed with a rammed earth core, and surfaced with three layers of specially baked bricks on both sides, with the interstices filled with mortar.\nAt the four corners of the wall sit corner towers (E) with intricate roofs boasting 72 ridges, reproducing the Pavilion of Prince Teng and the Yellow Crane Pavilion as they appeared in Song dynasty paintings. These towers are the most visible parts of the palace to people outside the walls, and much folklore is attached to them. According to one legend, artisans could not put a corner tower back together after it was dismantled for renovations in the early Qing dynasty, and it was only rebuilt after the intervention of master carpenter Lu Ban.\nThe wall is pierced by a gate on each side. At the southern end is the main Meridian Gate (A) (). To the north is the Gate of Divine Prowess (B) (), which faces Jingshan Park. The east and west gates are the East Glorious Gate (D) () and the West Glorious Gate (C) (). All gates in the Forbidden City are decorated with nine-by-nine arrays of golden door nails, except for the East Glorious Gate, which has only eight.\nThe Meridian Gate has two protruding wings, which form three sides of a square before it, and five gateways. The central gateway is part of the Imperial Way, a stone flagged path that forms the central axis of the Forbidden City and the ancient city of Beijing itself, leading all the way from the Gate of China in the south to Jingshan Park in the north. Except for the empress on the occasion of her wedding and successful students after the Imperial Examination, only the emperor could walk or ride on the Imperial Way.\nOuter Court or the Southern Section.\nTraditionally, the Forbidden City is divided into two parts: the Outer Court () or Front Court () to the south, which was used for ceremonial purposes; and the Inner Court () or Back Palace () to the north, which was the residence of the emperor and his family and was used for day-to-day affairs of state (the approximate dividing line shown as a red dash in the plan above). Generally, the Forbidden City has three vertical axes. The most important buildings are situated on the central north\u2013south axis.\nEntering from the Meridian Gate, one encounters a large square, pierced by the meandering Inner Golden Water River, which is crossed by five bridges. Beyond the square stands the Gate of Supreme Harmony (F) (). Behind that is a square from which a three-tiered white marble terrace rises and three halls stand on top of this terrace, the focus of the palace complex. From the south, these are the Hall of Supreme Harmony (), the Hall of Central Harmony (), and the Hall of Preserving Harmony ().\nThe Hall of Supreme Harmony (G) is the largest, and rises some above the level of the surrounding square. It is the ceremonial centre of imperial power, and the largest surviving wooden structure in China. It is nine bays wide and five bays deep, the numbers 9 and 5 being symbolically connected to the majesty of the emperor. Set into the ceiling at the centre of the hall is an intricate caisson decorated with a coiled dragon, from the mouth of which issues a chandelier-like set of metal balls, called the \"Xuanyuan Mirror\". In the Ming dynasty, the emperor held court here to discuss affairs of state. During the Qing dynasty, as emperors held court far more frequently, a less ceremonious location was used instead, and the Hall of Supreme Harmony was only used for ceremonial purposes, such as enthronements, investitures, and imperial weddings.\nThe Hall of Central Harmony is a smaller, square hall, used by the emperor to prepare and rest before and during ceremonies. Behind it, the Hall of Preserving Harmony, was used for rehearsing ceremonies, and was also the site of the final stage of the Imperial Examination. All three halls feature imperial thrones, the largest and most elaborate one being that in the Hall of Supreme Harmony.\nAt the centre of the stairs leading up to the terraces from the northern and southern sides are ceremonial ramps, part of the Imperial Way, featuring elaborate and symbolic bas-relief carvings. The northern ramp, behind the Hall of Preserving Harmony, is carved from a single piece of stone long, wide, and thick. It weighs some 200\u00a0tons and is the largest such carving in China. The southern ramp, in front of the Hall of Supreme Harmony, is even longer, but is made from two stone slabs joined \u2014 the joint was ingeniously hidden using overlapping bas-relief carvings, and was only discovered when weathering widened the gap in the 20th century. The stone slabs were likely transported from a quarry via ice sledge along an ice path lubricated by well water en route.\nIn the southwest and southeast of the Outer Court are the halls of Military Eminence (H) and Literary Glory (J). The former was used at various times for the emperor to receive ministers and hold court, and later housed the palace's own printing house. The latter was used for ceremonial lectures by highly regarded Confucian scholars, and later became the office of the Grand Secretariat. A copy of the \"Complete Library of the Four Treasuries\" was stored there. To the north-east are the Southern Three Places (\u5357\u4e09\u6240) (K), which was the residence of the crown prince.\nInner Court or the Northern Section.\nThe Inner Court is separated from the Outer Court by an oblong courtyard lying orthogonal to the city's main axis. It was the home of the Emperor and his family. In the Qing dynasty, the Emperor lived and worked almost exclusively in the Inner Court, with the Outer Court used only for ceremonial purposes.\nBack Three Palaces.\nAt the centre of the Inner Court is another set of three halls (L). From the south, these are:\nSmaller than the Outer Court halls, the three halls of the Inner Court were the official residences of the Emperor and the Empress. The Emperor, representing Yang and the Heavens, would occupy the Palace of Heavenly Purity. The Empress, representing Yin and the Earth, would occupy the Palace of Earthly Tranquility. In between them was the Hall of Union, where the Yin and Yang mixed to produce harmony.\nThe Palace of Heavenly Purity is a double-eaved building, and set on a single-level white marble platform. It is connected to the Gate of Heavenly Purity to its south by a raised walkway. In the Ming dynasty, it was the residence of the Emperor. However, beginning from the Yongzheng Emperor of the Qing dynasty, the Emperor lived instead at the smaller Hall of Mental Cultivation (N) to the west, out of respect to the memory of the Kangxi Emperor. The Palace of Heavenly Purity then became the Emperor's audience hall. A caisson is set into the roof, featuring a coiled dragon. Above the throne hangs a tablet reading \"Justice and Honour\" ().\nThe Palace of Earthly Tranquility (\u5764\u5be7\u5bae) is a double-eaved building, 9 bays wide and 3 bays deep. In the Ming dynasty, it was the residence of the Empress. In the Qing dynasty, large portions of the Palace were converted for Shamanist worship by the new Manchu rulers. From the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor, the Empress moved out of the Palace. However, two rooms in the Palace of Earthly Harmony were retained for use on the Emperor's wedding night.\nBetween these two palaces is the Hall of Union, which is square in shape with a pyramidal roof. Stored here are the 25 Imperial Seals of the Qing dynasty, as well as other ceremonial items.\nBehind these three halls lies the Imperial Garden (M). Relatively small, and compact in design, the garden nevertheless contains several elaborate landscaping features. To the north of the garden is the Gate of Divine Might.\nDirectly to the west is the Hall of Mental Cultivation (N). Originally a minor palace, this became the \"de facto\" residence and office of the Emperor starting from Yongzheng. In the last decades of the Qing dynasty, empresses dowager, including Cixi, held court from the eastern partition of the hall. Located around the Hall of Mental Cultivation are the offices of the Grand Council and other key government bodies.\nThe north-eastern section of the Inner Court is taken up by the Palace of Tranquil Longevity (\u5be7\u58fd\u5bae) (O), a complex built by the Qianlong Emperor in anticipation of his retirement. It mirrors the set-up of the Forbidden City proper and features an \"outer court\", an \"inner court\", and gardens and temples. The entrance to the Palace of Tranquil Longevity is marked by a glazed-tile Nine Dragons Screen.\nSix Western and Six Eastern Palaces.\nTo the west and to the east of the three main halls of the inner court are the Six Western Palaces (\u897f\u516d\u5bab; \"x\u012bli\u00f9g\u014dng\") and the Six Eastern Palaces (\u4e1c\u516d\u5bab; \"d\u014dngli\u00f9g\u014dng\"). These palaces were the residences of the imperial consorts. Six palaces lay to the west and six to the east of the three main halls, hence the name. The architecture of the twelve palaces, connected by passageways, is more or less the same. The Western and Eastern Palaces each have a layout of three palaces on either side of an alley that runs from north to south. Every palace has its own courtyards, main halls, and side-halls. The main halls stand in the middle and the side-halls are in the east and west. The front courtyard and its main hall was used for receptions, while the back courtyard and its main hall served as living quarters.\nAn imperial consort with the rank of concubine and above was given a residence in the main section of a palace and was the manager of that palace, an honor in itself. Lower ranking imperial consorts (noble ladies and below) lived in the side halls of the palaces and were supervised by the higher ranking imperial consort.\nThe twelve palaces were the place where many of the Qing emperors were born and grew up, and they formed the daily life of the imperial family.\nDuring the late Qing era, Empress Dowager Cixi resided in one of the Western Palaces and became known as the \"western empress\", while her co-regent Empress Dowager Ci'an lived in one of the Eastern Palaces and was thus known as the \"eastern empress\".\nThe names of the palaces were:\nWestern Six Palaces \nEastern Six Palaces\nCining Palace and Shoukang Palace.\nTo the west of the Hall of Mental Cultivation (N) in the western area of the Inner Court is Cining Palace (Palace of Compassion and Tranquility) and Shoukang Palace (Palace of Longevity and Good Health). The palaces were the residences of widowed consorts of previous emperors. In accordance with feudal manners, emperors should not live with the wives of late emperors, so they lived in this separate area of the Inner Court. The Cining palace is bigger and older than Shoukang Palace which is located to the west of Cining Palace. To the south of Cining Palace is Cining garden.\nReligion.\nReligion was an important part of life for the imperial court. In the Qing dynasty, the Palace of Earthly Harmony became a place of Manchu Shamanist ceremony. At the same time, the native Chinese Taoist religion continued to have an important role throughout the Ming and Qing dynasties. There were two Taoist shrines, one in the imperial garden and another in the central area of the Inner Court.\nAnother prevalent form of religion in the Qing dynasty palace was Buddhism. A number of temples and shrines were scattered throughout the Inner Court, including that of Tibetan Buddhism or Lamaism. Buddhist iconography also proliferated in the interior decorations of many buildings. Of these, the Pavilion of the Rain of Flowers is one of the most important. It housed a large number of Buddhist statues, icons, and mandalas, placed in ritualistic arrangements.\nSurroundings.\nThe palace complex is surrounded by numerous opulent imperial gardens and temples including the Zhongshan Park, the sacrificial Imperial Ancestral Temple, the Beihai Park, and the Jingshan Park.\nThe Forbidden City is surrounded on three sides by imperial gardens. To the north is Jingshan Park, also known as Prospect Hill, an artificial hill created from the soil excavated to build the moat and from nearby lakes.\nTo the west lies Zhongnanhai, a former royal garden centred on two connected lakes, which now serves as the central headquarters for the Chinese Communist Party and the State Council of the People's Republic of China. To the north-west lies Beihai Park, also centred on a lake connected to the southern two, and a popular royal park.\nTo the south of the Forbidden City were two important shrines \u2013 the Imperial Shrine of Family or the Imperial Ancestral Temple () and the Imperial Shrine of State or Beijing Shejitan (), where the Emperor would venerate the spirits of his ancestors and the spirit of the nation, respectively. Today, these are the Beijing Labouring People's Cultural Hall and Zhongshan Park (commemorating Sun Yat-sen) respectively.\nTo the south, two nearly identical gatehouses stand along the main axis. They are the Upright Gate () and the more famous Tiananmen Gate, which is decorated with a portrait of Mao Zedong in the centre and two placards to the left and right: \"Long Live the People's Republic of China\" () and \"Long live the Great Unity of the World's Peoples\" (). The Tiananmen Gate connects the Forbidden City precinct with the modern, symbolic centre of the Chinese state, Tiananmen Square.\nWhile development is now tightly controlled in the vicinity of the Forbidden City, throughout the past century uncontrolled and sometimes politically motivated demolition and reconstruction has changed the character of the areas surrounding the Forbidden City. Since 2000, the Beijing municipal government has worked to evict governmental and military institutions occupying some historical buildings, and has established a park around the remaining parts of the Imperial City wall. In 2004, an ordinance relating to building height and planning restriction was renewed to establish the Imperial City area and the northern city area as a buffer zone for the Forbidden City. In 2005, the Imperial City and Beihai (as an extension item to the Summer Palace) were included in the shortlist for the next World Heritage Site in Beijing.\nArchitecture.\nSymbolism.\nThe design of the Forbidden City, from its overall layout to the smallest detail, was meticulously planned to reflect philosophical and religious principles, and above all to symbolize the majesty of Imperial power. Some noted examples of symbolic designs include:\nCollections.\nThe collections of the Palace Museum are based on the Qing imperial collection, including paintings, ceramics, seals, steles, sculptures, inscribed wares, bronze wares and enamel objects. According to the latest audit, it has 1,862,690 pieces of art. In addition, the imperial libraries housed a large collection of rare books and historical documents, including government documents of the Ming and Qing dynasties, which has since been transferred to the First Historical Archives.\nFrom 1933, the threat of Japanese invasion forced the evacuation of the most important parts of the Museum's collection. After the end of World War II, this collection was returned to Nanjing. However, with the Communists' victory imminent in the Chinese Civil War, the Nationalist government decided to ship the pick of this collection to Taiwan. Of the 13,491 boxes of evacuated artefacts, 2,972 boxes are now housed in the National Palace Museum in Taipei. More than 8,000 boxes were returned to Beijing, but 2,221 boxes remain today in storage under the charge of the Nanjing Museum.\nThe Palace Museum holds 340,000 pieces of ceramics and porcelain. These include imperial collections from the Tang dynasty and the Song dynasty. It has close to 50,000 paintings, within which more than 400 date from before the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), which is the largest in China. Its bronze collection dates from the early Shang dynasty. Of the almost 10,000 pieces held, about 1,600 are inscribed items from the pre-Qin period (to 221 BC). A significant part of the collection is ceremonial bronzeware from the imperial court. The Palace Museum has one of the largest collections of mechanical timepieces of the 18th and 19th centuries in the world, with more than 1,000 pieces. The collection contains both Chinese- and foreign-made pieces. Chinese pieces came from the palace's own workshops. Foreign pieces came from countries including Britain, France, Switzerland, the United States, and Japan. Of these, the largest portion come from Britain. Jade has a unique place in Chinese culture. The Museum's collection includes some 30,000 pieces. The pre-Yuan dynasty part of the collection includes several pieces famed throughout history. The earliest pieces date from the Neolithic period. In addition to works of art, a large proportion of the Museum's collection consists of the artifacts of the imperial court. This includes items used by the imperial family and the palace in daily life. This comprehensive collection preserves the daily life and ceremonial protocols of the imperial era.\nInfluence.\nThe Forbidden City has been influential in the subsequent development of Chinese architecture, as well as in providing inspiration for many artistic works.\nDepiction in art, film, literature and popular culture.\nThe Forbidden City has served as the scene to many works of fiction. In recent years, it has been depicted in films and television series. Some notable examples include:\nReplicas.\nA large replica of the Forbidden City is included within the Hengdian World Studios in Dongyang, Zhejiang Province - a section of which many Chinese period-films and television shows were filmed. When filmography was restricted within the actual Forbidden City-proper in Beijing after gaining UNESCO World Heritage Status in 1987, the Hengdian World Studio-replica remained one of the only alternatives to legally do so, as it would raise concern that filmography work within the palace-proper in Beijing would risk damage to the historical site itself.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69125", "revid": "5230605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69125", "title": "Jan Timman", "text": "Dutch chess grandmaster (born 1951)\nJan Timman (born 14 December 1951) is a Dutch chess grandmaster who was one of the world's leading chess players from the late 1970s to the early 1990s. At the peak of his career, he was considered to be the best non-Soviet player and was known as \"The Best of the West\". He has won the Dutch Chess Championship nine times and has been a Candidate for the World Chess Championship several times. He lost the title match of the 1993 FIDE World Championship against Anatoly Karpov.\nEarly career.\nHe is the son of mathematics professor Rein Timman and his wife Anneke, who as a schoolgirl was a mathematics student of former world champion Max Euwe. His older brother, Ton (1946\u20132014), held the chess title of FIDE Master. Jan Timman was already an outstanding prospect in his early teens, and at Jerusalem 1967 played in the World Junior Championship, aged fifteen, finishing third.\nTimman received the International Master title in 1971, and in 1974 attained Grandmaster status, making him the Netherlands' third after Max Euwe and Jan Hein Donner. In the same year he won the Dutch Championship for the first time, having finished second in 1972. He was to win it again on many more occasions through 1996. His first notable international success was at Hastings 1973/74, where he shared victory with Tal, Kuzmin, and Szab\u00f3. A string of victories quickly followed at Sombor 1974 (with Boris Gulko), Netanya 1975, Reykjav\u00edk 1976 (with Fridrik Olafsson), Amsterdam IBM 1978, Nik\u0161i\u0107 1978, and Bled/Portoro\u017e 1979.\nTournament successes.\nBy 1982 Timman was ranked second in the world, behind only Anatoly Karpov. In the 1980s he won a number of very strong tournaments, including Amsterdam IBM in 1981, Wijk aan Zee in 1981 and 1985, Linares in 1988, the 1989 Euwe Memorial, and the 1989 World Cup tournament in Rotterdam. Other major successes included Las Palmas 1981, Mar del Plata 1982, Bugojno 1984, and Sarajevo 1984. One of his notable later successes was the 2nd Immopar Rapid Tournament in 1991, a weekend event which attracted a huge amount of prize money. In this knock-out format tournament he defeated Gata Kamsky 1\u00bd\u2013\u00bd, Karpov 2\u20130, Viswanathan Anand 1\u00bd\u2013\u00bd, and finally the World Champion Garry Kasparov 1\u00bd\u2013\u00bd to win the first prize of approximately 75,000 USD. His performance was equivalent to an Elo rating of 2950.\nWorld Championship Candidate.\nTimman's world championship career began at the zonal tournaments at Forssa/Helsinki 1972 and Reykjav\u00edk 1975. He failed to qualify for the next stage on both occasions. However his win at Amsterdam 1978 took him to his first interzonal tournament at Rio de Janeiro, where he failed to progress further. He finished in the middle of the field at the 1982 Las Palmas Interzonal, but won the Taxco 1985 Interzonal convincingly to qualify for the Candidates Matches for the first time. However, he lost in the first round to Artur Yusupov in 1986. In the next cycle, after winning the 1987 Tilburg Interzonal he defeated Valery Salov, Lajos Portisch, and Jonathan Speelman, but lost in the final to Anatoly Karpov in 1990. He reached the final round once again in 1993, having defeated Robert H\u00fcbner, Viktor Korchnoi, and Yusupov, but lost this time to Nigel Short. However, after Short and Garry Kasparov played their World Championship match outside of the auspices of the sport's governing body FIDE, Timman was invited to compete against Karpov for the FIDE version of the world title. He lost the match by 12\u00bd points to 8\u00bd.\nOlympiad career.\nTimman represented the Netherlands in 13 Chess Olympiads from 1972 to 2004, playing on the top board on 11 occasions. In 1976 he won the gold medal for the best individual performance on that board.\nLater career.\nTimman continues to play actively. In 2004 he placed equal first in a tournament in Reykjav\u00edk and was equal second at Amsterdam. He played in the gold medal-winning Dutch team at the European Team Chess Championships in Gothenburg in 2005, alongside Loek van Wely, Ivan Sokolov, Sergei Tiviakov, and Erik van den Doel. In 2006 he won the Sigeman Tournament in Malm\u00f6 Sweden and was second in the Howard Staunton Memorial in London.\nWritings.\nTimman is one of the chief editors of the magazine \"New In Chess\". His book \"The Art of Chess Analysis\" () is widely considered one of the modern classics of chess literature. His \"Timman's Titans\" won the 2017 ECF Book of the Year. His other books include \"Timman's Selected Games\" (1995), \"Studies and Games\" (1996), \"Fischer, World Champion!\" (2002), an account of the 1972 World Championship, \"Power Chess with Pieces: The Ultimate Guide to the Bishops Pair &amp; Strong Knights\" (2004), \"Botvinnik's Secret Games\" (2006), \"On the Attack: The Art of Attacking Chess According to the Modern Masters\" (2006), \"Cura\u00e7ao 1962: The Battle of Minds That Shook the Chess World\" (2007), which covers the 1962 Candidates Tournament and \"The Art of the Endgame (My journeys in the Magical World Endgame Studies)\" (2011).\nStyle.\nTimman likes to challenge opponents directly in the areas of their strengths. Yasser Seirawan describes a game where Timman had an over-the-board inspiration to opt for a complicated game\u2014the kind that Timman knew Seirawan really enjoyed\u2014in spite of having prepared an equalizing variation beforehand. Timman's fearlessness has caused him to lose a lot of games, but also makes him a feared competitor because nobody likes to lose from their favourite positions. Raymond Keene described Timman's playing style as that of \"a fighter, in the mould of Emanuel Lasker\".\nHe has always adopted a wide and varied opening repertoire, playing an array of different systems as both White and Black. When he first reached the world class level in the 1970s, this was relatively unusual, with most elite grandmasters deploying a more narrowly focused range of openings, but it is now the norm.\nExample game.\nThis game, played between Timman and Garry Kasparov in Hilversum on 17 December 1985, is a good example of Timman's style: \nTimman vs. Garry Kasparov, Hilversum 1985; Ruy Lopez, Zaitsev Variation 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.0-0 Be7 6.Re1 b5 7.Bb3 d6 8.c3 0-0 9.h3 Bb7 10.d4 Re8 11.Ng5 Rf8 12.Nf3 Re8 13.Nbd2 Bf8 14.a3 h6 15.Bc2 Nb8 16.b4 Nbd7 17.Bb2 g6 18.c4 exd4 19.cxb5 axb5 20.Nxd4 c6 21.a4 bxa4 22.Bxa4 Qb6 23.Nc2 Qc7 24.Bb3 Ba6 25.Rc1 Bg7 26.Ne3 Bb5 27.Nd5 Nxd5 28.Bxg7 Kxg7 29.exd5 Ne5 30.Ne4 Nd3 31.Qd2 Ra3 32.Nf6 Rxe1+ 33.Rxe1 Kxf6 34.Qc3+ Ne5 35.f4 Ba4 36.fxe5 dxe5 (see diagram; at this point, Timman finds a game-ending combination) 37.d6 Qxd6 38.Qf3+ Ke7 39.Qxf7+ Kd8 40.Rd1 Ra1 41.Qf6+ (Kasparov cannot hang on to his queen) 1\u20130\nPersonal life.\nTimman married twice, with a son and a daughter from the first marriage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69128", "revid": "15536200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69128", "title": "Tonkin", "text": "Historical name for Northern Vietnam\nTonkin, also spelled Tongkin, Tonquin or Tongking, is an exonym referring to the area surrounding the Red River Delta of Northern Vietnam. During the 17th and 18th centuries, this term referred to the domain of \"\u0110\u00e0ng Ngo\u00e0i\", under the control of the Tr\u1ecbnh lords, encompassing both the Northern and Thanh\u2013Ngh\u1ec7 regions, north of the Gianh River at the 17.7th parallel. From 1884 to early 1945, the term referred to the French protectorate of Tonkin, which comprised only the Northern region, approximately north of the 20th parallel.\nNames.\n\"Tonkin\" is a Western rendition of \u6771\u4eac \"\u0110\u00f4ng Kinh\", meaning 'Eastern Capital'. This was the name of the capital of the L\u00ea dynasty (present-day Hanoi). Locally, Tonkin is nowadays known as \"mi\u1ec1n B\u1eafc\", or \"B\u1eafc B\u1ed9\", meaning 'Northern Region'.\nThe name was used from 1883 to 1945 for the French protectorate of Tonkin (Vietnamese: \"B\u1eafc K\u1ef3\" \u5317\u573b), a constituent territory of French Indochina.\nGeography.\nIt is located south of Yunnan (V\u00e2n Nam) and Guangxi (Qu\u1ea3ng T\u00e2y) in China, east of northern Laos, west of the Gulf of Tonkin and north of Thanh H\u00f3a province.\nBeing on a fertile delta by the Red River, Tonkin is rich in rice production.\nHistory.\nThe area was called V\u0103n Lang from around 2000\u2212200 BC. Evidence of the earliest established society in northern Vietnam, along with the \u0110\u00f4ng S\u01a1n culture, was discovered in the C\u1ed5 Loa Citadel area, located near present-day Hanoi (the capital city of Vietnam).\nAccording to Vietnamese myths the first Vietnamese peoples descended from the Dragon Lord L\u1ea1c Long Qu\u00e2n and the Immortal Goddess \u00c2u C\u01a1. L\u1ea1c Long Qu\u00e2n and \u00c2u C\u01a1 had 100 sons before they decided to part ways. 50 of the children went with their mother to the mountains, and the other 50 went with their father to the sea. The eldest son became the first in a line of earliest Vietnamese kings, collectively known as the H\u00f9ng kings of the H\u1ed3ng B\u00e0ng dynasty. The country was called V\u0103n Lang and its people were referred to as the L\u1ea1c Vi\u1ec7t.\nBy the 3rd century BC, another Viet group, the \u00c2u Vi\u1ec7t, emigrated to the Red River delta and mixed with the indigenous population. A new kingdom, \u00c2u L\u1ea1c, emerged as the union of the \u00c2u Vi\u1ec7t and the L\u1ea1c Vi\u1ec7t, with Th\u1ee5c Ph\u00e1n proclaiming himself An D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u01b0\u01a1ng.\n\u00c2u L\u1ea1c was annexed into Nam Vi\u1ec7t kingdom of Tri\u1ec7u \u0110\u00e0. After the Tri\u1ec7u dynasty, this region started to be officially under Chinese rule. In pre-Tang times Tonkin was the port of call for ships on the South China Sea, though the center of commerce later moved north to Guangdong.\nThe victory of Ng\u00f4 Quy\u1ec1n at the Battle of B\u1ea1ch \u0110\u1eb1ng in 938 ushered a new era of independence of Vietnam. The Ng\u00f4 dynasty was followed by the \u0110inh, Early L\u00ea, L\u00fd, Tr\u1ea7n, and H\u1ed3.\n15th and 16th centuries.\nL\u00ea L\u1ee3i (reigned 1428\u20131433), a notable landowner in the Lam S\u01a1n region, had a following of more than 1,000 people before rising up against rule of the Chinese Ming dynasty. Following his victory he mounted the throne and established himself in the city of Th\u0103ng Long ('Ascending Dragon'), present H\u00e0 N\u1ed9i. Th\u0103ng Long was also called \"\u0110\u00f4ng Kinh\" \u6771\u4eac, meaning 'Eastern Capital' (\u6771\u4eac is identical in meaning and written form in Chinese characters to that of Tokyo).\n17th and 18th centuries.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries, Westerners commonly used the name Tonkin (from \"\u0110\u00f4ng Kinh\") to refer to \"\u0110\u00e0ng Ngo\u00e0i\" in the North, ruled by the Tr\u1ecbnh lords. \"\u0110\u00e0ng Ngo\u00e0i\", or \"B\u1eafc H\u00e0\", included not only the delta of the Red River, but also the deltas of the M\u00e3 River and C\u1ea3 River. Meanwhile, Cochinchina or Quinan was used to refer to \"\u0110\u00e0ng Trong\" in the South, ruled by the Nguy\u1ec5n lords; and Annam, from the name of the former Chinese province, was used to refer to Vietnam as a whole.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nAfter French assistance to Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1nh to unify Vietnam under the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty, the French Navy began its heavy presence in Lower Cochinchina, including Saigon, and later colonized the whole of this southern third of Vietnam in 1867.\nDuring the Sino-French War (1884\u20131885), Tonkin, then considered a crucial foothold in Southeast Asia and a key to the Chinese market, was invaded by the French in the Tonkin Campaign. It was colonized as the French protectorate of Tonkin, and was gradually separated from the French protectorate of Annam, with Vietnam being effectively separated into three parts.\nDuring French colonial rule within French Indochina, Hanoi was the capital of Tonkin protectorate, and in 1901 became the capital of all French Indochina (Cambodia, Laos, &amp; Vietnam). French colonial administration ruled until 9 March 1945, including 1941\u20131945 during the World War II Japanese occupation of Vietnam. French administration was allowed by the Japanese as a puppet government. Japan briefly took full control of Vietnam in March 1945, as the Empire of Vietnam. Tonkin became a site of the Vietnamese famine of 1944\u20131945 during this period.\nAfter the end of World War II, French rule returned over French Indochina. The Northern part of Vietnam became a stronghold for the communist Viet Minh. Hanoi was later reoccupied by the French and conflict between the Viet Minh and France broke out into the First Indochina War. In 1949 it came under the authority of the State of Vietnam, a new associated state of the French Union.\nAfter the French defeat at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in western Tonkin, and signature of Geneva accords in 1954, the communist nation of North Vietnam was formed, consisting of Tonkin and northern Annam. The State of Vietnam's territory was reduced to the southern half of the country, becoming South Vietnam.\nIn 1964, the US and North Vietnamese were involved in a battle off the coast, known as the Gulf of Tonkin Incident.\nTrivia.\nThe American mid-20th-century musical drama \"South Pacific\" includes a duet by the lead couple. It describes their nostalgia for their respective lives in the United States; their exposure to use of the Tonkinese language (or dialect) seems to stand out, among the particulars of their displacement from their respective roots.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "69129", "revid": "28877172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69129", "title": "Soca", "text": "Soca or SOCA may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69130", "revid": "64669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69130", "title": "Severn", "text": ""}
{"id": "69131", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69131", "title": "Fred Dagg", "text": "Fictional human\nFred Dagg is a fictional character from New Zealand created and acted on stage, film and television by satirist John Clarke. Clarke appeared on New Zealand TV screens as Dagg during the mid to late 1970s, \"taking the piss\" out of the post-pioneering Kiwi \"blokes\" and \"blokesses\". The sense of the name \"Dagg\" is associated with the slang term \"dag\". The Fred Dagg character is a stereotypical farmer and New Zealand bloke: clad in a black singlet and gumboots, hailing from the isolated rural town of Taihape, and attended by numerous associates (or sons) all named \"Trev\". One memorable expression was uttered whenever there was a knock at the door: \"That'll be the door.\" When Clarke first unveiled the character of Fred Dagg in recordings and on New Zealand TV in 1975, he became a national star. He also recorded a series of records and cassettes as Dagg, as well as publishing several books.\nIn 1977, Clarke moved from New Zealand to Australia, where he went on to establish himself as a top script writer and personality.\nHe appeared regularly on Australian television delivering political satire sketches with actor comedian Bryan Dawe until his death in April 2017.\nInfluence.\nClarke stated that the inspiration for Fred Dagg came primarily from his uncles who would talk in such a way, using intonation and speech rhythm, to cause laughter without the standard telling of jokes.\nMuch of the comedy coming into New Zealand at the time was British radio and this was an inspiration to him.\nWorks.\nJohn Clarke slowly refined the character of Fred Dagg in short comedic interview segments that screened occasionally on the New Zealand current affairs show \"Nationwide\" throughout 1974. In December of that year the character was the subject of a satirical mockumentary spoof episode on the NZBC farming show, \"Country Calendar\". Fred Dagg went on to become a household name in New Zealand in 1975 with further comedy skit appearances on the Television One news programme \"Tonight at Nine\" and with the release by Clarke (as Dagg) of two singles with EMI, \"Traditional Air\"/\"Unlabelled\", and \"We Don't Know How Lucky We Are\"/\"Larry Loves Barry\", with the latter making it to number 17 on the national music single charts.\nAn album called \"Fred Dagg's Greatest Hits\" followed and was a massive seller. Thirty years after its release this album remains one of New Zealand's all-time biggest selling records.\nAnother single recorded with Diamond Lil was an even bigger hit in 1976. \"Gumboots\"/\"Save The Last Dance For Me\" climbed to number 6 on the charts. \"Gumboots\" was a modified version of Billy Connolly's \"If It Wasna For Your Wellies\", itself an adaptation of the old song \"The Work Of The Weavers\".\nA second album, \"Fred Dagg Live\" was released in 1976. Following on in the style of the first, it was also a huge seller.\n1977 saw the release of the film \"Dagg Day Afternoon\", co-directed and co-written by John Clarke and Geoff Murphy, and starring Fred Dagg. The film, under 45 minutes long, is essentially a series of sketches tied together with a loose narrative about Dagg's secret mission to find a \"bionic sheep\" (or 6 million dollar ram) which has been lost by the government.\nBy 1978 John Clarke and his young family had settled in Australia but he briefly commuted back to New Zealand during that year to create a Fred Dagg television series for South Pacific Television (TV2). \"The Fred Dagg Lectures on Leisure\" consisted of 20 five-minute long episodes which screened Sunday nights from September 1978 through to February 1979. The programmes featured Fred holding forth on a variety of diverse subjects such as golf, photography, how to write an autobiography, UFO spotting, saving whales and tree-felling. The original master tapes of all these episodes no longer exist and are thought to have either been wiped or lost by SPTV when the company was dissolved and amalgamated with Television One in 1980.\nA third and final album was released in 1979 called \"The Fred Dagg Tapes\".\nIn 1998 the \"Fred Dagg Anthology\" CD was released by Columbia. It contained most of Dagg's best-known material. A lot of the second half of the \"Anthology\" isn't genuine \"Fred Dagg\" material, having been created by Clarke after he'd retired Fred Dagg and moved to Australia. A number of mock interviews were first broadcast on Australian current affairs television, and lampoon prominent people (such as businessman Alan Bond) who would not be familiar to a New Zealand audience. There are also six \"farnarkeling\" reports, which parody sports news and were first performed by Clarke on the ABC's \"The Gillies Report\".\n\"We Don't Know How Lucky We Are!\" was re-released in 1998 with revised lyrics. This re-recording was driven by Graeme Hill, and Sky TV's \"SportsCafe\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69134", "revid": "38355222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69134", "title": "Tiglath-Pileser III", "text": "8th-Century BCE Assyrian king, Neo-Assyrian Empire\nTiglath-Pileser III (, meaning \"my trust belongs to the son of E\u0161arra\", ) was the Neo-Assyrian emperor from 745 BC to his death in 727. One of the most prominent and historically significant Assyrian rulers, Tiglath-Pileser ended a period of Assyrian stagnation, introduced numerous political and military reforms, and doubled the lands under Assyrian control. Because of the massive expansion and centralization of Assyrian territory and the establishment of a standing army, some researchers consider Tiglath-Pileser's reign to mark the actual transition of Assyria into an empire. The reforms and methods of control introduced under Tiglath-Pileser laid the groundwork for policies enacted not only by later Assyrian kings but also by later empires for millennia after his death.\nThe circumstances of Tiglath-Pileser's rise to the throne are not clear. Because ancient Assyrian sources give conflicting accounts concerning Tiglath-Pileser's lineage and there are records of a revolt around the time of his accession, many historians have concluded that Tiglath-Pileser was a usurper, who seized the throne from his predecessor Ashur-nirari V, who was either his brother or his father. Other historians postulate that the evidence could just as easily be interpreted as Tiglath-Pileser inheriting the throne through legitimate means, and the debate remains unresolved.\nTiglath-Pileser increased royal power and authority by curbing the influence of prominent officials and generals. After securing some minor victories in 744 and 743, he defeated the Urartian king Sarduri II in battle near Arpad in 743. This victory was significant since Urartu had briefly equalled Assyria in power; Sarduri had defeated Tiglath-Pileser's predecessor Ashur-nirari eleven years earlier.\nAfter defeating Sarduri, Tiglath-Pileser turned his attention to the Levant. Over several years, he conquered most of the Levant, defeating and then either annexing or subjugating previously influential kingdoms, notably ending the kingdom of Aram-Damascus. Tiglath-Pileser's activities in the Levant were recorded in the Hebrew Bible. After a few years of conflict, Tiglath-Pileser conquered Babylonia in 729, becoming the first king to rule as sovereign of both Assyria and Babylonia.\nBackground.\nAncestry and rise to the throne.\nThere is not enough surviving evidence to conclude how Tiglath-Pileser III came to the throne and the nature of his accession is thus unclear and disputed. Several pieces of evidence indicate that he might have been a usurper. Pointing to this are the facts that there was a revolt in Nimrud, the capital of the Assyrian Empire, in 746/745 and that numerous officials and governors were replaced after 745. Ancient Assyrian sources give conflicting information in regards to Tiglath-Pileser's lineage. Tiglath-Pileser in inscriptions attributed his rise to the throne solely to divine selection, rather than the more typical practice of Assyrian kings ascribing their rise to both divine selection and his royal ancestry. The \"Assyrian King List\", an ancient Assyrian document listing the kings of Assyria, states that Tiglath-Pileser's father was his immediate predecessor Ashur-nirari V. Tiglath-Pileser in his own inscriptions claimed that he was the son of Adad-nirari III, making him Ashur-nirari's brother.\nAssyriologists and other historians have overwhelmingly concluded that Tiglath-Pileser was a usurper. The Assyriologist Bradley J. Parker went as far as suggesting that he was not part of the previous royal dynasty at all, but per the Assyriologist Karen Radner, his claims of royal descent were probably true, meaning that while he did usurp the throne, he was a legitimate contender for it, having been victorious in an intra-dynastic civil war. Tiglath-Pileser faced no known resistance or rebellions against his rule after taking the throne.\nIf accepted as a royal dynast, uncertainties still exist in whether Tiglath-Pileser was the son of Adad-nirari or Ashur-nirari. The Assyriologists Fei Chen, Albert Kirk Grayson and Shiego Yamada consider it more likely that he was Adad-nirari's son, with the Assyrian King List's identification of him as the son of Ashur-nirari possibly being a scribal error. The Assyriologist Paul Garelli considers this unlikely, given that 38 years separate the reign of Adad-nirari from that of Tiglath-Pileser, writing that the possibility of him being Ashur-nirari's son cannot be fully ruled out. \nThe historian Tracy Davenport holds that \"we may never know\" whether Tiglath-Pileser was Ashur-nirari's son or brother. There are ways to explain Tiglath-Pileser's inscriptions proclaiming him as the son of Adad-nirari despite the 38 years between their two reigns. It is possible that \"son\" in this context meant \"grandson\", meaning that Tiglath-Pileser would have been the son of Ashur-nirari or another of Adad-nirari's sons, or that Tiglath-Pileser actually was Adad-nirari's son, but came to the throne when he was already relatively old, possibly aged about 50.\nThe \"Eponym Chronicle\", a list of eponyms, names for the years, typically taken from influential officials, of Assyria confirms there was a revolt in Nimrud the year before Tiglath-Pileser became king. According to the historian Stefan Zawadzki, writing in 1994, the eponyms also provide insight into how the transition from Ashur-nirari to Tiglath-Pileser might have happened. That Tiglath-Pileser took the throne the year after the uprising was interpreted by Zawadzki, and others, as firmly indicating that he took the throne as the result of a \"coup d'etat\". Zawadzki believes the Eponym Chronicle further suggests that the rebellion, while not necessarily led by Tiglath-Pileser himself, was started with his knowledge and consent. The chief piece of evidence Zawadzki presents for this is that the revolt of 746 began in Nimrud and the first official appointed as eponym holder by Tiglath-Pileser (in 744) was Bel-dan, the governor of Nimrud. \nGarelli believes the revolt in 746 was instigated by Shamshi-ilu, a prominent official throughout the reigns of Tiglath-Pileser's predecessors, and that the uprising was crushed by Tiglath-Pileser after he legitimately inherited the throne. Zawadzki believes Shamshi-ilu may have revolted, as he is no longer recorded in Tiglath-Pileser's reign, but that the uprising in Nimrud was a separate revolt from Shamshu-ilu's supposed uprising and that Tiglath-Pileser or his supporters would have fought both Shamshu-ilu and Ashur-nirari.\nIn her 2016 PhD thesis, the historian Tracy Davenport advanced the theory that Tiglath-Pileser might have been entirely legitimate and that he could even have co-ruled with Ashur-nirari for some time. Supporting Garelli's idea that Tiglath-Pileser was not responsible for any rebellion and the idea that he was a member of the royal dynasty, Davenport examined the Eponym Chronicle. Notably, the eponyms for Tiglath-Pileser's early reign do not follow the traditional sequence used for Assyrian eponym holders. Typically, the king was eponym holder in his second regnal year, followed by important magnates and then provincial governors.\nIf Tiglath-Pileser became king in 745, the eponym holder of his second regnal year was Bel-dan, not the king himself, who was the eponym holder in 743, his third regnal year. This could be explained by Tiglath-Pileser not having become the sole ruler of Assyria until 744. There are some strange features of the Eponym Chronicle that suggest that Ashur-nirari ruled until 744, together with Tiglath-Pileser 745\u2013744. There are two horizontal lines in this part of the list, one beneath 746, possibly marking Tiglath-Pileser's rise to the throne, and one beneath 744, possibly marking Ashur-nirari's death. \nIt is unlikely that the second line is an error, since it occurs right after a note that records the end of Ashur-nirari's reign and its length. Both the Eponym Chronicle and the Assyrian King List gives Ashur-nirari a reign length of 10 years, only possible if he ruled until 744, and not 745. If Ashur-nirari did rule until 744, it is unlikely that there was a civil war, since Tiglath-Pileser is recorded to have gone on campaigns against Assyria's foreign enemies in this time, not possible if he was simultaneously involved in internal conflict.\nName.\nAssyria was known for centuries primarily through its appearances in the Hebrew Bible. Mesopotamian rulers mentioned in the Bible are thus known today by the Biblical forms of their names. The modern name Tiglath-Pileser therefore derives from the Hebrew version of the name, which is a corrupted form of the original form, Tukult\u012b-apil-E\u0161arra.\"\" Presumably a regnal name, adopted upon his accession to the throne, Tukult\u012b-apil-E\u0161arra means \"my trust belongs to the son of E\u0161arra.\" The E\u0161arra was a temple dedicated to the god Ninurta (who was thus the \"son of E\u0161arra\"). By the time of Tiglath-Pileser's reign, Ninurta was viewed as the son of the Assyrian national deity Ashur.\nIn some non-contemporary sources, such as the Canon of Kings, the Babylonian King List, the Bible and the works of later Babylonian and Greco-Roman historians, Tiglath-Pileser is recorded under the name Pulu (, ), the etymology of which is uncertain. Though sometimes interpreted as a second regnal name, there are no contemporary Assyrian or Babylonian sources that refer to Tiglath-Pileser by this name and there is no evidence that it was ever used officially. No evidence exists of any Assyrian king ever using more than one regnal name in their lifetime.\nIn 2007, the Incirli Trilingual inscription was published that gave contemporary confirmation that Pul (Pulu) and Tiglath-Pileser III were the same individual. Only the Phoenician language part of the inscription has been published so far because of the monument's poor state of preservation. Still, the identification of Tiglath-Pileser III as Pul is reasonably sure because this phrase is repeated more than once in the text. The Phoenician spelling of this name is \"Puwal\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tiglath-pileser III is also referred to as Pu\u02c0/wal\u00a0[Puwal] with an intervocalic glide, spelled quite clearly in at least one place (and probably the others) in contrast to biblical \u05e4\u05d5\u05dc, vocalized P\u00fbl. If it were pronounced according to the latter then one would expect in the Phoenician orthography.\"\nThe Phoenician inscription is narrated in the first person by king Awarikus (\"Awarikku\", \"Warika\", \"Urikki\") of Quw\u00ea, who is known from other ancient inscriptions. His stele was erected to mark the land gifted to Awariku by Tiglath-Pileser III. He is also known as the King of the Danaans, or the \"Danunean king\". He also describes himself as 'the King of the dynasty of Mopsos'.\nSome Assyriologists, such as Eckart Frahm and Paul-Alain Beaulieu, have speculated that Pulu was Tiglath-Pileser's original name before he became king and assumed his regnal name or perhaps a nickname.\nAccording to Gerard Gertoux, Tiglath-Pileser III was the son of Adad-n\u012br\u0101r\u012b III and used the name Pulu as a young co-regent under previous kings. When he won the kingship of Babylon, for the last two years of his life, this again became his official name in Babylon. Gertoux explains the derivation of this name as a hypocoristic use of the word \"aplu\" \u201cthe heir\u201d.\nAssyria before Tiglath-Pileser.\nAssyria first rose as a prominent state under the Middle Assyrian Empire in the 14th century BC, previously only having been a city-state centered on the city of Assur. From the 12th century BC onwards, the Middle Assyrian Empire entered into a period of decline, becoming increasingly restricted to just the Assyrian heartland itself. Though the decline was at times halted by energetic warrior-kings, reconquests were not lasting until the time of Ashur-dan II (r.934\u2013912\u00a0BC), who campaigned in the northeast and northwest. The accession of Ashur-dan's son Adad-nirari II (r.911\u2013891\u00a0BC) traditionally marks the beginning of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. \nUnder the early Neo-Assyrian kings, there was a gradual reconquest of former Assyrian lands. The success of this project was an extraordinary achievement given that the kings essentially had to rebuild the Assyrian Empire from scratch. Under Ashurnasirpal II (r.883\u2013859\u00a0BC) the Neo-Assyrian Empire rose to become the dominant political power in the ancient Near East. Ashurnasirpal's son Shalmaneser III (r.859\u2013824\u00a0BC) further expanded Assyrian territory but his enlarged domain proved difficult to stabilize and his last few years initiated a renewed period of stagnation and decline, marked by both external and internal conflict.\nThe most important problems facing Shalmaneser late in his reign were the rise of the kingdom of Urartu in the north and the increasing political authority and influence of the \"magnates\", a set of influential Assyrian courtiers and officials. The rise of Urartu threatened Assyrian hegemony since submission to Urartu was viewed by many vassal states as a realistic alternative to Assyria. The Urartian administration, culture, writing system and religion closely followed those of Assyria. The Urartian kings were also autocrats highly similar to the Assyrian kings. The imperialist expansionism undertaken by the kings of both Urartu and Assyria led to frequent military clashes between the two, despite being separated by the Taurus Mountains. \nFor a brief time, the Urartian army equalled that of Assyria; though the Assyrians scored many victories against Urartu, notably plundering Urartu's heartland late in Shalmaneser's reign, the Urartians scored victories of their own. In 754, the Urartian king Sarduri II defeated the Assyrian army under Ashur-nirari V at Arpad, an event that may have led to the Assyrian army not campaigning for several years. The Assyrian kings were unable to deal with external threats since the magnates had gradually become the dominant political actors and central authority had become very weak. \nThe reigns of Tiglath-Pileser's three predecessors Shalmaneser IV (r.783\u2013773\u00a0BC), Ashur-dan III (r.773\u2013755\u00a0BC) and Ashur-nirari V was the low point of Assyrian royal power. In Shalmaneser IV's reign, the \"turtanu\" (commander-in-chief) Shamshi-ilu was bold enough to credit military victories to himself rather than the king. Ashur-nirari V appears to have been relatively idle as a ruler. He campaigned only three times, staying in Assyria throughout the majority of his reign, and he is not known to have conducted any building projects.\nReign.\nReforms and policies.\nOne of Tiglath-Pileser's important early reforms was reducing the influence of the magnates, thus increasing the king's authority. The division of the large provinces previously governed by the magnates into smaller units, placed under royally appointed provincial governors, reduced the wealth and power of the magnates. The right to commission inscriptions concerning military and building activities was withdrawn from officials and henceforth restricted to the king. Some historically prominent officials, such as the turtanu Shamshi-ilu, were subjected to \"damnatio memoriae\", with their names being deliberately erased from inscriptions and documents. With these reforms, the power of the magnates to challenge the king was virtually eliminated.\nTiglath-Pileser revitalized the Assyrian army, transforming it from a seasonally active army, only assembled in the summer months, consisting only of conscripts, into a professional army. Under Tiglath-Pileser, these conscripts were largely replaced with trained, specialized soldiers. He introduced new and superior weapons, technologies and logistics. Among his major innovations were new forms of siege engines. The central standing army introduced under Tiglath-Pileser was dubbed the \"ki\u1e63ir \u0161arri\" (\"king's unit\"). \nThe size of the army was further increased throughout Tiglath-Pileser's reign through the recruitment of soldiers from the various lands the Assyrians conquered and through the recruitment of mercenaries from Babylonia, the Zagros Mountains and Anatolia. Though Tiglath-Pileser's conquests generated massive revenue, he appears to have invested little of it into the Assyrian heartland itself; the only known building work he conducted was a new palace in Nimrud. Instead, most of the money probably went into establishing the new army and into projects in the provinces.\nTiglath-Pileser's conquests were marked by brutality to emphasize the king's strength and power. Resettlements of tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of people were also a common practice. Though previous kings had resettled people, Tiglath-Pileser's reign saw the beginning of frequent mass deportations, a policy which continued under his successors. There were two intended goals of this policy: firstly to reduce the local identities in conquered regions, to counteract the risk of revolt, and secondly to recruit and move laborers to where the Assyrian kings needed them, such as underdeveloped and underutilized provinces. Though the Assyrian resettlements were probably devastating both for the resettled people and the regions they came from, resettled people were not harmed or killed. Deportees were highly valued for their labor and abilities. Their journeys and new settlements were designed to be as safe and comfortable as possible.\nWars and conquests.\nEarly campaigns.\nIn addition to his reforms, Tiglath-Pileser's reign is marked by a series of large-scale military campaigns in all directions. Though Tiglath-Pileser recorded his military exploits in great detail in his \"annals\", written on sculpted stone slabs decorating his palace in Nimrud, these are poorly preserved, meaning that for several of his campaigns it is only possible to produce a broad outline. Tiglath-Pileser's first campaign was conducted already in 744, when he assaulted Babylonian lands on the east side of the Tigris river. This conflict was resolved swiftly, with the Assyro-Babylonian border shifted in Tiglath-Pileser's favor. In 743, Tiglath-Pileser campaigned in the region around the Zagros Mountains, where he created the two new provinces Bit\u2010\u1e2aamban and Parsua. The new Zagros provinces were founded along a highly important trade route, the predecessor of the later Silk Road.\nThe Assyrian successes in 744 and 743 demonstrated to the empire's neighbors that the time of Assyrian stagnation was over. Tiglath-Pileser's success inspired Iranzu, king of the Mannaeans, a people who lived in northwestern Iran, to personally meet with Tiglath-Pileser in 744 and forge an alliance. Iranzu's predecessors had usually maintained their kingdom's independence through changing allegiance between Urartu and Assyria, but Iranzu made a firm choice to side with Assyria and Tiglath-Pileser eagerly accepted the alliance since Iranzu's realm was ideally placed to protect Assyria from Urartian raids.\nThese developments worried Sarduri II of Urartu, who intensified his efforts to oppose and overtake Assyrian hegemony. Later in 743, Sarduri arrived at the Euphrates river border of Assyria with his army, his forces bolstered by troops sent by various kingdoms and states in Syria. In the same year, Tiglath-Pileser engaged Sarduri in battle near Arpad. Unlike the Assyrian defeat by Arpad eleven years earlier, Tiglath-Pileser won the battle, one of the greatest triumphs of his reign. Sarduri was forced to flee the battle and was pursued back to the Urartian capital of Tushpa.\nConquest of the Levant.\nIn the period from 743 to 732, Tiglath-Pileser led several campaigns in the Levant, which led to a great annexation of territory and the loss of independence of numerous ancient states in the region. After defeating Sarduri, Tiglath-Pileser resolved to conquer Arpad itself, both because of the city's strategic value and in order to punish the city for providing Sarduri access to the Assyrian frontier. After three campaigns over the course of three years and a lengthy siege, Arpad was captured in 740. \nDuring the fighting, Arpad was assisted by both Urartian troops and by troops sent by other cities and minor states in Syria. After the city was captured, the Assyrian army did not simply plunder it and then leave, as they had dealt with cities in Syria in previous times. Instead, the lands controlled by Arpad were converted into two provinces and annexed into the Neo-Assyrian Empire. After his victory at Arpad, Tiglath-Pileser received tribute from the Neo-Hittite kingdoms of Gurgum and Kummuh, Carchemish and Quw\u00ea, some of which had previously sent forces to aid Sarduri, as well as from the Phoenician city of Tyre and the Aramean kingdom of Aram-Damascus.\nThe annexation of Arpad put rulers throughout the Levant on the alert. In the period of Assyrian stagnation, many of the Levantine states had aspired to expand and become large kingdoms in their own right, something the Assyrians might have perceived as an anti-Assyrian activity. In 738, Tiglath-Pileser continued his efforts in Syria, conquering some lands to the south of Arpad and establishing the three new provinces of Kullania, \u1e2aatarikka, and \u1e62imirra. These lands had been under the rule of the Neo-Hittite kingdom of Hama, which he accused of plotting against him. \nThe strategy employed by Tiglath-Pileser in his successful conquest of the Levant was carefully thought out and prepared. Instead of attacking the strongholds of the larger states, he first subdued smaller kingdoms through fast and wide-ranging attacks. The early conquests brought coastal and flat lands under his rule, which meant that Assyrian troops in the later campaigns could march through the region fast and efficiently. During the campaign against Hama, Tiglath-Pileser conquered and annexed the Neo-Hittite kingdom of Pattin. Hama was spared full annexation, with the kingdom being allowed to remain somewhat independent as a vassal state. The victory inspired more states in the region to pay tribute to the Assyrians, including the Phoenician city of Byblos, the Kingdom of Israel and various states in eastern Anatolia and some Arab tribes. Israel and Damascus had sent aid to Hama during the conflict.\nThe Anatolian realms who began paying tribute to Assyria, five kingdoms in total, probably did so not out of fear of Assyrian conquest but rather in the hope of Assyrian aid against the expansionist kingdom of Phrygia, which threatened their existence. The Anatolians at times tried to play Assyria and Phrygia against each other, with disastrous consequences. In 730, Tiglath-Pileser attacked and removed king Wasusarma of Tabal from power after he stopped paying tribute, writing in his annals that Wasusarma \"acted as if he were the equal of Assyria\".\nTiglath-Pileser marched on the Levant for the fifth time in 734, reaching as far south as the border of Egypt. This campaign resulted in the conquest of Gaza and the submission of numerous states, effectively bringing the entire Levant under direct or indirect Assyrian rule; Assyria and Egypt shared a border for the first time in history. Asqaluna, Judah, Edom, Moab and Ammon, and the Mu\u2019na Arab tribe, all began paying tribute to Tiglath-Pileser. By extending his control throughout the Levant, Tiglath-Pileser formed a semi-circle of control around Israel and Aram-Damascus and cut them off from Egypt, which had at times offered support to the Levantine states. The Assyrian efforts resulted in Aram-Damascus becoming both geopolitically isolated and without a large enough food supply to feed its people.\nIn 733, Tiglath-Pileser resolved to cement his conquest. In this year, he again campaigned against Aram-Damascus, still the strongest remaining native state in the region, which was supported by the Assyrian tributaries Tyre and Asqaluna, as well as Israel. In 732, Damascus fell and Tiglath-Pileser annexed the lands of Aram-Damascus. In the same conflict, Tiglath-Pileser also captured Tyre and defeated Israel, which he divided in half, annexing the northern portion of the kingdom as the province Megiddo and subjugating the southern portion as a vassal kingdom. The weakening and enormous reduction in size of Israel was seen by the Israelites as vindicating predictions of impending doom made by the prophet Amos a few decades prior.\nThe massive western expansion of Assyria brought Tiglath-Pileser and his armies into direct contact with Arab tribes, several of whom began paying tribute. In 733, Tiglath-Pileser campaigned against the Qedarites to the south of Damascus, hoping to consolidate his control of southern Syria. The surprise attack caught the Qedarite queen \u0160am\u0161i off-guard and the Qedarites were easily defeated. Though Tiglath-Pileser was victorious, he realized that he would not be able to govern the territories ruled by the Qedarites effectively and thus allowed \u0160am\u0161i to remain in control of her domain, though under the supervision of an Assyrian official to guide her political actions.\nConquest of Babylonia.\nIn his late reign, Tiglath-Pileser increasingly focused on Babylonia in the south. Babylonia had once been a large and hugely influential kingdom, competing with Assyria for centuries, but during the Neo-Assyrian period it was typically weaker than its northern neighbor. Babylonia suffered from both the lack of a well-organized army and from internal ethno-cultural divisions. Babylonians governed most of the prominent southern cities, such as Babylon, Kish, Ur, Uruk, Borsippa and Nippur, but were not the only prominent group in the region. Chaldean tribes, led by chieftains who often squabbled with each other, dominated most of the southernmost land. Arameans also lived on the fringes of settled land and were notorious for plundering surrounding territories. Through his agents, Tiglath-Pileser throughout his reign kept tabs on events in the south.\nIn 731, the Chaldean chieftain Nabu-mukin-zeri, of the Bit-Amukkani tribe, seized power in Babylon as king. Tiglath-Pileser saw the accession of Nabu-mukin-zeri, who aspired to heal the divides in Babylonia, as a provocation and threat to Assyrian interests and hegemony. Tiglath-Pileser thus dedicated the next several years to defeating Nabu-mukin-zeri and his supporters. First, Assyrian armies blockaded Babylonia's eastern border to ensure that Nabu-mukin-zeri would not receive any support from Elam, which was often opposed to Assyrian interests. Then, Tiglath-Pileser defeated and subdued a number of Aramean clans and Chaldean tribes, including the Bit-Shilani and the Bit-Sha'alli.\nThe struggle for control of Babylonia began in earnest in 730. In this year, Assyrian envoys are recorded travelling to Babylon and urging the inhabitants to open their gates and surrender to Tiglath-Pileser, stating that the king would grant them amnesty and tax privileges. The Babylonians refused the offer. Nabu-mukin-zeri was not in Babylon at this time and was instead probably directing the Babylonian war effort from his ancestral home city of Sapia. In 729, Tiglath-Pileser captured Babylon and proclaimed himself as both king of Assyria and king of Babylon, the first Assyrian king to be recognized as such by the Babylonians. \nNabu-mukin-zeri lost Sapia in the same year but appears to have continued to resist Tiglath-Pileser until 728 since there are some documents ascribed to his fourth regnal year. As the new king, Tiglath-Pileser received tribute from the most powerful Chaldean tribes, the Bit-Dakkuri and Bit-Yakin. The Bit-Yakin at this time was under the leadership of Marduk-apla-iddina II, who in the years following Tiglath-Pileser's reign would emerge as a staunch adversary of Assyria.\nUnlike many other Assyrian conquests, Babylonia was not divided into provinces but kept as a full kingdom, in personal union with Assyria. This was chiefly because the Assyrians greatly respected Babylonian culture and religion. Because of this respect and because Babylonia was showing signs of the beginning of an economic recovery, Tiglath-Pileser worked to conciliate the populace to the idea of Assyrian overlordship. He twice participated in the religiously important New Years' \"Akitu\" festival, which required the presence of the king, and also led campaigns against remaining Chaldean strongholds in the far south who resisted his rule.\nFamily and succession.\nTiglath-Pileser's queen was named Iaba (\"Iab\u00e2\"), a name clearly not of Akkadian origin. Possible roots and etymologies of the name include \"yph\" (\"beautiful\"), \"nby\" (\"to name\") and \"yhb\" (\"to give\"); Iaba might have been of Arab or West Semitic (Levantine or Aramean) descent. In 1998, Stephanie Dalley proposed that Iaba was of Hebrew origin and speculated that she might have been a princess from the Kingdom of Judah. She based this argument on the name Atalia, a later queen speculated to have been related to Iaba, being similar to the name Athaliah, borne by a Judean queen who ruled about a century earlier, and that the ending of the name Atalia (\"i-a\" or \"ia-a\") could represent a theophoric element deriving from Yahweh. Dalley's arguments have met with both support and opposition. The idea that the names Iaba and Atalia were Hebrew has also been independently forwarded by Simo Parpola. \nIn 2002, K. Lawson Younger pointed out that it was far from certain that \"i-a\" or \"ia-a\" actually corresponded to Yahweh since there are few analogues in other Neo-Assyrian names and inscriptions. The identification of Atalia as a Hebrew name was also doubted by Nicholas Postgate in 2008, and in that year Ran Zadok alternatively suggested that Atalia was an Arabic name. Iaba's tomb was discovered at Nimrud in 1989.\"\"\nTiglath-Pileser is believed to have died peacefully of old age. He was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser V. In Tiglath-Pileser's reign, Shalmaneser was known by his birth name Ululayu, \"Shalmaneser\" being a regnal name he assumed upon his accession to the throne in 727. Shalmaneser likely participated in some of his father's campaigns and several letters are known from him to his father, many of them reports on the status of the lands he governed. Shalmaneser was replaced as king after only a few years by Sargon II, probably through being deposed and assassinated. Though Assyrian king lists connected Sargon to previous kings through claiming that he was the son of Tiglath-Pileser, this claim does not appear in most of his inscriptions, which instead stress that he was called upon and appointed as king by Ashur. \nMany historians accept Sargon's claim to have been a son of Tiglath-Pileser, but do not believe him to have been the legitimate heir to the throne as the next-in-line after the end of Shalmaneser's reign, i.e. assuming Shalmaneser had children. Even then, his claim to have been Tiglath-Pileser's son is generally treated with more caution than Tiglath-Pileser's own claims of royal ancestry. Some Assyriologists, such as J. A. Brinkman, believe that Sargon, at the very least, did not belong to the direct dynastic lineage. If Tiglath-Pileser was Sargon's father, he also had a third son, Sin-ahu-usur. Sin-ahu-usur is attested as the younger brother of Sargon, in 714 granted the command of Sargon's royal cavalry guard.\nLegacy.\nThe Assyriologist Hayim Tadmor referred to Tiglath-Pileser's reign as a \"watershed\" in the history of the Middle East. Tiglath-Pileser left a legacy of enormous historical significance. His reign is generally seen as marking the beginning of an entirely new age of Assyrian imperialism. As the earliest Assyrian king to be mentioned in the Hebrew Bible and in the Babylonian Chronicles, Tiglath-Pileser is the first Assyrian king for whom there exist outside perspectives and accounts of his reign. All Mesopotamian history prior to Tiglath-Pileser is ignored in the Hebrew Bible. The Bible records both Tiglath-Pileser's impact on the Kingdom of Israel (2 Kings 15,29\u201331) and the events of his reign from the perspective of the southern Kingdom of Judah (2 Kings 15,32\u201316,20, 2 Chronicles 27,1\u201328,27, Isaiah, 7,1\u201325).\nTiglath-Pileser greatly expanded Assyrian territory. By the time of his death, Tiglath-Pileser had more than doubled the amount of land ruled by the Neo-Assyrian Empire. His method of introducing direct Assyrian rule to foreign lands, dividing them into Assyrian provinces rather than creating vassal kingdoms, significantly altered the economy of the Assyrian state. Whereas the Assyrians had previously relied on tribute from vassals, from Tiglath-Pileser's time they became increasingly dependent on taxes collected by provincial governors. This approach increased administrative costs but also reduced the risk of uprisings against Assyrian rule and reduced the need for military intervention.\nSeveral Assyriologists consider Assyria to only truly have transitioned into an \"empire\" in a strict sense during the reign of Tiglath-Pileser, owing to its unprecedented size, multi-ethnic and multi-lingual character and the new mechanisms of economic and political control. The supremacy attained by Assyria under Tiglath-Pileser is frequently seen as turning the Neo-Assyrian Empire into the first world empire in history; i.e. an imperial state without any competitors, ruling most of the world as known to the Assyrians themselves. \nThe Assyrian Empire served as the model for later empires in the Middle East and elsewhere, chiefly because of the imperial innovations of Tiglath-Pileser. Through the concept of \"translatio imperii\" (transfer of empire) the claim to world domination forwarded by the Neo-Assyrian kings gave rise to similar claims in later Middle Eastern empires, notably the Achaemenid Empire, which facilitated the rise of aspirations for universal rule in numerous later kingdoms and empires. \nThe Assyrian resettlement policy which intensified under Tiglath-Pileser and continued under his successors had large-scale consequences. First and foremost, it led to significant improvements in irrigation in the provinces, owing to deportees being tasked to introduce Assyrian-developed agricultural techniques to their new communities, and to an increase in prosperity across the empire. In the long term, the movement of peoples from across the empire changed the cultural and ethnic makeup of the Middle East forever and in time led to the rise of Aramaic as the region's lingua franca, a position the language retained until the 14th century AD. \nAramaic was the most widely spoken and mutually understandable of the empire's Semitic languages, the group to which many of the languages in the empire belonged. Already in Tiglath-Pileser's reign, Aramaic became an official language in the empire, indicated by reliefs from his time depicting the king using both Aramaic and Akkadian scribes to record messages.\nTitles.\nIn an inscription from Nimrud recounting some of the activities of his reign, Tiglath-Pileser claimed the following titles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tiglath-Pileser, the great king, the mighty king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four corners of the world; who is attentive to the lifting of the eyes of Enlil, the king who from the rising sun to the setting thereof has scattered all of his foes to the wind(s) and has maintained (his) sway; who subdues the peoples of the upper and lower land(s), who ousts their rulers and installs his (own) officials.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69136", "revid": "15962270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69136", "title": "Tiberius Caesar", "text": ""}
{"id": "69137", "revid": "4894133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69137", "title": "Thyine wood", "text": "15th-century English name for Tetraclinis articulata\nThyine wood is a 15th-century English name for a wood from the tree known botanically as \"Tetraclinis articulata\" (syn. \"Callitris quadrivalvis\", \"Thuja articulata\"). The name is derived from the Greek word \"thuon\", \"fragrant wood,\" or possibly \"thuein\", \u201cto sacrifice\u201d, and it was so called because it was burnt in sacrifices, on account of its fragrance.\nIn Rome, wood from this tree was called \"citrum\", \"citrus wood\". It was considered very valuable, and was used for making articles of furniture by the Greeks and Romans. Craftsmen who worked in citrus wood and ivory had their own guild \"(collegium)\".\nThyine wood is mentioned in the King James Version of the Bible at Revelation 18:12 as being among the articles which would cease to be purchased when Babylon fell. The New International Version translates the passage \"citron wood\"; the Amplified Bible translates it as \"scented wood\". This wood is also mentioned in the 1st Book of Kings, chapter 10, in a list of items brought to Solomon by the navy of Hiram.\nThe resin from this wood is used as the basis for euparal, a mounting medium used in microscopy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "69139", "revid": "1313461453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69139", "title": "List of rivers of Africa", "text": "This is a list of rivers in Africa. See below each river's article for its tributaries, drainage areas, etc.\n*Black Kei River - South Africa\n*White Kei River - South Africa\n* Caledon - South Africa, Lesotho\n* Vaal - South Africa\n* Fish - Namibia\n* Black Umfolozi River - South Africa\n* White Umfolozi River - South Africa\nRivers of Africa by discharge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "69140", "revid": "48296011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69140", "title": "List of rivers of Asia", "text": "This is a List of rivers of Asia. It includes major, notable rivers in Asia.\nRivers of Asia by discharge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69142", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69142", "title": "Thummim", "text": ""}
{"id": "69143", "revid": "47177166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69143", "title": "Tre Taverne", "text": "Place on the ancient Appian Way\nTre Taverne (; , \"Treis Tabernai\") was a place on the ancient Appian Way, about 50\u00a0km (31 miles) from Rome, designed for the reception of travellers, as the name indicates. In the Roman Empire there was also a place of that name (Tres Tabernae) in present-day France.\nHistory.\nTres Tabernae originated as a post station on the Appian Way (), around the 3rd century BC.\nHere, the Christian saint Paul of Tarsus, on his way to Rome, was met by a band of Roman Christians (Acts 28:15). The \"Tres Tabernae was the first \"mansio\" or \"mutatio\", that is, halting-place for relays, from Rome, or the last on the way to the city. At this point three roads run into the Via Appia, that from Tusculum, that from Alba Longa, and that from Antium; so necessarily here would be a halting-place, which took its name from the three shops there, the general store, the blacksmith's, and the refreshment-house...Tres Tabernae is translated as Three Taverns.\"\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition identifies it as \"an ancient village of Latium, Italy, a post station on the Via Appia, at the point where the main road was crossed by a branch from Antium\". It is by some fixed some 3\u00a0m. S.E. of the modern village of Cisterna just before the Via Appia enters the Pontine Marshes, at a point where the modern road to Ninfa and Norba diverges to the north-east, where a few ruins still exist (\"Grotte di Nottola\"), 33\u00a0m. from Rome. Others believe that it stood at Cisterna itself, where a branch road running from Antium by way of Satricum actually joins the Via Appia. However, excavations that took place at km 58.1 of the Via Appia Nuova between 1993 and 2001 revealed a bath plant and some further buildings.\nAround the 3rd century AD, the area was invaded by marshes, and the inhabitants of the nearby \"Ulubrae\" likely moved to \"Tres Tabernae\", which grew of importance and became a Christian episcopal see with a Palaeo-Christian cathedral dedicated to St. Paul. In 307, emperor Flavius Severus was assassinated (or forced to commit suicide) here by Heraclius, by order of other emperors Maximian and Maxentius. The barbaric invasions in Italy caused a further expansions of the marshes, and Tres Tabernae declined so that, in 592, Pope Gregory I united its diocese to that of Velletri. Later in the high Middle Ages, Tres Tabernae was ravaged several times by the Saracens, until it was completely destroyed in 868.\nThe position of the Tres Tabernae is also shown in the Tabula Peutingeriana in a location south of Rome.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69144", "revid": "45959955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69144", "title": "March of the Volunteers", "text": "National anthem of China\nThe \"March of the Volunteers\" is the national anthem of the People's Republic of China. Unlike previous Chinese state anthems, it was written entirely in vernacular Chinese, rather than in Classical Chinese.\nThe Japanese invasion of Manchuria saw a boom of nationalistic arts and literature in China. This song had its lyrics written first by the communist playwright Tian Han in 1934, then set to melody by Nie Er and arranged by Aaron Avshalomov for the communist-aligned film \"Children of Troubled Times\" (1935). It became a famous military song during the Second Sino-Japanese War beyond the communist faction, most notably the Nationalist general Dai Anlan designated it to be the anthem of the 200th Division, who fought in Burma. It was adopted as the PRC's provisional anthem in 1949 in place of the \"Three Principles of the People\" of the Republic of China and the Communist \"Internationale\".\nDuring the Cultural Revolution, Tian Han was criticized and placed in prison, where he died in 1968. The song was briefly and unofficially replaced by \"The East Is Red\", then reinstated but played without lyrics, restored to official status in 1978 with altered lyrics, before the original version was fully restored in 1982. In 2004, the March of the Volunteers was officially enshrined as the national anthem in the Constitution. In 2017, the Law of the People's Republic of China on the National Anthem was adopted.\nHistory.\nThe lyrics of the \"March of the Volunteers\", also formally known as the National Anthem of the People's Republic of China, were composed by Tian Han in 1934 as two stanzas in his poem \"The Great Wall\" (), () intended either for a play he was working on at the time or as part of the script for Diantong's upcoming film \"Children of Troubled Times\". It first appeared in the film.287\nThe film is a story about a Chinese intellectual who flees during the Shanghai Incident to a life of luxury in Qingdao, only to be driven to fight the Japanese occupation of Manchuria after learning of the death of his friend. Urban legends later circulated that Tian wrote it in jail on rolling paper or the liner paper from cigarette boxes after being arrested in Shanghai by the Nationalists; in fact, he was arrested in Shanghai and held in Nanjing just after completing his draft for the film. During March and April 1935, in Japan, Nie Er set the words (with minor adjustments) to music; in May, Diantong's sound director He Luting had the Russian composer Aaron Avshalomov arrange their orchestral accompaniment. The song plays in the film's concluding scene as the protagonists join the masses in taking up arms to oppose the invading Japanese.287 The song was performed by Gu Menghe and Yuan Muzhi, along with a small and \"hastily-assembled\" chorus; He Luting consciously chose to use their first take, which preserved the Cantonese accent of several of the men. On 9 May, Gu and Yuan recorded it in more standard Mandarin for Path\u00e9 Orient's Shanghai branch ahead of the movie's release, so that it served as a form of advertising for the film.\nOriginally translated as \"Volunteers Marching On\", the English name references the several volunteer armies that opposed Japan's invasion of Manchuria in the 1930s; the Chinese name is a poetic variation\u2014literally, the \"Righteous and Brave Armies\"\u2014that also appears in other songs of the time, such as the 1937 \"Sword March\".\nIn May 1935, the same month as the movie's release, L\u00fc Ji and other leftists in Shanghai had begun an amateur choir and started promoting a National Salvation singing campaign, supporting mass singing associations along the lines established the year before by Liu Liangmo, a Shanghai YMCA leader. Although the movie did not perform well enough to keep Diantong from closing, its theme song became wildly popular: musicologist Feng Zikai reported hearing it being sung by crowds in rural villages from Zhejiang to Hunan within months of its release and, at a performance at a Shanghai sports stadium in June 1936, Liu's chorus of hundreds was joined by its audience of thousands. Although Tian Han was imprisoned for two years, Nie Er fled to the Soviet Union, only to die en route in Japan; and Liu Liangmo eventually fled to the U.S. to escape harassment from the Nationalists. The singing campaign continued to expand, particularly after the December 1936 Xi'an Incident reduced Nationalist pressure against leftist movements. Visiting St\u00a0Paul's Hospital at the Anglican mission at Guide (now Shangqiu, Henan), W.H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood reported hearing a \"Chee Lai!\" treated as a hymn at the mission service and the same tune \"set to different words\" treated as a favorite song of the Eighth Route Army.\nThe Path\u00e9 recording of the march appeared prominently in Joris Ivens's 1939 \"The 400 Million\", an English-language documentary on the war in China. The same year, Lee Pao-chen included it with a parallel English translation in a songbook published in the new Chinese capital Chongqing; this version would later be disseminated throughout the United States for children's musical education during World War II before being curtailed at the onset of the Cold War. The \"New York Times\" published the song's sheet music on 24 December, along with an analysis by a Chinese correspondent in Chongqing. In exile in New York City in 1940, Liu Liangmo taught it to Paul Robeson, the college-educated polyglot folk-singing son of a runaway slave. Robeson began performing the song in Chinese at a large concert in New York City's Lewisohn Stadium. Reportedly in communication with the original lyricist Tian Han, the pair translated it into English and recorded it in both languages as \"Chee Lai!\" (\"Arise!\") for Keynote Records in early 1941. Its 3-disc album included a booklet whose preface was written by Soong Ching-ling, widow of Sun Yat-sen, and its initial proceeds were donated to the Chinese resistance. Robeson gave further live performances at benefits for the China Aid Council and United China Relief, although he gave the stage to Liu and the Chinese themselves for the song's performance at their sold-out concert at Washington's Uline Arena on 24 April 1941. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor and beginning of the Pacific War, the march was played locally in India, Singapore, and other locales in Southeast Asia; the Robeson recording was played frequently on British, American, and Soviet radio; and a cover version performed by the Army Air Force Orchestra appears as the introductory music to Frank Capra's 1944 propaganda film \"The Battle of China\" and again during its coverage of the Chinese response to the Rape of Nanking.\nThe \"March of the Volunteers\" was used as the Chinese national anthem for the first time at the World Peace Conference in April 1949. Originally intended for Paris, French authorities refused so many visas for its delegates that a parallel conference was held in Prague, Czechoslovakia. At the time, Beijing had recently come under the control of the Chinese Communists in the Chinese Civil War and its delegates attended the Prague conference in China's name. There was controversy over the third line, \"The Chinese nation faces its greatest peril\", so the writer Guo Moruo changed it for the event to \"The Chinese nation has arrived at its moment of emancipation\". The song was personally performed by Paul Robeson.\nIn June, a committee was set up by the Chinese Communist Party to decide on an official national anthem for the soon-to-be declared People's Republic of China. By the end of August, the committee had received 632 entries totaling 694 different sets of scores and lyrics. The \"March of the Volunteers\" was suggested by the painter Xu Beihong and supported by Zhou Enlai. Opposition to its use centered on the third line, as \"The Chinese people face their greatest peril\" suggested that China continued to face difficulties. Zhou replied, \"We still have imperialist enemies in front of us. The more we progress in development, the more the imperialists will hate us, seek to undermine us, attack us. Can you say that we won't be in peril?\" His view was supported by Mao Zedong and, on 27 September 1949, the song became the provisional national anthem, just days before the founding of the People's Republic. The highly fictionalized biopic \"Nie Er\" was produced in 1959 for its 10th anniversary; for its 50th in 1999, \"The National Anthem\" retold the story of the anthem's composition from Tian Han's point of view.\nAlthough the song had been popular among Nationalists during the war against Japan, its performance was then banned in the territories of the Republic of China until the 1990s.\nThe 1 February 1966 \"People's Daily\" article condemning Tian Han's 1961 allegorical Peking opera \"Xie Yaohuan\" as a \"big poisonous weed\" was one of the opening salvos of the Cultural Revolution, during which he was imprisoned and his words forbidden to be sung. As a result, there was a time when \"The East Is Red\" served as the PRC's unofficial anthem. Following the 9th National Congress, \"The March of the Volunteers\" began to be played once again from the 20th National Day Parade in 1969, although performances were solely instrumental. Tian Han died in prison in 1968, but Paul Robeson continued to send the royalties from his American recordings of the song to Tian's family.\nThe anthem was restored by the 5th National People's Congress on 5 March 1978, but with rewritten lyrics including references to the Chinese Communist Party, communism, and Chairman Mao. Following Tian Han's posthumous rehabilitation in 1979 and Deng Xiaoping's consolidation of power over Hua Guofeng, the National People's Congress resolved to restore Tian Han's original verses to the march and to elevate its status, making it the country's official national anthem on 4 December 1982.\nThe anthem's status was enshrined as an amendment to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China on 14 March 2004.\nOn 1 September 2017, the Law of the People's Republic of China on the National Anthem, which protects the anthem by law, was passed by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress and took effect one month later. The anthem is considered to be a national symbol of China. The anthem should be performed or reproduced especially at celebrations of national holidays and anniversaries, as well as sporting events. Civilians and organizations should pay respect to the anthem by standing and singing in a dignified manner. Personnel of the People's Liberation Army, the People's Armed Police and the People's Police of the Ministry of Public Security salute when not in formation when the anthem is played, the same case for members of the Young Pioneers of China and PLA veterans.\nSpecial administrative regions.\nThe anthem was played during the handover of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom in 1997 and during the handover of Macau from Portugal in 1999. It was adopted as part of Annex III of the Basic Law of Hong Kong, taking effect on 1 July 1997, and as part of Annex III of the Basic Law of Macau, taking effect on 20 December 1999.\nMacau.\nThe use of the anthem in the Macau Special Administrative Region is particularly governed by Law No.5/1999, which was enacted on 20 December 1999. Article 7 of the law requires that the anthem be accurately performed pursuant to the sheet music in its Appendix 4 and prohibits the lyrics from being altered. Under Article 9, willful alteration of the music or lyrics is criminally punishable by imprisonment of up to two years or up to 360 day-fines and, although both Chinese and Portuguese are official languages of the region, the provided sheet music has its lyrics only in Chinese. Mainland China has also passed a similar law in 2017.\nHong Kong.\nNonetheless, the Chinese National Anthem in Mandarin now forms a mandatory part of public secondary education in Hong Kong as well. The local government issued a circular in May 1998 requiring government-funded schools to perform flag-raising ceremonies involving the singing of the \"March of the Volunteers\" on particular days: the first day of school, the \"open day\", National Day (1 October), New Year's (1 January), the \"sport day\", Establishment Day (1 July), the graduation ceremony, and for some other school-organized events; the circular was also sent to the SAR's private schools. The official policy was long ignored, but\u2014following massive and unexpected public demonstrations in 2003 against proposed anti-subversion laws\u2014the ruling was reiterated in 2004 and, by 2008, most schools were holding such ceremonies at least once or twice a year. From National Day in 2004, as well, Hong Kong's local television networks have also been required to preface their evening news with government-prepared promotional videos including the national anthem in Mandarin. Initially a pilot program planned for a few months, it has continued ever since. Viewed by many as propaganda, even after a sharp increase in support in the preceding four years, by 2006, the majority of Hongkongers remained neither proud nor fond of the anthem. On 4 November 2017, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress decided to insert a Chinese National Anthem Law into the Annex III of the Basic Law of Hong Kong, which would make it illegal to insult or not show sufficient respect to the Chinese national anthem. On 4 June 2020, the National Anthem Bill was passed in Hong Kong after being approved by the Legislative Council.\nTune.\n&lt;score vorbis=\"1\"&gt;\n \\relative g' {\n \\key g \\major \\time 2/4\n g8. b16 d8 d8 \\bar \"|\" e4 d4 \\bar \"|\" b8. g16 \\times 2/3 {d'8 d d} \\bar \"|\" b4 g4 \\bar \"|\" \\times 2/3 {d8 d d} \\times 2/3 {d8 d d} \\bar \"|\" g4 r8 d8 \\bar \"|\" \\break\n g4. g8 \\bar \"|\" g8. g16 d8 e16 fis16 \\bar \"|\" g4 g4 \\bar \"|\" r8 b8 g8 a16 b16 \\bar \"|\" d4 d4 \\bar \"|\" \\break\n b8. b16 g8. b16 \\bar \"|\" d8. b16 a4 \\bar \"|\" a2 \\bar \"|\" e'4^&gt; d4^&gt; \\bar \"|\" a4^&gt; b4^&gt; \\bar \"|\" \\break\n d8^&gt; b8^&gt; r8 d8 \\bar \"|\" b8 a16 b16 g4 \\bar \"|\" b4 r4 \\bar \"|\" d,8. e16 g8 g8 \\bar \"|\" b8. b16 d8 d8 \\bar \"|\" \\break\n a8 a16 a16 e4 \\bar \"|\" a4. d,8 \\bar \"|\" ^\\&lt; g4. g8 \\bar \"|\" b4. b8 \\! \\bar \"|\" d2 \\bar \"|\" \\break\n g,8. b16 d8 d8 \\bar \"|\" e4 d4 \\bar \"|\" b8. g16 \\times 2/3 {d'8 d d} \\bar \"|\" b8 r8 g8 r8 \\bar \"|\" d4^&gt; g4^&gt; \\bar \"|\" \\break\n b8. g16 \\times 2/3 {d'8 d d} \\bar \"|\" b8 r8 g8 r8 \\bar \"|\" d4^&gt; g4^&gt; \\bar \"|\" d4^&gt; g4^&gt; \\bar \"|\" d4^&gt; g4^&gt; \\bar \"|\" g4^&gt; r4 \\bar \"|.\"\n \\addlyrics {\n \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u3000 \u8d77\n \u6765\uff01 \u4e0d \u613f \u505a \u5974 \u96b6 \u7684 \u4eba \u4eec\uff01 \u628a \u6211 \u4eec \u7684 \u8840 \u8089\uff0c\n \u7b51 \u6210 \u6211 \u4eec \u65b0 \u7684 \u957f \u57ce\uff01 \u4e2d \u534e \u6c11 \u65cf\n \u5230 \u4e86 \u6700 \u5371 \u9669 \u7684 \u65f6 \u5019\uff0c \u6bcf \u4e2a \u4eba \u88ab \u8feb \u7740 \u53d1 \u51fa\n \u6700 \u540e \u7684 \u543c \u58f0\u3002 \u8d77 \u6765\uff01 \u8d77 \u6765\uff01 \u8d77 \u6765\uff01\n \u6211 \u4eec \u4e07 \u4f17 \u4e00 \u5fc3\uff0c \u5192 \u7740 \u654c \u4eba \u7684 \u70ae \u706b\uff0c \u524d \u8fdb\uff01\n \u5192 \u7740 \u654c \u4eba \u7684 \u70ae \u706b\uff0c \u524d \u8fdb\uff01 \u524d \u8fdb\uff01 \u524d \u8fdb\uff01 \u8fdb\uff01\n&lt;/score&gt;\nA 1939 bilingual songbook which included the song called it \"a good example of...copy[ing] the good points from Western music without impairing or losing our own national color\". Nie's piece is a march, a Western form, opening with a bugle call and a motif (with which it also closes) based on an ascending fourth interval from D to G inspired by \"The \"Internationale\"\". Its rhythmic patterns of triplets, accented downbeats, and syncopation and use (with the exception of one note, F\u266f in the first verse) of the G major pentatonic scale, however, create an effect of becoming \"progressively more Chinese in character\" over the course of the tune. For reasons both musical and political, Nie came to be regarded as a model composer by Chinese musicians in the Maoist era. Howard Taubman, the \"New York Times\" music editor, initially panned the tune as telling us China's \"fight is more momentous than her art\" although, after US entrance into the war, he called its performance \"delightful\".\nVariations.\nThe march has been remixed by various performers:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69145", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69145", "title": "Gamma rays burst", "text": ""}
{"id": "69146", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69146", "title": "Thorn in the flesh", "text": "Biblical phrase\nThorn in the flesh is a phrase of New Testament origin used to describe an annoyance, or trouble in one's life, drawn from Paul the Apostle's use of the phrase in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. 8 For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. 9 And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. (2 Corinthians 12:7\u20139: King James Version).\nOther biblical passages where \"thorn\" is used as a metaphor are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Joshua 23:13\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And there shall be no more a pricking briar unto the house of Israel, nor \"[any]\" grieving thorn of all \"[that are]\" round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I \"[am]\" the Lord GOD.\u2014\u200aThe standard English translation was popularised by the 1611 King James Version of the Bible. Among earlier translations, the 1526 Tyndale Bible uses \"vnquyetnes\" (\"unquietness\") rather than \"thorn\", and the 1557 Geneva Bible refers to a \"pricke in the fleshe\".\nBiblical meaning.\nPaul mentions what the \"thorn in his flesh\" was in 2 Corinthians 12:6-7 when he said (Verse 6) \"...lest any man should think of me above that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me. (Verse 7) And lest I should be exalted above measure through 'the abundance of revelations', there was given to me 'a thorn in the flesh'...\" from \"the abundance of revelations\" and how people perceived him or \"...man should think of me above that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me.\"\nPaul does not specify the nature of his \"thorn\", and his other epistles do not directly address the topic. Throughout church history, there has been a significant amount of speculation about what Paul was referring to, although scholars such as Philip Edgcumbe Hughes, F. F. Bruce and Ralph P. Martin conclude that definite identification of the thorn is impossible with the evidence available. Other scholars such as B. J. Oropeza, M. David Litwa, and Paula R. Gooder suggest that the thorn refers to the messenger of Satan who harmed Paul during his third heaven experience.\nThe \"thorn\" is most commonly interpreted in relation to persecutions or hardships Paul faced.\nOther interpretations include:\nModern usage.\nThe phrase \"thorn in the flesh\" continues to be used as a metaphor for \"a source of continual annoyance or trouble.\" It is synonymous with the phrase \"thorn in the side\", which is also of biblical origin, based on the description in Numbers 33:55. As an example usage, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" cites E. M. Forster's 1924 novel \"A Passage to India\", in which Nawab Bahadur says, \"I can be a thorn in Mr. Turton's flesh, and if he asks me I accept the invitation.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69147", "revid": "45957157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69147", "title": "Mekong", "text": "Major river in Southeast Asia\nThe Mekong or Mekong River ( , ) is a transboundary river in East Asia and Southeast Asia. It is the world's twelfth-longest river and the third-longest in Asia with an estimated length of and a drainage area of , discharging of water annually. From its headwaters in the Tibetan Plateau, the river runs through Southwest China (where it is officially called the Lancang River), Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and southern Vietnam. The extreme seasonal variations in flow and the presence of rapids and waterfalls in the Mekong make navigation difficult, though the river remains a major trade route between Tibet and Southeast Asia. The construction of hydroelectric dams along the Mekong in the 2000s through the 2020s has caused serious problems for the river's ecosystem, including the exacerbation of drought.\nNames.\nThe Mekong was originally called \"Mae Nam Khong\" from a contracted form of Kra-Dai shortened to \"Mae Khong\". In Thai and Lao, \"Mae Nam\" (\"Mother of Water[s]\") is used for large rivers and \"Khong\" is the proper name referred to as \"River Khong\". However, \"Khong\" is an archaic word meaning \"river\", loaned from Austroasiatic languages, such as Vietnamese \"s\u00f4ng\" (from *\"krong\") and Mon \"kru\u014b\" \"river\", which led to Chinese whose Old Chinese pronunciation has been reconstructed as and which long served as the proper name of the Yangtze before becoming a generic word for major rivers. To the early European traders, the Mekong River was also known as \"Mekon River\", \"May-Kiang River\" and \"Cambodia River\". Historian William Dalrymple suggests that Mekong comes from \"Ma Ganga\" which means Mother Ganges. Hindus think of the river Ganges as mother. The local names for the river include:\nCourse.\nThe Mekong rises as the Za Qu (Tibetan: \u0f62\u0fab\u0f0b\u0f46\u0f74\u0f0b, Wylie: \"rDza chu\", ZWPY: \"Za qu\"; ) and soon becomes known as the Lancang River (, from the old name of Lao kingdom Lan Xang; the characters may also be literally understood as \"turbulent green river\"). It originates in the \"three rivers source area\" on the Tibetan Plateau in the Sanjiangyuan National Nature Reserve. The reserve protects the headwaters of, from north to south, the Yellow (Huang He), the Yangtze, and the Mekong Rivers. It flows through the Tibetan Autonomous Region and then southeast into Yunnan Province, and then the Three Parallel Rivers Area in the Hengduan Mountains, along with the Yangtze to its east and the Salween River (Nu Jiang in Chinese) to its west.\nThen the Mekong meets the China\u2013Myanmar border and flows about along that border until it reaches the tripoint of China, Myanmar and Laos. From there it flows southwest and forms the border of Myanmar and Laos for about until it arrives at the tripoint of Myanmar, Laos, and Thailand. This is also the point of confluence between the Ruak River (which follows the Thai\u2013Myanmar border) and the Mekong. The area of this tripoint is sometimes termed the Golden Triangle, although the term also refers to the much larger area of those three countries that was notorious as a drug producing region.\nFrom the Golden Triangle tripoint, the Mekong turns southeast form the border of Laos with Thailand for until the Khong Chiam district in Northeastern Thailand.\nKhon Pi Long is a series of rapids along a section of the Mekong River dividing Chiang Rai and Bokeo Province in Laos. The name of the rapids means 'where the ghost lost its way'. It then turns east into the interior of Laos, flowing first east and then south for some before meeting the border with Thailand again. Once more, it defines the Laos-Thailand border for some as it flows first east, passing the capital of Laos, Vientiane, then turns south. A second time, the river leaves the border and flows east into Laos soon passing the city of Pakse. Thereafter, it turns and runs more or less directly south, crossing into Cambodia.\nAt Phnom Penh the river is joined on the right bank by the river and lake system the Tonl\u00e9 Sap. When the Mekong is low, the Tonle Sap is a tributary: water flows from the lake and river into the Mekong. When the Mekong floods, the flow reverses: the floodwaters of the Mekong flow up the Tonle Sap.\nImmediately after the Sap River joins the Mekong by Phnom Penh, the Bassac River branches off the right (west) bank. The Bassac River is the first and main distributary of the Mekong. This is the beginning of the Mekong Delta. The two rivers, the Bassac to the west and the Mekong to the east, enter Vietnam shortly after this. In Vietnam, the Bassac is called the H\u1eadu River (S\u00f4ng H\u1eadu or H\u1eadu Giang); the main, eastern, branch of the Mekong is called the Ti\u1ec1n River or Ti\u1ec1n Giang. In Vietnam, distributaries of the eastern (main, Mekong) branch include the M\u1ef9 Tho River, the Ba Lai River, the H\u00e0m Lu\u00f4ng River, and the C\u1ed5 Chi\u00ean River.\nDrainage basin.\nThe Mekong Basin is frequently divided into two parts: the \"upper Mekong basin\" comprising those parts of the basin in Tibet, Yunnan and eastern Myanmar, and the \"lower Mekong basin\" from Yunnan downstream from China to the South China Sea. From the point where it rises to its mouth, the most precipitous drop in the Mekong occurs in the upper Mekong basin, a stretch of some . Here, it drops before it enters the lower basin where the borders of Thailand, Laos, China, and Myanmar come together in the Golden Triangle. Downstream from the Golden Triangle, the river flows for a further through Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia before entering the South China Sea via a complex delta system in Vietnam.\nUpper basin.\nThe upper basin makes up 24% of the total area and contributes 15\u201320% of the water that flows into the Mekong River. The catchment here is steep and narrow with soil erosion being a major problem and as a result of this, approximately 50% of the sediment in the river comes from the upper basin.\nIn Yunnan Province in China, the river and its tributaries are confined by narrow, deep gorges. The tributary river systems in this part of the basin are small. Only 14 have catchment areas that exceed , yet the greatest amount of loss of forest cover in the entire river system per square kilometer has occurred in this region due to heavy unchecked demand for natural resources. In the south of Yunnan, in Simao and Xishuangbanna Prefectures, the river changes as the valley opens out, the floodplain becomes wider, and the river becomes wider and slower.\nLower basin.\nMajor tributary systems develop in the lower basin. These systems can be separated into two groups: tributaries that contribute to the major wet season flows, and tributaries that drain low relief regions of lower rainfall. The first group are left bank tributaries that drain the high rainfall areas of Laos. The second group are those on the right bank, mainly the Mun and Chi Rivers, that drain a large part of northeast Thailand.\nLaos lies almost entirely within the lower Mekong basin. Its climate, landscape and land use are the major factors shaping the hydrology of the river. The mountainous landscape means that only 16% of the country is farmed under lowland terrace or upland shifting cultivation. With upland shifting agriculture (slash and burn), soils recover within 10 to 20 years but the vegetation does not. Shifting cultivation is common in the uplands of northern Laos and is reported to account for as much as 27% of the total land under rice cultivation. As elsewhere in the basin, forest cover has been steadily reduced during the last three decades by shifting agriculture and permanent agriculture. The cumulative impacts of these activities on the river regime have not been measured. However, the hydrological impacts of land cover changes induced by the Vietnam War were quantified in two sub-catchments of the lower Mekong River basin.\nLoss of forest cover in the Thai areas of the lower basin has been the highest of all the lower Mekong countries over the past 60 years. On the Khorat Plateau, which includes the Mun and Chi tributary systems, forest cover was reduced from 42% in 1961 to 13% in 1993. Although this part of northeast Thailand has an annual rainfall of more than , a high evaporation rate means it is classified as a semi-arid region. Consequently, although the Mun and Chi basins drain 15% of the entire Mekong basin, they only contribute 6% of the average annual flow. Sandy and saline soils are the most common soil types, which makes much of the land unsuitable for wet rice cultivation. In spite of poor fertility, however, agriculture is intensive. Glutinous rice, maize, and cassava are the principal crops. Drought is by far the major hydrological hazard in this region.\nAs the Mekong enters Cambodia, over 95% of its flows have already joined the river. From here on downstream the terrain is flat and water levels rather than flow volumes determine the movement of water across the landscape. The seasonal cycle of changing water levels at Phnom Penh results in the unique \"flow reversal\" of water into and out of the Great Lake via the Tonle Sap River. Phnom Penh also marks the beginning of the delta system of the Mekong River. Here the mainstream begins to break up into an increasing number of branches.\nIn Cambodia, wet rice is the main crop and is grown on the flood plains of the Tonle Sap, Mekong, and Bassac (the Mekong delta distributary known as the H\u1eadu in Vietnam) Rivers. More than half of Cambodia remains covered with mixed evergreen and deciduous broadleaf forest, but forest cover has decreased from 73% in 1973 to 63% in 1993. Here, the river landscape is flat. Small changes in water level determine the direction of water movement, including the large-scale reversal of flow into and out of the Tonle Sap basin from the Mekong River.\nThe Mekong Delta in Vietnam is farmed intensively and has little natural vegetation left. Forest cover is less than 10%. In the Central Highlands of Vietnam, forest cover was reduced from over 95% in the 1950s to around 50% in the mid-1990s. Agricultural expansion and population pressure are the major reasons for land use and landscape change. Both drought and flood are common hazards in the Delta, which many people believe is the most sensitive to upstream hydrological change.\nWater flow along its course.\nTable 1: Country share of Mekong River Basin (MRB) and water flows\nBy taking into account hydrological regimes, physiography land use, and existing, planned and potential resource developments, the Mekong is divided into six distinct reaches:\n\"Reach 1: Lancang Jiang or Upper Mekong River in China\". In this part of the river, the major source of water flowing into the river comes from melting snow on the Tibetan Plateau. This volume of water is sometimes called the \"Yunnan component\" and plays an important role in the low-flow hydrology of the lower mainstream. Even as far downstream as Kratie, the Yunnan component makes up almost 30% of the average dry season flow. A major concern is that the ongoing and planned expansion of dams and reservoirs on the Mekong mainstream in Yunnan could have a significant effect on the low-flow regime of the lower Mekong basin system.\n\"Reach 2: Chiang Saen to Vientiane and Nong Khai\". This reach is almost entirely mountainous and covered with natural forest although there has been widespread slash and burn agriculture. Although this reach cannot be termed \"unspoiled\", the hydrological response is perhaps the most natural and undisturbed of all the lower basin. Many hydrological aspects of the lower basin start to change rapidly at the downstream boundary of this reach.\nOn 19 July 2019 this reach of the river dropped to its lowest level in a century. Officials are particularly concerned as July is in the wet season, when mainstream flows are abundant historically. Locals are blaming low water on the newly constructed Xayaburi Dam, as it enters its test phase prior to the start of commercial operation in October 2019.\n\"Reach 3: Vientiane and Nong Khai to Pakse\". The boundary between Reach 2 and 3 is where the Mekong hydrology starts to change. Reach 2 is dominated in both wet and dry seasons by the Yunnan Component. Reach 3 is increasingly influenced by contributions from the large left bank tributaries in Laos, namely the Nam Ngum, Nam Theun, Nam Hinboun, Se Bang Fai, Se Bang Hieng and Se Done Rivers. The Mun-Chi river system from the right bank in Thailand enters the mainstream within this reach.\n\"Reach 4: Pakse to Kratie\". The main hydrological contributions to the mainstream in this reach come from the Se Kong, Se San, and Sre Pok catchments. Together, these rivers make up the largest hydrological sub-component of the lower basin. Over 25% of the mean annual flow volume to the mainstream at Kratie comes from these three river basins. They are the key element in the hydrology of this part of the system, especially to the Tonle Sap flow reversal.\n\"Reach 5: Kratie to Phnom Penh\". This reach includes the hydraulic complexities of the Cambodian floodplain, the Tonle Sap and the Great Lake. By this stage, over 95% of the total flow has entered the Mekong system. The focus turns from hydrology and water discharge to the assessment of water level, over- bank storage and flooding and the hydrodynamics that determine the timing, duration and volume of the seasonal flow reversal into and out of the Great Lake.\n\"Reach 6: Phnom Penh to the South China Sea\". Here the mainstream divides into a complex and increasingly controlled and artificial system of branches and canals. Key features of flow behaviour are tidal influences and salt water intrusion. Every year, 35\u201350% of this reach is flooded during the rainy season. The impact of road embankments and similar infrastructure developments on the movement of this flood water is an increasingly important consequence of development.\nTable 2 summarises the mean annual flows along the mainstream. The mean annual flow entering the lower Mekong from China is equivalent to a relatively modest depth of runoff. Downstream of Vientiane this increases to over as the principal left bank tributaries enter the mainstream, mainly the Nam Ngum and Nam Theun. The flow level falls again, even with the right bank entry of the Mun-Chi system from Thailand. Although the Mun\u2013Chi basin drains 20% of the lower system, average annual runoff is only . Runoff in the mainstream increases again with the entry from the left bank of the Se Kong from southern Laos and Se San and Sre Pok from Vietnam and Cambodia.\nTable 2: Lower Mekong Mainstream annual flow (1960 to 2004) at selected sites.\nFlows at Chiang Saen entering the lower basin from Yunnan make up about 15% of the wet season flow at Kratie. This rises to 40% during the dry season, even this far downstream. During the wet season, the proportion of average flow coming from Yunnan rapidly decreases downstream of Chiang Saen, from 70% to less than 20% at Kratie. The dry season contribution from Yunnan is much more significant. The major portion of the balance comes from Laos, which points to a major distinction in the low-flow hydrology of the river. One fraction comes from melting snow in China and Tibet and the rest from over-season catchment storage in the lower basin. This has implications for the occurrence of drought conditions. For example, if runoff from melting snow in any given year is very low, then flows upstream of Vientiane-Nong Khai would be lower.\nIn a large river system like the Mekong, seasonal flows can be quite variable from year to year. Although the pattern of the annual hydrograph is fairly predictable, its magnitude is not. The average monthly flows along the mainstream are listed in Table 3, providing an indication of their range and variability from year to year. At Pakse, for example, flood season flows during August would exceed nine years out of ten, but exceed only one year in ten.\nTable 3: Mekong Mainstream monthly discharge, 1960\u20132004 (m3/s).\nThere is little evidence from the last 45 years of data of any systematic changes in the hydrological regime of the Mekong.\nGeology.\nThe internal drainage patterns of the Mekong are unusual among those of large rivers. Most large river systems that drain the interiors of continents, such as the Amazon, Congo, and Mississippi, have relatively simple dendritic tributary networks that resemble a branching tree.\nTypically, such patterns develop in basins with gentle slopes where the underlying geological structure is fairly homogeneous and stable, exerting little or no control on river morphology. In marked contrast, the tributary networks of the Salween, Yangtze, and particularly the Mekong, are complex with different sub-basins often exhibiting different, and distinct, drainage patterns. These complex drainage systems have developed in a setting where the underlying geological structure is heterogeneous and active, and is the major factor controlling the course of rivers and the landscapes they carve out.\nThe elevation of the Tibetan Plateau during the Tertiary period was an important factor in the genesis of the south-west monsoon, which is the dominant climatic control influencing the hydrology of the Mekong Basin. Understanding the nature and timing of the elevation of Tibet (and the Central Highlands of Vietnam) therefore helps explain the provenance of sediment reaching the delta and the Tonle Sap Great Lake today. Studies of the provenance of sediments in the Mekong delta reveal a major switch in the source of sediments about eight million years ago (Ma). From 36 to 8 Ma the bulk (76%) of the sediments deposited in the delta came from erosion of the bedrock in the Three Rivers Area. From 8 Ma to the present, however, the contribution from the Three Rivers Area fell to 40%, while that from the Central Highlands rose from 11 to 51%. One of the most striking conclusions of provenance studies is the small contribution of sediment from the other parts of the Mekong basin, notably the Khorat Plateau, the uplands of northern Laos and northern Thailand, and the mountain ranges south of the Three Rivers area.\nThe last glacial period came to an abrupt end about 19,000 years ago (19 ka) when sea levels rose rapidly, reaching a maximum of about above present levels in the early Holocene about 8 ka. At this time the shoreline of the South China Sea almost reached Phnom Penh and cores recovered from near Angkor Borei contained sediments deposited under the influence of tides, and salt marsh and mangrove swamp deposits. Sediments deposited in the Tonle Sap Great Lake about this time (7.9\u20137.3 ka) also show indications of marine influence, suggesting a connection to the South China Sea. Although the hydraulic relationships between the Mekong and the Tonle Sap Great Lake systems during the Holocene are not well understood, it is clear that between 9,000 and 7,500 years ago the confluence of the Tonle Sap and the Mekong was in proximity to the South China Sea.\nThe present river morphology of the Mekong Delta developed over the last 6,000 years. During this period, the delta advanced over the continental shelf of the South China Sea, covering an area of more than . From 5.3 to 3.5\u00a0ka the delta advanced across a broad embayment formed between higher ground near the Cambodian border and uplands north of Ho Chi Minh City. During this phase of its development the delta was sheltered from the wave action of long-shore currents and was constructed largely through fluvial and tidal processes. At this time the delta was advancing at a rate of per year. After 3.5\u00a0ka, however, the delta had built out beyond the embayment and became subject to wave action and marine currents. These deflected deposition south-eastwards in the direction of the C\u00e0 Mau Peninsula, which is one of the most recent features of the delta.\nFor much of its length the Mekong flows through bedrock channels, i.e., channels that are confined or constrained by bedrock or old alluvium in the bed and riverbanks. Geomorphologic features normally associated with the alluvial stretches of mature rivers, such as meanders, oxbow lakes, cut-offs, and extensive floodplains are restricted to a short stretch of the mainstream around Vientiane and downstream of Kratie where the river develops alluvial channels that are free of control exerted by the underlying bedrock.\nThe Mekong basin is not normally considered a seismically active area as much of the basin is underlain by the relatively stable continental block. Nonetheless, the parts of the basin in northern Laos, northern Thailand, Myanmar and China do experience frequent earthquakes and tremors. The magnitude of these earthquakes rarely exceeds 6.5 on the Richter magnitude scale and is unlikely to cause material damage.\nHistory.\nThe difficulty of navigating the river has meant that it has divided, rather than united, the people who live near it. The earliest known settlements date to 210 BCE, with Ban Chiang being an excellent example of early Iron Age culture. The earliest recorded civilization was the 1st century Indianised-Khmer culture of Funan, in the Mekong delta. Excavations at Oc Eo, near modern An Giang, have found coins from as far away as the Roman Empire. This was succeeded by the Khmer culture Chenla state around the 5th century. The Khmer empire of Angkor was the last great Indianized state in the region. From around the time of the fall of the Khmer empire, the Mekong was the front line between the emergent states of Siam and Tonkin (North Vietnam), with Laos and Cambodia, then on the coast, torn between their influence.\nThe first European to encounter the Mekong was the Portuguese Ant\u00f3nio de Faria in 1540. A European map of 1563 depicts the river, although even by then little was known of the river upstream of the delta. European interest was sporadic: the Spanish and Portuguese mounted some missionary and trade expeditions, while the Dutch Gerrit van Wuysthoff led an expedition up the river as far as Vientiane in 1641\u201342.\nThe French invaded the region in the mid-19th century, capturing Saigon in 1861, and establishing a protectorate over Cambodia in 1863.\nThe first systematic European exploration began with the French Mekong Expedition led by Ernest Doudard de Lagr\u00e9e and Francis Garnier, which ascended the river from its mouth to Yunnan between 1866 and 1868. Their chief finding was that the Mekong had too many falls and rapids to ever be useful for navigation. The river's source was found by Pyotr Kuzmich Kozlov in 1900.\nFrom 1893, the French extended their control of the river into Laos, establishing French Indochina by the first decade of the 20th century. This lasted until the First and Second Indochina Wars expelled French from its former colony and defeated US-supported governments.\nDuring the wars in Indochina in the 1970s, a significant quantity of explosives (sometimes, entire barges loaded with military ordnance) sank in the Cambodian section of the Mekong (as well as in the country's other waterways). Besides being a danger for fishermen, unexploded ordnance also creates problems for bridge and irrigation systems construction. As of 2013, Cambodian volunteers are being trained, with the support of the Office of Weapons Removal and Abatement within the US State Department Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, to conduct underwater explosive removal.\nThe many maps of the river basin produced throughout recorded history reflect the region's changing human geography and politics.\nIn 1995, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam established the Mekong River Commission (MRC) to manage and coordinate the use and care of the Mekong. In 1996 China and Myanmar became \"dialogue partners\" of the MRC and the six countries now work together in a cooperative framework. In 2000, the governments of China, Laos, Thailand and Myanmar signed an \"Agreement on Commercial Navigation on Lancang-Mekong River among the Governments of the People's Republic of China, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, the Union of Myanmar and the Kingdom of Thailand\" which is the mechanism for cooperation with regard to riverine trade on the upper stretches of the Mekong.\nNatural history.\nThe Mekong basin is one of the richest areas of biodiversity in the world. Only the Amazon boasts a higher level of bio-diversity. Biota estimates for the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) include 20,000 plant species, 430 mammals, 1,200 birds, 800 reptiles and amphibians, and an estimated 850 freshwater fish species (excluding euryhaline species mainly found in salt or brackish water, as well as introduced species). The most species rich orders among the freshwater fish in the river basin are cypriniforms (377 species) and catfish (92 species).\nNew species are regularly described from the Mekong. In 2009, 145 species previously unknown to science were described from the region, including 29 fish species, 2 bird species, 10 reptiles, 5 mammals, 96 plants, and 6 amphibians. Between 1997 and 2015, an average of two new species per week were discovered in the region. The Mekong Region contains 16 WWF Global 200 ecoregions, the greatest concentration of ecoregions in mainland Asia.\nNo other river is home to so many species of very large fish. The biggest include three species of \"Probarbus\" barbs, which can grow up to and weigh , the giant freshwater stingray (\"Himantura polylepis\", syn. \"H. chaophraya\"), which can reach at least in length and in width, the giant pangasius (\"Pangasius sanitwongsei\"), giant barb (\"Catlocarpio siamensis\") and the endemic Mekong giant catfish (\"Pangasianodon gigas\"). The last three can grow up to about in length and weigh . All of these have declined drastically because of dams, flood control, and overfishing.\nOne species of freshwater dolphin, the Irrawaddy dolphin (\"Orcaella brevirostris\"), was once common in the whole of the lower Mekong but is now very rare, with only 85 individuals remaining.\nAmong other wetland mammals that have been living in and around the river are the smooth-coated otter (\"Lutra perspicillata\") and fishing cat (\"Prionailurus viverrinus\").\nThe endangered Siamese crocodile (\"Crocodylus siamensis\") occurs in small isolated pockets within the northern Cambodian and Laotian portions of the Mekong River. The saltwater crocodile (\"Crocodylus porosus\") once ranged from the Mekong Delta up the river into Tonle Sap and beyond but is now extinct in the river, along with being extinct in all of Vietnam and possibly even Cambodia.\nNatural phenomena.\nThe low tide level of the river in Cambodia is lower than the high tide level out at sea, and the flow of the Mekong inverts with the tides throughout its stretch in Vietnam and up to Phnom Penh. The very flat Mekong delta area in Vietnam is thus prone to flooding, especially in the provinces of An Giang and Dong Thap (\u0110\u1ed3ng Th\u00e1p), near the Cambodian border.\nFisheries.\nAquatic biodiversity in the Mekong River system is the second highest in the world after the Amazon.\nThe Mekong boasts the most concentrated biodiversity per hectare of any river. The largest recorded freshwater fish, a giant freshwater stingray in 2022 and previously a Mekong giant catfish in 2005, were both caught in the Mekong River.\nThe commercially valuable fish species in the Mekong are generally divided between \"black fish\", which inhabit low oxygen, slow moving, shallow waters, and \"white fish\", which inhabit well oxygenated, fast moving, deeper waters. People living within the Mekong River system generate many other sources of food and income from what are often termed \"other aquatic animals\" (OAAs) such as freshwater crabs, shrimp, snakes, turtles, and frogs.\nOAAs account for about 20% of the total Mekong catch. When fisheries are discussed, catches are typically divided between the wild capture fishery (i.e., fish and other aquatic animals caught in their natural habitat), and aquaculture (fish reared under controlled conditions). Wild capture fisheries play the most important role in supporting livelihoods. Wild capture fisheries are largely open access fisheries, which poor rural people can access for food and income.\nBroadly, there are three types of fish habitats in the Mekong: i) the river, including all the main tributaries, rivers in the major flood zone, and the Tonle Sap, which altogether yield about 30% of wild catch landings; ii) rain-fed wetlands outside the river-floodplain zone, including mainly rice paddies in formerly forested areas and usually inundated to about , yielding about 66% of wild catch landings; and iii) large water bodies outside the flood zone, including canals and reservoirs yielding about 4% of wild catch landings.\nThe Mekong Basin has one of the world's largest and most productive inland fisheries. An estimated two million tonnes of fish are landed a year, in addition to almost 500,000 tonnes of other aquatic animals. Aquaculture yields about two million tonnes of fish a year. Hence, the lower Mekong basin yields about 4.5 million tonnes of fish and aquatic products annually. The total economic value of the fishery is between US$3.9 and US$7 billion a year. Wild capture fisheries alone have been valued at US$2 billion a year. This value increases considerably when the multiplier effect is included, but estimates vary widely.\nAn estimated 2.56 million tonnes of inland fish and other aquatic animals are consumed in the lower Mekong every year. Aquatic resources make up between 47 and 80% of animal protein in rural diets for people who live in the Lower Mekong Basin. Fish are the cheapest source of animal protein in the region and any decline in the fishery is likely to significantly impact nutrition, especially among the poor. Fish are the staple of the diet in Laos and Cambodia, with around 80% of the Cambodian population's annual protein intake coming from fish caught in the Mekong River system, with no alternative source to replace it. An MRC report claims that dam projects on the Mekong River will reduce aquatic life by 40% by 2020, and predicted that 80% of fish will be depleted by 2040. Thailand will be impacted, as its fish stocks in the Mekong will decline by 55%, Laos will be reduced by 50%, Cambodia by 35%, and Vietnam by 30%.\nIt is estimated that 40 million rural people, more than two-thirds of the rural population in the lower Mekong basin, are engaged in the wild capture fishery. Fisheries contribute significantly to a diversified livelihood strategy for many people, particularly the poor, who are highly dependent on the river and its resources for their livelihoods. They provide a principal form of income for numerous people and act as a safety net and coping strategy in times of poor agricultural harvests or other difficulties. In Laos alone, 71% of rural households (2.9 million people) rely on fisheries for either subsistence or additional cash income. Around the Tonle Sap Lake in Cambodia, more than 1.2 million people live in fishing communes and depend almost entirely on fishing for their livelihoods.\nDams.\nDams in the Mekong reference those built for hydropower, irrigation and other uses (such as water supply). As of February 2024, dams in the Mekong are distributed as follows:\nTable 4: Dams in the Mekong River Basin\nNotes: HPPs = Hydropower Plants. Data calculated from the CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems - Greater Mekong 'Dataset on the Dams of the Irrawaddy, Mekong, Red and Salween River Basins'. Only HPPs with an installed capacity of 15 Megawatts (MW) or more are included; and/or dams with a reservoir area of 0.5 km2 or more. \nThere are also multiple HPPs under construction within the basin. As of February 2024, there is one under construction in Cambodia, three in the TAR, and 14 in Laos.\nOf the Mekong's HPPs, 15 are located on the Mekong mainstream. Of these, 13 are in China, and two in Laos. An additional mainstream dam is currently under construction in Laos, and another in China.\nNavigation.\nFor thousands of years the Mekong River has been an important conduit for people and goods between the many towns on its banks. Traditional forms of trade in small boats linking communities continue today, however the river is also becoming an important link in international trade routes, connecting the six Mekong countries to each other, and also to the rest of the world. The Mekong is still a wild river and navigation conditions vary greatly along its length. Broadly, navigation of the river is divided between upper and lower Mekong, with the \"upper\" part of the river defined as the stretch north of the Khone Falls in southern Laos and the \"lower\" part as the stretch below these falls.\nNarrower and more turbulent sections of water in the upstream parts of the Mekong River, coupled with large annual water level variations continue to present a challenge to navigation. The seasonal variations in water level directly affect trade in this section of the river. Volumes of trade being shipped decrease by more than 50%, primarily due to the reduced draughts available during the low water season (June\u2013January). Despite these difficulties, the Mekong River is already an important link in the transit chain between Kunming and Bangkok with about 300,000 tonnes of goods shipped via this route each year. The volume of this trade is expected to increase by 8\u201311% per year. Port infrastructure is being expanded to accommodate the expected growth in traffic, with new facilities planned for Chiang Saen port.\nIn Laos, 50 and 100 DWT vessels are operated for regional trade. Cargos carried are timber, agricultural products, and construction materials. Thailand imports a wide variety of products from China, including vegetables, fruit, agricultural products, and fertilisers. The main exports from Thailand are dried longan, fish oil, rubber products, and consumables. Nearly all the ships carrying cargo to and from Chiang Saen Port are 300 DWT Chinese flag vessels.\nWaterborne trade in the lower Mekong countries of Vietnam and Cambodia has grown significantly, with trends in container traffic at Phnom Penh port and general cargo through Can Tho port both showing steady increases until 2009 when a decrease in cargo volumes can be attributed to the 2008 financial crisis and a subsequent decline in demand for the export of garments to the US. In 2009, Mekong trade received a significant boost with the opening of a new deep-water port at Cai Mep in Vietnam. This new port has generated a renewed focus on the Mekong River as a trade route. The Cai Mep container terminals can accommodate vessels with a draught of , equivalent to the largest container ships in the world. These mother vessels sail directly to Europe or the United States, which means that goods can be shipped internationally to and from Phnom Penh with only a single transshipment at Cai Mep.\nAs an international river, a number of agreements exist between the countries that share the Mekong to enable trade and passage between them. The most important of these, which address the full length of the river, are:\nIn December 2016, the Thai cabinet of Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha agreed \"in principle\" to a plan to dredge stretches of the Mekong and demolish rocky outcrops that are hindrances to easy navigation. The international Lancang-Mekong River navigation improvement plan for 2015\u20132025, conceived by China, Myanmar, Lao, and Thailand, aims to make the river more navigable for 500-tonne cargo vessels sailing the river from Yunnan to Luang Prabang, a distance of . China has been the driving force behind the demolition plan as it aims to expand trade in the area. The plan is split into two phases. The first phase, from 2015 to 2020, involves a survey, a design, and an assessment of the environmental and social impacts of the project. These have to be approved by the four countries involved: China, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand. The second phase (2020\u20132025) involves navigational improvements from Simao in China to 243 border posts in China and Myanmar, a distance of . Local groups have countered that native inhabitants already operate their boats year-round and that the plan to blast the rapids is not about making life better for local people, but about enabling year-round traffic of large Chinese commercial boats.\nOn 4 February 2020, the Thai Cabinet voted to stop the project to blast and dredge of the river bed after Beijing failed to stump up the money for further surveys of the affected area.\nBridges.\nConstruction of Myanmar\u2013Laos Friendship Bridge started on 19 February 2013. The bridge will be long and have an wide two-lane motorway.\nThe First Thai\u2013Lao Friendship Bridge connects Nong Khai city with Vientiane in Laos. The bridge opened on 8 April 1994. It has two lanes with a single railway line in the middle. On 20 March 2004, the Thai and Lao governments agreed to extend the railway to Tha Nalaeng in Laos. This extension has since been completed.\nThe Second Thai\u2013Lao Friendship Bridge connects Mukdahan to Savannakhet. The two-lane, , bridge opened to the public on 9 January 2007.\nThe Third Thai\u2013Lao Friendship Bridge opened for traffic on 11 November 2011, connecting Nakhon Phanom Province (Thailand) and Thakhek (Laos), as part of Asian Highway 3. The Chinese and Thai governments agreed to build the bridge and share the estimated US$33 million cost.\nThe Fourth Thai\u2013Lao Friendship Bridge opened to traffic on 11 December 2013. It links Chiang Rai Province, Thailand with Ban Houayxay, Laos.\nThere is one bridge over the Mekong entirely within Laos. Unlike the Friendship Bridges, it is not a border crossing. It is at Pakse in Champasak Province. It is long, and was completed in 2000. ).\nThe Kizuna Bridge is in Cambodia, in the city of Kampong Cham, on the road linking Phnom Penh with the remote provinces of Ratanakiri and Mondolkiri, and Laos. The bridge opened for traffic on 11 December 2001.\nThe Prek Tamak Bridge, north of Phnom Penh opened in 2010.\nPhnom Penh itself has no bridge under construction yet, although two new bridges have recently opened on the Tonle Sap, and the main bridge on the highway to Ho Chi Minh was duplicated in 2010.\nAnother new bridge was built at Neak Leung on the Phnom Penh to Ho Chi Minh Highway 1 with Japanese government assistance, and opened in 2015.\nIn Vietnam, the M\u1ef9 Thu\u1eadn Bridge was opened in 2000, crossing the first channel\u2014the left, main branch of the Mekong, the S\u00f4ng Ti\u1ec1n or Ti\u1ec1n Giang\u2014near V\u0129nh Long. Since 2008, the R\u1ea1ch Mi\u1ec5u Bridge crosses it near M\u1ef9 Tho, between the provinces of Ti\u1ec1n Giang and B\u1ebfn Tre.\nC\u1ea7n Th\u01a1 Bridge crosses the second channel\u2014the right, main distributary of the Mekong, the Bassac (Song Hau). Inaugurated in 2010, it is the longest main span cable-stayed bridge in Southeast Asia.\nEnvironmental issues.\nDrought linked to a changing climate and dozens of hydroelectric dams are damaging the Mekong ecosystem. When drought ends and the inevitable floods begin, the effects of Mekong dams on flood pulse dynamics over the entire Lower Mekong are poorly understood.\nSewage treatment is rudimentary in towns and urban areas throughout much of the Mekong's length, such as Vientiane in Laos. Water pollution impacts the river's ecological integrity as a result.\nMuch of the 8.3 billion tonnes of plastic present on earth makes its way to the oceans. Ninety percent of plastic in the oceans is flushed there by just 10 rivers. The Mekong is one of them.\nA growing number of academics, NGOs, and scientists have urged the international community and the Mekong River Commission to reduce the use of hydropower, giving concerns of long-term sustainability. Some of them have urged an immediate moratorium on new construction of hydropower projects and a shift to solar and other forms of renewable energy, which are becoming more competitive and faster to install.\nSand mining of the Mekong River in the countries Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam has led to various environmental impacts on both areas local and downstream to these operations due to the disturbance of the river's natural flow. These impacts include river embankment instability, reduced supply of vital floodwater and sediments to floodplains, increased salinity levels and both the disturbance and displacement of various species.\nMining in \"Karen and Shan states, where tin and rare-earth mining\" is causing mounting pollution (as of 2025) to the Mekong basin.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69148", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69148", "title": "Tertullus", "text": "Lawyer in the Acts of the Apostles\nIn the New Testament, Tertullus (a modification of \"Tertius\") was an orator or lawyer who was employed by the Jewish leaders to state their case against the apostle Paul in the presence of Felix (Acts 24:1-9).\nNew Testament account.\nTertullus gives a formal rhetorical presentation on behalf of the Jewish leaders opposed to Paul's preaching. The charges he raised against Paul were that he created disturbances \"among all the Jews throughout the world\", an offence against the Roman government (\"crimen majestatis\"), secondly, that he was a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes; and thirdly, that he attempted to profane the temple, a crime which the Jews were permitted to punish.\nIt is generally assumed that Tertullus was himself a Hellenistic Jew, although he could have been a Gentile. It is not certain whether the trial would have taken place in Latin or Greek.\nTertullus before Antonius Felix makes the first recorded use of the plural \"Nazarenes\" (\"Nazoraioi\", the plural form of Iesous ho \"Nazoraios\" \"Jesus of Nazareth\") to refer to Christians, although the use of the term \"Christians\" at Antioch had already been noted in Acts, and it was used by Herod Agrippa II in the next trial of Paul before Porcius Festus. Tertullus' use of the Greek term \"Nazoraioi\" has continuity with the Hebrew term \"Notzrim\" found in later rabbinical literature. Tertullus presumably could not use the Antioch term \"Christianoi\" (Hebrew \"Meshiykhiyyim\" \u05de\u05e9\u05d9\u05d7\u05d9\u05d9\u05dd) since \"Christianoi\" from Greek \"Christos\" (literally \"Anointed One\", \"Messiah\") might imply Tertullus' recognition of Jesus of Nazareth as a Davidic \"Anointed One\" or \"Messiah\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69149", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69149", "title": "MMR vaccine", "text": "Combined vaccine against measles, mumps, and rubella\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe MMR vaccine (abbreviated as \"MMR\") is a combination vaccine against measles, mumps, and rubella (German measles). It contains the combined measles vaccine, mumps vaccine, and rubella vaccine into a single injection. After two doses, 97% of people are protected against measles, 88% against mumps, and at least 97% against rubella. The vaccine is also recommended for those who do not have evidence of immunity, those with well-controlled HIV/AIDS, and within 72 hours of exposure to measles among those who are incompletely immunized. It is given by injection.\nThe MMR vaccine is widely used around the world. As of 2012, 575 million doses had been administered since the vaccine's introduction worldwide. Measles resulted in 2.6 million deaths per year before immunization became common. This has decreased to 122,000 deaths per year as of 2012,[ [update]] mostly in low-income countries. Through vaccination, as of 2018[ [update]], rates of measles in North and South America are very low. Rates of disease have been seen to increase in populations that go unvaccinated. Between 2000 and 2018, vaccination decreased measles deaths by 73%.\nSide effects of immunization are generally mild and resolve without any specific treatment. These may include fever, as well as pain or redness at the injection site. Severe allergic reactions occur in about one in a million people. Because it contains live viruses, the MMR vaccine is not recommended during pregnancy but may be given during breastfeeding. The vaccine is safe to give at the same time as other vaccines. Being recently immunized does not increase the risk of passing measles, mumps, or rubella on to others: That is, even though the vaccine contains live viruses, they are not transmitted. There is no evidence of an association between MMR immunization and autistic spectrum disorders. The MMR vaccine is a mixture of live weakened viruses of the three diseases.\nThe MMR vaccine was developed by Maurice Hilleman. It was licensed for use in the US by Merck in 1971. Stand-alone measles, mumps, and rubella vaccines had been previously licensed in 1963, 1967, and 1969, respectively. Recommendations for a second dose were introduced in 1989. The MMRV vaccine, which also covers chickenpox, may be used instead. An MR vaccine, without coverage for mumps, is also occasionally used.\nMedical use.\nCochrane concluded that the \"Existing evidence on the safety and effectiveness of MMR and MMRV vaccine supports current policies of mass immunisation aimed at global measles eradication to reduce morbidity and mortality associated with measles mumps rubella and varicella.\"\nThe combined MMR vaccine induces immunity less painfully than three separate injections at the same time, and sooner and more efficiently than three injections given on different dates. Public Health England reports that providing a single combined vaccine as of 1988, rather than giving the option to have them also done separately, increased uptake of the vaccine.\nMeasles.\nBefore the widespread use of a vaccine against measles, rates of disease were so high that infection was felt to be \"as inevitable as death and taxes.\" Reported cases of measles in the United States fell from hundreds of thousands to tens of thousands per year following introduction of the vaccine in 1963. Increasing uptake of the vaccine following outbreaks in 1971, and 1977, brought this down to thousands of cases per year in the 1980s. An outbreak of almost 30,000 cases in 1990 led to a renewed push for vaccination and the addition of a second vaccine to the recommended schedule. Fewer than 200 cases have been reported in the US each year between 1997 and 2013, and the disease is no longer considered endemic there.\nThe benefit of measles vaccination in preventing illness, disability, and death has been well documented. The first 20 years of licensed measles vaccination in the US prevented an estimated 52 million cases of the disease, 17,400 cases of intellectual disability, and 5,200 deaths. During 1999\u20132004, a strategy led by the World Health Organization and UNICEF led to improvements in measles vaccination coverage that averted an estimated 1.4 million measles deaths worldwide. Between 2000 and 2018, measles vaccination resulted in a 73% decrease in deaths from the disease.\nMeasles is common in many areas of the world. Although it was declared eliminated from the US in 2000, high rates of vaccination and good communication with people who refuse vaccination are needed to prevent outbreaks and sustain the elimination of measles in the US. Of the 66 cases of measles reported in the US in 2005, slightly over half were attributable to one unvaccinated individual who acquired measles during a visit to Romania. This individual returned to a community with many unvaccinated children. The resulting outbreak infected 34 people, mostly children and virtually all unvaccinated; 9% were hospitalized, and the cost of containing the outbreak was estimated at $167,685. A major epidemic was averted due to high rates of vaccination in the surrounding communities.\nIn 2017, an outbreak of measles occurred among the Somali-American community in Minnesota, where MMR vaccination rates had declined due to the misconception that the vaccine could cause autism. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recorded 65 affected children in the outbreak by April 2017.\nRubella.\nRubella, also known as German measles, was also very common before widespread vaccination. The major risk of rubella is during pregnancy when the baby may contract congenital rubella, which can cause significant congenital defects.\nMumps.\nMumps is another viral disease that was once very common, especially during childhood. If mumps is acquired by a male who is past puberty, a possible complication is bilateral orchitis, which can in some cases lead to sterility.\nAdministration.\nThe MMR vaccine is administered by a subcutaneous injection, the first dose typically at twelve months of age. The second dose may be given as early as one month after the first dose. The second dose is a dose to produce immunity in the small number of persons (2\u20135%) who fail to develop measles immunity after the first dose. In the US it is done before entry to kindergarten because that is a convenient time. Areas where measles is common typically recommend the first dose at nine months of age and the second dose at fifteen months of age.\nSafety.\nAdverse reactions, rarely serious, may occur from each component of the MMR vaccine. Ten percent of children develop fever, malaise, and a rash 5\u201321 days after the first vaccination; and 3% develop joint pain lasting 18 days on average. Older women appear to be more at risk of joint pain, acute arthritis, and even (rarely) chronic arthritis. Anaphylaxis is an extremely rare but serious allergic reaction to the vaccine. One cause can be egg allergy. In 2014, the FDA approved two additional possible adverse events on the vaccination label: acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), and transverse myelitis, with permission to also add \"difficulty walking\" to the package inserts. A 2012 IOM report found that the measles component of the MMR vaccine can cause measles inclusion body encephalitis in immunocompromised individuals. This report also rejected any connection between the MMR vaccine and autism. Some versions of the vaccine contain the antibiotic neomycin and therefore should not be used in people allergic to this antibiotic.\nThe number of reports on neurological disorders is very small, other than evidence for an association between a form of the MMR vaccine containing the Urabe mumps strain and rare adverse events of aseptic meningitis, a form of viral meningitis. The UK National Health Service stopped using the Urabe mumps strain in the early 1990s due to cases of transient mild viral meningitis, and switched to a form using the Jeryl Lynn mumps strain instead. The Urabe strain remains in use in a number of countries; MMR with the Urabe strain is much cheaper to manufacture than with the Jeryl Lynn strain, and a strain with higher efficacy along with a somewhat higher rate of mild side effects may still have the advantage of reduced incidence of overall adverse events.\nA Cochrane review found that, compared with placebo, MMR vaccine was associated with fewer upper respiratory tract infections, more irritability, and a similar number of other adverse effects.\nNaturally acquired measles often occurs with immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP, a purpuric rash and an increased tendency to bleed that resolves within two months in children), occurring in 1 to 20,000 cases. Approximately 1 in 40,000 children are thought to acquire ITP in the six weeks following an MMR vaccination. ITP below the age of six years is generally a mild disease, rarely having long-term consequences.\nFalse claims about autism.\nIn 1998 Andrew Wakefield \"et al.\" published a fraudulent paper about twelve children, reportedly with bowel symptoms and autism or other disorders acquired soon after administration of MMR vaccine, while supporting a competing vaccine. In 2010, Wakefield's research was found by the General Medical Council to have been \"dishonest\", and \"The Lancet\" fully retracted the paper. Three months following \"The Lancet's\" retraction, Wakefield was struck off the UK medical register, with a statement identifying deliberate falsification in the research published in \"The Lancet\", and was barred from practising medicine in the UK. The research was declared fraudulent in 2011 by the \"British Medical Journal\".\nSince Wakefield's publication, multiple peer-reviewed studies have failed to show any association between the vaccine and autism. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Institute of Medicine of the US National Academy of Sciences, the UK National Health Service and the Cochrane Library review have all concluded that there is no evidence of a link.\nAdministering the vaccines in three separate doses does not reduce the chance of adverse effects, and it increases the opportunity for infection by the two diseases not immunized against first. Health experts have criticized media reporting of the MMR-autism controversy for triggering a decline in vaccination rates. Before publication of Wakefield's article, the inoculation rate for MMR in the UK was 92%; after publication, the rate dropped to below 80%. In 1998, there were 56 measles cases in the UK; by 2008, there were 1348 cases, with two confirmed deaths.\nIn Japan, the MMR triplet is not used. Immunity is achieved by a combination vaccine for measles and rubella, followed up later with a mumps only vaccine. This has had no effect on autism rates in the country, further disproving the MMR autism hypothesis.\nHistory.\nThe component viral strains of MMR vaccine were developed by propagation in animal and human cells.\nFor example, in the case of mumps and measles viruses, the virus strains were grown in embryonated chicken eggs. This produced strains of virus which were adapted for chicken cells and less well-suited for human cells. These strains are therefore called \"attenuated strains\". They are sometimes referred to as \"neuroattenuated\" because these strains are less virulent to human neurons than the wild strains.\nThe rubella component, Meruvax, was developed in 1967, through propagation using the human embryonic lung cell line WI-38 (named for the Wistar Institute) that was derived six years earlier in 1961.\nThe term \"MPR vaccine\" is also used to refer to this vaccine, whereas \"P\" refers to parotitis which is caused by mumps.\nMerck MMR II is supplied freeze-dried (lyophilized) and contains live viruses. Before injection, it is reconstituted with the solvent provided.\nAccording to a review published in 2018, the GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) MMR vaccine known as Pluserix \"contains the Schwarz measles virus, the Jeryl Lynn\u2013like mumps strain, and RA27/3 rubella virus\".\nPluserix was introduced in Hungary in 1999. Enders' Edmonston strain has been used since 1999 in Hungary in Merck MMR II product. GSK Priorix vaccine, which uses attenuated Schwarz Measles, was introduced in Hungary in 2003.\nMMRV vaccine.\nThe MMRV vaccine, a combined measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella (chickenpox) vaccine is used as a replacement for the MMR vaccine to simplify the administration of the vaccines.\nMR vaccine.\nThe MR vaccine (abbreviated \"MRV\") is a vaccine for measles and rubella, not mumps. In 2014, the World Health Organization reported it as used in a \"few (unidentified) countries\". A MRV delivered by a micro-needle patch was the subject of a study reported in 2024.\nSociety and culture.\nReligious concerns.\nSome brands of the vaccine use gelatin, derived from pigs, as a stabilizer. This has caused reduced take-up among some communities, despite the fact that alternative vaccines without pig derivatives are approved and available.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69150", "revid": "1303202949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69150", "title": "Terah", "text": "Figure in the Hebrew Bible; son of Nahor\nTerah or Terach ( \"Tera\u1e25\") is a biblical figure in the Book of Genesis. He is listed as the son of Nahor and father of the patriarch Abraham. As such, he is a descendant of Shem's son Arpachshad. Terah is mentioned in Genesis 11:26\u201327, Book of Joshua 24:2, and 1 Chronicles 1:17\u201327 of the Hebrew Bible and Luke 3:34\u201336 in the New Testament.\nBiblical narrative.\nTerah is mentioned in Genesis 11:26\u201327, Joshua 24:2, and 1 Chronicles 1:17\u201327 of the Hebrew Bible and Luke 3:34\u201336 in the New Testament. Terah is mentioned in Genesis 11:26\u201332 as a son of Nahor, the son of Serug, descendants of Shem. He is said to have had three sons: Abram (better known by his later name Abraham), Haran, and Nahor II, and one daughter: Sarai (better known by her later name Sarah). The family lived in Ur of the Chaldees. His grandchildren were Lot, Milcah and Iscah, whose father, Haran, had died at Ur.\nIn the Book of Joshua, in his final speech to the Israelite leaders assembled at Shechem, Joshua recounts the history of God's formation of the Israelite nation, beginning with \"Terah the father of Abraham and Nahor, who lived beyond the Euphrates River and worshiped other gods.\" Terah is also mentioned in a biblical genealogy given in 1 Chronicles.\nIn the Genesis narrative, Terah took his family and left Ur to move to the land of Canaan. Terah set out for Canaan but stopped in the city of Haran along the way, where he died.\nJewish tradition.\nChildren.\nGenesis 11:26 states that Terah lived 70 years, \"and begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran\". The Talmud says that Abraham was 52 years old at year 2000 AM (Anno Mundi), which means that he was born in the year 1948 AM.\nOccupation.\nAccording to rabbinic literature Terah was a wicked (\"Numbers Rabbah\" 19:1; 19:33), idolatrous priest (Midrash HaGadol on Genesis 11:28) who manufactured idols (\"Eliyahu Rabbah\" 6, and \"Eliyahu Zuta\" 25). Abram, in opposition to his father's idol shop, smashed his father's idols and chased customers away. Terah then brought his unruly son before Nimrod, who threw him into a fiery furnace, yet Abram miraculously escaped (Genesis Rabbah 38:13). The Zohar says that when God saved Abram from the furnace, Terah repented (Zohar Genesis 1:77b) and Rabbi Abba B. Kahana said that God assured Abram that his father Terah had a portion in the \"World to Come\" (Genesis Rabbah 30:4; 30:12).\nRabbi Hiyya relates this account in the Genesis Rabbah: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Terah left Abram to mind the store while he departed. A woman came with a plateful of flour and asked Abram to offer it to the idols. Abram then took a stick, broke the idols, and put the stick in the largest idol\u2019s hand. When Terah returned, he demanded that Abram explain what he'd done. Abram told his father that the idols fought among themselves and the largest broke the others with the stick. \"Why do you make sport of me?\" Terah cried, \"Do they have any knowledge?\" Abram replied, \"Listen to what you are saying!\"\nLeader of the journey.\nTerah is identified as the person who arranged and led the family to embark on a mysterious journey to Canaan. It is shrouded in mystery to Jewish scholars as to why Terah began the journey and as to why the journey ended prematurely. It is suggested that he was a man in search of a greater truth that could possibly be found in the land of Canaan, and that it was Abram who picked up the torch to continue his father's quest, that Terah himself was unable to achieve.\nWhen Abram leaves Haran.\nIn Jewish tradition, when Terah died at age 205, Abraham (70 years younger) was already 135 years old. Abram thus left Haran at age 75, well before Terah died. The Torah, however, relates Terah's death in Haran before Abram continues the journey to Canaan as an expression that he was not remiss in the Mitzvah of honoring a parent by leaving his aging father behind. The significance of Terah not reaching Canaan was a reflection of his character, a man who was unable to go \"all the way\". Although on a journey in the right direction, Terah fell short at arriving to the divine destination\u2014in contrast to Abram, who did follow through and achieved the divine goal, and was not bound by his father's idolatrous past. Abram's following God's command to leave his father, thus absolved him from the mitzvah of honoring parents, and as Abraham, he would go on to create a new lineage distinct from his ancestors.\nSamaritan tradition.\nIn the Samaritan Pentateuch Terah dies aged 145 years and Abram leaves Haran after his death.\nChristian tradition.\nIn the Christian tradition Abram left Haran after Terah died. The Christian views of the time of Terah come from a passage in the New Testament at Acts 7:2\u20134 where Stephen said some things that contrast with Jewish rabbinical views. He said that God appeared to Abraham in Mesopotamia, and directed him to leave the Chaldeans\u2014whereas most rabbinical commentators see Terah as being the one who directed the family to leave Ur Kasdim from Genesis 11:31: \"Terah took his son Abram, his daughter-in-law Sarai (his son Abram's wife), and his grandson Lot (his son Haran's child) and left Ur of the Chaldeans to go to the land of Canaan.\" Stephen asserts that Abram left Haran after Terah died.\nIslamic tradition.\nIn Sunni Islam.\nSome Sunni scholars are of the opinion that Azar (mentioned in the Qur'an) is not the father of Ibrahim. For some, the actual name of the father of Ibrahim is Tarakh, thus cannot be Azar. Ibn Hajar's position is that in fact Azar is the paternal uncle of Ibrahim and that Arabs use the term \"ab\" to refer to the paternal uncle also and that Allah used this expression in the Qur'an https:// where Isma'il, the paternal uncle of Ya'qub, is referred to as an \"ab\".\nSome commentators said: Terah's, had two names: Azar and Terah, as Al-Tabari narrated in Jami\u2019 al-Bayan (11/466) with his chain of transmission on the authority of Saeed bin Abdul Aziz. He said: He is Azar, and he is Terah, such as \u201cIsrael\u201d and \u201cJacob\u201d.\nIt is also maintained by some that Azar's real name was Nakhoor, and that though Azar earlier worshipped Allah, he abandoned his forefathers' religion when he became the minister of Namrud.\nIn Shi'ism.\nTerah as Abraham's father.\nThere is a consensus among Shia Muslim scholars and exegetes that Azar was not the biological father of Abraham but rather his paternal uncle while Terah is believed to be his father. Shaykh Tusi maintained that Azar was not Abraham's father and cited a hadith from Muhammad according to which none of the prophet's ancestors up to Adam were polytheists. By this he argued that since Azar was an idolater and Abraham was one of the prophet's ancestors, it is not possible for Azar to be Abraham's father. According to Grand Ayatollah Naser Makarem Shirazi in Tafsir Nemooneh, all Shiite exegetes and scholars believe that Azar was not Abraham's father. Allamah Tabatabai in his Tafsir al-Mizan appealed to the Quranic verses in which Abraham prayed for his parents, that they show that his father was someone other than Azar. In Dua Umm Dawood, a supplication recited by Shi'ite Muslims cited to be from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, the supplicant sends blessings on a person by the name of 'Turakh'. In \"Nahj al-Balagha\", Imam Ali is reported to have said in a sermon, \"I testify that Muhammad is His servant and messenger, and the chief of His creation; whenever Allah divided the line of descent, He put him in the better one..\" Likewise, in \"Ziyarat Arbaeen\", a recitation with which Shiite Muslims pay respect to Imam Husayn, it is recited \"I bear witness that you were a light in the sublime loins and purified wombs..\", through which it is believed that none of his ancestors up to Adam were impure, which includes Muhammad, Imam Ali and Lady Fatimah and hence including Abraham's biological father.\nThe Twelver Shi'ite website \"Al-Islam.org\" treats Azar as being Abraham's uncle, not his biological father. To justify this view, it references a passage of the Quran, which mentions that the sons of Ya\u02bfq\u016bb (Jacob) referred to his uncle Ism\u0101\u02bf\u012bl (Ishmael), father Is-\u1e25\u0101q (Isaac) and grandfather Ibr\u0101h\u012bm (Abraham) as his \"\u0101b\u0101\u02be\" ():\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Were you there to see when death came upon Ya'qub? When he said to his sons, \"What will you worship after I am gone?\" they replied, \"We shall worship your God and the God of your \"aba\u02be\", Ibrahim, Isma'il, and Is-haq, one single God: we devote ourselves to Him.\"\u2014\u200a\nTherefore, the singular word \"ab\" does not always mean progenitor, and can be used for an uncle or caretaker or a forefather, unlike the word \"w\u0101lid\" (, progenitor). Thus, \"Al-Islam.org\" denies that Abraham's biological father was 'Azar', and instead agreed with Ibn Kathir that he was the biblical figure 'Terah', who nevertheless treated him as a polytheist.\nAs Abraham's uncle.\nIn contrast to \"Al-Islam.org\", Shi'ite scholar and jurist Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi believed Terah to be the uncle of Abraham, not his father.\nIn popular culture.\nTerah is portrayed by Vittorio Gassman in the film \"Abraham\" (1993).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69151", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69151", "title": "List of rivers of the Americas", "text": "This is a list of rivers of the Americas, it includes major historical or physiological significant rivers of the Americas grouped by region where they are located (Central America, Northern America, West Indies and South Americas). The longest rivers in each country are included. Further details and references are provided in each river's separate article. Unusually significant tributaries appear in this list, under the river into which they drain.\nThe longest river in the Americas is the Amazon River. The length of the Amazon River is usually said to be \"at least\" , but reported values lie anywhere between .\nThe length measurements of many rivers are only approximations and differ from each other because there are many factors that determine the calculated river length, such as the position of the geographical source and the mouth, the scale of measurement, and the length measuring techniques (for details see also List of rivers by length).\nThere are 11 countries in the Americas that do not have rivers: Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, Bonaire, Cayman Islands, Cura\u00e7ao, Saba, Saint Barth\u00e9lemy, Saint Martin, Sint Eustatius, and Sint Maarten.\nNorth America.\nCentral America.\nThe water in rivers in Central America flows to either the Atlantic Ocean or Pacific Ocean. The R\u00edo Coco, locally known as the Wanks, runs along the border with Honduras and is the longest river flowing totally within Central America. The second longest river in Central America is the Patuca River.\nSome of the significant rivers and their lengths in Central America include:\nNorthern America.\nWater from rivers in the Northern Americas flows toward either the Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Pacific Ocean, the land-locked Great Basin in the western United States or the interior basin in Mexico.\nThe Missouri River is the longest river in North America and the United States (). The second longest river in North America and the United States is the Mississippi River (). The Rio Conchos () is the longest river in Mexico. The longest river in Canada is the Mackenzie River ().\nSome of the longest or otherwise notable rivers include the rivers listed in the table below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWest Indies.\nThe significant rivers in the West Indies include the following:\nRivers of North and Central America by discharge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSouth America.\nThe following are some of the significant rivers in South America\nRivers of South America by discharge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69152", "revid": "50549407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69152", "title": "Moskvitch", "text": "Soviet and Russian automobile brand produced by AZLK\nMoskvitch or Moskvich () (also written as \"Moskvich\", \"Moskvi\u010d\", or \"Moskwitsch\") is a Soviet/Russian automobile brand produced by AZLK from 1946 to 1991 and by OAO Moskvitch from 1991 to 2001. Production later resumed in 2022. The current article incorporates information about both the brand and the joint-stock successor of AZLK.\nOAO Moskvitch is the name of a privatized venture given to the former factory to avoid legal issues after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Since the factory had no assembly branches outside Russia after 1991, its name is largely used today to refer to the building located in the lower eastern part of Moscow.\nThe word \"moskvich\" () itself translates as \"a native of Moscow, a Moscovite\". It was used to point out the original location of the cars manufactured there.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Soviet Union initiated a series of five-year plans in 1928 under the rule of Joseph Stalin. The planning process aimed to rapidly industrialise the economy of the Soviet Union. Plans included provisions for developing domestic automobile production. It was assumed that by improving the quality of life for the affected citizens and providing them with the opportunity to learn to drive during peacetime, they would constitute a cadre of trained drivers for the Red Army in the event of armed conflict.\nIndustrial cooperation between Russia and the American Ford Motor Company (founded in 1903) dated back to the era of Russian emperor Nicholas II (r.\u20091894\u00a0\u2013\u00a01917), with the U.S. company being an important supplier of passenger- and commercial-vehicles such as tractors and trucks. This cooperation persisted despite the events and ideology of the October Revolution of November 1917, with tens of thousands of vehicles imported during the 1910s and 1920s. The Bolshevik government of Soviet Russia deemed importing necessary due to the devastation of the state and of its economic output following the Great War of 1914 to 1918, the Central Powers' occupation of Russian territories after 1918's Operation Faustschlag, and the Russian Civil War of 1917 to 1922.\nThe construction of the Moscow Car Assembly Factory () began in 1929. In December 1930, the plant received the name of KIM (Factory named after the Young Communist International organization) , from 1930 to 1939 its official name was Moscow Car Assembly Factory named after KIM () and then from 1939 until the beginning of the Great Patriotic War of 1941 to 1945 it was called the Moscow Car Factory named after KIM ().\nIn 1930, the licensed production of Ford Model A and Ford Model AA vehicles began. These were assembled using knock-down kits. In 1933, the plant became a branch of GAZ and began to assemble GAZ-A and GAZ-AA vehicles. In 1939, KIM was no longer a subsidiary of GAZ and in the following year it started to produce its own first model, the KIM 10 inspired by the Ford Prefect. The plant's newly-formed design-department was headed by A. N. Ostrovtsev, an engineer from the NAMI, and tasked by the Economic Committee of Sovnarkom with designing a small economy car suitable for large-scale manufacture. From November 1940 to April 1941, 338 sedans were assembled. Exact production numbers for the phaeton version are unknown.\nGreat Patriotic War.\nIn May 1941 the Red Army subjected a KIM-10 to a series of tests, including in road conditions varying from the newly built Moscow-Minsk Highway to rural mud roads and off-road. Despite the official \u201cmostly satisfactory\u201d mark, the car proved to be unsuited to the requirements of the military service.\nIn October, 1941 the plant was hastily evacuated to Ural. Most of the manufacturing equipment was abandoned or destroyed during the Battle of Moscow.\nIn 1944, with a Soviet Victory imminent, plans were in place to continue production of the KIM-10-52.\nFirst generation.\nIn August 1945, the plant was renamed to the Moscow Plant of Small Cars (MZMA) ().\nFollowing the war, the Soviet Union requested vehicle tooling and designs from Germany as part of war reparations, to compensate for the loss of industrial equipment in the Battle of Moscow. Soviet planners wished for a car similar in specifications to the KIM 10, and as such rejected the KdF-Wagen and DKW F8. The Opel Kadett K38 was found to match these requirements. In August 1945, the State Defense Committee published Order No. 9905, which prescribed the start of production of the Kadett, under the Moskvitch-400 name. The implementation of this order was however deeply complicated. The Opelwerk Brandenburg plant had been deeply involved in the Nazi German war effort, producing aircraft engines for the Luftwaffe, and had been heavily damaged by Allied bombing. However, a number of Kadetts had been captured by the Red Army and were available for study, and was accomplished through joint Soviet-German ventures overseen by the Soviet Military Administration in Germany. Nonetheless, the majority of stamping dies and tooling were freshly produced in the Soviet Union due to the amount of damage to the factory. Production of the Moskvitch 400-420 began in December 1946, and continued for ten years until 1956 with the improved Moskvitch 401. In total 247,439 400 and 401 models had been built, with some being exported to countries such as Belgium, East Germany and Norway.\nSecond generation.\nMZMA replaced the 400 and 401 with new designs starting in 1956, developed within the Soviet Union. This marked the second generation of production vehicles for the enterprise. This started with the Moskvitch 402, followed on by upgraded variants in the form of the Moskvitch 403 and Moskvitch 407, which featured improvements such as independent suspension, improved interior and radio included, comparable to models such as the Hillman Minx, Fiat 1100, and Ford Consul. The Moskvitch 402 series could be considered as the first step in Soviet and Russian automotive history towards producing adapted models for various use cases. While the Moskvitch 407 provided greater driving comfort at larger expenses, other trim levels included the Moskvitch 407-424 station wagon available for the general public, Moskvitch 431 van and even the Moskvitch 410/411 attempt of creating an early off-road sedan/station wagon. The M-407 was the first Soviet automotive export to be truly successful in the West. Up to half of all Moskvitch 407 production was reserved for export, mainly to the Eastern Bloc countries, Norway, Finland, and France.\nThird generation.\nThe 1960s bought about a third generation of cars, with the more advanced Moskvitch 408, Moskvitch 412 and Moskvitch 2140. On May 18, 1967, the company produced its one millionth car. The Moskvitch 408 was the first Soviet-built car to be designed with extra safety features in mind, including crumple zones, safer steering column, soft interior parts, seat belts, a padded dashboard, and a split circuit braking system. The first series of Moskvitch 408 cars had vertical rear lights, two or four round headlights, a front bench seat, and a 4-speed manual transmission with column mounted gear lever. The second generation 408 was produced between 1969 and 1976. It had the same engine and transmission as its predecessor, but an updated body fitted with rectangular headlights and horizontal rear lights, with triangular turn signal markers mounted on tailfins. It additionally included separated bucket seats and the transmission used a floor-mounted gear lever. The 408 was popular due to its good value in countries such as the United Kingdom, Finland and Norway. The Moskvitch 412 improved on this design with various engine and styling improvements.\nIn 1966 during a visit by French President Charles de Gaulle to the Soviet Union, an agreement was signed between MZMA and Renault. Renault would assist in the reconstruction of the plant in Moscow, as well as cooperate in the establishment of a second plant in Izhevsk.\nIn 1969, both the 412 and the related 408 had their bodies redesigned. These were notable for being the first Moskvitch models to feature rectangular headlights and horizontal rear lights. Safety improvements were also incorporated over time, with the Moskvitch 412 meeting the safety standards adopted by the UNECE, and received an international safety certificate as a result of almost five months of tests in France. The 412 was the first Moskvitch vehicle to pass safety-feature tests in France, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Sweden and West Germany.\nIn October 1968, the name of the factory was changed from MZMA to Automobile Factory in Honour of the Leninist Communist Youth Union (AZLK) (), to mark the 50th anniversary of the Komsomol.\nSATRA Motors entered M-412s in the Group One Production Saloon Car Championship in 1972 and 1973, where it easily beat \"sharp-handling but underpowered\" British Hillman Imps and Austin Minis. Further improvements were also made in the form of the Moskvitch 2138 and Moskvitch 2140, based on a modified Moskvitch 412 platform.\nFourth generation.\nIn 1986, the Moskvitch-2141 Aleko became available for the first time. It was influenced by the Simca 1307 (which had also been badged as the Chrysler/Talbot Alpine, and under other names, in western markets). It was upgraded and restyled during the period of its production. It was powered by the 1.5 L UZAM used in the M-412 model and VAZ-2106 1.6 L in-line, four-cylinder engines, which had by then had been used in several LADA models. Aleko was different from any model the factory had made previously; it was larger and more luxurious, made with more comfort, safety, and aerodynamics in mind. The new car had such features as front-wheel drive, a hatchback body style, MacPherson strut front suspension and torsion-crank rear suspension. It had rack-and-pinion steering and a collapsible steering column. The 1.8-liter gasoline engine for the new car was planned, but never materialized, as was also the case with a diesel version. In the early 1990s, AZLK still remained one of the largest auto companies in the USSR. Design and experimental work were prepared to create a new model car (sedan M-2142) and an engine plant. However, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, due to a financial crisis, disruptions in the work of the company, and financial mismanagement, the engine plant was not finished and the Moskvitch company fell into decline.\nOAO Moskvitch.\nThe factory, which had been renamed to OAO Moskvitch (Moskvitch Joint-Stock Company) in the early 1990s, filed for bankruptcy in 2002 and ceased production. Unfinished bodyshells remained on the production line in various stages of completion, while furniture, computers, office supplies, and documents remained in the plant's administration building. Several attempts to restart production had been made over the next 3 years, but none were successful.\nTechnopolis Moscow was opened in 2012 on the premises of the factory.\nA portion of the abandoned plant was acquired by Avtoframos (later renamed as Renault Russia), a joint venture between the City of Moscow and French automaker Renault. In 2005, Avtoframos commenced assembly of Renault Logan sedans from imported knock-down kits. It later became a wholly owned subsidiary of Renault.\nThe bankruptcy of OAO Moskvitch was officially announced in 2006, and the company was liquidated the following year. As of 2016, over a million Moskvitch cars remained on Russian roads.\nIn 2015, Renault announced they had begun the process for obtaining the Moskvitch rights in Russia.\nJSC Automobile Plant Moskvitch.\nIn May 2022, as a result of international sanctions against Russia, Renault sold its Moscow plant to the Moscow city government which intended to nationalize the facility for renewed production of vehicles under the Moskvitch name.\nMoskvitch presented its new range of models on July 6, 2022: a sedan and 3 SUVs, Model I having both a fuel version as well as an electric version. The cars have names made up of Roman numerals, from I and II to IV. All models are rebadged cars from Chinese manufacturer JAC.\nOn October 20, the mayor of Moscow, Sergey Sobyanin, said that the production of Moskvich vehicles will resume in December at Renault's former factory in Moscow, now renamed the \"Moscow Automobile Factory Moskvich\", which has been inactive after Renault decided to leave the Russian market.\nOn December 26, 2022, the Moskvitch 3 and Moskvitch 3e went on sale in Russia, with the JAC JS4 based cars produced in association with truck manufacturer Kamaz.\nIn early 2023, Moskvitch and Yandex Taxi signed an agreement of intent to supply 3,000 Moskvitch 3, and 2,000 Moskvitch 3e taxi and car share vehicles. This was followed by the introduction of Moskvitch 3 vehicles for the car services Citydrive, BelkaCar, Taxovichkof and Citymobil. Furthermore, traffic police in Moscow Oblast and Stavropol Krai began to be equipped with Moskvitch 3e electric crossovers. Furthermore, delivery was in progress for traffic police in Moscow City, Krasnodar and Krasnoyarsk.\nIn June 2023, Hans Peter Moser was appointed General Manager of Moskvitch, replacing Dmitry Valentinovich Pronin, who would move to the position of chairman of the board of directors. Moser had previously worked for the Russian truck manufacturer Kamaz, as well as the German industrial firm Knorr-Bremse. In addition, Moskvitch further announced an expansion of their dealer network to more cities across Russia, as well as the impending release of a new Moskvitch 6 model later in 2023, as well as the Moskvitch 5.\nModels.\nCurrent models.\nThe current model lines of Moskvitch cars are:\nLicensed production.\nBelgium.\nThe Moskvitch 408 was manufactured in Belgium under the Scaldia name. In 1965, this name was changed to Scaldia-Volga. These vehicles were imported partially built from the Soviet Union, with their engines and transmission installed after arrival in Belgium. Some of these vehicles were equipped with British origin Perkins diesel engines. The Moskvitch 2141 Aleko was also assembled by Scaldia-Volga for a short period of time.\nBulgaria.\nMoskvitch 408, Moskvitch 412, Moskvitch 2140 and Moskvitch 2141 Aleko models were license produced in Lovech, Bulgaria by Balkancar under the Rila marque. Some of these vehicles were identical in configuration to those produced by Moskvitch/AZLK, while some, like their Belgian counterparts, made use of British origin Perkins diesel engines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69153", "revid": "47496819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69153", "title": "Tekoa (Biblical)", "text": ""}
{"id": "69154", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69154", "title": "Teil tree", "text": "The Oxford English Dictionary gives the etymology of teil as Latin \"tilia\" and Old French (13th to 15th centuries) \"til\". In Modern French it is \"tilleul\". The French and Latin word cognates appeared amongst the English literate classes starting in the 14th century. Most names of trees, however, kept their Germanic origins, hence linden and lime (a deformation of lind according to the OED). The linden or til tree is native to northern Europe and Asia. In various versions of Protestant Bibles the til is sometimes confused with the terebinth, which is a tree native to southern Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East. One variety of terebinth furnishes the pistachio nut and the thick bark of the tree is a source of a highly valued varnish and particular turpentine (Modern French, t\u00e9r\u00e9benthine). The English and French translations in the Roman Catholic Douay Bible from the Vulgate do not confuse the two trees.\nThe Easton's Bible Dictionary (1897) says that Teil tree is an old name for the linden tree, the tilia (also known as \"lime tree\" in the UK).\nThe name was used in the King James Version of the Bible for the Hebrew word \"elah\", a word that more modern translations translate as \"terebinth\" or \"oak\" \u2013 this seems to be the chief source of Web references to the name, but the linden tree does not grow in the Middle East in present-day where the Bible verses are describing now. The translators of this version may have used \"teil tree\" rather than \"linden\" as an intention to distinguish this Middle Eastern tree (identified as a pistachio tree by Israeli philologist Avi Gold) from the similar European linden tree.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Teil Tree \" is mentioned only in the book of Isaiah.\n \"But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a Teil Tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.\""}
{"id": "69155", "revid": "50896997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69155", "title": "GAZ", "text": "Russian manufacturer of commercial vehicles\nGAZ (\"Gorkovsky avtomobilny zavod\", ) is a Russian automotive manufacturer located in Nizhny Novgorod, formerly known as Gorky (\u0413\u043e\u0440\u044c\u043a\u0438\u0439) (1932\u20131990). It is the core subsidiary of GAZ Group Holding, which is itself part of Basic Element industrial group. JSC Russian Machines is the controlling shareholder in OAO GAZ.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn May 1929 the Soviet Union signed an agreement with the American Ford Motor Company. Under its terms, the Soviets agreed to purchase $13 million worth of automobiles and parts, while Ford agreed to give technical assistance until 1938 to construct an integrated automobile-manufacturing plant at Nizhny Novgorod. The factory was founded and production started on 1 January 1932. At the time the factory was known as Nizhny Novgorod Automobile Plant, short NAZ (\"Nizhegorodskiy avtomobilny zavod\"), full name Nizhny Novgorod Automobile Plant named after V. M. Molotov (\"Nizhegorodskiy avtomobilny zavod imeni V. M. Molotova\"), after the Soviet minister Vyacheslav Molotov. In 1932 the plant produced its first automobiles, GAZ-AA (originally known as NAZ-AA, as they were manufactured before Nizhny Novgorod became Gorky) truck and GAZ-A passenger car (manufactured after Nizhny Novgorod became Gorky). The cars were based on the Ford Model AA and Ford Model A, respectively.\nIn 1933, the factory's name changed to \"Gorkovsky avtomobilny zavod\", or GAZ, when the city was renamed after Maxim Gorky.\nThe GAZ-A was succeeded by the more modern GAZ-M1 (based largely on the four-cylinder version of the Ford Model B), produced from 1936 to 1942. The M letter stands for \"Molotovets\" ('of Molotov's fame'), it was the origin of the car's nickname, \"M'ka\" (\u044d\u043c\u043a\u0430).\nDuring the war, GAZ assembled Chevrolet G7107 and G7117 (G7107 with winch) from parts shipped from the US under Lend Lease.\nPostwar period.\nAt that time, GAZ engineers worked to develop an all-new car model to enter production once hostilities ended. Called the GAZ-M20 Pobeda (Victory), this affordably-priced sedan with streamlined, fastback styling, entered production in 1946 and was produced by GAZ until 1958. (Licensed production under the name Warszawa continued in Polish FSO until the 1970s). It was the first Soviet car with electric windshield wipers (rather than mechanical- or vacuum-operated ones).\nGAZ also made GAZ-12 ZIM, GAZ-21 and GAZ-24 Volga and the luxury cars GAZ-13 and GAZ-14 Chaika. The ZIM was the first GAZ car to feature the leaping deer hood ornament. The GAZ-21 made its public debut in 1955, with a three cars on a demonstration drive from Moscow to the Crimea, two automatic models and a manual. It was launched in 1956 and became a symbol of the whole Soviet epoch. The car offered front seats able to fold flat and came standard with cigarette lighter and a radio at a time when most American-built cars did not have a radio. A small number of Volgas with the Chaika engine, automatic transmission, and power steering were built for the KGB as the M23, 603 were built in 1962\u20131970. As the car's leading engineer Boris Dekhtyar recalled, the new version of the Volga had improved brake pads and reached a higher top speed of over 170\u00a0km/h; it was well received. The new engine produced 195 h.p. at 4,400 rpm.\nFurthermore, GAZ produced several armored military vehicles, particularly during World War II and the early Cold War. These included the BA-64, a light armored reconnaissance car based on the GAZ-64 jeep and armed with a 7.62 mm DT machine gun, with over 9,000 units built between 1942 and 1946; the BA-6, an earlier heavy armored car equipped with a 45 mm gun and based on a six-wheeled truck chassis; and the BA-20, a light armored car built on the GAZ-M1 chassis, primarily used for communications and reconnaissance in the early stages of World War II. Another notable model was the BA-3, a six-wheeled armored car with a 45 mm main gun and heavy armor, considered one of the most powerful armored cars of the interwar period. In the postwar years, GAZ developed the BTR-40, an open-topped armored personnel carrier with capacity for up to 8 troops, and the BTR-152, a larger and more robust APC introduced in 1950, both of which became widely exported throughout the Eastern Bloc.\nIn the 1960s GAZ plant renewed its truck range by launching such models as GAZ-52, GAZ-53\u0410 and GAZ-66. In the 1960s and 1970s, the plant was overhauled and updated; 1962 saw it fitted with the Soviet Union's first automated precision shop. In 1994 the plant started production of GAZelle light commercial vehicles.\nThe plant became \"AvtoGAZ\", with the integration of its various subcontractors, on 24 August 1971; the same year, it was awarded the Order of Lenin. GAZ produced its ten millionth vehicle in March 1981. In the late 1990s GAZ was deemed to be the best managed Russian automotive manufacturer.\nSibAl takeover.\nIn November 2000 GAZ was acquired in a hostile takeover by SibAl. In March 2003 GAZ declared that the production of passenger cars was no longer a priority for the company, and plans to release a new GAZ-3115 model had been abandoned.\nIn 2006, GAZ made a move on the LDV company based in Birmingham, England, and acquired the van maker from the venture capital group Sun European Partners, LLP in July of that year. GAZ said that they planned to market the MAXUS (LDV's new Panel-van that was released in January 2005) into the rest of Europe and Asia. GAZ proposed to increase production in the LDV plant in England, while also commencing production of the MAXUS in a new plant in Russia. However, due to the recession, the production at the LDV plant was halted and the plant was sold to a Chinese company called ECO Concept in 2009.\nAs then DaimlerChrysler modernized its Sterling Heights Assembly plant in 2006, the old Chrysler Sebring / Dodge Stratus assembly line and tooling was sold to GAZ and was shipped to Nizhny Novgorod in Russia. Since then GAZ car facility is used for contract manufacturing for Volkswagen and General Motors.\nAndersson leadership.\nIn 2009, Bo Andersson, former Vice-President of General Motors, was invited to become a President/CEO of GAZ Group.\nIn 2010, GAZ upgraded its model range by launching new GAZelle-BUSINESS lineup with diesel and petrol engines and LPG equipment.\nIn November 2010 the company decided to end production of the Volga Siber, its last GAZ passenger car model, and to discontinue the GAZ Volga range. In December 2010, GAZ Group signed a memorandum of understanding with Daimler on contract manufacturing of Mercedes-Benz Sprinter at GAZ plant in Nizhny Novgorod. It is expected that production will start in 2013.\nIn February 2011, General Motors and GAZ Group signed an agreement on contract assembly of the new Chevrolet Aveo car at GAZ plant in Nizhny Novgorod. As of December 2012, production was underway with an expected annual production of 30,000 vehicles.\nIn June 2011, Volkswagen Group Rus and GAZ Group signed a long-term agreement on contract manufacturing at GAZ plant with total investment of \u20ac200 million. It is planned to produce \u0160koda Yeti, the new Volkswagen Jetta and \u0160koda Octavia. The total production volume in the peak years will be about 110,000 vehicles. In November 2011, under the contract manufacturing agreement, GAZ started SKD assembly of \u0160koda Yeti; full-cycle production started in December 2012.\nRecent developments.\nIn April 2019, GAZ asked for a $468 million bailout from the Russian government, saying that US sanctions on Oleg Deripaska and his assets put the company at risk of default. On July 4, 2019, workers from GAZ protested against the US sanctions in front of the US embassy in Moscow as an opposition to measures they claim will lead to the bankruptcy of the company.\nIn November 2021, \"GAZ Group\" announced that its division, \"Silovye Agregaty\", would be ready for mass production of hydrogen engines in 2.5 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69156", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69156", "title": "GAZ Chaika", "text": "Luxury Russian limousine\nThe GAZ Chaika (), which means gull, is a luxury automobile from the Soviet Union made by GAZ (\"Gorkovsky Avtomobilny Zavod\", translated as Gorky Automobile Plant (Russian: \"\u0413\u0410\u0417\" or \"\u0413\u043e\u0301\u0440\u044c\u043a\u043e\u0432\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0430\u0432\u0442\u043e\u043c\u043e\u0431\u0438\u0301\u043b\u044c\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0437\u0430\u0432\u043e\u0301\u0434\")). The vehicle is one step down from the ZIL-111 limousine, and was produced in much larger numbers. Chaika production consisted of two generations, the GAZ-13 from 1959 to 1981 and the GAZ-14 from 1977 to 1988.\nGAZ-13 Chaika.\nThe GAZ-13 Chaika debuted in 1958 and was exhibited internationally at the Brussels motor show. It was produced from 1959 to 1981, with a total of 3,179 built. The GAZ-13 was powered by a 195-hp SAE gross 5.5 L V8 and driven through a push-button automatic transmission of a similar design to the Chrysler TorqueFlite unit. It was offered as a saloon (GAZ-13), limousine (GAZ-13A), and four-door cabriolet (GAZ-13B) with an electrohydraulic top. The cabriolet was made in 1961 and 1962 for official parades. A station wagon version was also offered as a hearse or ambulance.\nGAZ-14 Chaika.\nThe GAZ-13's styling had become antiquated by the 1970s, and it was succeeded by the more modern \"GAZ-14 Chaika\" introduced in 1977 (although production of both versions overlapped by several years). Although visually modern and fitted with the latest electronic luxury features, the GAZ-14 was in fact built around the drivetrain and undercarriage of the older model. Chaikas were mainly used by local governors, as the more luxurious ZiL were usually reserved exclusively for members of the Politburo, but in some cases it found its way up to the top, such as in Cuba where it was used by Fidel Castro.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "69157", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69157", "title": "Taxes", "text": ""}
{"id": "69158", "revid": "10755432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69158", "title": "IZh", "text": ""}
{"id": "69159", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69159", "title": "UAZ", "text": "Russian automobile company\nUAZ or Ulyanovsky Avtomobilny Zavod () is an automobile manufacturer based in Ulyanovsk, Russia, which manufactures off-road vehicles, buses and trucks. It has been part of the Sollers automotive group since 2000.\nUAZ is best known for the UAZ-469 utility vehicle, which has seen wide use as a military vehicle in the Eastern bloc and around the world. The UAZ factory started production in 1941 as part of the Soviet war effort. 51,706 UAZ vehicles were produced in 2016.\nHistory.\nWar and postwar.\nThe Ulyanovsk Automobile Plant was founded in 1941 as a direct result of the German invasion of the Soviet Union. In response to this threat, the government of Joseph Stalin ordered the evacuation of strategically crucial industrial centers to the East. By October 1941, the rapid German drive to Moscow, triggered the decision to relocate the Moscow automotive manufacturer ZIS to the Volga town of Ulyanovsk. The town, already a nascent industrial center with a sufficiently developed infrastructure and a good supply of skilled workers, would be an ideal location for the reconstituted factory. It was also safely out of reach of the German army. At that time of its founding, the plant was considered a subsidiary of ZIS. By 1942, the plant began production of artillery shells and automobiles. The first vehicle produced at the plant was the ZIS-5 three-ton truck.\nIn 1943, when the prospect of a German victory had become far less likely, it was decided the relocated plant would remain in Ulyanovsk and be separated administratively from ZIS, which would be rebuilt in Moscow from scratch. This was in line with the Soviet post-war policy regarding various relocated industrial operations. It was considered more efficient to leave the newly built plants as is, while the original plants, provided they survived the war were outfitted anew, frequently with captured German machinery. At the end of 1944, the production of the ZIS-5 was transferred to The Ural Automotive Plant in Miass, while the Ulyanovsk plant began producing the smaller GAZ-AA in 1947. UAZ developed a prototype 1.5-tonne truck in 1948, using the ubiquitous inline four of the \"Pobeda\"; this, the UAZ-300, was never built, due to a lack of production capacity. In 1954, production was expanded to include the GAZ-69, and the first batches were assembled from GAZ parts. Two years later, the factory was not just assembling GAZ-69s from parts delivered elsewhere, but manufacturing them in their entirety.\nThe connection with GAZ led UAZ to be the top Soviet manufacturer of four-wheel drive vehicles.\nGolden age.\nUAZ began its growth away from being a mere assembler in 1954, with the creation of its own design office. It was this office, responding to a request from the Red Army, that in 1955 created a forward control van project, codenamed \"Forty\", on the GAZ-69 chassis. This became the UAZ-450, the first Soviet \"cabover\" truck. The prototype appeared in 1956, and was tested in both the Caucasus Mountains and the Crimea. Its loaded weight was 2.7 tonnes, and it, like all the UAZ-450 series vehicles, was powered by a low-compression inline-four (based on the ubiquitous \"Pobeda\"'s, but with an bore, rather than ), and the \"Pobeda\"'s three-speed transmission, while the transfer case, drive axles, leaf springs, and drum brakes came from the GAZ-69.\nIn 1958, UAZ began production of the UAZ-450 series of trucks and vans. The first model was the UAZ-450A ambulance; with room for two stretchers and four-wheel drive, it was arguably the best in the world for use in remote areas. It was followed by the UAZ-450D drop-side pickup, which had an payload; the UAZ-450 van, with a payload; and the 11-seat UAZ-450V microbus. All the UAZ-450 series were capable of disconnecting the front drive axle and of reaching , achieving fuel economy of , and of towing an trailer.\nA two-wheel drive variant of the UAZ-450 was announced on 12 December 1961, with the UAZ-450's wheelbase and engine, as the UAZ-451 (van), UAZ-451D (drop-side pickup), UAZ-451A (ambulance), and UAZ-451B (minibus). The ambulance spawned a prototype UAZ-452GP with hydropneumatic suspension, to enable it to cross rough ground at high speed, following on the work done by Citro\u00ebn on the DS19. The system proved very successful on trials, but it was rejected by the Soviet Army as too complicated, and so never entered production.\nIn 1966, the UAZ-451s were updated with a inline-four (still based on the \"Pobeda\"'s), four-speed gearbox, and minor detail changes, plus a stronger chassis (and so higher payload). The models were a redesignated UAZ-451M (van, with an payload) and a UAZ-451DM (pickup, with a payload). Maximum speed was .\nIn 1966, the four-wheel drives were renumbered UAZ-452 (van), UAZ-452D (pickup), UAZ-452V (minibus), UAZ-452A and UAZ-452G (both ambulances, with different patient capacities). There was also the UAZ-452S ambulance, specially designed for Arctic conditions, with more heating capacity, double-glazed windows, and insulation; they proved able to keep a 30\u00a0\u00b0C interior temperature in \u221260\u00a0\u00b0C outside conditions. The UAZ-452 was able to cross of snow and carry an load. The UAZ-452s would go on to become a workhorse of Soviet agriculture and police, with the pickup proving a popular commercial vehicle. Export versions of the UAZ-452D were called Trekmaster when sold in Britain, but never in large numbers; there was also a version with a British-built dump body, the Tipmaster.\nThe UAZ-451S was a snow-crossing variant with front skis and rear tracks; it was never produced in quantity, nor was the UAZ-451S2, which had tracks at front and rear. The UAZ-452 also served as the basis for an articulated model, the UAZ-452P, that was never put into production.\nIn 1972 the well-regarded, but outdated, GAZ-69 was replaced by the more modern UAZ-469. This was developed from the UAZ-471 of 1958 (with four-wheel independent suspension, which proved too complex) and the UAZ-460. The UAZ-469 was a sturdy, but not-so-comfortable vehicle with the ability to overcome virtually any terrain, while also providing ease of maintenance. The UAZ-469 was not made available to the civilian market until the late 1980s, before which time it was built exclusively for police and military use, as well as heads of agricultural enterprises (kolhozes and sovkhozes). A commercially available variant was produced by the Lutzk Automotive Works.\nLater years.\nIn the 1990s, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, UAZ became a joint-stock company and soon received the Golden Globe and Golden Mercury Awards for a significant volume of sales and its contribution to the Russian economy.\nOn 5 August 1997, the new UAZ-3160 went into production and received a gold medal at an international fair in Yekaterinburg. The car was used as the basis for the later Simbir and UAZ-3163.\nIn March 2003, UAZ opened an assembly line in Vietnam. On 20 November, the company produced the last UAZ-31512 and the first UAZ Hunter.\nOn 17 August 2005, the first UAZ Patriots rolled off the assembly line. They had new suspension, transmission and steering control and became the first brand new models of UAZ since the fall of the Soviet Union. The same year the assembly line had undergone a large-scale modernization. The company signed contracts with foreign suppliers and used a significant number of foreign components in its newest vehicles.\nIn 2006, UAZ opened a new control and test section of the main assembly line and presented 4 new cars at the Moscow International Automobile Salon.\nIn the following years UAZ introduced a number of additional options and improvements in its vehicles, such as the better heating and ventilation of the passenger compartment, engine cooling system, together with Lukoil introduced a new line of motor oils for its cars, offered Iveco diesel engines and launched the UAZ Cargo, a light commercial truck based on the UAZ Patriot.\nIn 2012, the Patriot and the Pickup received a new engine, ZMZ Euro-4 with European on-board diagnostics, which became the first Russian diesel engine to meet the Euro-4 Standard published in 1998. 2013 was the banner year for UAZ, with export sales increasing by 37% since 2012. The next year the sales of the Patriot rose by 10%, and the company was visited by Premier Dmitry Medvedev.\nDuring a test drive in 2014, a UAZ Patriot crossed winter roads and frozen tundra of the Sakha Republic and reached one of the northernmost Russian ports at Tiksi, being the first car to cross the 73rd parallel north moving under its own power.\nIn January 2015, the sales increased by 3%. A UAZ Patriot support vehicle took part in the 2015 Dakar Rally, crossing the route of 9,295\u00a0km through Bolivia, Chile and Peru. The company finished the production of special series of UAZ Hunters, which were to be replaced by newer models; these Hunters were a limited edition and had airbrushed artistic paintings on them commemorating the 70th anniversary of the victory in World War II. In August the UAZ Patriot received new upgrades, including new paint colors, 18-inch wheels, interiors, frameless wiper blades, etc. The same year UAZ trucks were present at the Moscow Off-Road Show 2015, Interpolitech-2015 and ComTrans-2015 exhibitions.\nUAZ delisted from the Moscow Exchange in July 2015.\nIn May 2023, Izvestia reported that UAZ would shortly launch knock down production of vehicles in Cuba, as a result of negotiations between Russian and Cuban enterprises. Service centers for the repair and maintenance of these vehicles would also be set up in the country. The Cuban side of the delegation was reportedly the most interested in UAZ Profi delivery vehicles, as well as ambulances based on the UAZ Classic. The first batch of machine kits will go to Cuba in July\u2013August 2023. UAZ further stated that vehicle production would increase by 2,000 units, as well as increase employee wages by 12%.\nIn June 2023, UAZ announced plans to launch a limited anniversary edition of the UAZ Classic.\nModels.\nCurrent.\nCurrent lineup of UAZ vehicles:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69160", "revid": "50999312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69160", "title": "ZAZ", "text": "Ukrainian car manufacturer\nZAZ or Zaporizhzhia Automobile Building Plant ( or ) is Ukraine's main automobile manufacturer based in the south-eastern city of Zaporizhzhia. ZAZ manufactures cars, buses and trucks. ZAZ is also often known by the public as its former parent company, AvtoZAZ.\nHistory.\nThe date of the plant's foundation is considered to be 1863. In 1908, the company was founded, which later became the Melitopol Motor Plant (MeMZ). In 1923, the former Abram Koop plant was renamed \"Communar\". In 1960, the Melitopol Motor Plant began supplying its engines to the Zaporizhzhia Automobile Plant. Since 1975, MeMZ has been a part of the production association \"AvtoZAZ\". Today, it is one of the structural elements of PJSC \"ZAZ\". In 1961, the plant was renamed to \"Zaporizhzhia Automobile Plant\". The plant was engaged in the production of a single car, ZAZ-965, which went down in history as a \"humpbacked Zaporozhets\".\nOn April 15, 1998, JV \"AvtoZAZ-DEU\" (CJSC \"ZAZ\", from January 2003) was established, as a closed joint-stock company on the production base of JSC \"Avtozaz\". The authorized capital was formed at the expense of the founders' contributions: from OJSC Avtozaz - property in the amount equivalent to $150; from Daewoo Motors - $150 million. In addition to the main enterprise in Zaporizhzhia, the joint venture included the Melitopol Motor Plant (Fracturing Plant AvtoZAZ-Motor), the Black Sea Plant of Automobile Units (Fracturing Plant ChZAA), and the Pologi Plant Iskra (Fracturing Plant Iskra) as self-supporting enterprises.\nFollowing the bankruptcy of Daewoo Motors in 2001, UKRAVTO Group bought AvtoZAZ in 2002. All production facilities of AvtoZAZ (primarily MeMZ and the Black Sea Motor Plant) were transformed into ZAZ. Furthermore, the company adopted a new logo. In 2003, the Swiss company Hirsch &amp; CIE bought Daewoo's stake (50%) in the joint venture.\nPJSC \"ZAZ\" is currently Ukraine's only company with a full passenger car production cycle, including stamping, welding, painting, body equipment, and car assembly. The plant has created and continually improves a qualitatively new, modern, high-tech production, meeting the requirements of the international standard ISO 9001, version 2000.\nThe first three symbols of the VIN code of Zaporizhzhia-made cars are Y6D.\nFrom A. J. Koop to Kommunar.\nThe company that became ZAZ developed out of four businesses founded by German entrepreneur Abram J. Koop to manufacture agricultural machinery. In 1863, local Mennonite industrialist Abram J. Koop built a factory for the production of iron parts for windmills, reapers, threshers, and plows. Later, it was nationalized and restarted as the state-operated Kommunar factory, which continued to produce twenty-four types of machines.. Its first combine harvesters appeared in 1929, with 129,724 being built by 1952 (excluding the war years). In 1930, Kommunar began producing the first Soviet harvester, Kommunar, based on the American Holt Caterpillar horse-drawn harvester. The production of the harvester allowed the Soviet Union to cease importing harvesters from abroad.\nFrom harvesters to cars.\nIn 1956, the company, then known as MZMA, launched mass production of the Moskvitch 402, one of the Soviet Union's most publicly accessible cars. Following the growing trend of small cars (then accounting for between 25% and 40% of all European car sales), the minister in charge of \"Minavtroprom\" (the Soviet automotive ministry) selected the new Fiat 600 as the model to follow. The first prototype, the \"MZMA 444\", appeared in October 1957. It was powered by a flat twin-cylinder MD-65 engine, provided by the Irbit Motorcycle Plant, which was \"totally unsuited\", as it produced only and lasted only between major overhauls. As a result, a search for another engine began, and the success of the VW Type 1's boxer led to a preference for an air-cooled engine, which NAMI (the National Automobile Institute) had on the drawing board. \"Minavtroprom\", however, preferred a V4 engine, the NAMI-G, which had the additional advantage of being developed for the LuAZ-967.\nOn 28 November 1958, the new car was approved for production, with the company's name changed to ZAZ (Zaporizhzhia Automobile Building Plant) reflecting its new profile. The Zaporizhzhia factory was supplemented with the Mikoyan Diesel-Building Factory in Melitopol, which was part of the \"Soyuzdiesel\" combinat.\nOn 12 June 1959, the prototype of the first car, dubbed the ZAZ-965 Zaporozhets, was delivered. It was approved on 25 July 1960 and entered production on 25 October 1960.\nFollowing the success of the ZAZ-965, plant manager Yuri Sorochkin planned a forward control microbus on the ZAZ-965's platform (akin to the VW Type 2 being built on a modified Type 1 pan), with a payload, as the ZAZ 970. Sorochkin hoped to capture the market for compact utility vehicles, which were in perennially short supply in the Soviet Union. The project was prototyped by a team under an individual by the name of Yuri Danilov, which pioneered use of -thick steel in the Soviet Union. The steel was provided by Zaporizkyi Metallurgical Plant. The engine and transmission were straight out of a ZAZ-965, which caused liftover problems, because the V4 was mounted under the rear floor. Three prototypes were built in 1962: a van with payload and volume, a pickup with a payload, and a microbus able to seat six or seven plus a ; even four-wheel drive models (971, 971B, and 971V) were planned. None was built.\nIn 1975, the factory was consolidated in the AvtoZAZ holding, which was transformed into joint-stock company in 1990s. In 1986, ZAZ, together with Comau, installed a new production complex. The Illichivsk factory of automobile parts (IZAA) in one of the biggest freight sea ports on Black Sea in Illichivsk became part of the AutoZAZ holding. \nIn November 1987, the plant began producing a new front wheel drive car ZAZ-1102 Tavria. In 1989, it became known that new models were being developed based on the \"Tavria\" - a five-door ZAZ-1105 and a \"Kombi\" model with \"station wagon\" body. In October 1989, the plant produced its three millionth car. All these cars were powered by a water cooled, front mounted MeMZ engine and fall into micro-class.\nIn Ukraine.\nOn 1 June 1994, the factory ceased production of its ZAZ-968M model.\nWhen AvtoZAZ-Daewoo joint venture with Daewoo Motors was formed in 1998, ZAZ was assigned to the new company as a 50% share on behalf of AvtoZAZ. Daewoo Motors made large investments and established the production of its own models, while keeping and modernizing the native ZAZ brand. CKD kits of Daewoo Lanos, Daewoo Nubira and Daewoo Leganza started assembling the same year in Chornomorsk; at the same time, CKD assembly of a number of older VAZ models started.\nFollowing the bankruptcy of Daewoo Motors in 2001, UkrAVTO corporation bought out AvtoZAZ holding in 2002. All of the AvtoZAZ manufacturing facilities (most notably, MeMZ and Illichivsk assembling plant) were reincorporated into ZAZ. The company even adopted a new logo. The Daewoo part in the joint venture was bought out by Swiss venture \"Hirsch &amp; CIE\" in 2003.\nEnd of 2004 saw the beginning of full-scale production of completely domestic ZAZ Lanos (T150), now that CKD kits of Lanos were no longer supplied. In 2006, ZAZ reached an agreement with the Chinese manufacturer Chery Automobile to assemble passenger cars from kits and from 2011 started full-scale production of the Chery A13 under its own badge as ZAZ Forza. The same year production of the Chevrolet Aveo (T250) was moved from the FSO car factory to ZAZ.\nBy Decree of the President of Ukraine, CJSC \"ZAZ\" employees were rewarded with State awards of Ukraine in 2009.\nIn the first half of 2012, ZAZ manufactured 20,060 vehicles, a 30% decline from the same period in 2011. In 2012, Zaporizhzhia Automobile Building Plant started serial full-scale production of new car model, the ZAZ Vida.\nThe era of \"Zaporozhets\".\nThe history of passenger car production in Zaporizhzhia, which is identified with the history of the Ukrainian automobile industry in general, dates back to 1960, when the first Ukrainian microcar - ZAZ-965 \"Zaporozhets\" came off the assembly line of the Kommunar plant (currently PJSC ZAZ).\nProduction of serial machines began on 1 October 1960, and by the end of the year was released about one and a half thousand \"Zaporozhtsiv\". ZAZ-965 \"Zaporozhets\" quickly became popular. It cost relatively little and was economical. Operating fuel consumption was 7.3 liters per 100 km against 10 liters in \"Moskvich-402\" or \"Moskvich-407\". The full-fledged 4-seater was compact and maneuverable: its length was 3.33 m, and the radius of rotation behind the track of the outer wheel - 5 m. Independent suspension of all wheels, smooth, without a tunnel for the \"cardan\", bottom, 20-centimeter ground clearance the rear axle provided good passability. There were, of course, shortcomings. For example, the noise, which often annoyed the rear passengers. The doors opened in the old-fashioned way, against the move, and could, if accidentally opened on the move, become a sail that could easily take the car off the road. Unsuccessful, from the point of view of fire safety, was the location of the gas tank in front of the body.\nMany motorists were not satisfied with the insufficient engine power, and therefore - the weak dynamics of the \"Zaporozhets\". Therefore, in October 1962 the production of the modernized ZAZ-965A began. Engine displacement increased from 746 to 887\u00a0cm3, respectively, power increased from 22 to 27\u00a0hp. The maximum speed has also increased - from 80 to 90\u00a0km / h. This machine was produced until 1969. When the 130th anniversary of the plant was celebrated in September 1993, the festive motorcade was opened by one of the first \"Zaporozhians\", decorated with a banner with the number 332 106. This is the number of cars produced during the years of production - from 1960 to 1969. In 1961, ZAZ designers began to develop the ZAZ-966 car with a new body. However, its production was delayed due to the allied leadership, perhaps for economic reasons - to put on the assembly line a new model just a year after the release of the previous one was considered inappropriate. Therefore, ZAZ-966 was released only six years later. Its engine was also located at the rear. Initially, it was a 30-horsepower MeMZ-966A, which was installed on the latest modifications of the \"humpback\" predecessor. Then came the 40-horsepower MeMZ-966V, which allowed the car to accelerate to 120\u00a0km / h on a straight road. However, in practice, not everyone could develop such a speed, and fines for speeding \"Zaporozhets\" were so rare that in itself such an event was regarded as a topic worthy of a joke.\nSince 1969, on the basis of the model ZAZ-966 began to produce ZAZ-968 with a new engine and some minor changes. Since 1975 in the same body - ZAZ-968A. It featured a new brake system, improved front seats and an ignition lock with anti-theft device. Before the ZAZ-968A in 1972 there was a slightly modernized model ZAZ-968 - it did not have a decorative panel on the front of the body, there was a new unit. A more serious reworking awaited the model in 1979\u20131980.\nZAZ-968M became not only the last domestic car with a rear engine, but also the most durable, because it was produced until 1994. But he received a new line of engines: more powerful MeMZ-968 GE (45\u00a0hp) and MeMZ-968 BE (50\u00a0hp).\nIn total (from 1960 to 1994) 3,422,444 Zaporozhets cars in Zaporizhzhia and air-cooled engines in Melitopol were manufactured.\nThe era of Tavria.\nThe development of the ZAZ-1102 \u201cTavria\u201d spanned multiple decades and included several conceptual prototypes prior to its production launch in 1988. Early prototypes were developed by design teams at the ZAZ plant in Zaporizhzhia (then Kommunar), some of which remained conceptual, while others progressed to testing phases.\nThe first known front-wheel drive concept bearing the \u201cTavria\u201d name was produced in 1970 under the direction of chief designer Steshenko. Testing of this model identified significant design shortcomings that prevented further development.\nIn 1973, two new experimental variants\u2014a three-door hatchback and a four-door sedan\u2014were produced, though neither reached mass production. Subsequent iterations included a 1974 front-wheel-drive prototype with a sedan body and a 1976 all-wheel-drive version, which adopted more modern styling features for the period.\nFollowing continued refinement, the final version of the ZAZ-1102 \u201cTavria\u201d entered serial production in 1988. In 1991, the model received a minor facelift that modified the front fenders and some interior elements. To reduce production costs, manufacturers attempted to replace imported Czech lighting components with domestic alternatives.\nEconomic difficulties in the mid-1990s\u2014marked by declining consumer purchasing power and production quality challenges\u2014impacted the Tavria\u2019s viability. In 1995, ZAZ introduced a derivative model, the five-door station wagon ZAZ-1105 \u201cDana\u201d, which remained in production until 1997.\nTechnical updates during the 1990s included a revised electric fan circuit and modifications to the half-shaft design beginning in 1994. However, increased use of domestic Ukrainian components after 1992 reportedly led to a decline in overall build quality.\nIn 1998, following the establishment of the AvtoZAZ-Daewoo joint venture, the Tavria underwent structural updates and received imported components from Korea. During this transitional phase, production continued with interim versions whose specifications may have differed from official documentation.\nThe ZAZ-1103 \u201cSlavuta\u201d, a five-door liftback based on the Tavria platform, was introduced in late 1995 and entered full production in 1999.\n\"AvtoZAZ-Daewoo\".\nIn 1998, a Ukrainian-Korean joint venture with foreign investment from Daewoo was registered in the form of the closed joint-stock company AvtoZAZ-Daewoo. Production of a qualitatively new ZAZ-110206 \"Tavria-Nova\" car has been introduced. Production preparation works have been completed and large-scale assembly of European-level cars Daewoo Lanos, Daewoo Nubira, Daewoo Leganza has been started at the Black Sea Automobile Assembly Plant.\nThanks to the financial support of Daewoo, new technologies, new quality control systems, engineering developments, in addition to monetary investment, as well as the continued cooperation of the state government, a new era began for Zaporizhzhya plant. In 1999, UkrAvto Corporation was delegated the functions of managing the state-owned stake in the plant. In 2002, UkrAvto Corporation became the owner of the state block of shares of Zaporizhzhya Automobile Plant (more than 82% of shares of OJSC AvtoZAZ, which in turn owns 50% of shares of CJSC ZAZ) and received the right to manage the enterprise and, in particular, its production programs. In January 2003, the company was renamed the Zaporizhzhia Automobile Plant.\nDuring 1998\u20132003, the company underwent profound structural changes according to new, world standards. organized quality control of products that meet international standards; production of Daewoo cars began at the car assembly plant in the Black Sea; after modernization at the main plant in Zaporozhye, the production of a qualitatively new Tavria was resumed; administrative and personnel policy changed. This period was also marked by significant changes in the strategy opened up new prospects and opportunities for cooperation with the greats of the global automotive business - DaimlerChrysler, General Motors, Opel, Renault and others, which allowed to implement investment projects to organize full-scale production of leading global brands.\nPJSC \"ZAZ\".\nIn 2003, the plant changed its form of ownership and became a Closed Joint-Stock Company with Foreign Investment \"Zaporizhzhya Automobile Plant\".\nAlso in 2003, a general distribution agreement was concluded between UkrAvto Corporation (represented by one of its divisions - UkrAvtoZAZ-Service), Zaporizhzhia Automobile Plant and the German company Adam Opel GmbH (European representative office of GMC). Opel acted as a production partner of ZAZ and UkrAvto, providing investments for the development of large- and small-scale production of cars of its model range.\nIn the same year, the Swiss financial and investment company Hirsch &amp; Cie acquired a 50% stake in ZAZ owned by Daewoo Motors.\nIn 2004, serial production of the Opel Astra Classic began.\nIn 2005, full-scale production of the Daewoo Lanos began at the Zaporizhzhia Automobile Plant.\nUkrAvto Corporation became the main shareholder of the flagship of the Polish automotive industry - the FSO plant. The Chevrolet Lanos car, manufactured by the Zaporizhzhia Automobile Plant, was exported to Russia.\nIn 2005, ZAZ designers developed the ZAZ Lanos Pick-up.\nIn 2005, the plant produced 148,163 cars, in 2006 - 193,113.\nIn 2006, the production of I-VAN buses was started on the basis of the platform of the well-known Indian company TATA.\nIn 2010, the production of ZAZ A10 buses with a load-bearing body and units of leading European companies began.\n10 September 2010 - ZAZ Lanos Electro van and ZAZ-A10C31 and ZAZ-A10L50 buses were presented at the 2010 Auto Show in Kyiv.\nIn 2011, production of a new model - ZAZ Forza - began.\nIn 2011, PJSC \"ZAZ\" produced 60,862 cars, which is 33.9% more than in 2010 (45,465), with more than 50% of the cars produced for export.\nZAZ and its reputation.\nZAZ's products were never held in high esteem by Soviet citizens. In fact, ZAZ's original mission was to create a \"people's car\", almost like Volkswagen's initial mission. In May 2009, ZAZ won the international tender for the production of vehicles for veterans and disabled people of Azerbaijan.\nModels.\nComplete knock down assembly.\nRebadged production performed at the Zaporizhzhia Automobile Building Plant (ZAZ):\nPerformed at the Illichivsk Automobile Parts Plant (IZAA):\nPerformed at the Zaporizhzhia Automobile Building Plant (ZAZ):\nCurrent production performed at the Melitopol Motor Plant (MeMZ):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69161", "revid": "50221534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69161", "title": "T\u1ebft", "text": "Vietnamese New Year celebration\nT\u1ebft (, ch\u1eef H\u00e1n: &lt;templatestyles src=\"vi-nom/fonts.css\" /&gt;\u7bc0), short for (ch\u1eef H\u00e1n: &lt;templatestyles src=\"vi-nom/fonts.css\" /&gt;\u7bc0\u5143\u65e6; lit.\u2009'Festival of the first day'), is the most important celebration in Vietnamese culture. T\u1ebft celebrates the arrival of spring based on the Vietnamese calendar and usually falls on January or February in the Gregorian calendar.\n is not to be confused with T\u1ebft Trung Thu, which is also known as Children's Festival in Vietnam. \"\" itself only means festival but it would generally refer to the Lunar New Year in Vietnamese, as it is often seen as the most important festival amongst the Vietnamese and the Vietnamese diaspora, with regarded as the second-most important.\nVietnamese people celebrate annually, which is based on a lunisolar calendar (calculating both the motions of Earth around the Sun and of the Moon around Earth). T\u1ebft is generally celebrated on the same day as Chinese New Year (also called Spring Festival), with the one-hour time difference between Vietnam and China resulting in the new moon occurring on different days. Rarely, the dates of Vietnamese and Chinese Lunar New Year can differ, such as in 1985, when Vietnam celebrated Lunar New Year one month before China. It takes place from the first day of the first month of the Vietnamese lunar calendar (around late January or early February) until at least the third day.\nT\u1ebft is also an occasion for pilgrims and family reunions. They set aside the trouble of the past year and hope for a better and happier upcoming year. This festival can also be referred to as in vernacular Vietnamese, (from \"l\u1ec5 h\u1ed9i\", \"festival\", and \"\", \"spring\").\nHistory.\nThe Lunar Year holiday was originally brought to Vietnam by the Chinese, who had formally incorporated Vietnam into their Han Dynasty empire in 111 BCE and mostly had ruled it for over 1000 years until the collapse of the Tang Dynasty in the 10th century. That historic period of Chinese rule had significantly influenced Vietnamese culture, language, and administration, as Chinese governors had attempted for complete Sinicization. Vietnamese Lunar New Year today still retains a degree of the original Chinese customs such as giving of lucky money in red envelopes and use of the lunar calendar, but has also over time, evolved its own separate and unique traditions that reflect Vietnam's distinct culture and identity, which includes the Vietnamese zodiac where the Vietnamese do not use the Ox, Rabbit, and Sheep in the Chinese zodiac but instead replace them with the Buffalo, Cat, and Goat, respectively, as well as traditional Vietnamese dishes.\nControversies.\nMost information sources state that T\u1ebft originated from the period of Chinese domination. However according to the official online newspaper of the Vietnamese government, some historical materials suggest otherwise. T\u1ebft's origins have been a subject of scholarly research for many generations.\nAccording to researcher Toan Anh, T\u1ebft Nguy\u00ean \u0110\u00e1n is considered the first festival of the new year, beginning at midnight with the ceremony. The ceremony usually takes place between the hour of the Pig on the 30th day or, if it is a short month, on the 29th day of the 12th lunar month, and the hour of the Rat on the 1st day of the first lunar month.\nResearcher Phan C\u1ea9m Th\u01b0\u1ee3ng, in his book \"Customs of Human Life\", explains that the Vietnamese use the agricultural calendar or lunar calendar, which is based on the moon's rotation around the earth but also accounts for the 24 solar terms of the earth with the sun, including the four key points of the spring equinox, autumnal equinox, winter solstice, and summer solstice. T\u1ebft begins on the first day of lunar January, marking the start of a new year and a new farming cycle.\nHistorian Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n Gi\u00e1p asserts that there are many ways to divide time into months and years. From the beginning, each ethnic group had its own way of dividing months and years. According to Tr\u1ea7n's research, T\u1ebft Nguy\u00ean \u0110\u00e1n in Vietnam dates back to the first century AD. The origin and meaning of T\u1ebft Nguy\u00ean \u0110\u00e1n have been prevalent since then.\nAccording to the legend of B\u00e1nh ch\u01b0ng B\u00e1nh gi\u1ea7y, the Vietnamese have celebrated T\u1ebft since before the time of the H\u00f9ng kings. The legend of Lang Lieu and B\u00e1nh ch\u01b0ng also suggests that T\u1ebft existed over a thousand years before the period of Chinese domination.\nName.\nThe name is a shortening of , literally written as (meaning 'festivals'; only used in festival names) and which means the first day of the year. Both terms come from Sino-Vietnamese, respectively, () and .\nThe word for festival is usually , another Sino-Vietnamese term .\nCustoms.\nIn Vietnamese T\u1ebft culture, there are many traditional customs and preparations leading up to the Lunar New Year celebration. The holiday is typically divided into two parts: the two weeks before the first day of the new year, which are dedicated to preparations, and the first three days of the new year, which focus on customs for welcoming and celebrating the new year.\nDuring T\u1ebft, people usually return home to be with their families. From the 23rd day of the last lunar month to New Year\u2019s Eve, many families begin the tradition of visiting their ancestral homeland to worship at the family altar or pay respects at their ancestors\u2019 graves. They also clean and tend to the gravesites as a gesture of respect and remembrance. Although T\u1ebft is a national holiday celebrated across Vietnam, each region and religion observes it with its own unique customs and traditions.\nMany Vietnamese prepare for T\u1ebft by cooking special holiday food and doing house cleaning. These foods include , , , , , dried young bamboo soup (), , and x\u00f4i (sticky rice). Many customs and traditions are practiced during T\u1ebft, such as visiting a person's house on the first day of the new year (), ancestor veneration, exchanging New Year's greetings, giving lucky money to children and elderly people, opening a shop, visiting relatives, friends, and neighbors.\nT\u1ebft can be divided into three time periods, t\u1ea5t ni\u00ean (celebrations before the end of the year), giao th\u1eeba (New Year's Eve), and n\u0103m m\u1edbi (the New Year), representing the preparation before T\u1ebft, the eve of T\u1ebft, and the days of and following T\u1ebft, respectively. \nNew Year in T\u1ebft.\nThe first day of T\u1ebft is reserved for the nuclear family. Children receive red envelopes containing money from their elders. This tradition is called \"m\u1eebng tu\u1ed5i\" (happy age) in the North region and l\u00ec x\u00ec in the South region. Usually, children wear their new clothes and give their elders the traditional T\u1ebft greetings before receiving money. Wearing red clothing during T\u1ebft is common as it is associated with good luck. Since the Vietnamese believe that the first visitor who a family receives in the year determines their fortune for the entire year, people never enter any house on the first day without being invited first. The verb of being the first person to enter a house at T\u1ebft is x\u00f4ng \u0111\u1ea5t, x\u00f4ng nh\u00e0, or \u0111\u1ea1p \u0111\u1ea5t, which is one of the most important customs during T\u1ebft. According to Vietnamese tradition, if good things come to a family on the first day of the lunar New Year, the entire following year will also be full of blessings. Usually, a person of good temper, morality, and success will be a lucky sign for the host family and be first invited into his house. However, just to be safe, the owner of the house will leave the house a few minutes before midnight and come back just as the clock strikes midnight to prevent anyone else from entering the house first who might potentially bring any unfortunate events in the new year to the household. This is a common practice done by many families. \nSweeping during T\u1ebft is taboo, it is xui or r\u1ee7i (unlucky), since it symbolizes sweeping the luck away; that is why they clean before the new year. It is also taboo for anyone who experienced a recent loss of a family member to visit anyone else during T\u1ebft. \nIt is important to retain harmony within the household during the first three days of T\u1ebft. Engaging in conflict, arguments, or exhibiting any feelings of anger and hatred may bring upon bad luck for the upcoming year. \nDuring subsequent days, people visit relatives and friends. Traditionally but not strictly, the second day of T\u1ebft is usually reserved for friends, while the third day is for teachers, who command respect in Vietnam. Students in Vietnam are usually given a one-week long break from school to celebrate T\u1ebft. Local Buddhist temples are popular spots because people like to give donations and get their fortunes told during T\u1ebft. Children are free to spend their new money on toys or on gambling games such as \"b\u1ea7u cua c\u00e1 c\u1ecdp\", which can be found in the streets. Prosperous families can pay for dragon dancers to perform at their house. Also, public performances are given for everyone to watch.\nTraditional celebrations.\nThese celebrations can last from a day up to the entire week, and the New Year is filled with people in the streets trying to make as much noise as possible using firecrackers, drums, bells, gongs, and anything they can think of to ward off evil spirits. This parade will also include different masks and dancers hidden under the guise of what is known as the \"m\u00faa l\u00e2n \"or lion dancing. The \"l\u00e2n\" is an animal between a lion and a dragon and is the symbol of strength in the Vietnamese culture that is used to scare away evil spirits. After the parade, families, and friends come together to have a feast of traditional Vietnamese dishes and share the happiness and joy of the New Year with one another. This is also the time when the elders will hand out red envelopes with money to the children for good luck in exchange for T\u1ebft greetings.\nIt is also a tradition to pay off debts before the Vietnamese New Year for some Vietnamese families.\nDecorations.\nTraditionally, each family displays \"c\u00e2y n\u00eau\", an artificial New Year tree consisting of a bamboo pole long. The top end is usually decorated with many objects, depending on the locality, including good luck charms, origami fish, cactus branches, and more. \nAt T\u1ebft, every house is usually decorated by Yellow Apricot blossoms (\"hoa mai\") in the central and southern parts of Vietnam, peach blossoms (\"hoa \u0111\u00e0o\") in the northern part of Vietnam, or St. John's wort (\"hoa ban\") in the mountain areas. In the north, some people (especially the elite in the past) also decorate their house with plum blossoms (also called \"hoa m\u01a1\" in Vietnamese but referring to a totally different species from mickey-mouse blossoms). In the north or central, the kumquat tree is a popular decoration for the living room during T\u1ebft. Its many fruits symbolize fertility and fruitfulness which the family hopes in the coming year. \nVietnamese people also decorate their homes with H\u00f2n non b\u1ed9 and flowers such as chrysanthemums (\"hoa c\u00fac\"), marigolds (\"v\u1ea1n th\u1ecd\") symbolizing longevity, cockscombs (\"m\u00e0o g\u00e0\") in southern Vietnam, and paperwhites (\"th\u1ee7y ti\u00ean\") and orchids (\"hoa lan\") in northern Vietnam. In the past, there was a tradition where people tried to make their paperwhites bloom on the day of the observance. \nThey also hung up \u0110\u00f4ng H\u1ed3 paintings and th\u01b0 ph\u00e1p calligraphy pictures.\nGreetings.\nThe traditional greetings are \"\"Ch\u00fac m\u1eebng n\u0103m m\u1edbi\" (\u795d\ud849\udf20\ud848\udda5\u3d4b, happy new year) and \"Cung ch\u00fac t\u00e2n xu\u00e2n\"\", (\u606d\u795d\u65b0\u6625, gracious wishes of the new spring). People also wish each other prosperity and luck. Common wishes for T\u1ebft include the following:\nFood.\nIn the Vietnamese language, to celebrate T\u1ebft is to \"\u0103n T\u1ebft\", literally meaning \"eat T\u1ebft\", showing the importance of food in its celebration. Some of the food is also eaten year-round, while other dishes are only eaten during T\u1ebft. Also, some of the food is vegetarian since it is believed to be good luck to eat vegetarian on T\u1ebft. Some traditional foods on T\u1ebft include the following:\nForms of entertainment.\nPeople enjoy traditional games during T\u1ebft, including \"b\u1ea7u cua c\u00e1 c\u1ecdp\", \"c\u1edd t\u01b0\u1edbng\", \"n\u00e9m c\u00f2n\", \"ch\u1ecdi tr\u00e2u\", and \"\u0111\u00e1 g\u00e0\". They also participate in some competitions presenting their knowledge, strength, and aestheticism, such as the bird competition and \"ng\u00e2m th\u01a1\" competition.\nFireworks displays have also become a traditional part of a T\u1ebft celebration in Vietnam. During New Year's Eve, fireworks displays at major cities, such as Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, and Da Nang, are broadcast through multiple national and local TV channels, accompanied by New Year wishes of the incumbent president. In 2017 only, fireworks displays were prohibited due to political and financial reasons. In 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, most provinces and cities canceled the fireworks displays; instead, the displays were only held in Hanoi and several provinces with public gatherings prohibited. In 2022, due to the aforementioned pandemic, all provinces canceled the firework displays due to financial reasons. In Australia, Canada, and the United States, there are fireworks displays at many of its festivals, although in 2021 they were either held virtually or canceled. In the United States, a popular show that many individuals engage in is \"Paris by Night\".\n\"G\u1eb7p nhau cu\u1ed1i n\u0103m\" (\"Year-end reunion\") is a satirical theatrical comedy show broadcast on VTV on New Year's Eve.\nDates in the Vietnamese calendar.\nFrom 2020 to 2043.\nMusic.\nIn the weeks leading up to T\u1ebft, celebratory songs are played throughout Vietnam. One song, Ng\u00e0y T\u1ebft Qu\u00ea Em (T\u1ebft in My Homeland) was released by Linh Trang and Xuan Mai in 2006. It was on the album Xu\u00e2n Mai v\u00e0 Thi\u1ebfu Nhi Cali 2 H\u1ed9i ch\u1ee3 Cali. The song can be heard playing in many public places across the country.\nThe song summarizes some of the main T\u1ebft traditions. During T\u1ebft, it is traditional for Vietnamese people to travel to their hometowns, hence the lyrics \"People traveling here and there.\" \nTypically, there are large fireworks displays in most major cities. Prior to 1995, it was customary to use firecrackers at individual homes; however, the government banned the production and use of these fireworks due to fatal accidents. In December 2020 a regulation was passed that allows \"anyone aged 18 and older with legal capacity\" to purchase sparklers for special occasions. The regulations went into effect on January 11, 2021.\nWhile the song is not inherently religious, it does reference pagodas, a tiered tower used by Buddhists and Taoists for worship. Many Buddhist altars are set up in the weeks leading up to Tet. \nThe line \"If you're a farmer, you'll gain more\" refers to beliefs held by many Vietnamese people about the effects the new year will bring on agriculture. Tet symbolizes the start of the spring season. Farmers traditionally use this time as an opportunity to remember the gods of harvest. The next line, \"If you're dealers, you'll earn more\" refers to the amount of work retailers do in order to be prepared for the surge of shopping in preparation for the holiday.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69162", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69162", "title": "Tarshish", "text": "Biblical term, generally a place-name\nTarshish (; ; ) occurs in the Hebrew Bible with several uncertain meanings, most frequently as a place (probably a large city or region) far across the sea from Phoenicia (now Lebanon) and the Land of Israel. Tarshish was said to have exported vast quantities of important metals to Phoenicia and Israel. The same place name occurs in the Akkadian inscriptions of the Neo-Assyrian emperor Esarhaddon (died 669\u00a0BC) and also on the Phoenician inscription of the Nora Stone (around 800 BCE) in Sardinia; its precise location was never commonly known, and was eventually lost in antiquity. Legends grew up around it over time, so its identity has been the subject of scholarly research and commentary for more than two thousand years.\nIts importance stems in part from the fact that Hebrew biblical passages tend to understand Tarshish as a source of King Solomon's tremendous wealth in metals \u2013 especially silver, but also gold, tin, and iron according to Ezekiel 27. The metals were reportedly obtained in partnership with the Phoenician king Hiram I of Tyre and fleets of ships from Tarshish, according to Isaiah 23.\nTarshish is also the name of a modern village in the Mount Lebanon Governorate, Lebanon, and Tharsis, Huelva is a village in Andalusia, Spain.\nAccording to the Jewish Encyclopedia \"Da'at\", the biblical phrase \"ships of Tarshish\" refers not to ships from a particular location, but to a class of ships: large vessels for long-distance trade.\nHebrew Bible.\n\"Tarshish\" occurs 25\u00a0times in the Masoretic Text of the Hebrew Bible. Although, as stated in the previous section, the phrase \"ships of Tarshish\" may refer only to huge ships fit for ocean journeys and not to a location or nation, possible references to Tarshish as a location or nation include:\nIdentifications and interpretations.\nTarshish is placed on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea by several biblical passages, and more precisely: west of Israel. It is described as a source of various metals: \"beaten silver is brought from Tarshish\" (Jeremiah 10:9), and the Phoenicians of Tyre brought from there silver, iron, tin and lead (Ezekiel 27:12).\nThe context in Isaiah\u00a023:6 and 66:19 seems to indicate that it is an island, and from Israel it could be reached by ship, as attempted by Jonah (Jonah\u00a01:3) and performed by Solomon's fleet (2\u00a0Chronicles\u00a09:21). Some modern scholars identify Tarshish with Tartessos, a port in southern Spain, described by classical authors as a source of metals for the Phoenicians, while Josephus' identification of Tarshish with the city of Tarsus in Cilicia (south-central Turkey) is even more widely accepted. However, a clear identification is not possible, since a whole array of Mediterranean sites with similar names are connected to the mining of various metals.\nMediterranean Sea.\nAccording to Rashi, a medieval rabbi and commentator of the Bible, quoting Tractate Hullin 9lb, 'tarshish' means the Mediterranean Sea.\nCarthage.\nThe Targum of Jonathan along with several passages of the Septuagint and the Vulgate render Tarshish as Carthage. The Jewish-Portuguese scholar, politician, statesman and financier Isaac Abarbanel (1437\u20131508\u00a0AD) described Tarshish as \"the city known in earlier times as Carthage and today called Tunis.\"\nSardinia.\nThompson and Skaggs argue that the Akkadian inscriptions of Esarhaddon (AsBbE) indicate that Tarshish was an island (not a coastland) far to the west of the Levant. American scholars William F. Albright (1891\u20131971) and Frank Moore Cross (1921\u20132012) suggested Tarshish was Sardinia, because of the discovery of the Nora Stone, whose Phoenician inscription mentions Tarshish. Cross read the inscription to understand that it was referring to Tarshish as Sardinia. \nIn 2003, Christine Marie Thompson identified the Cisjordan Corpus, a concentration of hacksilver hoards in Israel and Palestine (Cisjordan). This Corpus dates between 1200 and 586\u00a0BC, and the hoards in it are all silver-dominant. The largest hoard was found at Eshtemo'a, present-day as-Samu, and contained 26\u00a0kg of silver. Within it, and specifically in the geographical region that was part of Phoenicia, is a concentration of hoards dated between 1200 and 800\u00a0BC. There is no other known such concentration of silver hoards in the contemporary Mediterranean, and its date-range overlaps with the reigns of King Solomon (990\u2013931\u00a0BC) and Hiram of Tyre (980\u2013947\u00a0BC).\nHacksilver objects in these Phoenician hoards have lead isotope ratios that match ores in the silver-producing regions of Sardinia and Spain, only one of which is a large island rich in silver. Contrary to translations that have been rendering Assyrian \"tar-si-si\" as 'Tarsus' up to the present time, Thompson argues that the Assyrian tablets inscribed in Akkadian indicate \"tar-si-si\" (Tarshish) was a large island in the western Mediterranean, and that the poetic construction of Psalm\u00a072:10 also shows that it was a large island to the very distant west of Phoenicia. The island of Sardinia was always known as a hub of the metals trade in antiquity, and was also called by the ancient Greeks as \"Argyr\u00f3phleps n\u00e9sos\" \"island of the silver veins\".\nThe same evidence from hacksilver is said to fit with what the ancient Greek and Roman authors recorded about the Phoenicians exploiting many sources of silver in the western Mediterranean to feed developing economies back in Israel and Phoenicia soon after the fall of Troy and other palace centers in the eastern Mediterranean around 1200\u00a0BC. Classical sources starting with Homer (8th\u00a0century\u00a0BC), and the Greek historians Herodotus (484\u2013425\u00a0BC) and Diodorus Siculus (d.\u00a030\u00a0BC) said the Phoenicians were exploiting the metals of the west for these purposes before they set up the permanent colonies in the metal-rich regions of the Mediterranean and Atlantic.\nEither Sardinia or Spain.\nThe editors of the \"New Oxford Annotated Bible\", first published in 1962, suggest that Tarshish is either Sardinia or Tartessos.\nSpain.\nRufus Festus Avienus the Latin writer of the 4th century AD, identified Tarshish as C\u00e1diz. This is the theory espoused by Father Mapple in Chapter 9 of \"Moby Dick\".\nSome biblical commentators as early as 1646 (Samuel Bochart) read it as Tartessos in ancient Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula), near Huelva and Sevilla today. Bochart, the 17th\u00a0century French Protestant pastor, suggested in his \"Phaleg\" (1646) that Tarshish was the city of Tartessos in southern Spain. He was followed by others, including Hertz (1936).\nPhoenician coast.\nSir Peter le Page Renouf (1822\u20131897) thought that \"Tarshish\" meant a coast, and, as the word occurs frequently in connection with Tyre, the Phoenician coast is to be understood.\nTyrsenians or Etruscans.\nT. K. Cheyne (1841\u20131915) thought that \"Tarshish\" of and \"Tiras\" of are really two names of one nation derived from two different sources, and might indicate the Tyrsenians or Etruscans.\nBritain.\nSome 19th-century commentators believed that Tarshish was Britain, including Alfred John Dunkin who said \"Tarshish demonstrated to be Britain\" (1844), George Smith (1850), James Wallis and David King's \"The British Millennial Harbinger\" (1861), John Algernon Clarke (1862), and Jonathan Perkins Weethee of Ohio (1887). This idea stems from the fact that Tarshish is recorded to have been a trader in tin, silver, gold, and lead, all of which were mined in Cornwall. This is still reputed to be the \"Merchants of Tarshish\" today by some Christian sects.\nSoutheast Africa.\nAugustus Henry Keane (1833\u20131912) believed that Tarshish was Sofala, and that the biblical land of Havilah was centered on the nearby Great Zimbabwe.\nSouthern India and Sri Lanka.\nBochart, apart from Spain (see there), also suggested eastern localities for the ports of Ophir and Tarshish during King Solomon's reign, specifically the Tamilakkam continent (present day South India and Northern Ceylon) where the Dravidians were well known for their gold, pearls, ivory and peacock trade. He fixed on \"Tarshish\" being the site of Kudiramalai, a possible corruption of Thiruketheeswaram.\nCilicia.\nTarshish may refer to Tarsus in Cilicia, where Saul, later Paul, hailed from (Acts 9:11, 21:39, 22:3).\nTarxien.\nThere are several indications that Tarshish could have been located at Malta, where still today a local council is called Tarxien. The pronunciation in the Semitic language of the Maltese people is rather similar to the Hebrew pronunciation of Tarshish (namely ). All megalithic temples from the Neolithic epoch of Malta are assigned to the Tarxien phase of the island. The inhabitants claim that Tarxien was founded by the Carthaginians.\nControversy.\nThe existence of Tarshish in the western Mediterranean, along with any Phoenician presence in the western Mediterranean before c. 800\u00a0BC, has been questioned by some scholars in modern times, because there is no direct evidence. Instead, the lack of evidence for wealth in Israel and Phoenicia during the reigns of Solomon and Hiram, respectively, prompted a few scholars to opine that the archaeological period in Mediterranean prehistory between 1200 and 800\u00a0BC was a 'Dark Age'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69163", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69163", "title": "Segre (river)", "text": "River in France, Andorra and Spain\nThe Segre ( ; ) is a river tributary to the Ebro (\"Ebre\" in Catalan) with a basin comprising territories across three states: France, Andorra, and Spain.\nThe river Segre, known to Romans and Greeks as Sicoris, and to the Arabs of Al-Andalus as Nahr az-Zayt\u016bn (\u0646\u0647\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0632\u064a\u062a\u0648\u0646, river of Olives) has its sources on the north face of the Pic del Segre or \"Puigmal de Segre\" (\"Segre's Peak\") in the French department Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales (historically the \"comarca\" of Alta Cerdanya), in the Catalan Pyrenees. It follows a western direction all along the Cerdanya (\"Cerdagne\") Valley, and crosses the town Saillagouse, the Spanish exclave Ll\u00edvia, and Bourg-Madame.\nIt enters Spain at Puigcerd\u00e0 and continues west until La Seu d'Urgell, where it meets the Valira River coming from Andorra. From this point, it adopts a south-western course across the pre-Pyrenees (with several dams along its gorges) and the western plains of Catalonia. It passes through Balaguer, Lleida, and flows into the Ebro at Mequinenza.\nAmong its tributaries: Valira (from Andorra), Noguera Pallaresa, Noguera Ribagorzana, and Cinca.\nIn Lleida.\nThe river Segre is an essential feature of the Lleida's geography, dividing the city in two. During the city's history, several floods have occurred, the last in the late 1970s. There is also a dam on the river, near the natural park La Mitjana. Another park, Els Camps Elisis, is adjacent to the Segre.\nMany bridges span the river in the city of Lleida, namely: Pont Vell, Pont del Ferrocarril, Pont Nou, Pont de la Universitat, Pont de Pardinyes, Pont de Pr\u00edncep de Viana, Passarel\u00b7la de Rufea, Passarel\u00b7la dels Maristes, Passarel\u00b7la d'Onze de Setembre, Passarel\u00b7la de Pardinyes, and Passarel\u00b7la del Liceu Escolar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69164", "revid": "670045592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69164", "title": "EPOC (computing)", "text": ""}
{"id": "69165", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69165", "title": "Tammuz (mythology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "69166", "revid": "43150144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69166", "title": "Symbian Software", "text": "Software development company\nSymbian Ltd. was a software development and licensing consortium company, known for the Symbian operating system (OS), for smartphones and some related devices. Its headquarters were in Southwark, London, England, with other offices opened in Cambridge, Sweden, Silicon Valley, Japan, India, China, South Korea, and Australia.\nIt was established on 24 June 1998 as a partnership between Psion, Nokia, Ericsson, Motorola, and Sony, to exploit the convergence between personal digital assistants (PDAs) and mobile phones, and a joint-effort to prevent Microsoft from extending its desktop computer monopoly into the mobile devices market. Ten years to the day after it was established, on 24 June 2008, Nokia announced that they intended to acquire the shares that they did not own already, at a cost of \u20ac264 million. On the same day the Symbian Foundation was announced, with the aim to \"provide royalty-free software and accelerate innovation\", and the pledged contribution of the Symbian OS and user interfaces.\nThe acquisition of Symbian Ltd. by Nokia was completed on 2 December 2008, at which point all Symbian employees became Nokia employees. Transfer of relevant Symbian Software Ltd. leases, trademarks, and domain names from Nokia to the Symbian Foundation was completed in April 2009. On 18 July 2009, Nokia's Symbian professional services department, which was not transferred to the Symbian Foundation, was sold to the Accenture consulting company.\nOverview.\nSymbian Ltd. was the brainchild of Psion's next generation mobile operating system project following the 32-bit version of EPOC. Psion approached the other four companies and decided to work together on a full software suite including kernel, device drivers, and user interface. Much of Symbian's initial intellectual property came from the software arm of Psion.\nSymbian Ltd developed and licensed Symbian OS, an operating system for advanced mobile phones and personal digital assistants (PDAs).\nSymbian Ltd wanted the system to have different user interface layers, unlike Microsoft's offerings. Psion originally created several interfaces or \"reference designs\", which would later end up as Pearl (smartphone), Quartz (Palm-like PDA), and Crystal (clamshell design PDA). One early design called Emerald also ended up in the market on the Ericsson R380.\nNokia created the Series 60 (from Pearl), Series 80 and Series 90 platforms (both from Crystal), whilst UIQ Technology, which was a subsidiary of Symbian Ltd. at the time, created UIQ (from Quartz). Another interface was MOAP(S) from NTT Docomo. Despite being partners at Symbian Ltd, the different backers of each interface were effectively competing with each other's software. This became a prominent point in February 2004 when UIQ, which focuses on pen devices, announced its foray in traditional keyboard devices, competing head-on with Nokia's Series 60 offering whilst Nokia was in the process of acquiring Psion's remaining stake in Symbian Ltd. to take overall control of the company.\nShareholding.\nThe company's founder shareholders were Psion, Nokia and Ericsson. Motorola joined the Symbian consortium shortly later, gaining the same 23.1% stake as Nokia and Ericsson in October 1998. Matsushita followed in May 1999 paying \u00a322 million for an 8.8% stake. This was followed by Siemens taking 5% in April 2002 and Samsung also taking 5% in February 2003.\nMotorola sold its stake in the company to Psion and Nokia in September 2003.\nIn February 2004, Psion, the originator of Symbian, intended to sell its 31.1% stake in the company to Nokia. This caused unease amongst other shareholders as Nokia would gain majority control of the company, with Sony Ericsson in particular being a vocal critic. The deal finalised with the stake shared between Nokia, Matsushita, Siemens and Sony Ericsson in July 2004, with Nokia holding a 47.9% share.\nDecline.\nThe decline of Symbian Ltd. has been tied to Nokia's fate. By 2007, it enjoyed a high level of success with its operating system running one of every two mobile phones bearing the Nokia logo so that it claimed 65 percent of the mobile market. Its Symbian OS continued to dominate the market until Nokia acquired the company in its entirety in 2008, creating it as an independent non-profit organization called Symbian Foundation. Nokia donated the assets of Symbian Ltd. as well as the Nokia's S60 platform to the new entity with the goal of developing an open-source and royalty-free mobile platform.\nNokia, however, began to lose its market share with the emergence of Apple's iPhone and Google's Android. To address this, Nokia abandoned the Symbian OS in favor of Windows Phone OS for its mobile devices, shipping its last Symbian handset in 2013. Having lost its biggest supporter and caretaker, Symbian was absorbed by Accenture, which is supposed to maintain it until 2016. The prior Symbian Foundation has transitioned into a licensing entity with no permanent staff, claiming on its website that it is responsible for only specific licensing and legal frameworks put in place during the open sourcing of the platform.\nLicensees.\nLicensees of Symbian's operating system were:\nArima, BenQ, Fujitsu, Lenovo, Matsushita, Motorola, Nokia, Samsung, Sharp, Siemens and Sony Mobile.\nKey people.\nSymbian Ltd's CEO at the time of acquisition was Nigel Clifford. Prior CEOs included David Levin, who left in 2005 to head United Business Media, and the founding CEO, Colly Myers, who left the company in 2002 to found IssueBits, the company behind text messaging Short Message Service (SMS) information service Any Question Answered (AQA).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69167", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69167", "title": "Charley Paddock", "text": "American athlete (1900\u20131943)\nCharles William Paddock (August 11, 1900 \u2013 July 21, 1943) was an American athlete and two-time Olympic champion.\nBiography.\nPaddock was born in Gainesville, Texas, to Charles H. and Lulu (Robinson) Paddock. His family moved to Pasadena, California, when he was a child. After serving in World War I as a lieutenant of field artillery in the U.S. Marines, Paddock studied at the University of Southern California. There he became a member of the track and field team, and excelled in the sprint events. He won the 100 and 200 m in the first major sporting event after the war, the 1919 Inter-Allied Games, in which soldiers of the Allied nations competed against each other. Paddock was the first person named \"The fastest man alive\".\nIn 1920, Paddock represented his country at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp. In Belgium, he had his greatest successes, winning the 100 m final, while placing second in the 200 m event. With the American 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team, Paddock won a third Olympic medal. Paddock became famous for his unusual finishing style, leaping towards the finish line at the end of the race.\nThe next year, he ran the 110 yd, which is slightly more than 100 m, in 10.2 seconds. It was not until 1956 that the world record for the 100 m became lower than Paddock's time over 110 yard. Paddock broke or equaled several other world records over Imperial distances.\nAt the 1924 Olympics, Paddock again qualified for both the 100 and 200 m finals, but he was less successful than four years earlier; he finished 5th in the 100 m and won another silver medal in the 200 m. Paddock was not a part of the American relay team. In \"Chariots of Fire\", the 1981 Oscar-winning film about those races, Paddock was portrayed by Dennis Christopher. In 1928, Paddock participated in his third Olympics, but did not reach the 200 m final.\nDuring his athletic activities, Paddock also held management positions in several newspapers; his father-in-law was newspaper publisher Charles H. Prisk. In 1926, Paddock appeared in \"The Campus Flirt\", a black-and-white silent film (now lost) featuring another Texas native, Paramount starlet Bebe Daniels. Paddock served on the personal staff of Major General William P. Upshur beginning at the end of World War I. An autobiography, titled \"The Fastest Human\", was published in 1932.\nIn 1943, during World War II, Upshur and Paddock (by then a captain) died in a plane crash near Sitka, Alaska. Paddock is interred at Sitka National Cemetery in Sitka.\nIn 1976 he was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69168", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69168", "title": "Alastair Reynolds", "text": "Welsh science fiction author (born 1966)\nAlastair Preston Reynolds (born 13 March 1966) is a Welsh science fiction author. He specialises in hard science fiction and space opera.\nEarly life.\nReynolds was born in Wales and spent his early years in Cornwall before moving back to Wales, and later attended Newcastle University, where he studied physics and astronomy. He subsequently earned a PhD in astrophysics from the University of St Andrews.\nCareer.\nReynolds wrote his first four published science fiction short stories while still a graduate student, in 1989\u20131991; they appeared in 1990\u20131992, his first sale being to \"Interzone\". In 1991 Reynolds graduated and moved from Scotland to the Netherlands to work at ESA. He then started spending much of his writing time on a first novel, which eventually turned into \"Revelation Space\", while the few short stories he submitted from 1991\u20131995 were rejected. This ended in 1995 when his story \"Byrd Land Six\" was published, which he says marked the beginning of a more serious phase of writing. As of 2011[ [update]] he has published over forty shorter works and nine novels. His works are hard science fiction, typically in the sub-genres of space opera and noir, and reflect his professional expertise with physics and astronomy, included by extrapolating future technologies in terms that are consistent, for the most part, with current science. Reynolds has said he prefers to keep the science in his books to what he personally believes will be possible, and he does not believe faster-than-light travel will ever be possible, but that he adopts science he believes will be impossible when it is necessary for the story. Most of Reynolds's novels contain multiple storylines that originally appear to be completely unrelated, but merge later in the story.\nEight of his novels and several of his short stories take place within one consistent future universe, usually now called the Revelation Space universe after the first novel published in it, although it was originally developed in short stories for several years before the first novel. Although most characters appear in more than one novel, the works set within this future timeline rarely have the same protagonists twice. Often the protagonists from one work belong to a group that is regarded with suspicion or enmity by the protagonists of another work. While a great deal of science fiction reflects either very optimistic or dystopian visions of the human future, Reynolds's future worlds are notable in that human societies have not departed to either positive or negative extremes, but instead are similar to those of today in terms of moral ambiguity and a mixture of cruelty and decency, corruption and opportunity, despite their technology being dramatically advanced.\nThe \"Revelation Space\" series includes eight novels, seven novellas, and six short stories set over a span of several centuries, spanning approximately AD 2205 to 40\u00a0000, although the novels are all set in a 300-year period spanning from 2427 to 2727. In this universe, extraterrestrial sentience exists but is elusive, and interstellar travel is primarily undertaken by a class of vessel called a lighthugger which only approaches the speed of light (faster than light travel is possible, but it is so dangerous that no race uses it). Fermi's paradox is explained as resulting from the activities of an inorganic alien race referred to by its victims as the Inhibitors, which exterminates sentient races if they proceed above a certain level of technology. The tetralogy consisting of \"Revelation Space\", \"Redemption Ark\", \"Absolution Gap\", and \"Inhibitor Phase\" deals with humanity coming to the attention of the Inhibitors and the resultant war between them.\n\"Century Rain\" takes place in a future universe independent of the \"Revelation Space\" universe and has different rules, such as faster-than-light travel being possible through a system of portals similar to wormholes. \"Century Rain\" also departs substantially from Reynolds's previous works, both in having a protagonist who is much closer to the perspective of our real world (in fact he is from a version of our past), serving as a proxy for the reader in confronting the unfamiliarity of the advanced science fiction aspects and in having a much more linear storytelling process. Reynolds's previous protagonists started out fully absorbed in the exoticisms of the future setting and his previous \"Revelation Space\" works have several interlinked story threads, not necessarily contemporaneous. According to Reynolds, while \"Century Rain\" is a \"personal favorite\", he has \"sworn there will never be a sequel\".\n\"Pushing Ice\" is also a standalone story, with characters from much less distant in the future than in any of his other novels, set into a framework storyline that extends much further into the future of humanity than any of his previous novels. It contains an alternative interpretation of the Fermi paradox: intelligent sentient life in this universe is extremely scarce. Reynolds states that he is \"firmly intending\" to return to the \"Pushing Ice\" setting to write a sequel.\n\"The Prefect\" marked a return to the \"Revelation Space\" universe. Like \"Chasm City\", it is a stand-alone novel within that setting. It is set prior to any of the other \"Revelation Space\" novels, though still 200 years after the original human settlement is established on the planet Yellowstone in the Epsilon Eridani system. It was published in the United Kingdom on 2 April 2007. Since its publication, the title of \"The Prefect\" has been changed to \"Aurora Rising\" to more align with the name of the sequel, \"Elysium Fire\", which was published in 2018, marking the first novel length return to the \"Revelation Space\" universe since 2007. This sub-series within the \"Revelation Space\" universe is now called \"The Prefect Dreyfus Emergencies\". Reynolds states that he has \"tentative plans for three more Dreyfus titles, with an arc that would eventually take him beyond Yellowstone, and then back again.\"\n\"House of Suns\" is a standalone novel set in the same universe as his novella \"Thousandth Night\" from the \"One Million A.D.\" anthology. It was released in the UK on 17 April 2008 and in the US on 2 June 2009. Reynolds described it as \"Six million years in the future, starfaring clones, tensions between human and robot metacivilisations, King Crimson jokes.\" As with \"Pushing Ice\", Reynolds also states that he is \"firmly intending\" to return to the \"House of Suns\" setting to write a sequel.\n\"Terminal World\", published in March 2010 was described by Reynolds as \"a kind of steampunk-tinged planetary romance, set in the distant future\". As with \"Century Rain\", Reynolds has said that he does not plan any further work in the universe of \"Terminal World\".\nIn June 2009 Reynolds signed a new deal, worth \u00a31 million, with his British publishers for ten books to be published over the next ten years.\nBetween 2012 and 2015 Reynolds released three novels set in a new universe called \"Poseidon's Children\": \"Blue Remembered Earth\" (2012), \"On the Steel Breeze\" (2014), and \"Poseidon's Wake\" (2015). The novels comprise a hard science fiction trilogy dealing with the expansion of the human species into the Solar System and beyond, and the emergence of Africa as a spacefaring, technological super-state.\nHis \"Doctor Who\" novel \"Harvest of Time\" was published in June 2013.\nHis forthcoming work includes \"Banish\", which will be appearing in \"Multiverses\" by Preston Grassmann (ed.) for Titan Publishing.\nAwards and nominations.\nReynolds's fiction has received three awards and several other nominations. His second novel \"Chasm City\" won the 2001 British Science Fiction Award for Best Novel. His short story \"Weather\" and \"Zima Blue\" won the Japanese National Science Fiction Convention's Seiun Award for Best Translated Short Fiction. His novels \"Absolution Gap\" and \"The Prefect\" have also been nominated for previous BSFA awards. Reynolds has been nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award three times, for his novels \"Revelation Space\", \"Pushing Ice\" and \"House of Suns\". In 2010, he won the Sidewise Award for Alternate History for his short story \"The Fixation\". His novella \"Troika\" made the shortlist for the 2011 Hugo Awards. His Novel \"Revenger\" received the 2017\u00a0Locus Award for Best Young Adult Book.\u00a0\nAdaptations.\nOn 10 March 2019 Alastair Reynolds announced that his short stories \"Zima Blue\" and \"Beyond the Aquila Rift\" had been adapted as part of Netflix's animated anthology \"Love, Death &amp; Robots\". These stories are the first of Reynolds's works to be adapted for TV or film.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1991, Reynolds moved to Noordwijk in the Netherlands, where he met his wife Josette (who is from France) and worked for the European Space Research and Technology Centre (part of the European Space Agency) until 2004, when he left to pursue writing full-time. He returned to Wales in 2008 and lives near Cardiff.\n\"The Inhibitor Sequence:\"\n#\"Revelation Space\". London: Gollancz, 2000. \n#\"Redemption Ark\". London: Gollancz, 2002. \n#\"Absolution Gap\". London: Gollancz, 2003. \n#\"Inhibitor Phase\". London: Gollancz, 2021. \n\"The Prefect Dreyfus Emergencies:\"\n#\"The Prefect/Aurora Rising\". London: Gollancz, 2007, \n#\"Elysium Fire\". London: Gollancz, 2018, \n#\"Machine Vendetta\". London: Gollancz, 2024, \n\"Standalone:\"\n*\"Chasm City\". London: Gollancz, 2001. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69169", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69169", "title": "Millennium Bridge, London", "text": "Bridge over the River Thames in England\nThe Millennium Bridge, officially known as the London Millennium Footbridge, is a steel suspension bridge for pedestrians crossing the River Thames in London, England, linking Bankside with the City of London. It is owned and maintained by Bridge House Estates, a charitable trust overseen by the City of London Corporation. Construction began in 1998, and it initially opened on 10 June 2000.\nLondoners nicknamed it the \"Wobbly Bridge\" and even the \"Wibbly Wobbly\" after pedestrians experienced an alarming swaying motion on its opening day. The bridge was closed later that day and, after two days of limited access, it was closed again for almost two years so that modifications and repairs could be made to keep the bridge stable and stop the swaying motion. It reopened in February 2002, after real-life safety tests were conducted by 700 staff from engineering consultancy Arup.\nThe bridge is located between Southwark Bridge and Blackfriars Railway Bridge. Its southern end is near the Globe Theatre, the Bankside Gallery, and Tate Modern, while its northern end is next to the City of London School below St Paul's Cathedral. The bridge's alignment is such that a clear view (i.e. a \"terminating vista\") of St Paul's south fa\u00e7ade is presented from across the river, framed by the bridge supports.\nDesign.\nAn architectural design competition was organised in 1996 by Southwark council and RIBA Competitions. The winning entry was an innovative \"blade of light\" effort from Arup Group, Foster + Partners and Anthony Caro. Due to height restrictions, and to improve the view, the bridge's suspension design had the supporting cables below the deck level, giving a very shallow profile. The bridge has two river piers and consists of three main sections of , , (north to south) with a total structure length of ; the aluminium deck is wide. The eight suspension cables are tensioned to pull with a force of 2,000\u00a0tons against the piers set into each bank\u2014enough to support a working load of 5,000\u00a0people.\nConstruction.\nOrdinarily, bridges across the River Thames require an Act of Parliament. For this bridge, that was avoided by the Port of London Authority granting a licence for the structure, and the City of London and London Borough of Southwark granting planning permission. Construction began in late 1998, and the main works were started on 28 April 1999 by Monberg &amp; Thorsen and Sir Robert McAlpine. The eventual cost was \u00a318.2 million (\u00a32.2m over budget), primarily paid for by the Millennium Commission and the London Bridge Trust.\nOpening.\nThe bridge opened on 10 June 2000, one month late. Unexpected lateral vibration due to resonant structural response caused the bridge to be closed on 12 June for modifications. Attempts had been made to limit the number of people crossing the bridge, which led to long queues but were ineffective to dampen the vibrations. Closure of the bridge only two days after opening attracted public criticism as another high-profile British Millennium project that suffered an embarrassing setback, akin to how many saw the Millennium Dome.\nThe vibration was attributed to a then under-researched phenomenon whereby pedestrians crossing a bridge that has a \"lateral\" sway have an unconscious tendency to match their footsteps to the sway, exacerbating it. This is different from the well-understood problem of \"vertical\" sway, which is why troops stop marching in stride together as a unit when crossing such a bridge. An example is London's Albert Bridge, which has a sign dating from 1873 warning marching ranks of soldiers to break step while crossing.\nResonance.\nThe bridge's movements were caused by a positive feedback phenomenon, known as synchronous lateral excitation. The natural sway motion of people walking caused small sideways oscillations in the bridge, which in turn caused people on the bridge to sway in step, increasing the amplitude of the bridge oscillations and continually reinforcing the effect; the maximum sway was around . On the day of opening, the bridge was crossed by 90,000 people, with up to 2,000 on the bridge at a time.\nResonant vibrational modes due to vertical loads (such as trains, traffic or pedestrians) and wind loads are well understood in bridge design. In the case of the Millennium Bridge, because the lateral motion caused pedestrians to directly participate with the bridge, the vibrational modes had not been anticipated by the designers. When the bridge lurches to one side, the pedestrians must adjust to keep from falling over, and they all do this at the same time. The effect is similar to soldiers marching in lockstep, but horizontal instead of vertical.\nThe risks of lateral vibration in lightweight bridges are well known. Any bridge with lateral frequency modes of less than 1.3 Hz, and sufficiently low mass, could witness the same phenomenon with sufficient pedestrian loading. The greater the number of people, the greater the amplitude of the vibrations. Other bridges which have seen similar problems are:\nMitigation.\nEngineers at Arup, the company that designed the bridge, conducted research into the unexpected oscillation, which they called 'synchronous lateral excitation'. The first laboratory studies used pedestrians on moving platforms at the University of Southampton and Imperial College London. Later in 2000, one span of the bridge was instrumented and tested with crowds of up to 275 people.\nThey concluded that making the bridge stiffer, to move its resonant frequency out of the excitation range, was not feasible as it would greatly change its appearance. Instead, the resonance was controlled by retrofitting 37 viscous fluid dampers to dissipate energy. These include 17 chevron dampers \u2013 long V-shaped braces under the deck panels \u2013 to control lateral movement, 4 vertical to ground dampers to control lateral and vertical movements, and 16 pier dampers to control lateral and torsional movements. Additionally, 52 tuned mass dampers add inertia to control vertical movement. The work took from May 2001 to January 2002 and cost \u00a35 million. After a period of testing, the bridge was reopened on 22 February 2002 and, since that date, has not been subject to significant vibration. In spite of the successful cure, the \"wobbly bridge\" (sometimes \"wibbly-wobbly\") epithet remains in common usage among Londoners.\nCable resonance.\nAn artistic expression of the higher-frequency resonances within the cables of the bridge were explored by Bill Fontana's \"Harmonic Bridge\" exhibition at the Tate Modern in mid-2006. This used acoustic transducers placed at strategic locations on the cabling of the Millennium Bridge and the signals from those transducers were amplified and dynamically distributed throughout the Turbine Hall of the Tate by a programme which Fontana entered into the sound diffusion engine of the Richmond Sound Design AudioBox.\nRepair.\nIn October 2023, the bridge was closed for three weeks to allow repairs to its surface, undertaken by FM Conway. The bridge closed on Saturday 14 October and reopened late on 5 November.\nMillennium Inclinator.\nA short inclined lift, known as the Millennium Inclinator, is next to the northern end of the Millennium Bridge. It was opened in December 2003 to allow pedestrians to surmount the steep slope (13.6\u00b0) of Peter's Hill from the riverside to the entrance to the Millennium Bridge without using the alternative flight of steps. The lower end of the lift is on Paul's Walk next to the Thames, and the top end is further up Peter's Hill on the terrace which is level with the deck of the bridge. It was primarily installed for use by those who cannot easily manage the steep steps, such as people with disabilities and parents with push chairs.\nThe lift carriage was originally powered by an electric traction motor, manufactured in Italy by Maspero Elevatori, with a speed of and a maximum capacity of . However, by 2010 the City of London Planning and Transportation Committee decided that the level of service was unacceptable, because the inclinator was frequently out of service due to mechanical breakdowns and vandalism. So the Committee agreed it would be replaced at a cost of up to \u00a3750,000 in time for the 2012 Summer Paralympics.\nA major renovation project was undertaken in 2012, and the lift was reopened in time for the Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant of 3 June 2012, which took place about a month before the 2012 Summer Olympics. The new lift was manufactured by \"H\u00fctter Aufz\u00fcge\" of Glinde, Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, a lift manufacturer which was taken over by Otis in 2013. Axis Elevators installed the new equipment.\nFollowing a redevelopment of the area in 2021 the lift was closed and will be replaced by a platform lift.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69170", "revid": "43126470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69170", "title": "Pocket PC", "text": "Obsolete type of personal digital assistant running Windows Mobile\nA Pocket PC (P/PC, PPC) is a class of personal digital assistant (PDA) that runs the Windows Mobile operating system, which is based on Windows CE/Windows Embedded Compact, and that has some of the abilities of modern desktop PCs. The name was introduced by Microsoft in 2000 as a rebranding of the Palm-size PC category and was marketed until 2007. Some of these devices also had integrated phone and data capabilities, which were known as Pocket PC Phone Edition and are comparable to more modern smartphones. Windows Smartphone is another Windows CE based platform for non-touch and non-PDA devices.\nIn 2007, with the advent of Windows Mobile 6.0, Microsoft dropped the name Pocket PC in favor of a new naming scheme:\nAs of 2010, thousands of applications existed for handhelds adhering to the Microsoft Pocket PC specification, many of which were freeware. Microsoft-compliant Pocket PCs can be used with many add-ons such as GPS receivers, barcode readers, RFID readers, and cameras. Pocket PC was replaced by Windows Phone in 2010 but even after versions were released based on the Windows NT kernel were ultimately unable to compete with the iPhone of 2007 and Android phones and interest waned in Pocket PCs without phones.\nHistory.\nThe Pocket PC was an evolution from prior calculator-sized computers. Keystroke-programmable calculators which could do simple business and scientific applications were available by the 1970s. In 1982, Hewlett Packard's HP-75 incorporated a 1-line text display, an alphanumeric keyboard, HP BASIC language and some basic PDA abilities. The HP 95LX, HP 100LX and HP 200LX series packed a PC-compatible MS-DOS computer with graphics display and QWERTY keyboard into a palmtop format. The HP OmniGo 100 and 120 used a pen and graphics interface on DOS-based PC/GEOS, but was not widely sold in the United States. The HP 300LX built a palmtop computer on the Windows CE operating system.\nPalm-size PC (PsPC) was Microsoft's official name for Windows CE PDAs that were smaller than Handheld PCs by the lack of a physical keyboard. The class was announced in January 1998 originally as \"Palm PC\" which provoked a lawsuit by Palm Inc., and the name changed soon afterwards to Palm-size PC before release. These devices were similar to the Handheld PC and also ran Windows CE, however this version was more limited and lacked Pocket Microsoft Office, Pocket Internet Explorer, ActiveX and some other tools. Its main competitor was the PalmPilot and Palm III. According to the specification, Palm-size PCs use SuperH SH3 processors and MIPS architecture. The term \"palm-sized PC\" was also used as a generic term of similar such devices that are not necessary connected to Microsoft, such as the PalmPilot.\nMicrosoft's Handheld PCs and Palm-size PCs did not gain much success in the markets compared to Palm, with users complaining the Windows CE software were hard to use and the devices themselves were thick. On April 19, 2000, Microsoft introduced Pocket PC with a revamped interface and to better compete against the popular Palm devices. The Pocket PC was based on the all new version 3.0 of Windows CE. HP, Casio and Compaq were the first OEMs with Pocket PC devices in 2000. The familiar desktop Windows UI from Palm-size PCs was removed in favor of a more tailored interface on Pocket PCs.\nAccording to Microsoft, the Pocket PC is \"a handheld device that enables users to store and retrieve e-mail, contacts, appointments, tasks, play multimedia files, games, exchange text messages with Windows Live Messenger (formerly known as MSN Messenger), browse the Web, and more.\"Prior to the release of Windows Mobile 2003, third-party software was developed using Microsoft's eMbedded Visual Tools, eMbedded Visual Basic (eVB) and eMbedded Visual C (eVC). eVB programs can usually be converted fairly easily to NS Basic/CE. or to Basic4ppc.\nIn 2007, the Pocket PC name was dropped altogether. The Pocket PC Phone Edition became Windows Mobile Professional; the Smartphone became Windows Mobile Standard; and the classic phone-less Pocket PC (which by now had become a niche) became Windows Mobile Classic.\nThe Pocket PC/Windows Mobile OS was superseded by Windows Phone on February 15, 2010, when the latter was announced at Mobile World Congress that year. No existing hardware was officially supported for a Windows Phone 7 upgrade. Additionally, not a single one of the thousands of apps available for Windows Mobile would run unaltered on Windows Phone.\nSpecification.\nFrom a technical standpoint, \"Pocket PC\" is a Microsoft specification that sets various hardware and software requirements for mobile devices bearing the \"Pocket PC\" label.\nFor instance, any device which is to be classified as a Pocket PC must:\nOperating system versions.\nWindows CE 3.0.\nPocket PC 2000 was launched April 2000, and ran Windows CE 3.0. Pocket PC 2000 featured a mobile version of Microsoft Office, a chief feature being the ability to password-protect Excel files.\nPocket PC 2002 was launched October 2001, and was powered by Windows CE 3.0, as with its predecessor. Some Pocket PC 2002 devices were also sold as \"Phone Editions\", which included cell phone functionality in addition to the PDA abilities.\nWindows Mobile 2003.\nWindows Mobile 2003 consisted of the Windows CE.NET 4.2 operating system bundled with scaled-down versions of many popular desktop applications, including Microsoft Outlook, Internet Explorer, Word, Excel, Windows Media Player, and others.\nWindows Mobile 2003 Second Edition added native landscape, square screen and VGA support as well as other fixes and changes to those features already present in the original release of Windows Mobile 2003.\nWindows Mobile 5.\nWindows Mobile 5 for Pocket PC was based on Windows CE 5 and contained many fixes and improvements over Windows Mobile 2003.\nPocket PCs running prior versions of the operating system generally stored user-installed applications and data in RAM, which meant that if the battery was depleted the device would lose all of its data. Windows Mobile 5.0 solved this problem by storing all user data in persistent (flash) memory, leaving the RAM to be used only for running applications, as it would be on a desktop computer. As a result, Windows Mobile 5.0 Pocket PCs generally had more flash memory, and less RAM, compared to earlier devices.\nWindows Mobile 6.\nMicrosoft's Windows Mobile 6, internally code-named 'Crossbow', was officially released by Microsoft on February 12, 2007. Mobile 6 was still based on Windows CE 5 and was effectively just a face-lift of Windows Mobile 5. With Mobile 6 also came Microsoft's new naming conventions and devices were no longer called Pocket PCs: devices with no phone abilities were named Windows Mobile Classic, and devices with phone abilities were named Windows Mobile Professional.\nWindows Mobile 6.1.\nMicrosoft's Windows Mobile 6.1 was announced on April 1, 2008, and introduced instant messaging-like texting. Windows Mobile 6.1 was built upon Windows CE 5.\nWindows Mobile 6.5.\nThe first Windows Mobile 6.5 device was first shown in September 2009. Leaked ROMs surfaced in July 2009 for specific devices. The generic ROM images for Mobile 6.5 are also available as part of the officially distributed and freely downloadable development kit.\nSeveral phones running Windows Mobile 6.1 can be updated to Windows Mobile 6.5.\nVendors.\nBefore the Pocket PC brand was launched, there were other Windows-based machines of the same form factor called Palm-size PCs. These devices ran Windows CE 2.0\u20132.11 and had an interface that was similar to the then-current desktop versions of Windows like Windows 95. The first of these was the Everex Freestyle, also known as HTC Kangaroo, from 1998. Other examples include Casio Cassiopeia E-10/E-11, Compaq Aero 1500/1520, Philips Nino and HP Jornada 420/430.\nPocket PCs were manufactured and sold by several different companies; the major manufacturers include HP (under the iPAQ and now defunct Jornada brands), Toshiba, Acer, Asus, Dell (under the now defunct Axim brand), Fujitsu Siemens, E-TEN, HTC, and ViewSonic. In mid-2003, Gateway Computers and JVC announced they would release Pocket PCs, but the projects were discontinued before a product was released. Prices in 2003 ranged from around US$ for the high-end models, some of which are combined with cell phones, to $200 for low-end models. A $100\u2013$200 model was rumored to be released within 2004 or early 2005, although the lowest price for a just-released Pocket PC never went under $300. Many companies ceased to sell PDA's by 2003\u20132004 because of a declining market. Major companies such as Viewsonic and Toshiba stopped producing new Pocket PCs.\nCompanies like O2, T-Mobile and Orange were marketing Pocket PCs that have integrated mobile telephony (smartphones). All users have to do is put in the SIM card and follow the wizard, to put their SIM contacts in the address book. An example is O2's Xda, or T-Mobile's MDA Compact. Both of these devices, while bearing the phone operator's logo, are manufactured by the dominant Pocket PC manufacturer HTC.\nOne of the more popular high-end consumer-market Pocket PCs was the Dell Axim x51v, which was discontinued in 2007. Hardware specs included 3.7\" color TFT VGA display with 640x480 resolution, Intel XScaleTM PXA270 processor at 624\u00a0MHz, 336 MB of memory (256 MB flash, 64 MB SDRAM), integrated 802.11b and Bluetooth 1.2, integrated Intel 2700G multimedia accelerator with 16 MB video memory. Expansion was possible via CompactFlash Type II and SD slots (supporting SDIO Now!, SDIO and MMC cards). Included is a 1,100 mAh user replaceable battery (est. 4\u20136.5 hours, 2200 mAh also available).\nSome Pocket PCs featured integrated GPS often combined with mobile phone functionality. Pocket PCs with built-in telephony differ from Windows Mobile Smartphone Edition devices in several respects, including the lack of a touchscreen on the latter. Some examples of current Pocket PCs with GPS integrated are the Fujitsu Siemens Pocket Loox N560, a high-end Pocket PC with a VGA screen and an integrated SiRF Star III GPS; the HTC TyTN, a small communicator with integrated slide in keyboard; the HP hw6945 and HP iPAQ hw6515 with integrated thumb-board, GPS and GSM/GPRS telephony; the HTC top-of-the-line Universal, branded as the QTek 9000 (also branded by various telecommunications companies as the Orange SPV M5000, T-mobile MDA Pro, Vodafone VPA IV, O2 Xda Exec, i-Mate JasJar, Dopod 900).\nA newer entrant into the Pocket PC market was its rival Palm, which sold devices like the Treo 700w/wx based on Windows Mobile 5.0 and featuring integrated telephony. Previous to this, Palm only produced PDAs running its own Palm OS (as did the first versions of the Palm Treo) before it was losing popularity to Pocket PC's Windows Mobile.\nHTC manufactured up to 80% of all phone enabled Windows Mobile devices for other companies (including HP and O2), as well as many non-phone Pocket PCs (for companies such as Dell, HP and Fujitsu Siemens) as of 2006. HTC was by now marketing Windows Mobile devices under their own brand, as well as that of Dopod.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69171", "revid": "1639942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69171", "title": "Tahapanes", "text": ""}
{"id": "69174", "revid": "45853341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69174", "title": "Tartessos", "text": "Historical civilization in the southern Iberian Peninsula\nTartessos () is, as defined by archaeological discoveries, a historical civilization settled in the southern Iberian Peninsula from about the late Bronze Age until the 5th century BC. It had a writing system, identified as Tartessian, that includes some 97 inscriptions in a Tartessian language which has been proposed by Teresa J\u00fadice Gamito to be a Celtic language. Tartessos was the first \"entity located in southwestern Iberia to be recognised as a kingdom\".\nIn the historical records, Tartessos () appears as a semi-mythical or legendary harbor city and the surrounding culture on the south coast of the Iberian Peninsula (in modern Andalusia, Spain), at the mouth of the Guadalquivir. It appears in sources from Greece and the Near East starting during the first millennium BC. Herodotus, for example, describes it as beyond the Pillars of Hercules. Roman authors tend to echo the earlier Greek sources, but from around the end of the millennium there are indications that the name Tartessos had fallen out of use and the city may have been lost to flooding, although several authors attempt to identify it with cities of other names in the area.\nThe Tartessians were rich in metals. In the fourth century BC the historian Ephorus describes \"a very prosperous market called Tartessos, with much tin carried by river, as well as gold and copper from Celtic lands\". Trade in tin was very lucrative in the Bronze Age, since it is an essential component of bronze and is comparatively rare. Herodotus said a king of Tartessos, Arganthonios, welcomed the first Greeks to reach Iberia, Phocaeans who sailed from Asia Minor.\nPausanias wrote that Myron, the tyrant of Sicyon, built a treasury, which was called the treasury of the Sicyonians, to commemorate a victory in the chariot race at the Olympic games. In the treasury, he made two chambers with two different styles, one Doric and one Ionic, with bronze. The Eleans said that the bronze was Tartessian.\nThe people from Tartessos became important trading partners of the Phoenicians, whose presence in Iberia dates from the eighth century BC and who nearby built a harbor of their own, Gadir (, , present-day C\u00e1diz).\nLocation.\nSeveral early sources, such as Aristotle, refer to Tartessos as a river. Aristotle claims that it rises from the Pyrene Mountain (generally accepted by modern scholars as the Pyrenees) and flows out to sea outside the Pillars of Hercules, the modern Strait of Gibraltar. No such river traverses the Iberian Peninsula.\nAccording to the fourth century BC Greek geographer and explorer Pytheas, quoted by Strabo in the first century AD, the ancestral homeland of the Turduli was located north of Turdetania, the region where the kingdom of Tartessos was located in the Baetis River valley (the present-day Guadalquivir valley) in southern Spain.\nPausanias, writing in the second century AD, identified the river and gave details of the location of the city:\nThey say that Tartessus is a river in the land of the Iberians, running down into the sea by two mouths and that between these two mouths lies a city of the same name. The river, which is the largest in Iberia and tidal, those of a later day called Baetis and there are some who think that Tartessus was the ancient name of Carpia, a city of the Iberians.\nThe river known in his day as the Baetis is now the Guadalquivir. Thus, Tartessos may be buried, Schulten thought, under the shifting wetlands. The river delta has gradually been blocked by a sandbar that stretches from the mouth of the Rio Tinto, near Palos de la Frontera to Almonte, the riverbank that is opposite Sanl\u00facar de Barrameda. The area is now protected as the Parque Nacional de Do\u00f1ana.\nIn the first century AD, Pliny the Elder incorrectly identified the city of Carteia as the Tartessos mentioned in Greek sources while Strabo just commented. Carteia is identified as El Rocadillo, near S. Roque, Province of C\u00e1diz, some distance away from the Guadalquivir. In the second century AD, Appian thought that Karpessos (Carpia) was previously known as Tartessos.\nArchaeological discoveries.\nThe discoveries published by Adolf Schulten in 1922 first drew attention to Tartessos and shifted its study from classical philologists and antiquarians to investigations based on archaeology, although attempts at localizing a capital for what was conceived as a complicated culture in the nature of a centrally controlled kingdom ancestral to Spain were inconclusively debated. Subsequent discoveries were widely reported: in September 1923 archaeologists discovered a Phoenician necropolis in which human remains were unearthed and stones found with illegible characters. It may have been colonized by the Phoenicians for trade because of its richness in metals.\nA later generation turned instead to identifying and localizing \"orientalizing\" (eastern Mediterranean) features of the Tartessian material culture within the broader Mediterranean horizon of an \"Orientalizing period\" recognizable in the Aegean and Etruria.\nJ. M. Luz\u00f3n was the first to identify Tartessos with modern Huelva, based on discoveries made in the preceding decades. Since the discovery in September 1958 of the rich gold treasure of El Carambolo in Camas, Seville three kilometres west of Seville, and of hundreds of artefacts in the necropolis at La Joya, Huelva, archaeological surveys have been integrated with philological and literary surveys and the broader picture of the Iron Age in the Mediterranean basin to provide a more informed view of the supposed Tartessian culture on the ground, concentrated in western Andalusia, Extremadura, and in southern Portugal from the Algarve to the Vinalop\u00f3 River in Alicante.\nTuru\u00f1uelo archaeological site.\nSignificant discoveries were made at Turu\u00f1uelo archeological site in Guare\u00f1a, where excavation began in 2015. The site was declared \"bien de inter\u00e9s cultural\" (National heritage site) in May 2022.\nTwo ornate stone busts, featuring details of jewelry and hairstyles which are thought to be the first facial representations of the Tartessian goddesses were discovered in 2023. \nThese sculptures are somewhat similar to the Lady of Elche sculpture from Alicante, which are dated between the 5th and 4th centuries BC, considerably earlier. Fragments of at least three other busts have also been recovered and one of them is attributed to a warrior because part of his helmet is preserved.\nIn this region of southern Spain, the Tartessian culture was born around the 9th century B.C. as a result of hybridization between the Phoenician settlers and the local inhabitants. Scholars refer to the Tartessian culture as \"a hybrid archaeological culture\".\nMetallurgy.\nAlluvial tin was panned in Tartessian streams from an early date. The spread of a silver standard in Assyria increased its attractiveness (the tribute from Phoenician cities was assessed in silver). The invention of coinage in the seventh century BC spurred the search for bronze and silver as well. Henceforth trade connections, formerly largely in elite goods, assumed an increasingly broad economic role. By the Late Bronze Age, silver extraction in Huelva Province reached industrial proportions. Pre-Roman silver slag is found in the Tartessian cities of Huelva Province. Cypriot and Phoenician metalworkers produced 15 million tons of pyrometallurgical residues at the vast dumps of Riotinto. Mining and smelting preceded the arrival, from the eighth century BC onward, of Phoenicians and then Greeks, who provided a stimulating wider market and whose influence sparked an \"orientalizing\" phase in Tartessian material culture (c.\u2009750\u2013550 BC) before Tartessian culture was superseded by the Classic Iberian culture.\n\"Tartessic\" artefacts linked with the Tartessos culture have been found, and many archaeologists now associate the \"lost\" city with Huelva. In excavations on spatially restricted sites in the center of modern Huelva, sherds of elite painted Greek ceramics of the first half of the sixth century BC have been recovered. Huelva contains the largest accumulation of imported elite goods and must have been an important Tartessian center. Medell\u00edn, on the Guadiana River, revealed an important necropolis.\nElements specific to Tartessian culture are the Late Bronze Age fully evolved pattern-burnished wares and geometrically banded and patterns \"Carambolo\" wares, from the ninth to the sixth centuries BC; an \"Early Orientalizing\" phase with the first eastern Mediterranean imports, beginning circa 750 BC; a \"Late Orientalizing\" phase with the finest bronze casting and goldsmith work; gray ware turned on the fast potter's wheel, local imitations of imported Phoenician red-slip wares.\nCharacteristic Tartessian bronzes include pear-shaped jugs, often associated in burials, with shallow dish-shaped braziers having loop handles, incense-burners with floral motifs, fibulas, both elbowed and double-spring types, and belt buckles.\nNo pre-colonial necropolis sites have been identified. The change from a late Bronze Age pattern of circular or oval huts scattered on a village site to rectangular houses with dry-stone foundations and plastered wattle and daub walls took place during the seventh and sixth centuries BC, in settlements with planned layouts that succeeded one another on the same site. \nAt C\u00e1stulo (Ja\u00e9n), a mosaic of river pebbles from the end of the sixth century BC is the earliest mosaic in Western Europe.\nTimeline (10th-5th century BC).\nTartessic occupation sites of the Late Bronze Age that were not particularly complex: \"a domestic mode of production seems to have predominated\" is one mainstream assessment. An earlier generation of archaeologists and historians took a normative approach to the primitive Tartessian adoption of Punic styles and techniques, as of a less-developed culture adopting better, more highly evolved cultural traits, and finding Eastern parallels for Early Iron Age material culture in the Tartessian sites. A later generation has been more concerned with the process through which local institutions evolved.\nThe emergence of new archaeological finds in the city of Huelva is prompting the revision of these traditional views. Just in two adjacent lots adding up to 2,150\u00a0sq.\u00a0m. between Las Monjas Square and Mendez Nu\u00f1ez Street, some 90,000 ceramic fragments of indigenous, Phoenician, and Greek imported wares were exhumed, out of which 8,009 allowed scope for a type identification. This pottery, dated from the tenth to the early eighth centuries BC predates finds from other Phoenician colonies; together with remnants of numerous activities, the Huelva discoveries reveal a substantial industrial and commercial \"emporion\" on this site lasting several centuries. Similar finds in other parts of the city make it possible to estimate the protohistoric habitat of Huelva at some 20 hectares, large for a site in the Iberian Peninsula during that period.\nCarbon dating.\nCalibrated carbon-14 dating carried out by University of Groningen on associated cattle bones as well as dating based on ceramic samples permit a chronology of several centuries through the state of the art of craft and industry since the tenth century BC, as follows: pottery (bowls, plates, craters, vases, amphorae, etc.), melting pots, casting nozzles, weights, finely worked pieces of wood, ship parts, bovid skulls, pendants, fibulae, anklebones, agate, ivory \u2013with the only workshop of the period so far proven in the west-, gold, silver, etc.\nThe existence of foreign produce and materials together with local ones suggests that the old Huelva harbor was a major hub for the reception, manufacturing, and shipping of diverse products of different and distant origin. The analysis of written sources and the products exhumed, including inscriptions and thousands of Greek ceramics, some of which are works of excellent quality by known potters and painters, has led some scholars to suggest that this habitat can be identified not only with Tarshish mentioned in the Bible, in the Assyrian stele of Esarhaddon, and perhaps in the Phoenician inscription of the Nora Stone, but also with the \"Tartessos\" of Greek sources \u2013interpreting the Tartessus river as equivalent to the present-day Tinto River and the Ligustine Lake to the joint estuary of the Odiel and Tinto rivers flowing west and east of the Huelva Peninsula.\nMost sites were inexplicably abandoned in the fifth century BC.\nReligion.\nThere is very little data but it is assumed that as with other Mediterranean peoples, the religion was polytheistic. It is believed that Tartessians worshiped the goddess Astarte or Potnia and the masculine divinity Baal or Melkart, as a result of the Phoenician acculturation. Sanctuaries inspired by Phoenician architecture have been found in the deposit of Castulo (Linares, Ja\u00e9n) and in the vicinity of Carmona. Several images of Phoenician deities have been found in C\u00e1diz, Huelva, and Sevilla.\nLanguage.\nThe Tartessian language is an extinct pre-Roman language once spoken in southern Iberia. The oldest known indigenous texts of Iberia, dated from the seventh to sixth centuries BC, are written in Tartessian. The inscriptions are written in a semi-syllabic writing system called the Southwest script; they were found in the general area in which Tartessos was located and in surrounding areas of influence. Tartessian language texts were found in Southwestern Spain and Southern Portugal (namely in the Conii, Cempsi, Sefes, and Celtici areas of the Algarve and southern Alentejo).\nPossible identification as \"Tarshish\" or \"Atlantis\".\nSince the classicists of the early twentieth century, biblical archaeologists often identify the place-name Tarshish in the Hebrew Bible with Tartessos, although others connect Tarshish to Tarsus in Anatolia or other places as far as India. Tarshish, like Tartessos, is associated with extensive mineral wealth (Iberian Pyrite Belt).\nIn 1922, Adolf Schulten said Tartessos was the Western, and wholly European, source of the legend of Atlantis.\nIn 2011 a team led by Richard Freund said it had found strong evidence for the location in Do\u00f1ana National Park based on underground and underwater surveys and the interpretation of the archaeological site Cancho Roano as \"memorial cities\" rebuilt in the image of Atlantis.\n Spanish scientists said Freund was sensationalising their work. The anthropologist Juan Villar\u00edas-Robles, who works with the Spanish National Research Council, said \"Richard Freund was a newcomer to our project and appeared to be involved in his own very controversial issue concerning King Solomon's search for ivory and gold in Tartessos, the well-documented settlement in the Do\u00f1ana area established in the first millennium BC\" and described his claims as 'fanciful'.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69175", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69175", "title": "Tartessus", "text": ""}
{"id": "69176", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69176", "title": "Guarana", "text": "Species of tree\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGuaran\u00e1 ( from the Portuguese \"guaran\u00e1\" ; Paullinia cupana, syns. \"P. crysan, P. sorbilis\") is a climbing plant in the family Sapindaceae, native to the Amazon basin and especially common in Brazil. Guaran\u00e1 has large leaves and clusters of flowers, and is best known for the seeds from its beans, which are about the size of a coffee bean.\nAs a dietary supplement or herb, guaran\u00e1 seed is an effective stimulant: it contains about twice the concentration of caffeine found in coffee beans (about 2\u20138% caffeine in guaran\u00e1 seeds, compared to about 1\u20133% for coffee beans). The additive has gained notoriety for being used in energy drinks. As with other plants producing caffeine, the high concentration of caffeine is a defensive toxin that repels insects from the berry and seeds.\nThe color of the fruit ranges from brown to red and it contains black seeds that are partly covered by white arils. The color contrast when the fruit is split open has been compared with the appearance of eyeballs, and has become the basis of an origin myth among the Sater\u00e9-Maw\u00e9 people.\nHistory and culture.\nThe word \"guaran\u00e1\" has its origins in the Sater\u00e9-Mau\u00e9 word for the plant, \"warana\".\nGuaran\u00e1 plays an important role in Tupi and Guarani culture. According to a myth attributed to the Sater\u00e9-Mau\u00e9 tribe, guaran\u00e1's domestication originated with a deity killing a beloved village child. To console the villagers, a more benevolent god plucked the left eye from the child and planted it in the forest, resulting in the wild variety of guaran\u00e1. The god then plucked the right eye from the child and planted it in the village, giving rise to domesticated guaran\u00e1.\nThe Guaranis make a herbal tea called \"cupana\" by shelling, washing and drying the seeds, followed by pounding them into a fine powder. The powder is kneaded into a dough and then shaped into cylinders. This product is known as guaran\u00e1 bread, which is grated and then immersed into hot water along with sugar.\nThis plant was introduced to European colonizers and to Europe in the 16th century by Felip Betendorf, Oviedo, Hern\u00e1ndez, Cobo and other Spaniard chroniclers. It has since been used, refined, adapted and commercialized by settlers, folklorists, food scientists, and marketers.\nIdeal growth conditions.\nGuarana thrives in warm and humid environments, where annual temperature ranges from 23-28\u00b0C, the relative humidity is around 80% and the yearly rainfall reaches 1,500-3000 mm. The crop prefers deep, well-drained soils without stones and can be grown on either inclined or flat terrain.\nCultivation practices.\nGuarana was domesticated in the forests between the Tapaj\u00f3s River and the lower Madeira river in the Brazilian Amazon. The two dominating production modes are multi-species systems/ agroforestry and intensive monoculture plantation. Agroforestry systems are especially common amongst indigenous people. It was shown, that the soils of guarana agroforestry sytems and their sourrounding forest have both a low natural fertility. Nevertheless, indigenous farmers have developed ways to maintain the average nutrient composition of the soils compared to the adjacent forest which suggests that efficient nutrient cycling is taking place. Additionally, certain traditional agroecosystems produce litter with significantly higher concentrations of macro- and micronutrients compared to the native forest and could therefore be a sustainable method for improving the chemical quality of regions with highly weathered soils. Monoculture Systems on the other hand can be resulting from slash-and-burn forest clearance and involve periodic cleaning and pruning for pest control. \nThe guarana tree can be propagated sexually via seeds or asexually via cuttings. Seed production is generally not recommended due to the resulting genetic variability which results in plants with different phenotypes and productivity. To maintain the characteristics of the parent plant a propagule only consisting of somatic cells is taken and planted again. This is a way of clonally reproducing the plant which helps to maintain uniformity in the offspring.\nIn the Alto Urupadi region located in the municipality of Mau\u00e9s (state of Amazonas) guarana harvest starts in September and can last until December. The harvest is executed by hand using scissors and pruning shears (Tesoura), sickles (Ter\u00e7ado), baskets and fibre sacks for transport. The berries are picked individually, if only few are ripe or if possible as an entire fruit bunch. The fructification of the guarana tree is not uniform which is the reason why the guarana harvest is manual and staggered over an extended period of time. This current labor-intensive way of harvesting is very costly which makes it economically less attractive.\nPests and disease details.\nThe Amazonian climate is characterized by high temperatures (annual average of 27.2 \u00b0C) and abundant rainfall (approximately 2100 mm per year). This provides favorable conditions for certain pathogens to develop. There are three major pests and diseases impacting cultivation of guarana significantly: Thrips (\"Pseudophilothrips adisi\" Zur Strassen), anthracnose (\"Colletotrichum guaranicola\" Albuq.), and oversprouting caused by \"Fusarium decemcellulare\" Brick. They led to periods of stagnation in guarana production. \nAnother major constraint in guarana cultivation is weed interference. Weeds are capable to reduce guarana yields up to 65%. This makes effective weed management essential to sustain production. Unfortunately are herbicides often favored over mechanical weed control. This because they offer a more consistent and efficient weed suppression, especially in the hot and humid Amazonian climate. Herbicidesvare often favored based on guarana's high demand for water an nutrients in its reproductive differentiation phase (June-August). Weed competition during this phase reduces formation of reproductive structures and thus can lower the yield drastically.\nNevertheless can inappropriate herbicide use negatively affect the environment guarana is cultivated in. Over-time, extensive herbicide and pesticide use can contribute to soil degradation, increased disease risk, pest resistance and environmental contamination. As a consequence, within the framework of sustainable agriculture, there is a growing interest in safer and environmental friendly alternatives for pest and disease management.\nOne promising option is the use of \"Trichoderma\" spp., a genus of beneficial fungi wildly applied as biological control agent. \"Trichoderma\" spp. is naturally present in soil, air and on plant surfaces and capable of suppressing numerous plant pathogens. \"Trichoderma\" spp. suppresses these pathogens through mycoparasitism, competition for nutrients and space and induction of systemic resistance in plants. They are most effective against soil-born pathogens (e.g. \"Fusarium\" spp.) and some foliar or spike diseases.\nThe application of \"Trichoderma\"-based bioformulations could potentially lower the incidence of \"Fusarium\" \"decemcellulare\", the casual agent of over-sprouting, and other soil-born pathogens in guarana cultivation. Although field trials on guarana remain limited some studies on alternative tropical crops suggest that \"Trichoderma\" potentially enhances plant growth, improve stress tolerance and reduces dependence on chemical pesticides.\nComposition.\nAccording to the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank, guaranine (better known as caffeine) is found in guaran\u00e1 and is identical to caffeine derived from other sources, like coffee, tea, kola nut, and Ilex. Guaranine, theine, and mateine are all synonyms for caffeine when the definitions of those words include none of the properties and chemicals of their host plants except caffeine. \nNatural sources of caffeine contain widely varying mixtures of xanthine alkaloids other than caffeine, including the cardiac stimulants theophylline, theobromine and other substances such as polyphenols, which can form insoluble complexes with caffeine. The main natural phenols found in guaran\u00e1 are (+)-catechin and (-)-epicatechin.\nThe table below contains a partial listing of some of the chemicals found in guaran\u00e1 seeds, although other parts of the plant also may contain them in varying quantities.\nCurrent production economics.\nProperties of guarana seeds make them valuable to several industrial sectors. The world's largest producer for guarana is Brazil at the moment, with most of its production consumed domestically. Around 45% of the total outputs are used by the soft drink and beverage industry. The rest of 55% is processed into syrups, powders and pharmaceutical products The past years demand for health-orientated and functional products has been grown leading to a rapid expansion of the guarana industry in Brazil. Guarana cultivation currently covers around 15'000 hectares primary located in the states of Bahia (around 6'500 ha) and Amazonas (around 8'100 ha). Increasing global demand led ultimately as well to increasing global import and export prices on guarana seeds. In 2023, import and export ranged from $1.88 to $52.64 USD per kg. These prices increased even further in 2024 to a new range of $12.11 to $56 USD per kg. Even tough demand for guarana seeds is globally rising, cultivation within Europe remains negligible. There is little published agronomic research on adapting guarana cultivation to Europe in regards to climate, soil or pest regimes. On top regulatory classification (see: European Medicines Agency, 2014) and low consumer familiarity are limiting spread of guarana as an alternative crop in Europe. Market reports estimate the European guarana market at around $0.69 billion USD in 2023 with a proposed growth to approximately $1.11 billion USD until 2030.\nUses.\nSafety.\nIn the United States, guaran\u00e1 fruit powder and seed extract have not been evaluated for the status of \"generally recognized as safe\" (GRAS) by the Food and Drug Administration, but rather are approved as food additives for flavor (but not non-flavor) uses.\nGuaran\u00e1 is used in sweetened or carbonated soft drinks and energy drinks, an ingredient of herbal teas or contained in dietary supplement capsules. South America obtains much of its caffeine from guaran\u00e1.\nBeverages.\nBrazil, the third-largest consumer of soft drinks in the world, produces several soft drink brands from the seeds of guaran\u00e1. A fermented drink is also prepared from guaran\u00e1 seeds, cassava and water. Paraguay is also a producer of guaran\u00e1 soft drinks with several brands operating in its market. The word \"guaran\u00e1\" is widely used in Brazil, Peru and Paraguay as a reference to soft drinks containing guaran\u00e1 extract.\nPop culture references.\nGuaran\u00e1 is a key plot device in the \"Murdoch Mysteries\" episodes \"Excitable Chap\" and \"From Murdoch to Eternity\", in which inventor James Pendrick creates an energy drink from a particularly potent strain of guaran\u00e1, which is ultimately plowed under to make way for the Panama Canal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69178", "revid": "46271059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69178", "title": "Bilabial consonant", "text": "Consonant articulated with both lips\nIn phonetics, a bilabial consonant is a labial consonant articulated with both lips.\nFrequency.\nBilabial consonants are very common across languages. Only around 0.7% of the world's languages lack bilabial consonants altogether, including Tlingit, Chipewyan, Oneida, and Wichita, though all of these have a labial\u2013velar approximant .\nVarieties.\nSome bilabial consonants identified by the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) are:\nOwere Igbo has a six-way contrast among bilabial stops: .\nOther varieties.\nThe extensions to the IPA also define a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;bilabial percussive () for smacking the lips together. A lip-smack in the non-percussive sense of the lips audibly parting would be .\nThe IPA chart shades out \"bilabial lateral consonants\", which is sometimes read as indicating that such sounds are not possible. The fricatives and are often lateral, but since no language makes a distinction for centrality, the allophony is not noticeable.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
