{"id": "70023", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70023", "title": "Mysore", "text": "City in Karnataka, India\nMysore ( ), officially Mysuru (), is a city in the southern Indian state of Karnataka. It is the headquarters of Mysore district and Mysore division. As the traditional seat of the Wadiyar dynasty, the city functioned as the capital of the Kingdom of Mysore for almost six centuries (1399 to 1947). Known for its heritage structures, palaces (such as the famous Mysore Palace), and its culture, Mysore has been called the \"City of Palaces\", the \"Heritage City\", and the \"Cultural capital of Karnataka\". It is the second-most populous city in the state and one of the cleanest cities in India according to the Swachh Survekshan.\nMysore is situated at the foothills of the Chamundi Hills. At an altitude of above mean sea level, the city of Mysore is geographically located at 12\u00b0 18\u2032 26\u2033 north latitude and 76\u00b0 38\u2032 59\u2033 east longitude. It is about southwest of the state's capital, Bangalore, and spreads across an area of (city and neighbouring census towns). The population of the city combined with its neighbouring towns in its metropolitan area is about 1,288,000 in 2023.\nMost of the city's development during modern times could be attributed to the maharajas of Mysore and the Wadiyar dynasty, who were patrons of art and culture. Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan, when they were briefly in power in succession, also contributed significantly to the economic growth of the city and the kingdom by planting mulberry trees and silk in the region, and fighting four wars against the British. In present days, the Mysore City Corporation is responsible for the civic administration of the city.\nDuring the Dasara festivals, Mysore receives hundreds of thousands of tourists from around the world. The city is also the namesake to various art forms and culture, such as Mysore Dasara and Mysore painting; foods such as the sweet delicacy Mysore pak; breakfasts like Mysore Dosa and Mysore Masala Dosa; brands such as Mysore Sandal Soap and Mysore Paints; and styles and cosmetics such as Mysore peta, a traditional silk turban, and the Mysore silk saris. Mysore is also known for betel leaves and its own special variety of jasmine flower fondly referred to as \"Mysore mallige\". Tourism is a lifeline industry for the city alongside the traditional industries. Mysore's intracity public transportation includes bus and intercity public transportation includes rail, bus, and air.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mysore\" is an anglicised form of \"Mahi\u1e63\u016bru\", which means \"the abode of \"Mahi\u1e63a\"\" in the vernacular Kannada. The common noun \"Mahi\u1e63a,\" in Sanskrit, means buffalo; in this context, however, \"Mahi\u1e63a\" refers to Mahishasura, a mythical daemon who could assume the form of either a human or a buffalo, and who, according to Hindu mythology, ruled the ancient parts of Mysore Kingdom, known in Sanskrit as \"Mahi\u1e63aka\", centred at \"Mahi\u1e63apura\". He was killed by the goddess Chamundeshwari, whose temple is situated atop the Chamundi Hill, after whom it is named. 'Mahishapura' later became \"Mahis\u016bru\" (a name which, even now, the royal family uses), and finally came to be rendered as \"Mysore\" by the British and \"Mais\u016bru\" (Mysuru) in the vernacular Kannada language.\nIn December 2005, the Government of Karnataka announced its intention to change the English spelling of the city to \"Mysuru\". This was approved by the Government of India in October 2014, and Mysore was officially renamed, along with twelve other cities, on 1 November 2014.\nHistory.\nThe site where Mysore Palace now stands was occupied by a village named Puragere at the beginning of the 16th century. The Mahish\u016bru Fort was constructed in 1524 by Chamaraja Wodeyar III (1513\u20131553), who passed on the dominion of \"Puragere\" to his son Chamaraja Wodeyar IV (1572\u20131576). Since the 16th century, the name of \"Mayash\u016bru\" has commonly been used to denote the city. The Kingdom of Mysore, governed by the Wodeyar family, initially served as a vassal state of the Vijayanagara Empire. With the decline of that empire after the Battle of Talikota in 1565, the Mysore Kingdom gradually achieved independence, and by the time of King Narasaraja Wodeyar (1637), it had become a sovereign state. Seringapatam, near Mysore, the present-day Srirangapatna, was the capital of the kingdom beginning in 1610. The 17th century saw a steady expansion of its territory and, under Narasaraja Wodeyar I and Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar, the kingdom annexed large areas of what is now southern Karnataka and parts of Tamil Nadu, to become a powerful state in the southern Deccan.\nThe kingdom reached the height of its military power and dominion in the latter half of the 18th\u00a0century, under the de facto rulers Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan. The latter demolished parts of Mysore to remove legacies of the Wodeyar dynasty. During this time, the kingdom of Mysore came into conflict with the Marathas, the British, and the Nizam of Hyderabad, leading to the four Anglo-Mysore wars, success in the first two of which was followed by defeat in the third and fourth. After Tipu Sultan's death in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War in 1799, the capital of the kingdom was moved back to Mysore from Seringapatam, and the kingdom was distributed by the British to their allies of the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War. Part of the kingdom was annexed into the Madras Presidency, another to the Nizam of Hyderabad. The landlocked interior of the defeated kingdom of Mysore was turned into a princely state under the suzerainty of the British Crown, with the five-year-old Wodeyar Krishnaraja III as titular ruler and with Purnaiah, who had served under Tipu, as chief minister or \"diwan\" and Lt. Col. Barry Close as Resident. The British took control of Mysore's foreign policy and insisted on an annual tribute for maintaining a standing British army at Mysore. Purnaiah is credited with improving Mysore's public works. In 1831, claiming there was maladministration, the British took direct control of the princely state. For the next fifty years, the kingdom of Mysore was under the direct rule of British Commissioners, and in 1831 the city of Mysore lost its status as the administrative centre, when the British Commissioner moved the capital to Bangalore.\nIn 1876\u201377, towards the end of the period of direct British rule, Mysore suffered from the Great Famine of 1876\u20131878, in which nearly a fifth of the population died. In 1881, Maharaja Chamaraja Wadiyar X was given control of Mysore, in a process called rendition, but with a resident British officer and a diwan to handle the Maharaja's administration, and the city of Mysore regained its status as the capital. The Mysore municipality was established in 1888 and the city was divided into eight wards. In 1897 an outbreak of bubonic plague killed nearly half of the population of the city. With the establishment of the City Improvement Trust Board (CITB) in 1903, Mysore became one of the first cities in Asia to undertake planned urban development. Public demonstrations and meetings were held there during the Quit India movement and other phases of the Indian independence movement.\nUntil the independence of British India (which did not include Mysore) in 1947, Mysore remained a Princely State within the British Indian Empire, with the Wodeyars continuing their rule. After Indian Independence, Mysore city remained as part of the Mysore State, now known as Karnataka. Jayachamarajendra Wodeyar, then king of Mysore, was allowed to retain his titles and was nominated as the \"Rajapramukh\" (appointed governor) of the state with a \u00a320,000 payment. He died in September 1974 and was cremated in Mysore.\nOver the years, Mysore became well known as a centre for tourism; the city remained largely peaceful, except for occasional riots related to the Kaveri River Water Dispute. Among the events that took place in Mysore and made national headlines were a fire at a television studio that claimed 62 lives in 1989, and the sudden deaths of many animals at the Mysore Zoo.\nGeography.\nArea and extent.\nMysore is located at and has an average altitude of . It is spread across an area of at the base of the Chamundi Hills in the southern region of Karnataka. Mysore is the southernmost city of Karnataka and is a neighbouring city of the states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu in the south, flanked by the state cities Madikeri, Chamarajanagara, and Mandya. People in and around Mysore extensively use Kannada as a medium of language. Mysore has several lakes, such as the Kukkarahalli, the Karanji, and the Lingambudhi lakes. Mysore has The Biggest 'Walk-Through Aviary' called Karanji Lake in India. In 2001, total land area usage in Mysore city was 39.9%\u00a0residential, 16.1%\u00a0roads, 13.74%\u00a0parks and open spaces, 13.48%\u00a0industrial, 8.96%\u00a0public property, 3.02%\u00a0commercial, 2.27%\u00a0agriculture and 2.02\u00a0water. The city is located between two rivers: the Kaveri River that flows through the north of the city and the Kabini River, a tributary of the Kaveri, that lies to the south.\nClimate.\nMysore has a tropical savanna climate (\"Aw\") bordering on a hot semi-arid climate (\"BSh\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The main seasons are Summer from March to May, the monsoon season from June to October and winter from November to February. The highest temperature recorded in Mysore was on 25\u00a0April 2016, and the lowest was on 16 January 2012. The city's average annual rainfall is .\nRainfall.\nAs per Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre, Mysore taluk has been divided into 4 hoblis. In 2022, the rainfall received by these hoblis are as follows:\nOverall, Mysore taluk received 67% of excess rainfall in the year 2022.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2011[ [update]], Mysore city had an estimated population of 920,550\u00a0consisting of 461,042\u00a0males and 459,508\u00a0females, making it the third most populous city in Karnataka Mysore urban agglomeration is the second largest urban agglomeration in the state and is home to 1,060,120\u00a0people, consisting of 497,132\u00a0males and 493,762\u00a0females. According to 2011\u00a0census, Mysore was the largest non-metropolitan city in India and had the highest basic infrastructure index of 2.846. Mysore was estimated to have crossed 1\u00a0million in 2017\u00a0making it a metropolitan city. For the year 2022, the projected population of Mysuru Metropolitan Area, which includes Mysore City Corporation, Hootagalli City Municipal Council, and Bogadi, Srirampura, Rammanahalli and Kadakola Town Panchayats is 1,261,000, as per the United Nation's World Urbanization Prospects - 2018.\nThe gender ratio of Mysore is 1,000\u00a0females to every 1,000\u00a0males and the population density is . According to the census of 2001, 73.65%\u00a0of the city population are Hindus, 21.92%\u00a0are Muslims, 2.71%\u00a0are Christians, 1.13%\u00a0are Jains and the remainder belong to other religions. The population exceeded 100,000 in the census of 1931 and grew by 20.5\u00a0per cent in the decade 1991\u20132001. As of 2011[ [update]], the literacy rate of the city is 86.84\u00a0per cent, which is higher than the state's average of 75.6\u00a0per cent.\nKannada is the most widely spoken language in the city. Approximately 19%\u00a0of the population live below the poverty line, and 9%\u00a0live in slums. According to the 2001 census, 35.75% of the population in the urban areas of Karnataka are workers, but only 33.3% of the population of Mysore are. Members of Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes constitute 15.1% of the population. According to the National Crime Records Bureau of India, the number of cognisable crime incidents reported in Mysore during 2010\u00a0was 3,407\u00a0(second in the state, after Bangalore's 32,188), increasing from 3,183\u00a0incidents reported in 2009.\nThe residents of the city are known as \"Mysoreans\" in English and \"Mysoorinavaru\" in Kannada. The dispute between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over the sharing of Kaveri river water often leads to minor altercations and demonstrations in the city. Growth in the information technology industry in Mysore has led to a change in the city's demographic profile; likely strains on the infrastructure and haphazard growth of the city resulting from the demographic change have been a cause of concern for some of its citizens.\nAdministration and utilities.\nThe civic administration of the city is managed by the Mysore City Corporation, which was established as a municipality in 1888\u00a0and converted into a corporation in 1977. Overseeing engineering works, health, sanitation, water supply, administration and taxation, the corporation is headed by a Mayor, who is assisted by commissioners and council members. The city is divided into 65\u00a0wards and the council members (also known as \"corporators\") are elected by the citizens of Mysore every five years. The council members, in turn, elect the mayor. The annual budget of the corporation for the year 2011\u20132012 was (). Among 63\u00a0cities covered under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, Mysore City Corporation was adjudged the second-best city municipal corporation and was given the \"Nagara Ratna\" award in 2011. The present MCC Commissioner is Shri.Tanveer Asif.\nUrban growth and expansion is managed by the Mysore Urban Development Authority (MUDA), which is headed by a commissioner. Its activities include developing new layouts and roads, town planning and land acquisition. One of the major projects undertaken by MUDA is the creation of an Outer Ring Road to ease traffic congestion. Citizens of Mysore have criticised MUDA for its inability to prevent land mafias and ensure lawful distribution of housing lands among city residents. The Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation is responsible for electric supply to the city.\nDrinking water for Mysore is sourced from the Kaveri and Kabini rivers. The city got its first piped water supply when the Belagola project was commissioned in 1896. As of 2011[ [update]], Mysore gets of water per day. Mysore sometimes faces water crises, mainly during the summer months (March\u2013June) and in years of low rainfall. The city has had an underground drainage system since 1904. The entire sewage from the city drains into four valleys: Kesare, Malalavadi, Dalavai and Belavatha. In an exercise carried out by the Urban Development Ministry under the national urban sanitation policy, Mysore was rated the second cleanest city in India in 2010 and the cleanest in Karnataka. In Mysore, the Jal Diwali Campaign empowered SHGs to collectively address water conservation challenges. 90 women heads of 30 women\u2019s Self-Help Groups (SHGs) in Mysuru city were introduced to the nitty-gritty of water supply, by a visit to Mysuru City Corporation\u2019s (MCC) Water Treatment Plant at Hongalli near Krishna Raja Sagar (KRS) Dam in Mandya district.\nThe citizens of Mysore elect five representatives to the Legislative assembly of Karnataka through the constituencies of Chamaraja, Krishnaraja, Narasimharaja, Hunsur and Chamundeshwari. Mysore city, being part of the larger Mysore Lok Sabha constituency, also elects one member to the Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Indian Parliament. The politics in the city is dominated by three political parties: the Indian National Congress (INC), the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and the Janata Dal (Secular) (JDS).\nEconomy.\nTourism and IT are the major industries in Mysore. The city attracted about 3.15\u00a0million tourists in 2010. Mysore has traditionally been home to industries such as weaving, sandalwood carving, bronze work and the production of lime and salt. It has many big IT companies like Infosys and Wipro. The planned industrial growth of the city and the state was first envisaged at the \"Mysore economic conference\" in 1911. This led to the establishment of industries such as the Mysore Sandalwood Oil Factory in 1917\u00a0and the Sri Krishnarajendra Mills in 1920. Mysore has emerged as an industrial hub in Karnataka next to Bangalore. Mysore is part of the Bidar-Mysore Industrial Corridor. Major drivers of the economy are tourism, finance, manufacturing and industry which includes chemicals, petrochemicals, machinery, automobile, engineering, textiles and food processing sectors. A new industrial corridor plan is underway between Mysore and Bangalore.\nFor the industrial development of the city, the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board (KIADB) has established four industrial areas in and around Mysore, in the Belagola, Belawadi, Hebbal and Hootagalli areas. One of the major industrial areas near Mysore is Nanjangud which will be a satellite town to Mysore. Nanjangud industrial area hosts a number of industries like AT&amp;S India Pvt Ltd, Nestle India ltd, Reid and Taylor, Jubiliant, TVS, and Asian Paints. Nanjangud Industrial area also boasts being 2nd\u00a0highest VAT / Sales Taxpayer which is more than () after Peenya which is in state capital Bangalore. JK Tyre has its manufacturing facility in Mysore. The city has emerged as a hub of automobile industries in Karnataka.\nThe major software companies in Mysore are Infosys, ArisGlobal, Larsen &amp; Toubro Infotech, Excelsoft Technologies and Triveni Engineering. The growth of the information technology industry in the first decade of the 21st century has resulted in the city emerging as the second largest software exporter in Karnataka (as of[ [update]]), next to Bangalore. Mysore also has many shopping malls, including the Mall of Mysore which is one of the largest malls in India and Karnataka. Retail is also a major part of the economy in Mysore.\nMysore also hosts many central government organisations like CFTRI, DFRL, CIPET, BEML, RMP (Rare Material Project), RBI Note printing Press and RBI Paper Printing Press.\nCulture.\nReferred to as the \"cultural capital\" of Karnataka, Mysore is well known for the festivities that take place during the period of \"Dasara\"; the state festival of Karnataka. The \"Dasara\" festivities, which are celebrated over a ten-day period, were first introduced by King Raja Wodeyar I in 1610. On the ninth day of \"Dasara\", called \"Mahanavami\", the royal sword is worshipped and is taken on a procession of decorated elephants, camels and horses. On the tenth day, called \"Vijayadashami\", the traditional \"Dasara\" procession (locally known as \"Jumboo Savari\") is held on the streets of Mysore which usually falls in the month of September or October. The idol of the goddess Chamundeshwari is placed on a golden \"mantapa\" on the back of a decorated elephant and taken on a procession, accompanied by tabla, dance groups, music bands, decorated elephants, horses and camels. The procession starts from the Mysore Palace and culminates at a place called Bannimantapa, where the \"banni\" tree (\"Prosopis spicigera\") is worshipped. The \"Dasara\" festivities culminate on the night of \"Vijayadashami\" with a torchlight parade, known locally as \"Panjina Kavayatthu\".\nMysore is called the \"City of Palaces\" because of several ornate examples in the city. Among the most notable are Amba Vilas, popularly known as Mysore Palace; Jaganmohana Palace, which also serves as an art gallery; Rajendra Vilas, also known as the summer palace; Lalitha Mahal, which has been converted into a hotel; and Jayalakshmi Vilas. The palace of Mysore burned down in 1897, and the present structure was built on the same site. Amba Vilas palace exhibits an Indo-Saracenic style of architecture on the outside, but a distinctly Hoysala style in the interior. Even though the Government of Karnataka maintains the Mysore palace, a small portion has been allocated for the erstwhile royal family to live in. The Jayalakshmi Vilas Mansion was constructed by Sri Chamaraja Wodeyar for his daughter Jayalakshammanni. It is now a museum dedicated to folk culture and artefacts of the royal family.\nThe Mysore painting style is an offshoot of the Vijayanagar school of painting, and King Raja Wodeyar (1578\u20131617 CE) is credited with having been its patron. The distinctive feature of these paintings is the \"gesso\" work, to which gold foil is applied. Mysore is known for rosewood inlay work; around 4,000\u00a0craftsmen were involved in this art in 2002. The city lends its name to the Mysore silk sari, a women's garment made with pure silk and gold \"zari\" (thread). \"Mysore Peta\", the traditional indigenous turban worn by the erstwhile rulers of Mysore, is worn by men in some traditional ceremonies. A notable local dessert that traces its history to the kitchen in the Mysore palace is \"Mysore pak\".\nMysore is the location of the International Ganjifa Research Centre, which researches the ancient card game \"Ganjifa\" and the art associated with it. The Chamarajendra Academy of Visual Arts (CAVA) offers education in visual art forms such as painting, graphics, sculpture, applied art, photography, photojournalism and art history. The Rangayana repertory company performs plays and offers certificate courses in subjects related to theatre. Kannada writers Kuvempu, Gopalakrishna Adiga and U. R. Ananthamurthy were educated in Mysore and served as professors at the Mysore University. R. K. Narayan, a popular English-language novelist and creator of the fictional town of Malgudi, and his cartoonist brother R. K. Laxman spent much of their life in Mysore.\nTourism.\nMysore is a major tourist destination in its own right and serves as a base for other tourist attractions in the vicinity. The city receives many tourists during the ten-day \"Dasara\" festival. One of the most visited monuments in India, the Amba Vilas Palace, or Mysore Palace, is the centre of the \"Dasara\" festivities. The Jaganmohana Palace, The Sand Sculpture Museum the Jayalakshmi Vilas and the Lalitha Mahal are other palaces in the city. Chamundeshwari Temple, atop the Chamundi Hills, and St. Philomena's Church, Wesley's Cathedral, Karanji lake are notable religious places in Mysore.\nThe Mysore Zoo, established in 1892, the Karanji, Kukkarahalli and the Blue Lagoon Lake are popular recreational destinations. Blue Lagoon is a lake with a mini-island located behind the KrishnaRajaSagar (KRS) water dam, from which it is mesmerising to watch the sunset and sunrise. Mysore has the Regional Museum of Natural History, the Folk Lore Museum, the Railway Museum and the Oriental Research Institute. The city is a centre for yoga-related health tourism that attracts domestic and foreign visitors, particularly those who, for years, came to study with the late Ashtanga vinyasa yoga guru K. Pattabhi Jois.\nA short distance from Mysore city is the neighbouring Mandya District's Krishnarajasagar Dam and the adjoining Brindavan Gardens, where a musical fountain show is held every evening. Places of historic importance close to Mysore are Mandya District's Ranganathaswamy Temple, Srirangapatna. And other historical places are Somanathapura and Talakad. B R Hills, Himavad Gopalaswamy Betta hill and the hill stations of Ooty, Sultan Bathery and Madikeri are close to Mysore. Popular destinations for wildlife enthusiasts near Mysore include the Nagarahole National Park, the wildlife sanctuaries at Melkote, Mandya and B R Hills and the bird sanctuaries at Ranganathittu, Mandya and Kokrebellur, Mandya. Bandipur National Park and Mudumalai National Park in Tamil Nadu, which are sanctuaries for gaur, chital, elephants, tigers, leopards and other threatened species, lie between to the south. Other tourist spots near Mysore include the religious locations of Nanjanagud and Bylakuppe and the waterfalls at neighbouring districts of Mandya's Shivanasamudra. Known for their royal grandeur, the annual Mysore Dasara celebrations are a major tourist attraction and attract large number of tourists every year.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nMysore is connected by National Highway 212 (India) to the state border town of Gundlupet, where the road forks into the states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. State Highway 17, which connects Mysore to Bangalore, was upgraded to a four-lane highway in 2006, reducing travel time between the two cities. A project was planned in 1994\u00a0to construct a new expressway to connect Bangalore and Mysore. After numerous legal hurdles, it remains unfinished as of 2012[ [update]]. State Highway 33\u00a0and National Highway 275 which connect Mysore to H D Kote and Mangalore respectively. The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) and other private agencies operate buses both within the city and between cities. A new division of KSRTC called Mysore City Transport Corporation (MCTC) has been proposed. Within the city, buses are cheap and popular means of transport, auto-rickshaws are also available and \"tongas\" (horse-drawn carriages) are popular with tourists.\nMysore also has a long ring road that is being upgraded to six lanes by the MUDA. Mysore has implemented Intelligent Transport System (ITS) to manage its city buses and ferrying commuters.\nRTO code of Mysore West is KA09 and Mysore East is KA55.\nTrin Trin PBS.\nA public bicycle-sharing system, Trin Trin, funded partially by the United Nations is popular mode of transport. It is a government project. It is the first public bike-sharing system throughout India. The key objective of Trin Trin is to encourage local commuters, as well as visitors, to use the bicycle in preference to motorised modes of travel and thereby help scale down the multifarious environmental and road-traffic hazards, enhance conveyance convenience, and make local daily commutes economical for the common citizen.\nRail.\nMysore railway station has three lines, connecting it to Bangalore, Mangalore, and Chamarajanagar. The first railway line established in the city was the Bangalore\u2013Mysore Junction metre gauge line, which was commissioned in 1882. Railway lines that connect the city to Chamarajanagara and Mangalore are unelectrified single track and the track that connects to Bengaluru is electrified double track. Mysore Railway Junction comes under the jurisdiction of South Western Railway Zone. Within the city limits of Mysore, there are two small stations in the line which connects Chamarajanagara. They are Ashokpuram and Chamarajapuram. The fastest train to serve the city is the Shatabdi Express which goes to Chennai via Bangalore. A satellite terminal is planned at Naganahalli to reduce congestion in the main railway station. On 20 June 2022, Prime Minister Narendra Modi laid the foundation to upgrade the present city railway junction. The \u20b9 project envisages construction of another three platforms, four pit lines and four stabling lines to make nine platforms. Additionally, the Naganahali station will be expanded with a coach complex and MEMU hub, and two more platforms to reduce congestion in the city railway junction.\nAir.\nMysore Airport is a domestic airport and is located near the village of Mandakalli, 10 kilometres south of the centre of the city. It was built by the kings of Mysore in early 1940s. Mysore Airport currently serves the city of Mysore and is connected to multiple domestic locations including Chennai and Hyderabad. The current runway is not able to handle big flights and hence a runway expansion is about to take place expanding the runway from 1.7\u00a0km to 2.8\u00a0km and will be upgraded to international airport after the expansion. The nearest International airport is Bangalore Airport.\nEducation.\nBefore the advent of the European system of education in Mysore, \"Agraharas\" (Brahmin quarters) provided Vedic education to Hindus, and \"madrassas\" provided schooling for Muslims. Modern education began in Mysore when a free English school was established in 1833. Maharaja's College was founded in 1864. A high school exclusively for girls was established in 1881\u00a0and was later renamed \"Maharani's Women's College\". The \"Industrial School\", the first institute for technical education in the city, was established in 1892; this was followed by the Chamarajendra Technical Institute in 1913. While the modern system of education have made inroads, colleges such as the \"Mysore Sanskrit P\u0101tha\u015bh\u0101la\", established in 1876, still continue to provide Vedic education.\nThe education system was enhanced by the establishment of the University of Mysore in 1916. This was the sixth university to be established in India and the first in Karnataka. It was named \"Manasagangotri\" (\"fountainhead of the Ganges of the mind\") by the poet Kuvempu. The university caters to the districts of Mysore, Mandya, Hassan and Chamarajanagar in Karnataka. About 127 colleges, with a total of 53,000 students, are affiliated with the university. Its alumni include Kuvempu, Gopalakrishna Adiga, S. L. Bhyrappa, U. R. Ananthamurthy and N.R. Narayana Murthy. Engineering education began in Mysore with the establishment in 1946 of the National Institute of Engineering, the second oldest engineering college in the state. The Mysore Medical College, founded in 1924, was the first medical college to be started in Karnataka and the seventh in India. National institutes in the city include te Central Food Technological Research Institute, the Central Institute of Indian Languages, the Defence Food Research Laboratory, and the All India Institute of Speech and Hearing. The city houses a campus multi-campus, multi-disciplinary private deemed university, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham.\nMedia.\nNewspaper publishing in Mysore started in 1859\u00a0when Bhashyam Bhashyacharya began publishing a weekly newspaper in Kannada called the \"Mysooru Vrittanta Bodhini\", the first of a number of weekly newspapers published in the following three decades. A well-known Mysore publisher during Wodeyar rule was M. Venkatakrishnaiah, known as the father of Kannada journalism, who started several news magazines. Many local newspapers are published in Mysore and carry news mostly related to the city and its surroundings, and national and regional dailies in English and Kannada are available, as in the other parts of the state. Sudharma, the only Indian daily newspaper in Sanskrit, is published in Mysore.\nMysore was the location of the first private radio broadcasting station in India when \"Akashavani\" (voice from the sky) was established in the city on 10 September 1935\u00a0by M.V. Gopalaswamy, a professor of psychology, at his house in the Vontikoppal area of Mysore, using a 50-watt transmitter. The station was taken over by the princely state of Mysore in 1941\u00a0and was moved to Bangalore in 1955. In 1957, \"Akashvani\" was chosen as the official name of All India Radio (AIR), the radio broadcaster of the Government of India. The AIR station at Mysore broadcasts an FM radio channel at 100.6\u00a0MHz, and Gyan Vani broadcasts on 105.6. BIG FM, Radio Mirchi and Red FM are the three private FM channels operating in the city.\nMysore started receiving television broadcasts in the early 1980s, when Doordarshan (public service broadcaster of the Indian government) started broadcasting its national channel all over India. This was the only channel available to Mysoreans until Star TV started satellite channels in 1991. Direct-to-home channels are now available in Mysore.\nSports.\nThe Wodeyar kings of Mysore were patrons of games and sports. King Krishnaraja Wodeyar III had a passion for indoor games. He invented new board games and popularised the \"ganjifa\" card game. Malla-yuddha (traditional wrestling) has a history in Mysore dating back to the 16th\u00a0century. The wrestling competition held in Mysore during the \"Dasara\" celebrations attracts wrestlers from all over India. An annual sports meeting is organised there during the \"Dasara\" season too.\nIn 1997\u00a0Mysore and Bangalore co-hosted the city's biggest sports event ever, the National Games of India. Mysore was the venue for six sports: archery, gymnastics, equestrianism, handball, table tennis and wrestling. Cricket is by far the most popular sport in Mysore. The city has five established cricket grounds. Javagal Srinath, who represented India for several years as its frontline fast bowler, comes from Mysore. Other prominent sportsmen from the city are Prahlad Srinath, who has represented India in Davis Cup tennis tournaments; Reeth Abraham, a national champion in the heptathlon and a long jump record holder; Sagar Kashyap, the youngest Indian to officiate at the Wimbledon Championships; and Rahul Ganapathy, a national amateur golf champion. The Mysore race course hosts a racing season each year from August through October. India's first youth hostel was formed in the Maharaja's College Hostel in 1949.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70024", "revid": "915833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70024", "title": "Maine Coon", "text": "Breed of cat\nBreed of cat\nThe Maine Coon is a large domesticated cat breed. One of the oldest natural breeds in North America, it originated in the U.S. state of Maine, where it is the official state cat.\nThe Maine Coon is a large and social cat, commonly referred to as \"the gentle giant.\" The Maine Coon is predominantly known for its size and dense coat of fur which helps it survive in the harsh climate of Maine. The Maine Coon is often cited as having \"dog-like\" characteristics.\nHistory.\nThe Maine Coon is one of the largest domesticated cats. It has a distinctive physical appearance and valuable hunting skills. The breed was popular in cat shows in the late 19th century, but its existence became threatened when long-haired breeds from overseas were introduced in the early 20th century. The Maine Coon has since made a comeback, and in 2025 the Maine Coon overtook the Ragdoll, becoming the most registered cat breed with the Cat Fanciers' Association.\nOrigin.\nMyths.\nMaine Coon cats are known to have originated in Maine. However, their lineage is surrounded by mystery, folk tales, and myths. One myth claims that the Maine Coon cat is a hybrid with another animal species, such as the raccoon or bobcat. Another myth suggests that the cats are descendants of Viking ship's cats, known today as the Norwegian Forest cats. A third story involves Marie Antoinette, the Queen of France who was executed in 1793. According to this tale, before her death, Antoinette attempted to escape from France with the help of Captain Samuel Clough, loading his ship with her most prized possessions, including six of her favorite Turkish Angora or possibly Siberian cats. Although she did not reach the United States, her pets supposedly arrived safely at Wiscasset, Maine, where they bred with other short-haired cats and contributed to the development of the modern Maine Coon breed.\nScience.\nThese myths and theories have long speculated that the long-haired Maine Coon cat has to be related to other long-haired breeds, due to their similarities in phenotype. This is true for the Maine Coon in particular, that it is descended from the Norwegian or Siberian Forest cat, brought to New England by settlers or Vikings. Phylogenetic studies showed that the Maine Coon belongs to the Western European monophyletic cat branch, but forms the closest relationship with the random-bred cat population in the Northeastern US (New York region). This Western European branch contains the Norwegian and Siberian Forest cat, but they fall under a different sub-branch.\nMaine Coons are descendants of cats brought to New England by Puritan settlers in the 1600\u20131700s, and out of the European cats they are genetically closest to cats found in the United Kingdom. It is not relatedness that makes them look similar to the Norwegian and Siberian Forest cats, but convergent evolution. These breeds all formed in harsh climates, in which natural selection pressures for similar qualities. Thick, long coats, toe and ear tufts, big bodies, and snowshoe-like big feet, are useful traits in all the harsh climates where these breeds originate.\nCat shows and popularity.\nThe first mention of Maine Coon cats in a literary work was in 1861, in Frances Simpson's \"The Book of the Cat\" (1903). F.R. Pierce, who owned several Maine Coons, wrote a chapter about the breed. During the late 1860s, farmers located in Maine told stories about their cats and held the \"Maine State Champion Coon Cat\" contest at the local Skowhegan Fair.\nIn 1895, a dozen Maine Coons were entered into a show in Boston. On 8 May 1895, the first North American cat show was hosted at Madison Square Garden in New York City. A female Maine Coon brown tabby, named Cosey, was entered into the show. Owned by Mrs. Fred Brown, Cosey won the silver collar and medal and was named Best in Show. The silver collar was purchased by the Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) Foundation with the help of a donation from the National Capital Cat Show. The collar is housed at the CFA Central Office in the Jean Baker Rose Memorial Library.\nIn the early 20th century, the Maine Coon's popularity began to decline with the introduction of other long-haired breeds, such as the Persian, which originated in the Middle East. The last recorded win by a Maine Coon in a national cat show for over 40 years was in 1911 at a show in Portland, Oregon. The breed was rarely seen after that. The decline was so severe that the breed was declared extinct in the 1950s, although this declaration was considered to be exaggerated and reported prematurely at the time. The Central Maine Cat Club (CMCC) was created in the early 1950s by Ethylin Whittemore, Alta Smith, and Ruby Dyer in an attempt to increase the popularity of the Maine Coon. For 11 years, the CMCC held cat shows and hosted exhibitions of photographs of the breed and is noted for creating the first written breed standards for the Maine Coon.\nThe Maine Coon was denied provisional breed status\u2014one of the three steps required for a breed not yet recognized by the CFA to be able to compete in championship competitions\u2014by the CFA three times, which led to the formation of the Maine Coon Cat Club in 1973. The breed was accepted by the CFA under provisional status in May 1975, and was approved for championship status in May 1976. The next couple of decades saw a rise in the popularity of the Maine Coon, with championship victories and an increase in national rankings. In 1985, the state of Maine announced that the breed would be named the official state cat.\nDescription.\nFur coat.\nThe Maine Coon is a long- or medium-haired cat. The coat is soft and silky, although texture may vary with coat color. The length is shorter on the head and shoulders and longer on the stomach and flanks, with some cats having a leonine ruff around their neck. Minimal grooming is required for the breed compared to other long-haired breeds, as their double coat is mostly self-maintaining owing to a light-density undercoat. The coat is subject to seasonal variation, with the fur being thicker in the winter and thinner during the summer.\nMaine Coons have several physical adaptations for survival in harsh winter climates. Their dense water-resistant fur is longer and shaggier on their underside and rear for extra protection when they are walking or sitting on top of wet surfaces of snow or ice. Their long and bushy raccoon-like tail is resistant to sinking in snow, and can be curled around their face and shoulders for warmth and protection from wind and blowing snow. It can even be curled around their backside like an insulated seat cushion when sitting down on a frozen surface.\nLarge paws facilitate walking on snow and are often compared to snowshoes. Long tufts of fur growing between their toes help keep the toes warm and further aid walking on snow by giving the paws additional structure without significant extra weight. Heavily furred ears with extra long tufts of fur growing from inside can keep warm more easily.\nCoat colors.\nMaine Coons can have any colors that other cats have. Colors indicating crossbreeding, such as chocolate, lavender, the Siamese pointed patterns or the \"ticked\" patterns, are not accepted by some breed standards. This is not universal; the ticked pattern, for example, is accepted by TICA and CFA. The most common pattern seen in the breed is brown tabby. All eye colors are accepted under breed standards, with the exception of blue or odd-eyes, i.e. heterochromia iridium (two eyes of different colors), in cats possessing coat colors other than white.\nSize.\nThe Maine Coon was considered the largest breed of domestic cat until the introduction of the Savannah cat in the mid-1980s, yet it is still the largest non-hybrid breed. On average, males weigh from , with females weighing from . The height of adults can vary between and they can reach a length of up to , including the tail, which can reach a length of and is long, tapering, and heavily furred, almost resembling a raccoon's tail. The body is solid and muscular, which is necessary for supporting their weight, and the chest is broad. Maine Coons possess a rectangular body shape and are slow to physically mature; their full size is normally not reached until they are three to five years old, while other cats take about one year.\nIn 2010, the \"Guinness World Records\" accepted a male purebred Maine Coon named \"Stewie\" as the \"Longest Cat\", measuring from the tip of his nose to the tip of his tail. Stewie died on February 4, 2013, from cancer at his home in Reno, Nevada, at age\u00a08. As of 2015 the living record-holder for \"Longest Cat\" is \"Ludo\", measuring . He lives in Wakefield, England, in the United Kingdom. \nLarge Maine Coons can overlap in length with Eurasian lynxes, although with a much lighter build and lower height.\nPolydactylism.\nMany of the original Maine Coon cats that inhabited the New England area possessed a trait known as polydactylism (having one or more extra toes on a paw). With the 1970s revival of the interest in the breed, Maine Coon cats were noted to show an increased incidence of polydactylism compared to other breeds. Subsequently, breeders of show-standard cats were advised to regard this variation as undesirable and to offer affected kittens as household pets. The trait later became separately certified by some organizations, like The International Cat Association (TICA). Meanwhile, in increasing numbers of cat fancy competitions, the trait is no longer marked down.\nPolydactylism is rarely, if ever, seen in Maine Coons in the show ring, since it is not allowed by competition standards. The gene for polydactylism is a simple autosomal dominant gene. The genetic mutations which cause polydactylism in Maine Coons do not appear to cause other health problems. Polydactyly in Maine Coon cats is characterised by broad phenotypic diversity. Polydactyly not only affects digit number and conformation, but also carpus and tarsus conformation. The trait was almost eradicated from the breed due to the fact that it was an automatic disqualifier in show rings. Some private organizations and breeders were created in order to preserve polydactylism in Maine Coon cats.\nHealth.\nLife expectancy.\nPet insurance data obtained from a study during years\u00a02003\u20132006 in Sweden puts the median lifespan of the Maine Coon at &gt;\u00a012.5\u00a0years. 74% lived to 10\u00a0years or more and 54% lived to 12.5\u00a0years or more. A UK study found a life expectancy of 9.71 years for Maine Coons, compared to 11.74 years for all cats.\nHeart.\nHypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) has been observed in Maine Coon populations. A mutation in the MYBPC3 gene found in Maine Coons has been associated with HCM.\nOf all the Maine Coons tested for the MyBPC mutation at the Veterinary Cardiac Genetics Lab at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Washington State University, approximately one-third tested positive. Not all cats that test positive will have clinical signs of the disease, and some Maine Coon cats with clinical evidence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy test negative for this mutation, strongly suggesting that a second mutation exists in the breed. The HCM prevalence was found to be 10.1% (95% CI 5.8 -14.3%) in this study. Early growth and nutrition, larger body size, and obesity may be environmental modifiers of genetic predisposition to HCM.\nKidney.\nPolycystic kidney disease (PKD) is an inherited condition in cats that causes multiple cysts (pockets of fluid) to form in the kidneys. These cysts are present from birth. Initially, they are very small, but they grow larger over time and may eventually disrupt kidney function, resulting in kidney failure. While renal cysts are observed with a low incidence in Maine Coons, PKD appears to be a misnomer in this particular breed. In a 2013 study, spanning 8\u00a0years, renal cysts were documented by ultrasound in 7 of 187\u00a0healthy Maine Coons enrolled in a pre-breeding screening programme. The cysts were mostly single and unilateral (6/7, 85.7%), small (mean 3.6\u00a0mm in diameter), and located at the corticomedullary junction (4/6, 66.7%), thus, different in size, number, and location from those observed in Persian-related breeds. In the same study, all six Maine Coon cats with renal cysts tested negative for the PKD1 mutation, proving the disease in these cats to be unrelated to the PKD observed in Persians and related breeds. Gene sequencing of these cats failed to demonstrate any common genetic sequences. Gendron et al. found that 'Maine Coon PKD' represents a form of juvenile nephropathy other than PKD.\nSkeletal, joint and muscle.\nHip dysplasia is an abnormality of the hip joint which can cause crippling lameness and arthritis. The cats most commonly affected with hip dysplasia tend to be males of the larger, big-boned breeds such as Persians and Maine Coons. Smaller and lighter cats frequently experience less severe symptoms. X-rays submitted to the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA) between 1974 and 2011 indicates that 24.3% of Maine Coons in the database were dysplastic. Dysplasia was more severe in bilateral than unilateral cases and with increasing age.\nThe Maine Coon is one of the more commonly affected breeds for spinal muscular atrophy. An autosomal recessive mutation in both the LIX1 and LNPEP gene are responsible for the condition in the breed.\nOther.\nMaine Coons also seem to be predisposed to develop entropion, mainly on the lateral aspect of the eyelids, which can lead to corneal irritation and ulceration, and may require surgery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70025", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70025", "title": "American Curl", "text": "Breed of cat\nBreed of cat\nThe American Curl is a cat characterised by its unusual ears, which curl back from the face toward the center of the back of the skull. The breed originated in Lakewood, California, due to a spontaneous mutation.\nHistory.\nThe first American Curls appeared as strays on the doorstep of the Rugas in Lakewood, California in June 1981. The black female, named Shulamith, gave birth to a litter of cats with the same curled ears, and so became the ancestor of all American Curls today. In 1986, an American Curl was exhibited at a cat show for the first time, and in 1992, the longhaired American Curl was given championship status by The International Cat Association (TICA). In 1999, the American Curl became the first breed admitted to the Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) Championship Class with both longhair and shorthair divisions.\nThe American Curl is a medium-sized cat , and does not reach maturity until 2\u20133 years of age. Females should be between and males .\nAmerican Curl kittens are born with straight ears, which begin to curl within forty-eight hours. After four months, their ears will not curl any longer, and should be hard and stiff to the touch at the base of the ear with flexible tips. A pet-quality American Curl may have almost straight ears, but showcats must have ears that curl in an arc between 90 and 180 degrees. A 90 degrees is preferable, but cats will be disqualified if their ears touch the back of their skulls.\nBoth longhaired and shorthaired American Curls have soft, silky coats which lie flat against their bodies. They require little grooming and enjoy spending time with their owners and generally get along well with other animals and people who aren't their owners. \nThe American Curl, while still an uncommon breed, is found across the world in the United States, Spain, France, Japan, Russia, and many other countries.\nGenetics and Health.\nVarious matings between cats with curled ears and cats without curled ears revealed a dominant inheritance of the curl gene. Sex-linked distribution was not found. The mutant gene was designated as curl and is symbolized by Cu. Another mutation of the ear pinna was found in Scottish Fold cats. In these cats both heterozygous and homozygous (FdFd) cats, animals suffer from osteochondrodysplasia. The question arises if homozygous curls (CuCu) could also be affected by cartilage formation defects and bone abnormalities. However, observations of a CuCu cat over two years showed no sign of anomaly.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70026", "revid": "47093768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70026", "title": "Charles IX of Sweden", "text": "King of Sweden from 1604 to 1611\nCharles IX, also Carl (; 4 October 1550 \u2013 30 October 1611), reigned as King of Sweden from 1604 until 1611. He was the youngest son of King Gustav I (r.\u20091523\u00a0\u2013\u00a01560) and of his second wife, Margaret Leijonhufvud, the brother of King Eric XIV and of King John III, and the uncle of Sigismund, who became king both of Sweden and of Poland. By his father's will Charles received, by way of appanage, the Duchy of S\u00f6dermanland, which included the provinces of N\u00e4rke and V\u00e4rmland; but he did not come into actual possession of them till after the fall of Eric and the succession to the throne of John in 1569.\nBoth Charles and one of his predecessors, Eric XIV (r.\u20091560\u00a0\u2013\u00a01569), took their regnal numbers according to a fictitious history of Sweden. He was actually the third Swedish king called Charles.\nHe came into the throne by championing the Protestant cause during the increasingly tense times of religious strife between competing sects of Christianity. Just under a decade after his death, these would re-ignite in the Thirty Years' War of 1618\u20131648. These conflicts had already caused the dynastic squabble rooted in religious freedom that deposed Charles' nephew (Sigismund III) and brought Charles to rule as king of Sweden.\nHis reign marked the start of the final chapter (dated 1648 by some) both of the Reformation and of the Counter-Reformation. With the death of his brother John III of Sweden in November 1592, the Swedish throne went to his nephew, the Habsburg ally Sigismund of Poland and Sweden. During these tense political times, Charles viewed the inheritance of the throne of Protestant Sweden by his devout Catholic nephew with alarm. Several years of religious controversy and discord followed.\nWhile King Sigismund resided in Poland, Charles and the Swedish privy council ruled in Sigismund's name. After various preliminaries, the Riksdag of the Estates forced Sigismund to abdicate the throne to Charles IX in 1595. This eventually kicked off nearly seven decades of sporadic warfare as the two lines of the divided House of Vasa both continued to attempt to remake the union between the Polish and Swedish thrones with opposing counter-claims and dynastic wars.\nQuite likely, the dynastic outcome between the Swedish and Polish representatives of the House of Vasa exacerbated and radicalized the later actions of Europe's Catholic princes in the German states such as the Edict of Restitution of 1629. In fact, it worsened European politics to the abandonment or prevention of settling events by diplomacy and compromise during the vast bloodletting of the Thirty Years' War.\nEarly life.\nCharles IX was born on 4 October 1550 at Tre Kronor Castle in Stockholm as the youngest son of King Gustav Vasa and Queen Margaret. He was educated in childhood by his private tutor Jean d'Herboville. Upon Gustav Vasa's death in 1560, Charles received a duchy that included most of S\u00f6dermanland and N\u00e4rke, some parishes in V\u00e4stmanland, part of Vadsbo County in V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, and all of V\u00e4rmland. According to Gustav Vasa's will, Dukes John (III) and Charles were to have a partially independent position as vassals under their elder brother Erik XIV. After he was crowned king, however, in 1561 he had a Riksdag in Arboga decide to restrict the independence of the duchies, the so-called Arboga Articles. At the age of 15, Charles participated in the Northern Seven Years' War where he commanded the artillery at the conquest of Varberg in 1565.\nRebel duke.\nIn 1568, he was the real leader of the rebellion against Eric XIV. However, he took no part in the designs of his brother John III against the unhappy king after his deposition. Charles's relations with John were always more or less strained. He was at least suspected of being implicated in the Mornay Plot to depose John III in 1574, and was one of the alternative regents suggested by the conspirators of the 1576 Plot. He had no sympathy with John's High-Church tendencies on the one hand, and he sturdily resisted all the king's endeavours to restrict his authority as Duke of S\u00f6dermanland on the other. The nobility and the majority of the Riksdag of the Estates supported John. However, in his endeavours to unify the realm, and Charles had consequently (1587) to resign his pretensions to autonomy within his duchy. But, steadfast Lutheran as he was, on the religious question he was immovable. The matter came to a crisis on the death of John III in 1592. The heir to the throne was John's eldest son, Sigismund III Vasa, already king of Poland and a devoted Catholic. The fear that Sigismund might re-catholicize the land alarmed the Protestant majority in Sweden\u2014particularly the commoners and lower nobility, and Charles came forward as their champion, and also as the defender of the Vasa dynasty against foreign interference.\nIt was due entirely to him that Sigismund \"as king-elect\" was forced to confirm the resolutions at the Uppsala Synod in 1593, thereby recognizing the fact that Sweden was essentially a Lutheran Protestant state. Under the agreement, Charles and the Swedish Privy Council shared power and ruled in Sigismund's place since he resided in Poland. In the ensuing years 1593\u20131595, Charles's task was extraordinarily difficult. He had steadily to oppose Sigismund's reactionary tendencies and directives; he had also to curb the nobility which sought to increase their power at the expense of the absent king, which he did with cruel rigor.\nNecessity compelled him to work with the clergy and people rather than the gentry; hence it was that the Riksdag of the Estates assumed under his regency government a power and an importance which it had never possessed before. In 1595, the Riksdag of S\u00f6derk\u00f6ping elected Charles regent, and his attempt to force Klas Fleming, governor of Finland, to submit to his authority, rather than to that of the king, provoked a civil war. Charles sought to increase his power and the king attempted to manage the situation by diplomacy over several years, until fed up, Sigismund got permission from the Commonwealth's legislature to pursue the matters dividing his Swedish subjects, and invaded with a mercenary army.\nIn April 1597, after having subdued the Cudgel War and preparing to resist the expected invasion of Charles, Fleming died and was succeeded as governor by Arvid St\u00e5larm the Younger. In August 1597, Charles and his army invaded \u00d6sterland, took \u00c5land, which was the fief of her sister Queen Dowager Catherine, and besieged Turku Castle. Fleming was still not buried, and, according to legend, Charles had the coffin opened to reassure himself that Fleming was indeed dead. After having identified the face of Fleming, he was to have pulled Fleming's beard with the words, \"If you had been alive, your head would not have been safe\", upon which Fleming's wife Ebba Stenbock replied, \"If my late husband was alive, Your Grace would never have been here.\"\nDespite some initial successes, Sigismund lost the decisive Battle of St\u00e5ngebro and was captured. He was then forced to surrender several Swedish noblemen, whom Charles and the Riksdag of the Estates had named traitors. These noblemen were later executed in what became known as the Link\u00f6ping Bloodbath. With Sigismund defeated and exiled\u2014seen as both an outsider and a heretic by most of the Swedish nation\u2014his formal deposition by the Riksdag of the Estates in 1599 served as both a natural vindication of Charles's actions and a retroactive legitimization of his claim to power. In the same session, the Riksdag named Charles as regent.\nKing.\nFinally, the Riksdag at Link\u00f6ping, 24 February 1604 declared that Sigismund abdicated the Swedish throne, that duke Charles was recognized as the sovereign. He was declared king as Karl IX (anglicized as Charles IX). Charles's short reign was one of uninterrupted warfare. The hostility of Poland and the breakup of Russia involved him in overseas contests for the possession of Livonia and Ingria, the Polish\u2013Swedish War (1600\u20131611) and the Ingrian War. In the final year of his reign, his claims to all of Lapland west of the Varangerfjord and extending to the Arctic Ocean led to the Kalmar War with Denmark-Norway.\nIn all these struggles, he was more or less unsuccessful, owing partly to the fact that he and his forces had to oppose superior generals (e.g. Jan Karol Chodkiewicz and Christian IV of Denmark) and partly to sheer ill-luck. Compared with his foreign policy, the domestic policy of Charles IX was comparatively unimportant. It aimed at confirming and supplementing what had already been done during his regency. He did not officially become king until 22 March 1604. The first deed in which the title appears is dated 20 March 1604; but he was not crowned until 15 March 1607.\nDeath and legacy.\nFour and a half years later Charles IX died at Nyk\u00f6ping, 30 October 1611 when he was succeeded by his seventeen-year-old son Gustavus Adolphus ; he had participated in the wars. As a ruler, Charles is the link between his great father and his still greater son. He consolidated the work of Gustav I, the creation of a great Protestant state; he prepared the way for the erection of the Protestant empire of Gustavus Adolphus.\nChildren.\nHe married, firstly, Anna Marie of Palatinate-Simmern (1561\u20131589), daughter of Louis VI, Elector Palatine (1539\u20131583) and Elisabeth of Hesse (1539\u20131584). Their children were:\nIn 1592 he married his second wife Christina of Holstein-Gottorp (1573\u20131625), daughter of Adolf of Holstein-Gottorp (1526\u20131586) and Christine of Hesse (1543\u20131604), and first cousin of his previous wife. Their children were:\nHe also had a son with his mistress, Karin Nilsdotter:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70030", "revid": "10512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70030", "title": "Charles II of France", "text": ""}
{"id": "70031", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70031", "title": "Charles II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": ""}
{"id": "70048", "revid": "50292890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70048", "title": "Rectangle", "text": "Quadrilateral with four right angles\nIn Euclidean plane geometry, a rectangle is a rectilinear convex polygon or a quadrilateral with four right angles. It can also be defined as: an equiangular quadrilateral, since equiangular means that all of its angles are equal (360\u00b0/4 = 90\u00b0); or a parallelogram containing a right angle. A rectangle with four sides of equal length is a \"square\". The term \"oblong\" is used to refer to a non-square rectangle. A rectangle with vertices \"ABCD\" would be denoted as \u00a0\"ABCD\".\nThe word rectangle comes from the Latin \"rectangulus\", which is a combination of \"rectus\" (as an adjective, right, proper) and \"angulus\" (angle).\nA crossed rectangle is a crossed (self-intersecting) quadrilateral which consists of two opposite sides of a rectangle along with the two diagonals (therefore only two sides are parallel). It is a special case of an antiparallelogram, and its angles are not right angles and not all equal, though opposite angles are equal. Other geometries, such as spherical, elliptic, and hyperbolic, have so-called rectangles with opposite sides equal in length and equal angles that are not right angles.\nRectangles are involved in many tiling problems, such as tiling the plane by rectangles or tiling a rectangle by polygons.\nCharacterizations.\nA convex quadrilateral is a rectangle if and only if it is any one of the following:\nClassification.\nTraditional hierarchy.\nA rectangle is a special case of a parallelogram in which each pair of adjacent sides is perpendicular.\nA parallelogram is a special case of a trapezium (known as a trapezoid in North America) in which \"both\" pairs of opposite sides are parallel and equal in length.\nA trapezium is a convex quadrilateral which has at least one pair of parallel opposite sides.\nA convex quadrilateral is\nAlternative hierarchy.\nDe Villiers defines a rectangle more generally as any quadrilateral with axes of symmetry through each pair of opposite sides. This definition includes both right-angled rectangles and crossed rectangles. Each has an axis of symmetry parallel to and equidistant from a pair of opposite sides, and another which is the perpendicular bisector of those sides, but, in the case of the crossed rectangle, the first axis is not an axis of symmetry for either side that it bisects.\nQuadrilaterals with two axes of symmetry, each through a pair of opposite sides, belong to the larger class of quadrilaterals with at least one axis of symmetry through a pair of opposite sides. These quadrilaterals comprise isosceles trapezia and crossed isosceles trapezia (crossed quadrilaterals with the same vertex arrangement as isosceles trapezia).\nProperties.\nSymmetry.\nA rectangle is cyclic: all corners lie on a single circle.\nIt is equiangular: all its corner angles are equal (each of 90 degrees).\nIt is isogonal or vertex-transitive: all corners lie within the same symmetry orbit.\nIt has two lines of reflectional symmetry and rotational symmetry of order 2 (through 180\u00b0).\nRectangle-rhombus duality.\nThe dual polygon of a rectangle is a rhombus, as shown in the table below.\nMiscellaneous.\nA rectangle is a rectilinear polygon: its sides meet at right angles.\nA rectangle in the plane can be defined by five independent degrees of freedom consisting, for example, of three for position (comprising two of translation and one of rotation), one for shape (aspect ratio), and one for overall size (area).\nTwo rectangles, neither of which will fit inside the other, are said to be incomparable.\nFormulae.\nIf a rectangle has length formula_3 and width formula_4, then:\nTheorems.\nThe isoperimetric theorem for rectangles states that among all rectangles of a given perimeter, the square has the largest area.\nThe midpoints of the sides of any quadrilateral with perpendicular diagonals form a rectangle.\nA parallelogram with equal diagonals is a rectangle.\nThe Japanese theorem for cyclic quadrilaterals states that the incentres of the four triangles determined by the vertices of a cyclic quadrilateral taken three at a time form a rectangle.\nThe British flag theorem states that with vertices denoted \"A\", \"B\", \"C\", and \"D\", for any point \"P\" on the same plane of a rectangle:\nformula_9\nFor every convex body \"C\" in the plane, we can inscribe a rectangle \"r\" in \"C\" such that a homothetic copy \"R\" of \"r\" is circumscribed about \"C\" and the positive homothety ratio is at most 2 and formula_10.\nThere exists a unique rectangle with sides formula_11 and formula_12, where formula_11 is less than formula_12, with two ways of being folded along a line through its center such that the area of overlap is minimized and each area yields a different shape\u00a0\u2013 a triangle and a pentagon. The unique ratio of side lengths is formula_15.\nCrossed rectangles.\nA \"crossed\" \"quadrilateral\" (self-intersecting) consists of two opposite sides of a non-self-intersecting quadrilateral along with the two diagonals. Similarly, a crossed rectangle is a \"crossed quadrilateral\" which consists of two opposite sides of a rectangle along with the two diagonals. It has the same vertex arrangement as the rectangle. It appears as two identical triangles with a common vertex, but the geometric intersection is not considered a vertex.\nA \"crossed quadrilateral\" is sometimes likened to a bow tie or butterfly, sometimes called an \"angular eight\". A three-dimensional rectangular wire frame that is twisted can take the shape of a bow tie.\nThe interior of a \"crossed rectangle\" can have a polygon density of \u00b11 in each triangle, dependent upon the winding orientation as clockwise or counterclockwise.\nA \"crossed rectangle\" may be considered equiangular if right and left turns are allowed. As with any \"crossed quadrilateral\", the sum of its interior angles is 720\u00b0, allowing for internal angles to appear on the outside and exceed 180\u00b0.\nA rectangle and a crossed rectangle are quadrilaterals with the following properties in common:\nOther rectangles.\nIn spherical geometry, a spherical rectangle is a figure whose four edges are great circle arcs which meet at equal angles greater than 90\u00b0. Opposite arcs are equal in length. The surface of a sphere in Euclidean solid geometry is a non-Euclidean surface in the sense of elliptic geometry. Spherical geometry is the simplest form of elliptic geometry.\nIn elliptic geometry, an elliptic rectangle is a figure in the elliptic plane whose four edges are elliptic arcs which meet at equal angles greater than 90\u00b0. Opposite arcs are equal in length.\nIn hyperbolic geometry, a hyperbolic rectangle is a figure in the hyperbolic plane whose four edges are hyperbolic arcs which meet at equal angles less than 90\u00b0. Opposite arcs are equal in length.\nTessellations.\nThe rectangle is used in many periodic tessellation patterns, in brickwork, for example, these tilings:\nSquared, perfect, and other tiled rectangles.\nA rectangle tiled by squares, rectangles, or triangles is said to be a \"squared\", \"rectangled\", or \"triangulated\" (or \"triangled\") rectangle respectively. The tiled rectangle is \"perfect\" if the tiles are similar and finite in number and no two tiles are the same size. If two such tiles are the same size, the tiling is \"imperfect\". In a perfect (or imperfect) triangled rectangle the triangles must be right triangles. A database of all known perfect rectangles, perfect squares and related shapes can be found at http://. The lowest number of squares need for a perfect tiling of a rectangle is 9 and the lowest number needed for a perfect tilling a square is 21, found in 1978 by computer search.\nA rectangle has commensurable sides if and only if it is tileable by a finite number of unequal squares. The same is true if the tiles are unequal isosceles right triangles.\nThe tilings of rectangles by other tiles which have attracted the most attention are those by congruent non-rectangular polyominoes, allowing all rotations and reflections. There are also tilings by congruent polyaboloes.\nUnicode.\nThe following Unicode code points depict rectangles:\n U+25AC \u25ac BLACK RECTANGLE\n U+25AD \u25ad WHITE RECTANGLE\n U+25AE \u25ae BLACK VERTICAL RECTANGLE\n U+25AF \u25af WHITE VERTICAL RECTANGLE\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70050", "revid": "1289582734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70050", "title": "Christer Pettersson", "text": "Swedish criminal (1947\u20132004)\nCarl Gustaf Christer Pettersson (23 April 1947 \u2013 29 September 2004) was a Swedish criminal who was a suspect in the 1986 assassination of Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of Sweden. In 1989 he was convicted of the murder in district court but acquitted on appeal the following year.\nLife.\nPettersson was born on 23 April 1947, to Roland Pettersson (1916\u20131977) and Inga Maria Hansson (1918\u20131973) and grew up in a middle-class family in Solna outside of Stockholm and later moved to the suburb of Sollentuna. In his youth, he attended a theatrical school (\"Calle Flygares teaterskola\"), where he was considered to be promising by at least one of his teachers. However, Pettersson suffered a head injury from which he would never fully recover. Petterson then began a period of substance abuse, which would eventually force him to drop out of school.\nIn 1970, he stabbed a man to death in central Stockholm, during a street brawl in what the Swedish press dubbed the \"bayonet murder\". The killing took place just around the corner from what would later be the site of the Palme assassination. Pettersson was sentenced to closed psychiatric care for manslaughter for the killing. After less than two years he was released and continued a life of petty crime, which financed his alcohol and drug abuse.\nTried for murder of Olof Palme.\nOn the night of 28 February 1986, Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, a Social Democrat, was shot and killed in Stockholm as he walked home from a cinema with his wife, Lisbet Palme. The killer quickly escaped and left no traces except two .357-caliber Magnum bullets. Witness statements about his appearance were confused and contradictory.\nIn 1988, Pettersson was detained and accused of Palme's murder after an investigation, which appeared to have started based on rumors about his involvement among fellow small-time criminals and drug addicts. The initial investigation had uncovered little of significance, but once detained, Pettersson was picked out from a ten-person police lineup by Lisbet Palme.\nPettersson denied any involvement and claimed he had liked Palme and had left central Stockholm at the time of the murder.\nHowever, Lisbet Palme's identification, combined with statements by acquaintances of Pettersson, who stated that he had been near the scene of the crime at the night of the murder, led to a 1989 conviction for murder. Pettersson was sentenced to life imprisonment.\nJust a few months later, however, Pettersson was freed on appeal. The court cited a lack of evidence, including the missing murder weapon, and raised questions over the reliability of Lisbet Palme's identification. Pettersson was awarded about $50,000 in compensation.\nAlthough Pettersson appears to have quickly spent the money on alcohol and drugs, he remained in the media spotlight and then raised his income by selling TV and newspaper interviews. In several interviews, particularly on TV3, Pettersson was encouraged to admit to killing Olof Palme. In such situations, he repeatedly engaged in what-if scenarios that came close to an admission of guilt. However, his confession was not treated seriously, and when cornered, he argued that he had simply come seeking money for yet another television appearance.\nPolice investigators continued to investigate Pettersson, with many reportedly feeling that he had got off on a technicality and was in fact guilty. In 1998, the Swedish Supreme Court rejected a prosecutor's appeal to retry Pettersson by citing that the new evidence put before it was \"not of such nature that a new trial can be granted in the case.\"\nIn June 2020, the Swedish Prosecution Authority announced their conclusion that Stig Engstr\u00f6m was the killer, although he would not be prosecuted as he had been dead for 20 years. The report made no mention of Pettersson, whose acquittal in 1989 meant he could not be seriously investigated any further without new evidence. The conclusion was widely criticised and many felt it was based on little to no actual evidence.\nComa and death.\nAfter a brawl with police, Pettersson was admitted to hospital on 15\u00a0September 2004. On leaving hospital the following day, he reportedly fell and suffered a cerebral haemorrhage and went into a coma. Pettersson died at Karolinska University Hospital on 29\u00a0September 2004, at the age of 57. \nPettersson was buried in Sollentuna on 20 January 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70052", "revid": "7716227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70052", "title": "Temple of Heaven", "text": "Imperial complex of religious buildings in Beijing, China\nThe Temple of Heaven () is a complex of imperial religious Confucian buildings situated in the southeastern part of central Beijing. The complex was visited by the Emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties for annual ceremonies of prayer to Heaven for a good harvest. The Temple of Heaven was inscribed as a World Heritage site in 1998 and was described as \"a masterpiece of architecture and landscape design which simply and graphically illustrates a cosmogony of great importance for the evolution of one of the world's great civilizations...\" as the \"symbolic layout and design of the Temple of Heaven had a profound influence on architecture and planning in the Far East over many centuries.\"\nHistory.\nThe temple complex was constructed from 1406 to 1420 during the reign of the Yongle Emperor of Ming Dynasty, who was also responsible for the construction of the Forbidden City in Beijing. It is currently located in Dongcheng Beijing, China. The complex was extended and renamed Temple of Heaven during the reign of the Jiajing Emperor in the 16th century. Jiajing also built three other prominent temples in Beijing, the Temple of the Sun (\u65e5\u58c7) in the east, the Temple of Earth (\u5730\u58c7) in the north, and the Temple of Moon (\u6708\u58c7) in the west. The Temple of Heaven was renovated in the 18th century under the Qianlong Emperor. By then, the state budget was insufficient, so this was the last large-scale renovation of the temple complex in imperial times. \nThe temple was occupied by the Anglo-French alliance during the Second Opium War. In 1900, during the Boxer Rebellion, the Eight-Nation Alliance occupied the temple complex and turned it into the force's temporary command in Peking, which lasted for one year. With the downfall of the Qing, the temple complex was left un-managed. The neglect of the temple complex led to the collapse of several halls in the following years.\nIn 1914, Yuan Shikai, then President of the Republic of China, performed a Ming prayer ceremony at the temple, as part of an effort to have himself declared Emperor of China. In 1918 the temple was turned into a park and for the first time open to the public.\nBuildings and layout.\nThe Temple grounds cover of parkland and comprises three main groups of constructions, all built according to strict philosophical requirements:\nCeremony.\nIn ancient China, the Emperor of China was regarded as the \"Son of Heaven\", who administered earthly matters on behalf of, and representing, heavenly authority. To be seen to be showing respect to the source of his authority, in the form of sacrifices to heaven, was extremely important. The temple was built for these ceremonies, mostly comprising prayers for good harvests.\nTwice a year the Emperor and all his retinue would move from the Forbidden City through Beijing to encamp within the complex, wearing special robes and abstaining from eating meat. No ordinary Chinese was allowed to view this procession or the following ceremony. In the temple complex the Emperor would personally pray to Heaven for good harvests. The highpoint of the ceremony at the winter solstice was performed by the Emperor on the Earthly Mount. The ceremony had to be perfectly completed; it was widely held that the smallest of mistakes would constitute a bad omen for the whole nation in the coming year.\nSymbolism.\nEarth was represented by a square and Heaven by a circle; several features of the temple complex symbolize the connection of Heaven and Earth, of circle and square. The whole temple complex is surrounded by two cordons of walls; the outer wall has a taller, semi-circular northern end, representing Heaven, and a shorter, rectangular southern end, representing the Earth. Both the Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests and the Circular Mound Altar are round, each standing on a square yard, again representing Heaven and Earth. \nThe number nine represents the Emperor and is evident in the design of the Circular Mound Altar: a single round marmor plate is surrounded by a ring of nine plates, then a ring of 18 plates, and so on for a total of nine surrounding rings, the outermost having 9\u00d79 plates.\nThe Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests has four inner, twelve middle and twelve outer pillars, representing the four seasons, twelve months and twelve traditional Chinese hours respectively. Combined, the twelve middle and twelve outer pillars represent the traditional solar terms. \nAll the buildings within the Temple have special dark blue roof tiles, representing the Heaven.\nThe Seven-Star Stone Group, east of the Hall of Prayer for Good Harvest, represents the seven peaks of Taishan Mountain, a place of Heaven worship in classical China.\nThere are four main supportive, dragon pillars each representing a season. The structure, held up by these dragons, imitates the style of an ancient Chinese royal palace. Twelve inner pillars symbolize the lunar months, and it is thought that the twelve outer pillars refer to the 12 two-hour periods of the day.\nPark.\nThe surrounding park is quite extensive, with the entire complex totaling . Some of it consists of playgrounds, exercise and game areas. These facilities are well used by adults, as well as by parents and grandparents bringing children to play. Some of the open spaces and side buildings are often used, particularly in the morning, for choral shows, ethnic dances, and other presentations.\nAccess.\nThe Temple of Heaven is located in southern Dongcheng District, which until 2010 was part of Chongwen District. The park itself is open daily from 6:00am\u201310:00 pm. The relic sites inside the park open at 8:00 and close at 17:30 from April 1 to October 31, and close at 17:00 from November 1 to March 31. There is a nominal entry charge which varies according to whether it is peak season or off season. Tickets stop selling one hour and a half before gate closing.\nAll four of the park's gates are accessible by public transportation.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70057", "revid": "1286743676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70057", "title": "Brokkr", "text": "Dwarf smith from Norse mythology\nIn Norse mythology, Brokkr (Old Norse: , \"the one who works with metal fragments; blacksmith\", anglicized Brokk) is a dwarf, and the brother of Eitri or Sindri.\nAccording to \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Loki had Sif's hair, Freyr's ship Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir and Odin's spear Gungnir fashioned by the Sons of Ivaldi. Loki boasted greatly of all the things that the Sons of Ivaldi could create. He also boasted that the other dwarves could not create anything beautiful or useful. Brokkr, who was in Asgard at the time, declared that his brother Eitri could make things far more beautiful and useful than the Sons of Ivaldi. Brokkr bet his head with that of Loki that his brother Eitri could make things with better craftsmanship than Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir or Gungnir.\nWhile Eitri used magic in a forge that was extremely hot, Brokkr worked the bellows so that the fire would not cool down nor get too hot for the magic. While making the boar Gullinbursti, a gadfly, often thought to be Loki himself, came and bit Brokkr on the hand. Brokkr was not disturbed though and kept blowing into the fire. While making the golden arm ring Draupnir the gadfly came again and bit Brokkr, this time in the neck but Brokkr kept on blowing. Finally, while making the hammer Mj\u00f6lnir the gadfly bit Brokkr on the eye this time. This temporarily caused Brokkr to stop blowing. That brief stoppage of blowing into the fire caused Mj\u00f6lnir's handle to become shorter than it should have been. Because of this, Thor had to wear the iron gauntlets J\u00e1rngreipr to handle it.\nEitri succeeded in making the golden ring Draupnir, the golden-bristled boar Gullinbursti and the hammer Mj\u00f6lnir. These objects were judged by the gods to be superior and Brokkr won the bet. However, Loki did not allow him to take his head as doing so would have damaged his neck which was not included in the bet. In lieu of this, Brokkr sewed Loki's lips so that Loki would not brag until the thread came out.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70058", "revid": "49436719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70058", "title": "NF", "text": "NF may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70060", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70060", "title": "Eitri", "text": "Dwarf in Norse mythology\nIn the Old Norse religion, Eitri (Old Norse: ; or Sindri) is a dwarf and the brother of Brokkr.\nAccording to \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", when Loki had Sif's hair, Freyr's ship Skidbladnir and Odin's spear Gungnir fashioned by the Sons of Ivaldi, he bet his own head with Brokkr that Eitri would not have been able to make items that matched the craftsmanship of those mentioned above.\nEitri began working in his furnace while his brother was working the bellows, but a fly (sometimes thought to be Loki himself) began stinging Brokkr, trying to stop him and spoil the items.\nEitri succeeded in making the golden boar Gullinbursti, the golden ring Draupnir, and the hammer Mj\u00f6llnir that made his brother win the bet, even if its handle was shorter than it should have been.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70061", "revid": "46288275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70061", "title": "First Fleet", "text": "11 British ships establishing an Australian penal colony\nThe First Fleet were eleven British ships which transported a group of settlers to mainland Australia, marking the beginning of the European colonisation of Australia. It consisted of two Royal Navy vessels, three storeships and six convict transports under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip. On 13 May 1787, the ships, with over 1,400 convicts, marines, sailors, colonial officials and free settlers onboard, left Portsmouth and travelled over and over 250 days before arriving in Botany Bay on 18 January 1788. Governor Arthur Phillip rejected Botany Bay choosing instead Port Jackson, to the north, as the site for the new colony; they arrived there on 26 January 1788, establishing the colony of New South Wales, as a penal colony which would become the first British settlement in Australia.\nHistory.\nLord Sandwich, together with the President of the Royal Society, Sir Joseph Banks, the eminent scientist who had accompanied Lieutenant James Cook on his 1770 voyage, was advocating establishment of a British colony in Botany Bay, New South Wales. Banks accepted an offer of assistance from the American Loyalist James Matra in July 1783. Under Banks's guidance, he rapidly produced \"A Proposal for Establishing a Settlement in New South Wales\" (24 August 1783), with a fully developed set of reasons for a colony composed of American Loyalists, Chinese and South Sea Islanders (but not convicts). The decision to establish a colony in Australia was made by Thomas Townshend, Lord Sydney, Secretary of State for the Home Office. This was taken for two reasons: the ending of transportation of criminals to North America following the American Revolution, as well as the need for a base in the Pacific to counter French expansion.\nIn September 1786, Captain Arthur Phillip was appointed Commodore of the fleet, which came to be known as the First Fleet, which was to transport the convicts and soldiers to establish a colony at Botany Bay. Upon arrival there, Phillip was to assume the powers of Captain General and Governor in Chief of the new colony. A subsidiary colony was to be founded on Norfolk Island, as recommended by Sir John Call and Sir George Young, to take advantage for naval purposes of that island's native flax (harakeke) and timber.\nThe cost to Britain of outfitting and dispatching the Fleet was \u00a384,000 (about \u00a3\u00a0million or US$\u00a0million in 2023).\nShips.\nRoyal Naval escort.\nOn 25 October 1786 the 10-gun , lying in the dock at Deptford, was commissioned, and the command given to Phillip. The armed tender HMAT was under command of Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball, who was also commissioned to join the expedition. Lt. David Blackburn was the ship's Master. On 15 December, Captain John Hunter was assigned as second captain to \"Sirius\" to command in the absence of Phillip, whose presence, it was to be supposed, would be requisite at all times wherever the seat of government in that country might be fixed.\nHMS \"Sirius\".\n\"Sirius\" was Phillip's flagship for the fleet. She had been converted from the merchantman \"Berwick\", built in 1780 for Baltic trade. She was a 520-ton, sixth-rate vessel, originally armed with ten guns, four six-pounders and six carronades, Phillip had ten more guns placed aboard.\nHMAT \"Supply\".\n\"Supply\" was designed in 1759 by shipwright Thomas Slade, as a yard craft for the ferrying of naval supplies. Measuring 170 tons, she had two masts, and was fitted with four small 3-pounder cannons and six -pounder swivel guns. Her armament was substantially increased in 1786 with the addition of four 12-pounder carronades.\nFood and supply transports.\nRopes, crockery, agricultural equipment and a miscellany of other stores were needed. Items transported included tools, agricultural implements, seeds, spirits, medical supplies, bandages, surgical instruments, handcuffs, leg irons and a prefabricated wooden frame for the colony's first Government House. The party had to rely on its own provisions to survive until it could make use of local materials, assuming suitable supplies existed, and grow its own food and raise livestock.\n\"Golden Grove\".\nThe reverend Richard Johnson, chaplain for the colony, travelled on the \"Golden Grove\" with his wife and servants.\nLegacy.\nScale models of all the ships are on display at the Museum of Sydney. The models were built by ship makers Lynne and Laurie Hadley, after researching the original plans, drawings and British archives. The replicas of \"Supply\", \"Charlotte\", \"Scarborough\", \"Friendship\", \"Prince of Wales\", \"Lady Penrhyn\", \"Borrowdale\", \"Alexander\", \"Sirius\", \"Fishburn\" and \"Golden Grove\" are made from Western Red or Syrian Cedar.\nNine Sydney harbour ferries built in the mid-1980s are named after First Fleet vessels. The unused names are \"Lady Penrhyn\" and \"Prince of Wales\".\nPeople.\nThe majority of the people travelling with the fleet were convicts, all having been tried and convicted in Great Britain, almost all of them in England. Many are known to have come to England from other parts of Great Britain and, especially, from Ireland; at least 14 are known to have come from the British colonies in North America; at least 15 are identified as black (born in Britain, Africa, the West Indies, North America, India or a European country or its colony). The convicts had committed a variety of crimes, including theft, perjury, fraud, assault, robbery, for which they had variously been sentenced to death, which was then commuted to penal transportation for 7 years, 14 years, or the term of their natural life.\nFour companies of marines volunteered for service in the colony, these marines made up the New South Wales Marine Corps, under the command of Major Robert Ross, a detachment on board every convict transport. The families of marines also made the voyage.\nA number of people on the First Fleet kept diaries and journals of their experiences, including the surgeons, sailors, officers, soldiers, and ordinary seamen. There are at least eleven known manuscript journals of the First Fleet in existence as well as some letters.\nThe exact number of people directly associated with the First Fleet will likely never be established, as accounts of the event vary slightly. A total of 1,420 people have been identified as embarking on the First Fleet in 1787, and 1,373 are believed to have landed at Sydney Cove in January 1788. In her biographical dictionary of the First Fleet, Mollie Gillen gives the following statistics:\nWhile the names of all crew members of \"Sirius\" and \"Supply\" are known, the six transports and three store ships may have carried as many as 110 more seamen than have been identified \u2013 no complete musters have survived for these ships. The total number of persons embarking on the First Fleet would, therefore, be approximately 1,530 with about 1,483 reaching Sydney Cove.\nAccording to the first census of 1788 as reported by Governor Phillip to Lord Sydney, the non-indigenous population of the colony was 1,030 and the colony also consisted of 7 horses, 29 sheep, 74 swine, 6 rabbits, and 7 cattle.\nThe following statistics were provided by Governor Phillip:\nThe chief surgeon for the First Fleet, John White, reported a total of 48 deaths and 28 births during the voyage. The deaths during the voyage included one marine, one marine's wife, one marine's child, 36 male convicts, four female convicts, and five children of convicts.\nVoyage.\nPreparing the fleet.\nIn September 1786 Captain Arthur Phillip was chosen to lead the expedition to establish a colony in New South Wales. On 15 December, Captain John Hunter, was appointed Phillip's second. By now had been nominated as flagship, with Hunter holding command. The armed tender HMAT under command of Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball had also joined the fleet.\nWith Phillip in London awaiting Royal Assent for the bill of management of the colony, the loading and provisioning of the transports was carried out by Lieutenant John Shortland, the agent for transports.\nOn 16 March 1787, the fleet began to assemble at its appointed rendezvous, the Mother Bank, Isle of Wight. His Majesty's frigate \"Sirius\" and armed tender \"Supply\", three store-ships, \"Golden Grove\", \"Fishburn\" and \"Borrowdale\", for carrying provisions and stores for two years; and lastly, six transports; \"Scarborough\" and \"Lady Penrhyn\", from Portsmouth; \"Friendship\" and \"Charlotte\", from Plymouth; \"Prince of Wales\", and \"Alexander\", from Woolwich. On 9 May Captain Phillip arrived in Portsmouth, the next day coming aboard the ships and giving orders to prepare the fleet for departure.\nLeaving Portsmouth.\nPhillip first tried to get the fleet to sail on 10 May, but a dispute by sailors of the \"Fishburn\" about pay, they refused to leave until resolved. The fleet finally left Portsmouth, England on 13 May 1787. The journey began with fine weather, and thus the convicts were allowed on deck. The Fleet was accompanied by the armed frigate until it left English waters. On 20 May 1787, one convict on \"Scarborough\" reported a planned mutiny; those allegedly involved were flogged and two were transferred to \"Prince of Wales\". In general, however, most accounts of the voyage agree that the convicts were well behaved. On 3 June 1787, the fleet anchored at Santa Cruz at Tenerife. Here, fresh water, vegetables and meat were brought on board. Phillip and the chief officers were entertained by the local governor, while one convict tried unsuccessfully to escape. On 10 June they set sail to cross the Atlantic to Rio de Janeiro, taking advantage of favourable trade winds and ocean currents.\nThe weather became increasingly hot and humid as the Fleet sailed through the tropics. Vermin, such as rats, and parasites such as bedbugs, lice, cockroaches and fleas, tormented the convicts, officers and marines. Bilges became foul and the smell, especially below the closed hatches, was over-powering. While Phillip gave orders that the bilge-water was to be pumped out daily and the bilges cleaned, these orders were not followed on \"Alexander\" and a number of convicts fell sick and died. Tropical rainstorms meant that the convicts could not exercise on deck as they had no change of clothes and no method of drying wet clothing. Consequently, they were kept below in the foul, cramped holds. On the female transports, promiscuity between the convicts, the crew and marines was rampant, despite punishments for some of the men involved. In the doldrums, Phillip was forced to ration the water to three pints a day.\nThe Fleet reached Rio de Janeiro on 5 August and stayed for a month. The ships were cleaned and water taken on board, repairs were made, and Phillip ordered large quantities of food. The women convicts' clothing had become infested with lice and was burnt. As additional clothing for the female convicts had not arrived before the Fleet left England, the women were issued with new clothes made from rice sacks. While the convicts remained below deck, the officers explored the city and were entertained by its inhabitants. A convict and a marine were punished for passing forged quarter-dollars made from old buckles and pewter spoons. Ellen Fraser, mother of the second child of English parents born in the colony (John Fraser born 7 June 1789), is thought to be the female convict transferred from the \"Prince of Wales\" to the \" Charlotte\" during the stop over in Rio on 13 August 1787. Her husband, William Fraser was a convict on \"Charlotte\".\nThe Fleet left Rio de Janeiro on 4 September to run before the westerlies to the Table Bay in southern Africa, which it reached on 13 October. This was the last port of call, so the main task was to stock up on plants, seeds and livestock for their arrival in Australia. The livestock taken on board from Cape Town destined for the new colony included two bulls, seven cows, one stallion, three mares, 44 sheep, 32 pigs, four goats and \"a very large quantity of poultry of every kind\". Women convicts on \"Friendship\" were moved to other transports to make room for livestock purchased there. The convicts were provided with fresh beef and mutton, bread and vegetables, to build up their strength for the journey and maintain their health. The Dutch colony of Cape Town was the last outpost of European settlement which the fleet members would see for years, perhaps for the rest of their lives. \"Before them stretched the awesome, lonely void of the Indian and Southern Oceans, and beyond that lay nothing they could imagine.\"\nAssisted by the gales in the \"Roaring Forties\" latitudes below the 40th parallel, the heavily laden transports surged through the violent seas. In the last two months of the voyage, the Fleet faced challenging conditions, spending some days becalmed and on others covering significant distances; \"Friendship\" travelled 166 miles one day, while a seaman was blown from \"Prince of Wales\" at night and drowned. Water was rationed as supplies ran low, and the supply of other goods including wine ran out altogether on some vessels. Van Diemen's Land was sighted from \"Friendship\" on 4 January 1788. A freak storm struck as they began to head north around the island, damaging the sails and masts of some of the ships.\nOn 25 November, Phillip had transferred to \"Supply\". With \"Alexander\", \"Friendship\" and \"Scarborough\", the fastest ships in the Fleet, which were carrying most of the male convicts, \"Supply\" hastened ahead to prepare for the arrival of the rest. Phillip intended to select a suitable location, find good water, clear the ground, and perhaps even have some huts and other structures built before the others arrived. This was a planned move, discussed by the Home Office and the Admiralty prior to the Fleet's departure. However, this \"flying squadron\" reached Botany Bay only hours before the rest of the Fleet, so no preparatory work was possible. \"Supply\" reached Botany Bay on 18 January 1788; the three fastest transports in the advance group arrived on 19 January; slower ships, including \"Sirius\", arrived on 20 January.\nThis was one of the world's greatest sea voyages \u2013 eleven vessels carrying about 1,487 people and stores had travelled for 252 days for more than 15,000 miles (24,000\u00a0km) without losing a ship. Forty-eight people died on the journey, a death rate of just over three percent.\nArrival in Australia.\nIt was soon realised that Botany Bay did not live up to the glowing account that the explorer Captain James Cook had provided. The bay was open and unprotected, the water was too shallow to allow the ships to anchor close to the shore, fresh water was scarce, and the soil was poor. First contact was made with the local indigenous people, the Eora, who seemed curious but suspicious of the newcomers. The area was studded with enormously strong trees. When the convicts tried to cut them down, their tools broke and the tree trunks had to be blasted out of the ground with gunpowder. The primitive huts built for the officers and officials quickly collapsed in rainstorms. The marines had a habit of getting drunk and not guarding the convicts properly, whilst their commander, Major Robert Ross, drove Phillip to despair with his arrogant and lazy attitude. Crucially, Phillip worried that his fledgling colony was exposed to attack from those described as \"Aborigines\" or from foreign powers. Although his initial instructions were to establish the colony at Botany Bay, he was authorised to establish the colony elsewhere if necessary.\nOn 21 January, Phillip and a party which included John Hunter, departed the Bay in three small boats to explore other bays to the north. Phillip discovered that Port Jackson, about 12 kilometres to the north, was an excellent site for a colony with sheltered anchorages, fresh water and fertile soil. Cook had seen and named the harbour, but had not entered it. Phillip's impressions of the harbour were recorded in a letter he sent to England later: \"the finest harbour in the world, in which a thousand sail of the line may ride in the most perfect security ...\". The party returned to Botany Bay on 23 January.\nOn the morning of 24 January, the party was startled when two French ships, the \"Astrolabe\" and the \"Boussole\", were seen just outside Botany Bay. This was a scientific expedition led by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de La P\u00e9rouse. The French had expected to find a thriving colony where they could repair ships and restock supplies, not a newly arrived fleet of convicts considerably more poorly provisioned than themselves. There was some cordial contact between the French and British officers, but Phillip and La P\u00e9rouse never met. The French ships remained until 10 March before setting sail on their return voyage. They were not seen again and were later discovered to have been shipwrecked off the coast of Vanikoro in the present-day Solomon Islands.\nOn 26 January 1788, the Fleet weighed anchor and sailed to Port Jackson. The site selected for the anchorage had deep water close to the shore, was sheltered, and had a small stream flowing into it. Phillip named it Sydney Cove, after Lord Sydney, the British Home Secretary. This date is celebrated as Australia Day, marking the beginning of British settlement. The British flag was hoisted that day. The remaining ships of the Fleet did not arrive at Sydney Cove until later that day. Writer and art critic Robert Hughes popularized the idea in his 1986 book \"The Fatal Shore\" that an orgy occurred upon the unloading of the convicts, though more modern historians regard this as untrue, since the first reference to any such indiscretions is as recent as 1963.\nFirst contact.\nThe First Fleet encountered Indigenous Australians when they landed at Botany Bay. The Cadigal people of the Botany Bay area witnessed the Fleet arrive and six days later the two ships of French explorer La P\u00e9rouse, the \"Astrolabe\" and the \"Boussole\", sailed into the bay. When the Fleet moved to Sydney Cove seeking better conditions for establishing the colony, they encountered the Eora people, including the Bidjigal clan. A number of the First Fleet journals record encounters with Aboriginal people.\nAlthough the official policy of the British Government was to establish friendly relations with Aboriginal people, and Arthur Phillip ordered that the Aboriginal people should be well treated, it was not long before conflict began. The colonists did not sign treaties with the original inhabitants of the land. Between 1790 and 1810, Pemulwuy of the Bidjigal clan led the local people in a series of attacks against the colonists.\nAfter January 1788.\nThe ships of the First Fleet mostly did not remain in the colony. Some returned to England, while others left for other ports. Some remained at the service of the Governor of the colony for some months: some of these were sent to Norfolk Island where a second penal colony was established.\n1788\n1789\n1790:\nLegacy.\nLast survivors.\nOn Sat 26 January 1842 The \"Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser\" reported \"The Government has ordered a pension of one shilling per diem to be paid to the survivors of those who came by the first vessel into the Colony. The number of these really 'old hands' is now reduced to three, of whom, two are now in the Benevolent Asylum, and the other is a fine hale old fellow, who can do a day's work with more spirit than many of the young fellows lately arrived in the Colony.\" The names of the three recipients were not given, and is academic as the notice turned out to be false, not having been authorised by the Governor. There were at least 25 persons still living who had arrived with the First Fleet, including several children born on the voyage. A number of these contacted the authorities to arrange their pension and all received a similar reply to the following received by John McCarty on 14 Mar 1842 \"I am directed by His Excellency the Governor to inform you, that the paragraph which appeared in the Sydney Gazette relative to an allowance to the persons of the first expedition to New South Wales was not authorised by His Excellency nor has he any knowledge of such an allowance as that alluded to\". E. Deas Thomson, Colonial Secretary.\nFollowing is a list of persons known to be living at the time the false pension notice was published, in order of their date of death. At this time New South Wales included the whole Eastern seaboard of present day Australia except for Van Diemen's Land which was declared a separate colony in 1825 and achieved self governing status in 1855-6. This list does not include marines or convicts who returned to England after completing their term in NSW and who may have lived past January 1842.\nSmallpox.\nHistorians have disagreed over whether those aboard the First Fleet were responsible for introducing smallpox to Australia's indigenous population, and if so, whether this was the consequence of deliberate action.\nIn 1914, J.\u00a0H.\u00a0L. Cumpston, director of the Australian Quarantine Service, put forward the hypothesis that smallpox arrived in Australia with First Fleet. Some researchers have argued that any such release may have been a deliberate attempt to decimate the indigenous population. Hypothetical scenarios for such an action might have included: an act of revenge by an aggrieved individual, a response to attacks by indigenous people, or part of an orchestrated assault by the New South Wales Marine Corps, intended to clear the path for colonial expansion. Seth Carus, a former Deputy Director of the National Defense University in the United States wrote in 2015 that there was a \"strong circumstantial case supporting the theory that someone deliberately introduced smallpox in the Aboriginal population.\"\nOther historians have disputed the idea that there was a deliberate release of smallpox virus and/or suggest that it arrived with visitors to Australia other than the First Fleet. It has been suggested that live smallpox virus may have been introduced accidentally when Aboriginal people came into contact with variolous matter brought by the First Fleet for use in anti-smallpox inoculations.\nIn 2002, historian Judy Campbell offered a further theory, that smallpox had arrived in Australia through contact with fishermen from Makassar in Indonesia, where smallpox was endemic. In 2011, Macknight stated: \"The overwhelming probability must be that it [smallpox] was introduced, like the later epidemics, by [Indonesian] trepangers ... and spread across the continent to arrive in Sydney quite independently of the new settlement there.\"\nThere is a fourth theory, that the 1789 epidemic was not smallpox but chickenpox \u2013 to which indigenous Australians also had no inherited resistance \u2013 that happened to be affecting, or was carried by, members of the First Fleet. This theory has also been disputed.\nCommemoration Garden.\nAfter Ray Collins, a stonemason, completed years of research into the First Fleet, he sought approval from about nine councils to construct a commemorative garden in recognition of these immigrants. Liverpool Plains Shire Council was ultimately the only council to accept his offer to supply the materials and construct the garden free of charge. The site chosen was a disused caravan park on the banks of Quirindi Creek at Wallabadah, New South Wales. In September 2002 Collins commenced work on the project. Additional support was later provided by Neil McGarry in the form of some signs and the council contributed $28,000 for pathways and fencing. Collins hand-chiselled the names of all those who came to Australia on the eleven ships in 1788 on stone tablets along the garden pathways. The stories of those who arrived on the ships, their life, and first encounters with the Australian country are presented throughout the garden. On 26 January 2005, the First Fleet Garden was opened as the major memorial to the First Fleet immigrants. Previously the only other specific memorial to the First Fleeters was an obelisk at Brighton-Le-Sands, New South Wales. The surrounding area has a barbecue, tables, and amenities.\nFirst Fleet Park.\nFirst Fleet Park is situated in The Rocks, near the site of the First Fleet's landing. The area has remained in public ownership continually since 1788, under the control of various agencies. It was previously used for a hospital, Queen's Wharf, shops and houses, the first Commissariat Store and the first post office. Archaeological remains are extant on the site dating back to the earliest days of settlement.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70062", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70062", "title": "NF2", "text": "NF2, NF-2, or similar, may refer to:\nBiology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "70063", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70063", "title": "Easter Rising of 1916", "text": ""}
{"id": "70066", "revid": "918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70066", "title": "Padraig Pearse", "text": ""}
{"id": "70068", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70068", "title": "Ska\u00f0i", "text": "Norse goddess\nIn Norse mythology, Ska\u00f0i (; Old Norse: ; sometimes anglicized as Skadi, Skade, or Skathi) is a j\u00f6tunn and goddess associated with bowhunting, skiing, winter, and mountains. Ska\u00f0i is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources; the \"Prose Edda\" and in \"Heimskringla\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and in the works of skalds.\nSka\u00f0i is the daughter of the deceased j\u00f6tunn \u00dejazi, and was married the god Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r as part of the compensation provided by the gods for having killed her father. In \"Heimskringla\", Ska\u00f0i is described as having split up with Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and as later having married the god Odin, and that the two produced many children together. In both the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\", Ska\u00f0i is responsible for placing the serpent that drips venom onto the bound Loki. Ska\u00f0i is alternately referred to as \u00d6ndurgu\u00f0 (Old Norse 'ski god') and \u00d6ndurd\u00eds (Old Norse 'ski d\u00eds').\nThe etymology of the name \"Ska\u00f0i\" is uncertain, but may be connected with the original form of \"Scandinavia\". Some place names in Scandinavia refer to Ska\u00f0i. Scholars have theorized a potential connection between Ska\u00f0i and the god Ullr (who is also associated with skiing), a particular relationship with the j\u00f6tunn Loki, and that \"Scandinavia\" may be related to the name Ska\u00f0i (potentially meaning 'Ska\u00f0i's island') or the name may be connected to Old Norse nouns meaning either 'shadow' or 'harm'. Ska\u00f0i has inspired various works of art.\nEtymology.\nThe Old Norse name \"Ska\u00f0i\", along with \"Sca(n)dinavia\" and \"Sk\u00e1ney\", may be related to Gothic \"skadus\", Old English \"sceadu\", Old Saxon \"scado\", and Old High German \"scato\" (meaning 'shadow') - compare also the Irish Sc\u00e1thach, a famous woman warrior known as 'the shadowy one'. Scholar John McKinnell comments that this etymology suggests Ska\u00f0i may have once been a personification of the geographical region of Scandinavia or associated with the underworld.\nGeorges Dum\u00e9zil disagrees with the notion of \"Scadin-avia\" as etymologically 'the island of the goddess Ska\u00f0i'. Dum\u00e9zil comments that the first element \"Scadin\" must have had\u2014or once had\u2014a connection to \"darkness\" \"or something else we cannot be sure of\". Dum\u00e9zil says that, rather, the name \"Ska\u00f0i\" derives from the name of the geographical region, which was at the time no longer completely understood. In connection, Dum\u00e9zil points to a parallel in \"\u00c9riu\", a goddess personifying Ireland that appears in some Irish texts, whose name he says comes from \"Ireland\" rather than the other way around.\nAlternatively, \"Ska\u00f0i\" may be connected with the Old Norse noun \"ska\u00f0i\" ('harm'), source of the Icelandic and Faroese \"ska\u00f0i\" ('harm, damage') and cognate with English \"scathe\" (\"unscathed\", \"scathing\").\nAttestations.\nSka\u00f0i is attested in poems found in the \"Poetic Edda\", in two books of the \"Prose Edda\" and in one \"Heimskringla\" book.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", the god Odin (disguised as \"Gr\u00edmnir\") reveals to the young Agnarr the existence of twelve locations. Odin mentions the location \u00derymheimr sixth in a single stanza. In the stanza, Odin details that the j\u00f6tunn \u00dejazi once lived there, and that now his daughter Ska\u00f0i does. Odin describes \u00derymheimr as consisting of \"ancient courts\" and refers to Ska\u00f0i as \"the shining bride of the gods\". In the prose introduction to the poem \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\", the god Freyr has become heartsick for a fair girl (the j\u00f6tunn Ger\u00f0r) he has spotted in J\u00f6tunheimr. The god Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r asks Freyr's servant Sk\u00edrnir to talk to Freyr, and in the first stanza of the poem, Ska\u00f0i also tells Sk\u00edrnir to ask Freyr why he is so upset. Sk\u00edrnir responds that he expects harsh words from their son Freyr.\nIn the prose introduction to the poem \"Lokasenna\", Ska\u00f0i is referred to as the wife of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and is cited as one of the goddesses attending \u00c6gir's feast. After Loki has an exchange with the god Heimdallr, Ska\u00f0i interjects. Ska\u00f0i tells Loki that he is \"light-hearted\" and that Loki will not be \"playing [...] with [his] tail wagging free\" for much longer, for soon the gods will bind Loki to a sharp rock with the ice-cold entrails of his son. Loki responds that, even if this is so, he was \"first and foremost\" at the killing of \u00dejazi. Ska\u00f0i responds that, if this is so, \"baneful advice\" will always flow from her \"sanctuaries and plains\". Loki responds that Ska\u00f0i was more friendly in speech when Ska\u00f0i was in his bed\u2014an accusation he makes to most of the goddesses in the poem and is not attested elsewhere. Loki's flyting then turns to the goddess Sif.\nIn the prose section at the end of \"Lokasenna\", the gods catch Loki and bind him with the innards of his son Nari, while they turn his son V\u00e1li into a wolf. Ska\u00f0i places a venomous snake above Loki's face. Venom drips from the snake and Loki's wife Sigyn sits and holds a basin beneath the serpent, catching the venom. When the basin is full, Sigyn must empty it, and during that time the snake venom falls onto Loki's face, causing him to writhe in a tremendous fury, so much so that all earthquakes stem from Loki's writhings.\nIn the poem \"Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0\", the female j\u00f6tunn Hyndla tells the goddess Freyja various mythological genealogies. In one stanza, Hyndla notes that \u00dejazi \"loved to shoot\" and that Ska\u00f0i was his daughter.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn the \"Prose Edda\", Ska\u00f0i is attested in two books: \"Gylfaginning\" and \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\".\n\"Gylfaginning\".\nIn chapter 23 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\", the enthroned figure of High details that Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r's wife is Ska\u00f0i, that she is the daughter of the j\u00f6tunn \u00dejazi, and recounts a tale involving the two. High recalls that Ska\u00f0i wanted to live in the home once owned by her father called \u00derymheimr. However, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r wanted to live nearer to the sea. Subsequently, the two made an agreement that they would spend nine nights in \u00derymheimr and then the next three nights in Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r's sea-side home N\u00f3at\u00fan (or nine winters in \u00derymheimr and another nine in N\u00f3at\u00fan according to the \"Codex Regius\".). However, when Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r returned from the mountains to N\u00f3at\u00fan, he said:\n\"Hateful for me are the mountains,\nI was not long there,\nonly nine nights.\nThe howling of the wolves\nsounded ugly to me\nafter the song of the swans.\"\nSka\u00f0i responded:\n\"Sleep I could not\non the sea beds\nfor the screeching of the bird.\nThat gull wakes me\nwhen from the wide sea\nhe comes each morning.\"\nThe sources for these stanzas are not provided in the \"Prose Edda\" or elsewhere. High says that afterward Ska\u00f0i went back up to the mountains and lived in \u00derymheimr, and there Ska\u00f0i often travels on skis, wields a bow, and shoots wild animals. High notes that Ska\u00f0i is also referred to as \"ski god\" (Old Norse \"\u00d6ndurgud\") or \u00d6ndurdis and the \"ski lady\" (\"\u00d6ndurd\u00eds\"). In support, the above-mentioned stanza from the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" is cited. In the next chapter (24), High says that \"after this\", Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r \"had two children\": Freyr and Freyja. The name of the mother of the two children is not provided here.\nAt the end of chapter 51 of \"Gylfaginning\", High describes how the gods caught and bound Loki. Ska\u00f0i is described as having taken a venomous snake and fastening it above the bound Loki, so that the venom may drip on to Loki's face. Loki's wife Sigyn sat by his side and caught the venom in a bowl. But when the bowl becomes full, she must leave to empty it, and then Loki is burned by the acidic liquid and he writhes in extreme pain, causing the earth to shake and resulting in what we know as an earthquake.\n\"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\".\nIn chapter 56 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Bragi recounts to \u00c6gir how the gods killed \u00dejazi. \u00dejazi's daughter, Ska\u00f0i, took a helmet, a coat of mail, and \"all weapons of war\" and traveled to Asgard, the home of the gods. Upon Ska\u00f0i's arrival, the gods wished to atone for her loss and offered compensation. Ska\u00f0i provides them with her terms of settlement, and the gods agree that Ska\u00f0i may choose a husband from among themselves. However, Ska\u00f0i must choose this husband by looking solely at their feet. Ska\u00f0i saw a pair of feet that she found particularly attractive and said \"I choose that one; there can be little that is ugly about Baldr.\" However, the owner of the feet turned out to be Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r.\nSka\u00f0i also included in her terms of settlement that the gods must do something she thought impossible for them to do: make her laugh. To do so, Loki tied one end of a cord around the beard of a nanny goat and the other end around his testicles. The goat and Loki drew one another back and forth, both squealing loudly. Loki dropped into Ska\u00f0i's lap, and Ska\u00f0i laughed, completing this part of her atonement. Finally, in compensation to Ska\u00f0i, Odin took \u00dejazi's eyes, plunged them into the sky, and from the eyes made two stars.\nFurther in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", a work by the skald \u00de\u00f3r\u00f0r Sj\u00e1reksson is quoted. The poem refers to Ska\u00f0i as \"the wise god-bride\" and notes that she \"could not love the Van\". Prose below the quote clarifies that this is a reference to Ska\u00f0i's leaving of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r. In chapter 16, names for Loki are given, including \"wrangler of Heimdall and Ska\u00f0i\". In chapter 22, Ska\u00f0i is referenced in the 10th century poem \"Haustl\u00f6ng\" where the skald \u00dej\u00f3\u00f0\u00f3lfr of Hvinir refers to an ox as \"bow-string-Var's [Ska\u00f0i's] whale\". In chapter 23, the skald Bragi Boddason refers to \u00dejazi as the \"father of the ski-dis\". In chapter 32, Ska\u00f0i is listed among six goddesses who attend a party held by \u00c6gir. In chapter 75, Ska\u00f0i is included among a list of 27 \u00e1synjur names.\n\"Heimskringla\".\nIn chapter 8 of the \"Heimskringla\" book \"Ynglinga saga\", Ska\u00f0i appears in an euhemerized account. This account details that Ska\u00f0i had once married Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r but that she would not have sex with him, and that later Ska\u00f0i married Odin. Ska\u00f0i and Odin had \"many sons\". Only one of the names of these sons is provided: S\u00e6mingr, a king of Norway. Two stanzas are presented by the skald Eyvindr sk\u00e1ldaspillir in reference. In the first stanza, Ska\u00f0i is described as a j\u00f6tunn and a \"fair maiden\". A portion of the second stanza is missing. The second stanza reads:\nOf sea-bones,\nand sons many\nthe ski-goddess\ngat with \u00d3thin\nLee Hollander explains that \"bones-of-the-sea\" is a kenning for \"rocks\", and believes that this defective stanza undoubtedly referred to Ska\u00f0i as a \"dweller of the rocks\" in connection with her association with mountains and skiing.\nTheories.\n\"V\u00f6lsunga saga\".\nAnother figure by the name of Ska\u00f0i who appears in the first chapter of \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\". In the chapter, this Ska\u00f0i\u2014who is male\u2014is the owner of a thrall by the name of Bre\u00f0i. Another man, Sigi\u2014a son of Odin\u2014went hunting one winter with the thrall. Sigi and the thrall Bre\u00f0i hunted throughout the day until evening, when they compared their kills. Sigi saw that the thrall's kills outdid his own, and so Sigi killed Bre\u00f0i and buried Bre\u00f0i's corpse in a snowdrift.\nThat night, Sigi returned home and claimed that Bre\u00f0i had ridden out into the forest, that he had lost sight of Bre\u00f0i, and that he furthermore did not know what became of the thrall. Ska\u00f0i doubted Sigi's explanation, suspected that Sigi was lying, and that Sigi had instead killed Bre\u00f0i. Ska\u00f0i gathered men together to look for Bre\u00f0i and the group eventually found the corpse of Bre\u00f0i in a snowdrift. Ska\u00f0i declared that henceforth the snowdrift should be called \"Bre\u00f0i's drift,\" and ever since then people have referred to large snow drifts by that name. The fact that Sigi murdered Bre\u00f0i was evident, and so Sigi was considered an outlaw. Led by Odin, Sigi leaves the land, and Ska\u00f0i is not mentioned again in the saga.\nScholar Jesse Byock notes that the goddess Ska\u00f0i is also associated with winter and hunting, and that the episode in \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\" involving the male Ska\u00f0i, Sigi, and Bre\u00f0i has been theorized as stemming from an otherwise lost myth.\nOther.\nScholar John Lindow comments that the episode in \"Gylfaginning\" detailing Loki's antics with a goat may have associations with castration and a ritual involving making a goddess laugh. Lindow notes that Loki and Ska\u00f0i appear to have had a special relationship, an example being Ska\u00f0i's placement of the snake over Loki's face in \"Lokasenna\" and \"Gylfaginning.\"\nDue to their shared association with skiing and the fact that both place names referring to Ullr and Ska\u00f0i appear most frequently in Sweden, some scholars have proposed a particular connection between the two gods. On the other hand, \"Ska\u00f0i\" may potentially be a masculine form and, as a result, some scholars have theorized that Ska\u00f0i may have originally been a male deity.\nScholar Hilda Ellis Davidson proposes that Ska\u00f0i's cult may have thrived in H\u00e5logaland, a province in northern Norway, because \"she shows characteristics of the Sami people, who were renowned for skiing, shooting with the bow and hunting; her separation from Njord might point to a split between her cult and that of the Vanir in this region, where Scandinavians and the Sami were in close contact.\"\nModern influence.\nModern works of art depicting Ska\u00f0i include \"Skadi und Niurd\" by Karl Ehrenberg (1883) and \"Skadi\" by Emil Doepler (1901). Ska\u00f0i also appears in Adam Oehlenschl\u00e4ger's poem \"Skades Giftermaal\" (1819). \nArt deco depictions of both the god Ullr (1928) and Ska\u00f0i (1929) appear on covers of the Swedish ski annual \"P\u00e5 Skidor\", both skiing and wielding bows. E. John B. Allen notes that the deities are portrayed in a manner that \"give[s] historical authority to this most important of Swedish ski journals, which began publication in 1893\". \nA moon of the planet Saturn (Skathi) and the highest mountain on Venus (Skadi Mons) are named after the goddess.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70070", "revid": "144047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70070", "title": "The Weirdstone of Brisingamen", "text": "1960 fantasy novel by Alan Garner\nThe Weirdstone of Brisingamen: A Tale of Alderley is a children's fantasy novel by English author Alan Garner. Garner began work on the novel, his literary debut, in 1957, after he moved into the late medieval house, Toad Hall, in Blackden, Cheshire. The story, which took the local legend of The Wizard of the Edge as a partial basis for the novel's plot, was influenced by the folklore and landscape of neighbouring Alderley Edge where he had grown up. Upon completion the book was picked up by Sir William Collins who released it through his publishing company Collins in 1960.\nThe novel, set in and around Macclesfield and Alderley Edge in Cheshire, tells the story of two children, Colin and Susan, who are staying with some old friends of their mother while their parents are overseas. Susan possesses a small tear-shaped jewel held in a bracelet: unknown to her, this is the weirdstone of the title. Its nature is revealed when the children are hunted by the minions of the dark spirit Nastrond who, centuries before, had been defeated and banished by a powerful king. The children also have to compete with the wicked shape-shifting sorceress Selina Place and the evil wizard Grimnir, each of whom wishes to possess the weirdstone. Along the way Colin and Susan are aided by the wizard Cadellin Silverbrow and his dwarf companions.\nThe novel met with critical praise and led to a sequel, \"The Moon of Gomrath\", published in 1963. Growing to dislike the main characters, Garner decided not to write the envisioned third part of the trilogy. For the 1963 reprint Garner also made several changes to the original text and by the late 1960s he came to reject \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" as \"a fairly bad book\". Although it fell out of critical approval it was adapted in the late 1970s as a musical that was staged in Manchester and Essex. In 2010 HarperCollins brought out a special 50th anniversary issue of the book, containing a new preface by Garner and praise from various other figures involved in children's literature, while 2011 saw BBC Radio 4 produce a radio adaptation. In August 2012 \"Boneland\", the third volume in Garner's trilogy, was finally released.\nPlot.\nThe book's introduction concerns the origin of the weirdstone. Following the defeat of Nastrond steps had been taken to prepare for his eventual return. This involved bringing together a small band of warriors of pure heart, each with a horse, and gathering them inside the old dwarf caves of Fundindelve, deep inside the hill of Alderley. The caves were sealed by powerful white magic which would both defend Fundindelve from evil as the ages passed and prevent the warriors and their horses from ageing. When the time was ripe and the world once more in mortal peril it was prophesied that this small band of warriors would ride out from the hill, trusting in their purity of heart to defeat Nastrond forever. Fundindelve had a guardian, the ancient wizard Cadellin Silverbrow, and the heart of the white magic was sealed inside a drop-shaped jewel, the Weirdstone of Brisingamen, also known as Firefrost.\nAt the beginning of the story, however, the Weirdstone has been lost, stolen centuries before by a farmer whose milk-white mare Cadellin had bought to complete the numbers in Fundindelve. The stone became a family heirloom \u2013 now called only \"the Tear\"- and eventually found its way to Susan's mother, who passed it on to Susan, oblivious of its history and purpose. When the children meet Cadellin the wizard fails to notice the bracelet even when the children come to visit him in Fundindelve. However, its presence does not go unnoticed by Selina Place and the witches of the morthbrood, who send their minions to steal it. Susan finally realises the identity of the Weirdstone and, fearing its destruction, sets out to warn the wizard. The children return to Fundindelve but are waylaid by a dark presence and the Tear is taken. Once they inform Cadellin they are told to keep away, to not further involve themselves. However, while exploring on their bikes they notice a mysterious cloud travelling across the landscape before hovering over the home of Selina Place, St Mary's Clyffe, and they go to investigate hoping to recover the stone on their own. They are successful but become lost in a labyrinth of mine-shafts and caverns. As the members of the morthbrood and Selina Place, later revealed as The Morrigan, close in on them they are rescued by a pair of dwarves, Fenodyree and Durathror, who are close companions of Cadellin. After passing through many perils the group returns to the farm where Susan and Colin are staying to spend the night, where at midnight The Morrigan menaces them through the door. They set out with the farm's owner the next day to return the Weirdstone to Cadellin before it can fall into the wrong hands. Their travels take them through gardens, lawns, fens, tangled rhododendron thickets, pine plantations, mountain peaks and snowy fields while striving to avoid the attention of the morthbrood.\nAt the climax of the story a great battle takes place on a hill near Alderley during which the children and their companions make a desperate last stand to protect the Weirdstone. However the enemy forces prove too strong and Durathror is mortally wounded. Grimnir takes the Weirdstone for himself and, in the ensuing chaos, Nastrond sends the great wolf Fenrir (in some editions Managarm) to destroy his enemies. As the remaining companions begin to despair, Cadellin appears and slays Grimnir, whom he reveals to be his own brother and who in the final moment accepts defeat and drops the stone into Cadellin's hand. The Morrigan flees in terror while Cadellin uses the power of the Weirdstone to subdue once again the forces of darkness.\nBackground.\nAlan Garner.\nAlan Garner was born in the front room of his grandmother's house in Congleton, Cheshire, on 17 October 1934. He grew up not far away, on Alderley Edge, a well-to-do rural Cheshire village that by this time had effectively become a suburb of Manchester. Growing up in \"a rural working-class family\", Garner's ancestry had been connected to Alderley Edge since at least the 16th century, with Alan tracing his lineage back to the death of William Garner in 1592. The Garner family had passed on \"a genuine oral tradition\", teaching their children the folk tales about The Edge, which included a description of a king and his army of knights that slept under it, guarded by a wizard, and in the mid 19th century, Alan's great-great-grandfather Robert had carved the face of a bearded wizard onto the rock of a cliff next to a well that was known in local folklore as the Wizard's Well.\nAlan's own grandfather, Joseph Garner, \"could read, but didn't and so was virtually unlettered\", but instead taught his grandson the various folk tales about The Edge, Alan later remarking that, as a result, he was \"aware of [the Edge's] magic\" when as a child he would often play there with his friends. The story of the king and the wizard living under the hill played an important part in the young Alan's life, becoming \"deeply embedded in my psyche\" and influencing his novels, in particular \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\".\nIn 1957 Garner purchased Toad Hall, a late mediaeval building in Blackden, seven miles from Alderley Edge. In the late 19th century the Hall had been divided into two agricultural labourers' cottages, but Garner obtained both for a total of \u00a3670, and proceeded to convert them back into a single home. It was at Toad Hall, on the afternoon of Tuesday 4 September 1957, that Garner set about writing his first novel, which would result in \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\". Whilst engaged in writing in his spare time, Garner attempted to gain employment as a teacher, but soon gave that up, believing that \"I couldn't write and teach: the energies were too similar\". He began working as a general labourer for four years, remaining unemployed for much of that time.\nLandscape of Cheshire.\nLike many of Garner's books the novel is set in the real landscape of Cheshire, in this case focused around Alderley Edge, and features fictional characters interacting at genuine sites such as the sandstone escarpment of the Edge, the Wizard's Well, the open mine pits, and the Beacon.\" Literary critic Neil Philip would later relate that \"this sense of a numinous, sacred potency in landscape\" was something that imbued all of Garner's work.\nIn a 1968 article Garner explained why he chose to set \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" in a real landscape rather than in a fictional realm, remarking that \"If we are in Eldorado, and we find a mandrake, then OK, so it's a mandrake: in Eldorado anything goes. But, by force of imagination, compel the reader to believe that there is a mandrake in a garden in Mayfield Road, Ulverston, Lancs, then when you pull up that mandrake it is really going to scream; and possibly the reader will too.\"\nSome features of the Cheshire landscape mentioned in the story are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMythology and folklore.\nStory.\nThe legend of The Wizard of Alderley Edge revolves around a king and his sleeping knights who rest beneath the hill, waiting for the day when they must awake to save the land. Each knight had a steed, a pure white horse. However, at the time the knights were placed under their enchanted slumber, the wizard whose job it was to guard the king and his knights found that they lacked one horse. One day, he encountered a local farmer taking a pure white mare to sell at the market. The wizard bought the horse, offering the farmer many rich jewels taken from the king's secret store of treasure under the Edge in payment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"As I turned toward writing, which is partially intellectual in its function, but is primarily intuitive and emotional in its execution, I turned towards that which was numinous and emotional in me, and that was the legend of King Arthur Asleep Under the Hill. It stood for all that I'd had to give up in order to understand what I'd had to give up. And so my first two books, which are very poor on characterization because I was somehow numbed in that area, are very strong on imagery and landscape, because the landscape I had inherited along with the legend.\"\nAlan Garner, 1989\nLanguage.\nThe majority of the non-English words used in \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" have been adopted from Norse mythology. For instance, the svart-alfar, which means 'black elves' in Scandinavian, are described as the \"maggot-breed of Ymir\", a reference to the primeval giant of Norse myth; while the realm of Ragnarok, which in Garner's story is the home of the malevolent spirit Nastrond, is actually named after the Norse end-of-the-world myth. Fimbulwinter, the magically induced winter weather that hinders the children's escape, also refers to Norse eschatology.\nCharacters.\nOther terms are taken not from Norse mythology, but from the Welsh mythology encapsulated in Mediaeval texts like the \"Mabinogion\". For instance, Govannon, one of the names with which Garner addresses Grimnir, has been adopted from the mythological character of Govannon ap Dun. Although Garner avoided incorporating his story into Arthurian mythology, the benevolent wizard in the novel, Cadellin Silverbrow, does have a link to the Arthurian mythos, in that \"Cadellin\" is one of the many names by which Culhwch invoked Arthur's aid in the Mediaeval Welsh Arthurian romance about \"Culhwch and Olwen\".\nOther words used in the novel are taken from elsewhere in European mythology and folklore. The name of Fenodyree, a benevolent dwarf in Garner's tale, is actually borrowed from Manx folklore, where it refers to a type of grotesque goblin or brownie. Meanwhile, the Morrigan, whom Garner presents as a malevolent shapeshifting witch, has a name adopted from Irish mythology, where she is a war goddess who is the most powerful aspect of the tripartite goddess Badb. Literary critic Neil Philip also argued that further folkloric and mythological influences could be seen in the character of Grimnir, who had both a foul smell from and an aversion to fresh water, characteristics traditionally associated with the Nuckelavee, a creature in Scottish folklore. Accompanying this, Philip opined that Grimnir was also \"half identified\" with the creature Grendel, the antagonist in the Old English poem \"Beowulf\".\nPublication.\nGarner sent his debut novel to the publishing company Collins, where it was picked up by the company's head, Sir William Collins, who was on the lookout for new fantasy novels following on from the recent commercial and critical success of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" (1954\u201355). Garner, who would go on to become a personal friend of Collins, would later relate that \"Billy Collins saw a title with funny-looking words in it on the stockpile, and he decided to publish it.\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I could not have hoped for the mood of the book to be better expressed. George Adamson has caught it exactly. Fenodyree is just as I imagined him and the eyes are the best part of the jacket. I am delighted.\"\nAlan Garner in a letter to the publisher, regarding cover artist George Adamson\nFollowing its release in 1960, \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" proved to be a \"resounding success... both critically and commercially\", later being described as \"a tour de force of the imagination, a novel that showed almost every writer who came afterwards what it was possible to achieve in novels ostensibly published for children.\" For the book's republication in 1963, Garner made several alterations to the text, excising what Neil Philip called \"extraneous clauses, needless adjectives and flabby phrases.\" In his opinion, this \"second text is taut where the first one is slack, precise where the first is woolly.\" Nonetheless, as the novel was republished by the US market by Puffin Books as an Armada Lion paperback in 1971, the 1960 text was once more used.\n50th anniversary reprint.\nIn the fiftieth anniversary edition of \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\", published by HarperCollins in 2010, several notable British fantasy novelists praised Garner and his work. Susan Cooper related that \"The power and range of Alan Garner's astounding talent has grown with every book he's written\", whilst David Almond called him one of Britain's \"greatest writers\" whose works \"really matter\". Philip Pullman, the author of the \"His Dark Materials\" trilogy, went further when he remarked that:\nGarner is indisputably the great originator, the most important British writer of fantasy since Tolkien, and in many respects better than Tolkien, because deeper and more truthful ... Any country except Britain would have long ago recognised his importance, and celebrated it with postage stamps and statues and street-names. But that's the way with us: our greatest prophets go unnoticed by the politicians and the owners of media empires. I salute him with the most heartfelt respect and admiration.\nAnother British fantasy author, Neil Gaiman, said \"Garner's fiction is something special\" in that it was \"smart and challenging, based in the here and the now, in which real English places emerged from the shadows of folklore, and in which people found themselves walking, living and battling their way through the dreams and patterns of myth.\" Praise also came from Nick Lake, the editorial director of HarperCollins Children's Books, who proclaimed that \"Garner is, quite simply, one of the greatest and most influential writers this country has ever produced.\"\nReception.\nIn 1970 \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" was given the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award by the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison School of Education.\nThe author.\nUpon publication it was a critical success, but later Garner had begun to find fault, referring to it in a 1968 interview as \"a fairly bad book\" and in 1970 as \"one of the worst books published in the last twenty years... technically... inept\".\nLiterary critics.\nLiterary critic Neil Philip devoted a chapter to both \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" and \"The Moon of Gomrath\" in his book \"A Fine Anger: A Critical Introduction to the Work of Alan Garner\" (1981). He noted that it had become \"fashionable to condemn Garner's early work, perhaps because of his own dismissive attitude to it.\" He argued that the two books \"may be flawed\", but that \"they are arguably Garner's most popular books; certainly it is on them that his reputation as a purely children's author rests.\" Philip argued that \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" suffers from a \"lack of characterisation\"; its \"most serious flaw\". Yet he also felt that the book had much to commend it, with a narrative that while \"unstructured\", was \"gripping and enthralling\", holding the reader's attention and keeping them \"guessing what is going to happen next.\" He commented on \"Garner's assured, poetic command of English\", with a writing style that is \"more fleshy, more prolix than the pared-down economy of Garner's later style\".\nIn the 2005 book \"Horror: Another 100 Best Books\", edited by Stephen Jones and Kim Newman, Muriel Gray's article for \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" described it with expressions such as \"truly gripping,\" \"beautifully crafted\" and \"a young person's introduction to horror.\"\nOther fantasy writers.\nThe book has received high praise from numerous other fantasy writers. Young adult fantasy writer Garth Nix indicated its impact on his own writing, saying \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen is one of the most important books in children\u2019s fantasy. It has been an enormous inspiration to me and countless other writers, and is as enjoyable and fascinating now as it was when I first read it, wide-eyed and mesmerised at the age of ten.\"\nPhilip Pullman also gave it high praise, stating \"Alan Garner is indisputably the great originator, the most important British writer of fantasy since Tolkien.\" Neil Gaiman has observed that \"Alan Garner\u2019s fiction is something special. Garner\u2019s fantasies were smart and challenging, based in the here and now, in which real English places emerged from the shadow of folklore, and in which people found themselves walking, living and battling their way through the dreams and patterns of myth.\"\nAdaptations.\n1963 radio drama.\nA six-part radio adaptation by Nan MacDonald was broadcast on the BBC Home Service in 1963. The cast included John Thornley as Colin, Margaret Dew as Susan, Alison Bayley as Selina Place, Geoffrey Banks as Cadellin the Wizard, Brian Trueman as Fenodyree, John Blain as Police Sergeant, Ronald Harvi as Durathror, and George Hagan as Narrator.\n1989 radio drama.\nThe novel was dramatised in four parts by David Wade, and broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 1989. The production was directed at BBC Manchester by Caroline Smith. It starred Robin Bailey as Cadellin, James Tomlinson as Gowther Mossock/Narrator, Andrea Murphy as Susan, Mark Kingston as Colin, Rosalind Knight as Selina Place, Patsy Byrne as Bess, George Parsons as Guard/Ticket collector, Richard Herdman as Farmer/Porter, and Anne Jameson as the Crow.\n2011 radio drama.\nIn the 2011 BBC Radio 4 adaptation Robert Powell played the narrator; he has known Garner since he was a schoolboy at Manchester Grammar School. Struan Rodger, who played the dwarf Durathror, was in a radio production of another Garner story, \"Elidor\", when he was thirteen years old. This adaptation was broadcast again in November 2012.\nMusical.\nIn the 1970s, \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\" was adapted as a musical by Paul Pearson and was staged in 1983 in Manchester and later in Essex. The original Manchester cast included artist Sue Mason, who also designed the programme book. The songs from the show were later re-arranged by Inkubus Sukkubus with hopes of resurrecting the musical for a modern audience, but copyright restrictions have made it unlikely that it will be presented again.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70074", "revid": "32722751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70074", "title": "N\u00e1str\u00f6nd", "text": "Place in Hel in Norse belief\nIn Norse mythology, N\u00e1str\u00f6nd (\"Corpse Shore\") is a place in Hel where N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr devours the dead souls of the dishonorable. It is the afterlife for those guilty of murder, and severe oath-breaking.\nOrthography.\nIn the standardized Old Norse orthography, the name was spelled \"N\u00e1str\u01ebnd\", which in 11th century Old West Norse was pronounced . In Modern Icelandic the letter '\u01eb' is replaced by \u00f6, and N\u00e1str\u00f6nd is pronounced .\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nThe \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" says:\n\"Prose Edda\".\nSnorri Sturluson quotes this part of V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 in the \"Gylfaginning\" section of his Prose Edda. He uses the plural of the word: N\u00e1strandir (\"Corpse Shores\")."}
{"id": "70075", "revid": "39745640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70075", "title": "Chancellor of the Exchequer", "text": "Lead minister of His Majesty's Treasury\nThe chancellor of the exchequer, often abbreviated to chancellor, is a senior minister of the Crown within the Government of the United Kingdom, and the head of His Majesty's Treasury. As one of the four Great Offices of State, the chancellor is a high-ranking member of the British Cabinet.\nResponsible for all economic and financial matters, the role is equivalent to that of a finance minister in other countries. The chancellor is now always second lord of the Treasury as one of at least six lords commissioners of the Treasury, responsible for executing the office of the Treasurer of the Exchequer\u00a0\u2013 the others are the prime minister and Commons government whips. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, it was common for the prime minister also to serve as Chancellor of the Exchequer if he sat in the Commons; the last Chancellor who was simultaneously prime minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer was Stanley Baldwin in 1923. Formerly, in cases when the chancellorship was vacant, the lord chief justice of the King's Bench would act as chancellor \"pro tempore\". The last lord chief justice to serve in this way was Lord Denman in 1834.\nThe chancellor is the third-oldest major state office in English and British history, and in recent times has come to be the most powerful office in British politics after the prime minister. It originally carried responsibility for the Exchequer, the medieval English institution for the collection and auditing of royal revenues. The earliest surviving records which are the results of the exchequer's audit date from 1129 to 1130 under King Henry I and show continuity from previous years. The chancellor has oversight of fiscal policy, therefore of taxation and public spending across government departments. It previously controlled monetary policy as well until 1997, when the Bank of England was granted independent control of its interest rates.\nSince 1718, all chancellors of the exchequer, except at times the lord chief justice as interim holders, have been members of the House of Commons, with Lord Stanhope being the last chancellor from the House of Lords.\nThe office holder works alongside the other Treasury ministers and the permanent secretary to the Treasury. The corresponding shadow minister is the shadow chancellor of the Exchequer, and the chancellor is also scrutinised by the Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesperson and the Treasury Select Committee.\nThe current chancellor is Rachel Reeves.\nSecond Lord of the Treasury.\nThe holder of the office of chancellor of the exchequer is \"ex officio\" second lord of the Treasury as a member of the commission exercising the ancient office of treasurer of the exchequer. As second lord, her official residence is 11 Downing Street in London, next door to the residence of the first lord of the Treasury (a title that has for many years been held by the prime minister), who resides in 10 Downing Street. While in the past both houses were private residences, today they serve as interlinked offices, with the occupant living in an apartment made from attic rooms previously resided in by servants.\nSince 1827, the chancellor has always simultaneously held the office of second lord of the Treasury when that person has not also been the prime minister.\nRoles and responsibilities.\nA previous chancellor, Robert Lowe, described the office in the following terms in the House of Commons, on 11 April 1870: \"The Chancellor of the Exchequer is a man whose duties make him more or less of a taxing machine. He is entrusted with a certain amount of misery which it is his duty to distribute as fairly as he can.\"\nFiscal policy.\nThe chancellor has considerable control over other departments as it is the Treasury that sets Departmental Expenditure Limits. The amount of power this gives to an individual chancellor depends on their personal forcefulness, their status within their party and their relationship with the prime minister. Gordon Brown, who became chancellor when Labour came into Government in 1997, had a large personal power base in the party. Perhaps as a result, Tony Blair chose to keep him in the same position throughout his ten years as prime minister; making Brown an unusually dominant figure and the longest-serving chancellor since the Reform Act 1832. This has strengthened a pre-existing trend towards the chancellor occupying a clear second position among government ministers, elevated above their traditional peers, the foreign secretary and home secretary.\nOne part of the chancellor's key roles involves the framing of the annual year budget. As of 2017, the first is the Autumn Budget, also known as Budget Day which forecasts government spending in the next financial year and also announces new financial measures. The second is a Spring Statement, also known as a \"mini-Budget\". Britain's tax year has retained the old Julian end of year: 24 March (Old Style) / 5 April (New Style, i.e. Gregorian). From 1993, the Budget was in spring, preceded by an annual autumn statement. This was then called Pre-Budget Report. The Autumn Statement usually took place in November or December. The 1997, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2012 and 2016 budgets were all delivered on a Wednesday, summarised in a speech to the House of Commons.\nThe budget is a state secret until the chancellor reveals it in the speech given to Parliament. Hugh Dalton, on his way to giving the budget speech in 1947, inadvertently blurted out key details to a newspaper reporter, and they appeared in print before he made his speech. Dalton was forced to resign.\nMonetary policy.\nAlthough the Bank of England is responsible for setting interest rates, the chancellor also plays an important part in the monetary policy structure. They set the inflation target which the Bank must set interest rates to meet. Under the Bank of England Act 1998 the chancellor has the power of appointment of four out of nine members of the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee \u2013 the so-called 'external' members. They also have a high level of influence over the appointment of the Bank's Governor and Deputy Governors, and has the right of consultation over the appointment of the two remaining MPC members from within the Bank. The Act also provides that the Government has the power to give instructions to the Bank on interest rates for a limited period in extreme circumstances. This power has never been officially used.\nMinisterial arrangements.\nAt HM Treasury the chancellor is supported by a political team of four junior ministers and by permanent civil servants. The most important junior minister is the chief secretary to the Treasury, a member of the Cabinet, to whom the negotiations with other government departments on the details of government spending are delegated, followed by the paymaster general, the financial secretary to the Treasury and the economic secretary to the Treasury. Whilst not continuously in use, there can also be appointed a commercial secretary to the Treasury and an exchequer secretary to the Treasury. Two other officials are given the title of a secretary to the Treasury, although neither is a government minister in the Treasury: the parliamentary secretary to the Treasury is the Government Chief Whip in the House of Commons; the permanent secretary to the Treasury is not a minister but the senior civil servant in the Treasury.\nThe chancellor is obliged to be a member of the Privy Council, and thus is styled the Right Honourable (Rt. Hon.). Because the House of Lords is excluded from financial matters by tradition confirmed by the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, the office is effectively limited to members of the House of Commons; apart from the occasions when the lord chief justice of the King's Bench has acted as interim Chancellor. The last peer to hold the office was Henry Booth, 2nd Baron Delamer (created Earl of Warrington shortly after leaving office) from 9 April 1689 to 18 March 1690. The chancellor holds the formerly independent office of Master of the Mint as a subsidiary office.\nPerquisites of the office.\nOfficial residence.\nThe chancellor of the Exchequer has no official London residence as such but since 1828 in their role as Second Lord of the Treasury they live in the second lord's official residence, No. 11 Downing Street. In 1997, the then first and second Lords, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown respectively, swapped apartments, as the chancellor's larger apartment in No. 11 better accommodated Blair's substantial family (besides himself and his wife, he had three children under 18 upon taking office, and a fourth was born in 2000); meanwhile, Brown was then unmarried and had no children.\nDorneywood.\nDorneywood is the summer residence that is traditionally made available to the chancellor, though it is the prime minister who ultimately decides who may use it. Gordon Brown, on becoming chancellor in 1997, refused to use it and the house, which is set in of parkland, was allocated to Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott. In 2007, it reverted to the then-chancellor, Alistair Darling.\nBudget box.\nThe chancellor traditionally carries their budget speech to the House of Commons in a particular red despatch box. The so-called 'Budget Box' is identical to the cases used by all other government ministers (known as ministerial boxes or \"despatch boxes\") to transport their official papers, but is better known because the chancellor traditionally displays the box, containing the budget speech, to the press before leaving 11 Downing Street for the House of Commons.\nThe original budget box was first used by William Ewart Gladstone in 1853 and continued in use until 1965 when James Callaghan was the first chancellor to break with tradition when he used a newer box. Prior to Gladstone, a generic red despatch box of varying design and specification was used. The practice is said to have begun in the late 16th century, when Queen Elizabeth I's representative Francis Throckmorton presented the Spanish Ambassador, Bernardino de Mendoza, with a specially constructed red briefcase filled with black puddings.\nIn July 1997, Gordon Brown became the second chancellor to use a new box for the Budget. Made by industrial trainees at Babcock Rosyth Defence Ltd ship and submarine dockyard in Fife, the new box is made of yellow pine, with a brass handle and lock, covered in scarlet leather and embossed with the Royal cypher and crest and the chancellor's title. In his first Budget, in March 2008, Alistair Darling reverted to using the original budget box and his successor, George Osborne, continued this tradition for his first budget, before announcing that it would be retired due to its fragile condition. The key to the original budget box has been lost.\nBudget tipple.\nBy tradition, the chancellor has been allowed to drink whatever they wish while making the annual budget speech to Parliament. This includes alcohol, which is otherwise banned under parliamentary rules.\nPrevious chancellors have opted for whisky (Kenneth Clarke), gin and tonic (Geoffrey Howe), brandy and water (Benjamin Disraeli and John Major), spritzer (Nigel Lawson) and sherry and beaten egg (William Gladstone).\nThe chancellors after Clarke, Philip Hammond, George Osborne, Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown, opted for water. In fact Darling drank what was named \"Standard Water\" in reference to, and support of, the London \"Evening Standard\" newspaper's campaign to have plain tap water available in restaurants at no charge to customers.\nRobe of office.\nThe chancellor, as Master of the Mint, has a robe of office, similar to that of the lord chancellor (as seen in several of the portraits depicted below). In recent times, it has only regularly been worn at coronations, but some chancellors (at least until the 1990s) have also worn it when attending the Trial of the Pyx as Master of the Mint. According to George Osborne, the robe (dating from Gladstone's time in office, and worn by the likes of Lloyd George and Churchill) 'went missing' during Gordon Brown's time as chancellor.\nList of chancellors of the exchequer.\nEngland (c.\u20091221 \u2013 c.\u20091558).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^\u2020 Died in office.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEngland (c.\u20091558 \u2013 1708).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGreat Britain (1708\u20131817).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnited Kingdom (1817\u2013present).\nAlthough the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland had been united by the Acts of Union 1800, the Exchequers of the two Kingdoms were not consolidated until 1817 under the Consolidated Fund Act 1816 (56 Geo. 3. c. 98). For the holders of the Irish office before this date, see Chancellor of the Exchequer of Ireland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70076", "revid": "6429027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70076", "title": "Hel (location)", "text": "Location in Norse mythology and paganism\nHel (Old Norse: ) is an afterlife location in Norse mythology and paganism. It is ruled over by a being of the same name, Hel. In late Icelandic sources, varying descriptions of Hel are given and various figures are described as being buried with items that will facilitate their journey to Hel after their death . In the \"Poetic Edda\", Brynhildr's trip to Hel after her death is described and Odin, while alive, also visits Hel upon his horse Sleipnir. In the \"Prose Edda\", Baldr goes to Hel on his death and subsequently Herm\u00f3\u00f0r uses Sleipnir to attempt to retrieve him.\nEtymology.\nThe Old Norse feminine proper noun \"Hel\" is identical to the name of the entity that presides over the realm. The word has cognates in all branches of the Germanic languages, including Old English (and thus Modern English \"hell\"), Old Frisian \"helle\", Old Saxon \"hellia\", Old High German \"\", and Gothic \"\ud800\udf37\ud800\udf30\ud800\udf3b\ud800\udf3e\ud800\udf30\". All forms ultimately derive from the reconstructed Proto-Germanic feminine noun *\"halj\u014d\" ('concealed place, the underworld'). In turn, the Proto-Germanic form derives from the o-grade form of the Proto-Indo-European root *\"kel-\", *\"kol\"-: 'to cover, conceal, save'.\nThe term is etymologically related to Modern English \"hall\" and therefore also \"Valhalla\", an afterlife 'hall of the slain' in Norse Mythology. \"Hall\" and its numerous Germanic cognates derive from Proto-Germanic *\"hall\u014d\" 'covered place, hall', from Proto-Indo-European *\"kol-\".\nRelated early Germanic terms and concepts include Proto-Germanic *\"halja-r\u016bn\u014d(n)\", a feminine compound noun, and *\"halja-w\u012btjan\", a neutral compound noun. This form is reconstructed from the Latinized Gothic plural noun *\"haliurunnae\" (attested by Jordanes; according to philologist Vladimir Orel, meaning 'witches'), Old English ' ('sorceress, necromancer', according to Orel), and Old High German ' 'magic'. The compound is composed of two elements: *\"halj\u014d\" and *\"r\u016bn\u014d\", the Proto-Germanic precursor to Modern English \"rune\". The second element in the Gothic \"\" may however instead be an agent noun from the verb \"rinnan\" (\"to run, go\"), which would make its literal meaning \"one who travels to the netherworld\".\nProto-Germanic *\"halja-w\u012btjan\" is reconstructed from Old Norse ' 'hell', Old English ' 'hell-torment, hell', Old Saxon \"helli-w\u012bti\" 'hell', and the Middle High German feminine noun '. The compound is a compound of *\"halj\u014d\" (discussed above) and *\"w\u012btjan\" (reconstructed from forms such as Old English ' 'right mind, wits', Old Saxon \"gewit\" 'understanding', and Gothic \"\" 'foolishness, understanding').\nAttestations.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn reference to Hel, in the poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", a v\u00f6lva states that Hel will play an important role in Ragnar\u00f6k. The v\u00f6lva states that a crowing \"sooty-red cock from the halls of Hel\" is one of three cocks that will signal one of the beginning events of Ragnar\u00f6k. The other two are Fjalar in Jotunheim and Gullinkambi in Valhalla.\nIn \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" stanza 31, Hel is listed as existing beneath one of the three roots of the world tree Yggdrasil. One of the other two leads to the frost j\u00f6tnar and the third to Mankind. In \"Gu\u00f0r\u00fanarkvi\u00f0a I\", as Herborg tells of her grief in having prepared funeral arrangements for various members of her family, her children and her husbands, described it as \"arranging their journey to Hel\".\nIn the short poem \"Helrei\u00f0 Brynhildar\", Hel is directly referenced as a location in the title, translating to \"Brynhild's Hel-Ride\". While riding along a road on the border of Hel in a lavish cart (the cart her corpse was burnt within), Brynhildr encounters a dead g\u00fdgr at a burial mound belonging to her. This results in a heated exchange, during which Brynhildr tells of her life.\nIn \"Baldrs draumar\", Odin rides to the edge of Hel to investigate nightmares that Baldr has had. He uses a spell to bring to life the corpse of a v\u00f6lva. Odin introduces himself under a false name and pretense and asks for information from the v\u00f6lva relating to Baldr's dreams. The v\u00f6lva reluctantly proceeds to produce prophecies regarding the events of Ragnar\u00f6k.\nThe poem gives some information regarding the geographic location of Hel in parallel to the description in the Prose Edda, which may be related to the fact that it was not included in the Codex Regius but is instead a later addition. Niflhel is mentioned as being just outside Hel. The bloody Garmr makes an appearance, encountering Odin on Odin's ride to Hel. Odin continues down the road and approaches Hel, which is described as the \"high hall of Hel.\" There he proceeds to the grave of the v\u00f6lva near the eastern doors where the descriptions of Hel end.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn the \"Prose Edda\", more detailed information is given about the location, including a detailed account of a venture to the region after the death of the god Baldr. Snorri's descriptions of Hel in the \"Prose Edda\" are not corroborated outside \"Baldrs draumar\", which does not appear in the original Codex Regius but is a later addition often included with modern editions of the \"Poetic Edda\".\n\"Gylfaginning\".\nIn the book \"Gylfaginning\", Hel is introduced in chapter 3 as a location where \"evil men\" go upon death, and into Niflhel. The chapter further details that Hel is in the ninth of the Nine Worlds.\nIn chapter 34, Hel, the being is introduced. Snorri writes that Hel was cast down into Hel by Odin who \"made her ruler over Nine Worlds\". Snorri further writes that there Hel is located in Niflheim. Here it is related that she could give out lodging and items to those sent to her that have died of disease or old age. A very large dwelling is described as existing in Niflheim owned by Hel with huge walls and gates. The within of this place is called \u00c9lj\u00fa\u00f0nir, where Hel is described as having a servant, a slave and various possessions.\nAt the end of chapter 49, the death of Baldr and Nanna is described. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r, described as Baldr's brother in this source, sets out for Hel on horseback to retrieve the deceased Baldr. To enter Hel, Herm\u00f3\u00f0r rides for nine nights through \"valleys so deep and dark that he saw nothing\" until he arrives at the river Gj\u00f6ll (\"Noisy\") and the Gj\u00f6ll bridge. The bridge is described as having a roof made of shining gold. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r then proceeds to cross it. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r encounters M\u00f3\u00f0gu\u00f0, who is the guard of the bridge (\"Furious Battler\").\nM\u00f3\u00f0gu\u00f0 speaks to Herm\u00f3\u00f0r and comments that the bridge echoes beneath him more than the entire party of five people who had just passed. This is a reference to Baldr, Nanna and those that were burnt in their funeral pyre passing over the bridge on death. M\u00f3\u00f0gu\u00f0 also says that the dead in Hel appear as a different color than the living and tells him that to get to Hel he must go \"down and to the North\" where he would find the Road to Hel.\nContinuing along the Road to Hel, Herm\u00f3\u00f0r encounters the Gates of Hel. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r remounts and spurs Sleipnir, and the two bound far over it. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r proceeds further beyond the gates for some distance before arriving at the hall, dismounting and entering. There Herm\u00f3\u00f0r sees Baldr sitting in a \"seat of honor\" and Herm\u00f3\u00f0r spends a night in Hel. The following day, Herm\u00f3\u00f0r presses Hel, the being, to allow Baldr to leave. Hel gives him an offer and then Baldr leads him out of the hall. Baldr then gives Herm\u00f3\u00f0r various gifts from Nanna and himself to bring from Hel to the living \u00c6sir. Herm\u00f3\u00f0r then retraces his path back to the land of the living. Hel's offer fails and in chapter 50, Loki is blamed for Baldr remaining in Hel.\nIn chapter 53, Hel is mentioned a final time in the \"Prose Edda\". Here, H\u00f6\u00f0r and Baldr are mentioned as returning from Hel in a post-Ragnar\u00f6k world:\n\"Gesta Danorum\".\nBook I of \"Gesta Danorum\" contains an account of what has often been interpreted as a trip to Hel. While having dinner, King Hadingus is visited by a woman bearing stalks of hemlock who asks him if he knows where such fresh herbs grow in winter. Hadingus wants to know; so the woman muffles him with her cloak, pulls him into the ground, and they vanish. Saxo reasons that the gods wished for Hadingus to visit in the flesh where he will go when he dies.\nThe two penetrate a dark and misty cloud, and then continue along a path worn from heavy use over the ages. The two see men wearing rich-looking robes, and nobles wearing purple. Passing them, they finally reach sunny regions where the herbs the woman presented Hadingus grow.\nHadingus and the woman continue until they arrived at a river of blue-black water that is fast-moving, full of rapids, and filled with various weapons. They cross the bridge, and see two \"strongly-matched\" armies meeting. Hadingus asks the woman about their identity, and she responds that they are men that have met their death by sword, and that they present an everlasting display of their destruction while attempting to equal the activity of their past lives.\nMoving forward, the two encounter a wall that they cannot find a way over. The woman attempts to leap over it, but despite her slender and wrinkled body, cannot. The woman removes the head of a cock that she was carrying and throws it over the wall. The bird crows immediately; it has returned to life. Hadingus returns to his wife, and foils a threat by pirates.\nTheories.\nHilda Ellis Davidson, writing on Snorri's unique description of Hel in his Prose Edda, states that \"it seems likely that Snorri's account of the underworld is chiefly his own work\" and that the idea that the dead entering Hel who have died of sickness and old age may have been an attempt on Snorri's part to reconcile the tradition with his description of Valhalla, citing that \"the one detailed account of Hel\" that Snorri gives is that of Baldr entering Hel without dying of old age or sickness. Davidson writes that Snorri was potentially using a \"rich source\" unknown to us for his description of Hel, though it may not have told him very much about the location beyond that it was a hall and that Snorri's description of Hel may at times be influenced by Christian teachings about the after-life.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70078", "revid": "308199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70078", "title": "Asynjur", "text": ""}
{"id": "70084", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70084", "title": "August Bournonville", "text": "Danish ballet master and choreographer (1805\u20131879)\nAugust Bournonville (21 August 1805 \u2013 30 November 1879) was a Danish ballet master and choreographer. He was the son of Antoine Bournonville, a dancer and choreographer trained under the French choreographer, Jean Georges Noverre, and the nephew of Julie Alix de la Fay, n\u00e9e Bournonville, of the Royal Swedish Ballet.\nBournonville was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, where his father had settled. He trained with his father Antoine Bournonville as well he studied under the Italian choreographer Vincenzo Galeotti at the Royal Danish Ballet, Copenhagen, and in Paris, France, under French dancer Auguste Vestris. He initiated a unique style in ballet known as the Bournonville School.\nFollowing studies in Paris as a young man, Bournonville became solo dancer at the Royal Ballet in Copenhagen. From 1830 to 1848 he was choreographer for the Royal Danish Ballet, for which he created more than 50 ballets admired for their exuberance, lightness and beauty. He created a style which, although influenced from the Paris ballet, is entirely his own. As a choreographer, he created a number of ballets with varied settings that range from Denmark to Italy, Russia to South America. A limited number of these works have survived.\nBournonville's work became known outside Denmark only after World War II. Since 1950, The Royal Ballet has several times made prolonged tours abroad, not the least to the United States, where they have performed his ballets.\nBournonville's best-known ballets are \"La Sylphide\" (1836), \"Napoli\" (1842), \"Le Conservatoire\" (1849), \"The Kermesse in Bruges\" (1851) and \"A Folk Tale\" (1854). Later major ballets include Valkyrien, Thrymskviden, Arcona and Fjedstuen.\nEarly years.\nBorn in Copenhagen on 21 August 1805, Bournonville was the son of the French ballet master Antoine Bournonville, who had settled in Denmark, and Lovisa Sundberg, a Swede. At the age of eight, he entered the Royal Ballet School at the Court Theatre in Christiansborg Palace under the tutelage of his father and Vincenzo Galeotti, ballet master and principal choreographer of the Royal Danish Ballet from 1775 to 1816.\nOn 2 October 1813, Bournonville made his first stage appearance in a small part as the son of a Viking king in Galeotti's \"Lagertha\", the first ballet on a Nordic theme. Less than a year later, he received his first personal applause for dancing a Hungarian solo at the Court Theatre. In addition to dance, Bournonville was a voracious reader, learned French at home, played the violin, sang in a boy soprano voice, and studied declamation with the actors Michael Rosing, Lindgreen, and Frydensdahl. His many talents were brought together on the Queen's birthday, 29 October 1817, when as a twelve-year-old he played the role of Adonia to royal acclaim in a music-drama, \"Solomon's Judgment\" and sang a romance, \"The Mother with Her Drooping Wings\".\nFamily.\nBournonville had five siblings. He was the only one in out of the children who showed any interest in dancing. He married Helena Fredrika H\u00e5kansson on 23 June 1830. They had seven children, including Charlotte who became an opera singer and actress. Both sons died as toddlers.\nParis.\nIn 1820, Antoine Bournonville received a grant from his sovereign, Frederick\u202fVI, to briefly study ballet in Paris. Bournonville accompanied his father to Paris, and, although he studied solely with his father during the Paris sojourn, he was exposed to the latest trends in ballet and watched the illustrious teachers, Gardel and Vestris in action. Upon returning to Denmark, Bournonville became a member of the Royal Theatre, dancing in repertory that was less interesting to him after his exposure to Paris ballet.\nIn the spring of 1824, Bournonville returned to Paris for final studies and examination preparations at the Paris Opera. The expected fifteen-month sojourn would stretch to five years, during which time Danish ballet would approach near-disastrous decline. In Paris, Bournonville met his father's old friend, Louis Nivelon, who provided him with friendship, meals, and entree into society. Bournonville hoped the master Gardel would accept him but Gardel's studio was no longer in existence and he was directed to Auguste Vestris for training in his weakest areas \u2014 \"balance, pirouettes, and arms.\" Vestris accepted Bournonville. Bournonville wrote his father: {\nBournonville danced from 1820 to 1828 with the noted dancer Marie Taglioni and the Paris Opera Ballet.\nDeath.\nBournonville stopped teaching adult classes in the spring of 1877. On returning from church on 30 November 1879, he was stricken and taken to a hospital. Bournonville was interred in Asminder\u00f8d Churchyard near Fredensborg.\nLegacy.\nBournonville's work remains an important link with earlier traditions. He resisted many of the excesses of the romantic era ballets in his work. He is noted for his egalitarian choreography, which gave equal emphasis to both male and female roles, at a time when European ballet emphasized the ballerina. Many of his contemporaries explored the extremes of human emotion, while Bournonville, using enthusiastic footwork and fluid phrases in his work, portrayed a more balanced human nature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "70085", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70085", "title": "J. J. Thomson", "text": "British physicist (1856\u20131940)\nSir Joseph John Thomson (18 December 1856 \u2013 30 August 1940) was a British physicist whose study of cathode rays led to his discovery of the electron, a subatomic particle with a negative electric charge. In 1897, he showed that cathode rays were composed of previously unknown negatively charged particles (now called electrons), which he calculated must have bodies much smaller than atoms and a very large charge-to-mass ratio.\nIn 1906, Thomson was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics \"in recognition of the great merits of his theoretical and experimental investigations on the conduction of electricity by gases.\"\nThomson is credited with finding the first evidence for isotopes of a stable (non-radioactive) element in 1912, as part of his exploration into the composition of canal rays (positive ions). His experiments to determine the nature of positively charged particles, with Francis William Aston, were the first use of mass spectrometry and led to the development of the mass spectrograph.\nThomson was an influential teacher, and seven of his students went on to win Nobel Prizes: Ernest Rutherford (Chemistry 1908), Lawrence Bragg (Physics 1915), Charles Barkla (Physics 1917), Francis Aston (Chemistry 1922), Charles Thomson Rees Wilson (Physics 1927), Owen Richardson (Physics 1928) and Edward Appleton (Physics 1947).\nBiography.\nJoseph John Thomson was born on 18 December 1856 in Cheetham Hill, Manchester. His mother, Emma Swindells, came from a local textile family. His father, Joseph James Thomson, ran an antiquarian bookshop founded by Thomson's great-grandfather. Joseph John had a brother, Frederick Vernon Thomson, who was two years younger than he was. Thomson was a reserved yet devout Anglican.\nEducation.\nThomson's early education was in small private schools where he demonstrated outstanding talent and interest in science. In 1870, he was admitted to Owens College in Manchester (now the University of Manchester) at the unusually young age of 14, and came under the influence of Balfour Stewart, Professor of Physics, who initiated him into physical research. He began experimenting with contact electrification and soon published his first scientific paper. His parents planned to enroll him as an apprentice engineer to Sharp, Stewart &amp; Co, a locomotive manufacturer, but these plans were cut short when his father died in 1873.\nIn 1876, Thomson moved on to Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1880, he received his B.A. in mathematics (Second Wrangler in the Tripos and 2nd Smith's Prizeman). He applied for and became a Fellow of Trinity College the following year. He obtained an M.A. (Adams Prizeman) in 1883.\nCareer.\nOn 22 December 1884, Thomson was appointed Cavendish Professor of Physics at the University of Cambridge. This appointment caused considerable surprise; candidates such as Osborne Reynolds and Richard Glazebrook were older and more experienced in laboratory work, whereas Thomson was known for his work as a mathematician\u2014being recognised as an exceptional talent.\nThomson was knighted in 1908 and appointed to the Order of Merit in 1912. At Oxford, he gave the 1914 Romanes Lecture titled \"The Atomic Theory\". In 1918, he became Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, a position he held until his death on 30 August 1940. His ashes rest in Westminster Abbey, near the graves of Isaac Newton and his former student, Ernest Rutherford.\nRutherford succeeded him as Cavendish Professor. Six of Thomson's research assistants and junior colleagues (Charles Glover Barkla, Niels Bohr, Max Born, William Henry Bragg, Owen Willans Richardson and Charles Thomson Rees Wilson) won the Nobel Prize in Physics, and two (Francis William Aston and Ernest Rutherford) won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Thomson's son, George Paget Thomson, won the 1937 Nobel Prize in Physics for proving the wave-like properties of electrons.\nResearch.\nEarly work.\nThomson's prize-winning master's work, \"Treatise on the motion of vortex rings\", shows his early interest in atomic structure. In it, Thomson mathematically described the motions of Lord Kelvin's vortex theory of the atom.\nThomson published a number of papers addressing both mathematical and experimental issues of electromagnetism. He examined the electromagnetic theory of light of James Clerk Maxwell, introduced the concept of electromagnetic mass of a charged particle, and demonstrated that a moving charged body would apparently increase in mass.\nMuch of his work in mathematical modelling of chemical processes can be thought of as early computational chemistry. In further work, published in book form as \"Applications of dynamics to physics and chemistry\" (1888), Thomson addressed the transformation of energy in mathematical and theoretical terms, suggesting that all energy might be kinetic. His next book, \"Notes on recent researches in electricity and magnetism\" (1893), built upon Maxwell's \"Treatise upon electricity and magnetism\", and was sometimes referred to as \"the third volume of Maxwell.\" In it, Thomson emphasized physical methods and experimentation and included extensive figures and diagrams of apparatus, including a number for the passage of electricity through gases. His third book, http:// (1895) was a readable introduction to a wide variety of subjects, and achieved considerable popularity as a textbook.\nA series of four lectures, given by Thomson on a visit to Princeton University in 1896, were subsequently published as \"Discharge of electricity through gases\" (1897). He also presented a series of six lectures at Yale University in 1904.\nDiscovery of the electron.\nSeveral scientists, such as William Prout and Norman Lockyer, had suggested that atoms were built up from a more fundamental unit, but they envisioned this unit to be the size of the smallest atom, hydrogen. Thomson in 1897 was the first to suggest that one of the fundamental units of the atom was more than 1,000 times smaller than an atom, suggesting the subatomic particle now known as the electron. Thomson discovered this through his explorations on the properties of cathode rays. Thomson made his suggestion on 30 April 1897 following his discovery that cathode rays (at the time known as Lenard rays) could travel much further through air than expected for an atom-sized particle. He estimated the mass of cathode rays by measuring the heat generated when the rays hit a thermal junction and comparing this with the magnetic deflection of the rays. His experiments suggested not only that cathode rays were over 1,000 times lighter than the hydrogen atom, but also that their mass was the same in whichever type of atom they came from. He concluded that the rays were composed of very light, negatively charged particles which were a universal building block of atoms. He called the particles \"corpuscles\", but later scientists preferred the name electron, which had been suggested by George Johnstone Stoney in 1891, prior to Thomson's discovery.\nIn April 1897, Thomson had only early indications that the cathode rays could be deflected electrically (previous investigators such as Heinrich Hertz had thought they could not be). A month after Thomson's announcement of the corpuscle, he found that he could reliably deflect the rays by an electric field if he evacuated the discharge tube to a very low pressure. By comparing the deflection of a beam of cathode rays by electric and magnetic fields he obtained more robust measurements of the mass-to-charge ratio that confirmed his previous estimates. This became the classic means of measuring the charge-to-mass ratio of the electron. Later in 1899 he measured the charge of the electron to be of .\nThomson believed that the corpuscles emerged from the atoms of the trace gas inside his cathode-ray tubes. He thus concluded that atoms were divisible, and that the corpuscles were their building blocks. In 1904, Thomson suggested a model of the atom, hypothesizing that it was a sphere of positive matter within which electrostatic forces determined the positioning of the corpuscles. To explain the overall neutral charge of the atom, he proposed that the corpuscles were distributed in a uniform sea of positive charge. In this \"plum pudding model\", the electrons were seen as embedded in the positive charge like raisins in a plum pudding (although in Thomson's model they were not stationary, but orbiting rapidly).\nThomson made the discovery around the same time that Walter Kaufmann and Emil Wiechert discovered the correct mass to charge ratio of these cathode rays (electrons).\nThe name \"electron\" was adopted for these particles by the scientific community, mainly due to the advocation by George Francis FitzGerald, Joseph Larmor, and Hendrik Lorentz. The term was originally coined by George Johnstone Stoney in 1891 as a tentative name for the basic unit of electrical charge (which had then yet to be discovered). For some years Thomson resisted using the word \"electron\" because he didn't like how some physicists talked of a \"positive electron\" that was supposed to be the elementary unit of positive charge just as the \"negative electron\" is the elementary unit of negative charge. Thomson preferred to stick with the word \"corpuscle\" which he strictly defined as negatively charged. He relented by 1914, using the word \"electron\" in his book \"The Atomic Theory\". In 1920, Rutherford and his fellows agreed to call the nucleus of the hydrogen ion \"proton\", establishing a distinct name for the smallest known positively-charged particle of matter (that can exist independently anyway).\nIsotopes and mass spectrometry.\nIn 1912, as part of his exploration into the composition of the streams of positively charged particles then known as canal rays, Thomson and his research assistant, F. W. Aston, channelled a stream of neon ions through a magnetic and an electric field and measured its deflection by placing a photographic plate in its path. They observed two patches of light on the photographic plate (see image on right), which suggested two different parabolas of deflection, and concluded that neon is composed of atoms of two different atomic masses (neon-20 and neon-22), that is to say of two isotopes. This was the first evidence for isotopes of a stable element; Frederick Soddy had previously proposed the existence of isotopes to explain the decay of certain radioactive elements.\nThomson's separation of neon isotopes by their mass was the first example of mass spectrometry, which was subsequently improved and developed into a general method by F. W. Aston and by A. J. Dempster.\nExperiments with cathode rays.\nEarlier, physicists debated whether cathode rays were immaterial like light (\"some process in the aether\") or were \"in fact wholly material, and ... mark the paths of particles of matter charged with negative electricity\", quoting Thomson. The aetherial hypothesis was vague, but the particle hypothesis was definite enough for Thomson to test.\nMagnetic deflection.\nThomson first investigated the magnetic deflection of cathode rays. Cathode rays were produced in the side tube on the left of the apparatus and passed through the anode into the main bell jar, where they were deflected by a magnet. Thomson detected their path by the fluorescence on a squared screen in the jar. He found that whatever the material of the anode and the gas in the jar, the deflection of the rays was the same, suggesting that the rays were of the same form whatever their origin.\nElectrical charge.\nWhile supporters of the aetherial theory accepted the possibility that negatively charged particles are produced in Crookes tubes, they believed that they are a mere by-product and that the cathode rays themselves are immaterial. Thomson set out to investigate whether or not he could actually separate the charge from the rays.\nThomson constructed a Crookes tube with an electrometer set to one side, out of the direct path of the cathode rays. Thomson could trace the path of the ray by observing the phosphorescent patch it created where it hit the surface of the tube. Thomson observed that the electrometer registered a charge only when he deflected the cathode ray to it with a magnet. He concluded that the negative charge and the rays were one and the same.\nElectrical deflection.\nIn May\u2013June 1897, Thomson investigated whether or not the rays could be deflected by an electric field. Previous experimenters had failed to observe this, but Thomson believed their experiments were flawed because their tubes contained too much gas.\nThomson constructed a Crookes tube with a better vacuum. At the start of the tube was the cathode from which the rays projected. The rays were sharpened to a beam by two metal slits \u2013 the first of these slits doubled as the anode, the second was connected to the earth. The beam then passed between two parallel aluminium plates, which produced an electric field between them when they were connected to a battery. The end of the tube was a large sphere where the beam would impact on the glass, created a glowing patch. Thomson pasted a scale to the surface of this sphere to measure the deflection of the beam. Any electron beam would collide with some residual gas atoms within the Crookes tube, thereby ionizing them and producing electrons and ions in the tube (space charge); in previous experiments this space charge electrically screened the externally applied electric field. However, in Thomson's Crookes tube the density of residual atoms was so low that the space charge from the electrons and ions was insufficient to electrically screen the externally applied electric field, which permitted Thomson to successfully observe electrical deflection.\nWhen the upper plate was connected to the negative pole of the battery and the lower plate to the positive pole, the glowing patch moved downwards, and when the polarity was reversed, the patch moved upwards.\nMeasurement of mass-to-charge ratio.\nIn his classic experiment, Thomson measured the mass-to-charge ratio of the cathode rays by measuring how much they were deflected by a magnetic field and comparing this with the electric deflection. He used the same apparatus as in his previous experiment, but placed the discharge tube between the poles of a large electromagnet. He found that the mass-to-charge ratio was over a thousand times \"lower\" than that of a hydrogen ion (H+), suggesting either that the particles were very light and/or very highly charged. Significantly, the rays from every cathode yielded the same mass-to-charge ratio. This is in contrast to anode rays (now known to arise from positive ions emitted by the anode), where the mass-to-charge ratio varies from anode-to-anode. Thomson himself remained critical of what his work established, in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech referring to \"corpuscles\" rather than \"electrons\".\nThomson's calculations can be summarised as follows (in his original notation, using F instead of E for the electric field and H instead of B for the magnetic field):\nThe electric deflection is given by formula_1, where \u0398 is the angular electric deflection, F is applied electric intensity, e is the charge of the cathode ray particles, l is the length of the electric plates, m is the mass of the cathode ray particles and v is the velocity of the cathode ray particles. The magnetic deflection is given by formula_2, where \u03c6 is the angular magnetic deflection and H is the applied magnetic field intensity.\nThe magnetic field was varied until the magnetic and electric deflections were the same, when formula_3. This can be simplified to give formula_4. The electric deflection was measured separately to give \u0398 and H, F and l were known, so m/e could be calculated.\nConclusions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As the cathode rays carry a charge of negative electricity, are deflected by an electrostatic force as if they were negatively electrified, and are acted on by a magnetic force in just the way in which this force would act on a negatively electrified body moving along the path of these rays, I can see no escape from the conclusion that they are charges of negative electricity carried by particles of matter.\nAs to the source of these particles, Thomson believed they emerged from the molecules of gas in the vicinity of the cathode.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If, in the very intense electric field in the neighbourhood of the cathode, the molecules of the gas are dissociated and are split up, not into the ordinary chemical atoms, but into these primordial atoms, which we shall for brevity call corpuscles; and if these corpuscles are charged with electricity and projected from the cathode by the electric field, they would behave exactly like the cathode rays.\nThomson imagined the atom as being made up of these corpuscles orbiting in a sea of positive charge; this was his plum pudding model. This model was later proved incorrect when his student Ernest Rutherford showed that the positive charge is concentrated in the nucleus of the atom.\nOther work.\nIn 1905, Thomson discovered the natural radioactivity of potassium.\nIn 1906, Thomson demonstrated that hydrogen had only a single electron per atom. Previous theories allowed various numbers of electrons.\nFrom 1916 to 1918, Thomson chaired the \"Committee appointed by the Prime Minister to enquire into the Position of Natural Science in the Educational System of Great Britain\". The Report of the Committee, published in 1918, was known as the Thomson Report.\nFamily.\nIn 1890, Thomson married Rose Elisabeth Paget at the church of St. Mary the Less. Rose, who was the daughter of Sir George Edward Paget, a physician and then Regius Professor of Physic at Cambridge, was interested in physics. Beginning in 1882, women could attend demonstrations and lectures at the University of Cambridge. Rose attended demonstrations and lectures, among them Thomson's, leading to their relationship.\nThey had two children: George Paget Thomson, who was also awarded a Nobel Prize for his work on the wave properties of the electron; and Joan Paget Thomson (later Charnock), who became an author\u2014writing children's books, non-fiction, and biographies.\nCommemorations.\nIn November 1927, Thomson opened the Thomson building, named in his honour, in the Leys School, Cambridge.\nIn 1991, the thomson (symbol: Th) was proposed as a unit to measure mass-to-charge ratio in mass spectrometry in his honour.\nJ J Thomson Avenue, on the University of Cambridge's West Cambridge site, is named after Thomson.\nThe Thomson Medal Award, sponsored by the International Mass Spectrometry Foundation, is named after Thomson.\nThe Institute of Physics Joseph Thomson Medal and Prize is named after Thomson.\nThomson Crescent in Deep River, Ontario, connects with Rutherford Ave. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70086", "revid": "1162403042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70086", "title": "Naming", "text": "Naming is assigning a name to something.\nNaming may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70087", "revid": "91912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70087", "title": "Battle Abbey", "text": "Benedictine abbey in Battle, East Sussex, England\nBattle Abbey is a partially ruined Benedictine abbey in Battle, East Sussex, England. The abbey was built on the site of the Battle of Hastings and dedicated to St Martin of Tours. It is a Scheduled Monument.\nThe Grade I listed site is now operated by English Heritage as 1066 Battle of Hastings, Abbey and Battlefield, which includes the abbey buildings and ruins, a visitor centre with a film and exhibition about the battle, audio tours of the battlefield site, and the monks' gatehouse with recovered artefacts. The visitor centre includes a children's discovery room and a caf\u00e9, and there is an outdoor-themed playground.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nWilliam the Conqueror had vowed to build a monastery in the event that he won the battle. In 1070, Pope Alexander II ordered the Normans to do penance for killing so many people during their conquest of England. William vowed to build an abbey where the Battle of Hastings had taken place, with the high altar of the church on the supposed spot where King Harold fell in battle on Saturday, 14 October 1066.\nWilliam started building it but died before it was completed. The Vill survey of 1076 and early legal documents of adjoining property refer to a hospital or guesthouse which was attached to the gate of the abbey. The monastic buildings were about a mile in circuit and formed a large quadrangle, the high altar of the church being on the spot where Harold fell. The church was finished in about 1094 and consecrated during the reign of his son William II (commonly known as William Rufus). The king presented there his father's sword and coronation robes.\nThe first monks were from the Benedictine Abbey of Marmoutier; the new foundation was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, St. Mary and St. Martin. It was designed for one hundred and forty monks, though there were never more than sixty in residence at one time.\nWilliam I had ruled that the church of St Martin of Battle was to be exempted from all episcopal jurisdiction, putting it on the level of Canterbury. The abbey was enriched by many privileges, including the right of sanctuary, of treasure trove, of free warren, and of inquest, and the inmates and tenants were exempt from all episcopal and secular jurisdiction. It was ruled by a mitred abbot who afterward had a seat in Parliament and who had the curious privilege of pardoning any criminal he might meet being led to execution.\nWalter de Luci became abbot in 1139 and made several improvements. During the reign of Henry II of England, rival church authorities at Canterbury and Chichester unsuccessfully tested the charter. At the Abbey was kept the famous \"Roll of Battle Abbey\" which was a list of all those who accompanied William from Normandy. As time went on and the honour of descent from one of these Norman families was more highly thought of, unauthentic additions seem to have been made.\nSuppression.\nThe church was remodelled in the late 13th century, but virtually destroyed during the dissolution of the monasteries in 1538 under King Henry VIII. At the time of the suppression of the Abbey (May 1538), there were seventeen monks in residence. The displaced monks of Battle Abbey were provided with pensions, including the abbot John Hamond and the prior Richard Salesherst, as well as monks John Henfelde, William Ambrose, Henry Sinden, Thomas Bede and Thomas Levett, all bachelors in theology.\nThe abbey and much of its land was given by Henry VIII to his friend and Master of the Horse, Sir Anthony Browne, who demolished the church and parts of the cloister and turned the abbot's quarters into a country house.\nA triple-light window in Buckland Church, Tasmania, depicting the life of St John and the crucifixion of Jesus, is claimed to have once adorned Battle Abbey. The oft repeated legend goes that it was removed and hidden during the Cromwell era to protect it from destruction, until it was transported to Tasmania many years later. This seems highly unlikely. \nLater history.\nThe abbey was sold in 1721 by Browne's descendant, Anthony Browne, 6th Viscount Montagu, to Sir Thomas Webster, MP and baronet. Webster was succeeded by his son, Sir Whistler Webster, 2nd Baronet, who died childless in 1779, being succeeded in the baronetcy by his brother. Battle Abbey remained in the Webster family until 1857, when it was sold to Lord Harry Vane, later Duke of Cleveland. On the death of the Duchess of Cleveland in 1901, the estate was bought back by Sir Augustus Webster, 7th baronet.\nSir Augustus (son of Sir Augustus, 7th baronet) was born in 1864 and succeeded his father as 8th baronet in 1886. Sir Augustus was formerly a captain in the Coldstream Guards. With the death of the 8th baronet in 1923, the baronetage became extinct. The abbot's house was an all-girls boarding school; Canadian troops were stationed there during the Second World War.\nPresent day.\nIn 1976, the Webster family trustees sold Battle Abbey to the British government (albeit aided by a substantial contribution from a group of American philanthropists); it is now in the care of English Heritage. In 2016, Historic England commissioned tree-ring analyses of oak timbers from the gatehouse, dorter and reredorter to help identify when these areas might have been built. Findings imply phased building and local timber acquisition, with samples indicating early- and later-fifteenth-century building work.\nThe church's high altar reportedly stood on the spot where Harold died. This is now marked by a plaque on the ground, and nearby is a monument to Harold erected by the people of Normandy in 1903. The ruins of the abbey, with the adjacent battlefield, are a popular tourist attraction, with events such as the Battle of Hastings reenactments.\nAll that is left of the abbey church itself today is its outline on the ground, but parts of some of the abbey's buildings are still standing: those built between the 13th and 16th centuries. These are still in use as the independent Battle Abbey School. Visitors to the abbey are usually not allowed inside the school buildings, although during the school's summer holidays, access to the abbot's hall is often allowed.\nThe church was used as the primary ground for the filming of band Black Sabbath's music video for \"Headless Cross\", the title track of the album of the same name released in 1989.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70089", "revid": "31322263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70089", "title": "Recursive descent parser", "text": "Algorithm\nIn computer science, a recursive descent parser is a kind of top-down parser built from a set of mutually recursive procedures (or a non-recursive equivalent) where each such procedure implements one of the nonterminals of the grammar. Thus the structure of the resulting program closely mirrors that of the grammar it recognizes.\nA \"predictive parser\" is a recursive descent parser that does not require backtracking. Predictive parsing is possible only for the class of LL(\"k\") grammars, which are the context-free grammars for which there exists some positive integer \"k\" that allows a recursive descent parser to decide which production to use by examining only the next \"k\" tokens of input. The LL(\"k\") grammars therefore exclude all ambiguous grammars, as well as all grammars that contain left recursion. Any context-free grammar can be transformed into an equivalent grammar that has no left recursion, but removal of left recursion does not always yield an LL(\"k\") grammar. A predictive parser runs in linear time.\nRecursive descent with backtracking is a technique that determines which production to use by trying each production in turn. Recursive descent with backtracking is not limited to LL(\"k\") grammars, but is not guaranteed to terminate unless the grammar is LL(\"k\"). Even when they terminate, parsers that use recursive descent with backtracking may require exponential time.\nAlthough predictive parsers are widely used, and are frequently chosen if writing a parser by hand, programmers often prefer to use a table-based parser produced by a parser generator, either for an LL(\"k\") language or using an alternative parser, such as LALR or LR. This is particularly the case if a grammar is not in LL(\"k\") form, as transforming the grammar to LL to make it suitable for predictive parsing is involved. Predictive parsers can also be automatically generated, using tools like ANTLR.\nPredictive parsers can be depicted using transition diagrams for each non-terminal symbol where the edges between the initial and the final states are labelled by the symbols (terminals and non-terminals) of the right side of the production rule.\nExample parser.\nThe following EBNF-like grammar (for Niklaus Wirth's PL/0 programming language, from \"Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs\") is in LL(1) form:\n program = block \".\" .\n block =\n [\"const\" ident \"=\" number {\",\" ident \"=\" number} \";\"]\n [\"var\" ident {\",\" ident} \";\"]\n {\"procedure\" ident \";\" block \";\"} statement .\n statement =\n ident \":=\" expression\n | \"call\" ident\n | \"begin\" statement {\";\" statement } \"end\"\n | \"if\" condition \"then\" statement\n | \"while\" condition \"do\" statement .\n condition =\n \"odd\" expression\n | expression (\"=\"|\"#\"|\"&lt;\"|\"&lt;=\"|\"&gt;\"|\"&gt;=\") expression .\n expression = [\"+\"|\"-\"] term {(\"+\"|\"-\") term} .\n term = factor {(\"*\"|\"/\") factor} .\n factor =\n ident\n | number\n | \"(\" expression \")\" .\nTerminals are expressed in quotes. Each nonterminal is defined by a rule in the grammar, except for \"ident\" and \"number\", which are assumed to be implicitly defined.\nC implementation.\nWhat follows is an implementation of a recursive descent parser for the above language in C. The parser reads in source code, and exits with an error message if the code fails to parse, exiting silently if the code parses correctly.\nNotice how closely the predictive parser below mirrors the grammar above. There is a procedure for each nonterminal in the grammar. Parsing descends in a top-down manner until the final nonterminal has been processed. The program fragment depends on a global variable, \"sym\", which contains the current symbol from the input, and the function \"nextsym\", which updates \"sym\" when called.\nThe implementations of the functions \"nextsym\" and \"error\" are omitted for simplicity.\ntypedef enum {ident, number, lparen, rparen, times, slash, plus,\n minus, eql, neq, lss, leq, gtr, geq, callsym, beginsym, semicolon,\n endsym, ifsym, whilesym, becomes, thensym, dosym, constsym, comma,\n varsym, procsym, period, oddsym} Symbol;\nSymbol sym;\nvoid nextsym(void);\nvoid error(const char msg[]);\nint accept(Symbol s) {\n if (sym == s) {\n nextsym();\n return 1;\n return 0;\nint expect(Symbol s) {\n if (accept(s))\n return 1;\n error(\"expect: unexpected symbol\");\n return 0;\nvoid factor(void) {\n if (accept(ident)) {\n } else if (accept(number)) {\n } else if (accept(lparen)) {\n expression();\n expect(rparen);\n } else {\n error(\"factor: syntax error\");\n nextsym();\nvoid term(void) {\n factor();\n while (sym == times || sym == slash) {\n nextsym();\n factor();\nvoid expression(void) {\n if (sym == plus || sym == minus)\n nextsym();\n term();\n while (sym == plus || sym == minus) {\n nextsym();\n term();\nvoid condition(void) {\n if (accept(oddsym)) {\n expression();\n } else {\n expression();\n if (sym == eql || sym == neq || sym == lss || sym == leq || sym == gtr || sym == geq) {\n nextsym();\n expression();\n } else {\n error(\"condition: invalid operator\");\n nextsym();\nvoid statement(void) {\n if (accept(ident)) {\n expect(becomes);\n expression();\n } else if (accept(callsym)) {\n expect(ident);\n } else if (accept(beginsym)) {\n do {\n statement();\n } while (accept(semicolon));\n expect(endsym);\n } else if (accept(ifsym)) {\n condition();\n expect(thensym);\n statement();\n } else if (accept(whilesym)) {\n condition();\n expect(dosym);\n statement();\n } else {\n error(\"statement: syntax error\");\n nextsym();\nvoid block(void) {\n if (accept(constsym)) {\n do {\n expect(ident);\n expect(eql);\n expect(number);\n } while (accept(comma));\n expect(semicolon);\n if (accept(varsym)) {\n do {\n expect(ident);\n } while (accept(comma));\n expect(semicolon);\n while (accept(procsym)) {\n expect(ident);\n expect(semicolon);\n block();\n expect(semicolon);\n statement();\nvoid program(void) {\n nextsym();\n block();\n expect(period);\nExamples.\nSome recursive descent parser generators:\nThe C++ front-end of the Clang compiler contains a hand-written parser based on the recursive-descent parsing algorithm. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70091", "revid": "48270863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70091", "title": "Spirited Away", "text": "2001 film by Hayao Miyazaki\n is a 2001 Japanese animated fantasy film written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki. It was produced by Toshio Suzuki, animated by Studio Ghibli, and distributed by Toho. The film stars Rumi Hiiragi, alongside Miyu Irino, Mari Natsuki, Takashi Naito, Yasuko Sawaguchi, Tsunehiko Kamij\u014d, Takehiko Ono, and Bunta Sugawara. It follows a young girl named Chihiro \"Sen\" Ogino, who moves to a new neighborhood and inadvertently enters the world of \"kami\" (spirits of Japanese Shinto folklore). After her parents are turned into pigs by the witch Yubaba, Chihiro takes a job working in Yubaba's bathhouse to find a way to free herself and her parents and return to the human world.\nMiyazaki wrote the screenplay after he decided the film would be based on the ten-year-old daughter of his friend Seiji Okuda, the film's associate producer, who came to visit his house each summer. At the time, Miyazaki was developing two personal projects, but they were rejected. With a budget of US$19 million, production of \"Spirited Away\" began in 2000. Pixar animator John Lasseter, a fan and friend of Miyazaki, convinced Walt Disney Studios to buy the film's North American distribution rights, and served as executive producer of its English-dubbed version. Lasseter then hired Kirk Wise as director and Donald W. Ernst as producer, while screenwriters Cindy and Donald Hewitt wrote the English-language dialogue to match the characters' original Japanese-language lip movements.\nReleased in Japan on 20 July 2001, \"Spirited Away\" was widely acclaimed and commercially successful, grossing US$ at the worldwide box office. It became the highest-grossing film in Japanese history with a total of \u00a5. It held the record for 19 years until it was surpassed by \"\" in 2020.\n\"Spirited Away\" was a co-recipient of the Golden Bear at the 2002 Berlin International Film Festival and became the first hand-drawn, non-English-language animated film to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature at the 75th Academy Awards. The film is frequently regarded as one of the greatest animated films ever made.\nPlot.\nTen-year-old Chihiro Ogino and her parents Akio and Y\u016bko travel to their new home. Akio, taking a shortcut, stops in front of a tunnel leading to what appears to be an abandoned resort town, which Y\u016bko insists on exploring over Chihiro's protestations. Upon finding a seemingly empty restaurant stocked with food, Chihiro's parents immediately begin to eat. While exploring further, Chihiro finds an enormous bathhouse and meets a boy named Haku, who warns her to return across the riverbed before sunset. However, spirits begin to appear, and Chihiro discovers that her parents have been transformed into pigs and that she cannot cross the now-flooded river.\nHaku finds Chihiro and instructs her to ask for a job from the bathhouse's boiler-man, Kamaji, a y\u014dkai spirit commanding soot sprites known as susuwatari. Kamaji instead asks a worker named Lin to bring Chihiro to Kamaji's master Yubaba, the witch who runs the bathhouse and who cursed Chihiro's parents. Yubaba tries to frighten Chihiro away but eventually gives her a work contract. As Chihiro signs the contract with her name (), Yubaba takes away the second kanji in her name, renaming her . She soon forgets her real name, and Haku later explains that Yubaba controls people by taking their names; if Chihiro completely forgets hers like he once did, she will never be able to leave the spirit world.\nThe other workers, except for Kamaji and Lin, frequently mock Sen. While working, she invites a silent creature named No-Face inside, believing him to be a customer. The spirit of a polluted river arrives as Sen's first customer. After she cleans him, he gives her a magic emetic dumpling as a token of gratitude. Meanwhile, No-Face demands food from the bathhouse workers, granting gold copied from the river spirit in exchange. However, when Sen declines the gold and leaves to find Haku, No-Face angrily swallows some workers.\nSen sees paper shikigami spirits attacking a dragon and recognizes the dragon as a metamorphosed Haku. When the seriously injured Haku crashes into Yubaba's penthouse, Sen follows him upstairs. A shikigami that stowed away on her back shapeshifts into Yubaba's twin sister Zeniba, who turns Yubaba's son, Boh, into a mouse and creates a false copy of him. Zeniba tells Sen that Haku has stolen a magic golden seal from her that carries a deadly curse. Haku strikes the shikigami, causing Zeniba to vanish. Sen and Haku fall into the boiler room, where she feeds him part of the emetic dumpling. He vomits up the seal and a slug that a disgusted Sen kills.\nSen resolves to return the seal and apologize to Zeniba. She confronts an engorged No-Face and feeds him the rest of the dumpling, forcing him to regurgitate the workers. No-Face follows Sen out of the bathhouse, and Lin helps them leave. Sen, No-Face, and Boh travel to see Zeniba using train tickets from Kamaji. Meanwhile, Yubaba nearly orders Sen's parents slaughtered, but Haku reveals Boh is missing and offers to retrieve him if Yubaba releases Sen and her parents. Yubaba agrees, but only if Sen can pass a final test.\nThe train crosses a sea to a land where Sen meets Zeniba, who reveals that Yubaba used the slug to control Haku. Zeniba tells Sen that she cannot help her parents, but she makes her a magic protective hairband. Using his dragon form, Haku flies Sen and Boh back, while No-Face decides to stay with Zeniba. Mid-flight, Sen recalls falling into the Kohaku River years earlier and being washed safely ashore, correctly guessing Haku's real identity as the spirit of the Kohaku River and restoring his memory.\nWhen they arrive at the bathhouse, Yubaba tests Sen, asking her to identify her parents among a group of pigs. After she answers correctly that none of the pigs are her parents, her contract disappears and she is given back her real name. Haku takes her to the now-dry riverbed and vows to meet her again. Chihiro crosses the riverbed to her restored parents. Shortly before leaving for her new home, Chihiro looks back at the tunnel, still wearing her hairband from Zeniba.\nVoice cast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain row headers/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment and inspiration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I created a heroine who is an ordinary girl, someone with whom the audience can sympathize [...]. [I]t's not a story in which the characters grow up, but a story in which they draw on something already inside them, brought out by the particular circumstances [...]. I want my young friends to live like that, and I think they, too, have such a wish.\"\n\u2014Hayao Miyazaki\nDuring summers, Hayao Miyazaki spent his vacation at a mountain cabin with his family and five girls who were friends of the family. The idea for \"Spirited Away\" came about when he wanted to make a film for these friends. Miyazaki had previously directed films for small children and teenagers such as \"My Neighbor Totoro\" and \"Kiki's Delivery Service\", but he had not created a film for ten-year-old girls. For inspiration, he read the sh\u014djo manga magazines (like \"Nakayoshi\" and \"Ribon\") that the girls had left at the cabin, but felt they only offered subjects on \"crushes\" and romance. Miyazaki felt this was not what these young friends \"held dear in their hearts\", and resolved to make the film about a young heroine whom they could look up to.\nMiyazaki had wanted to produce a new film for years, but his two previous proposals\u2014one based on the Japanese book by Sachiko Kashiwaba, and another about a teenage heroine\u2014were rejected. His third proposal, which ended up becoming \"Spirited Away\", was more successful. The three stories revolved around a bathhouse that was inspired by one in Miyazaki's hometown. He thought the bathhouse was a mysterious place, and there was a small door next to one of the bathtubs in the bath house. Miyazaki was always curious about what was behind it, and he made up several stories about it, one of which inspired the bathhouse setting of \"Spirited Away\".\nProduction of \"Spirited Away\" commenced in February 2000 on a budget of \u00a5 (US$15 million). The film was produced in association with Tokuma Shoten, Nippon Television Network, Dentsu, Buena Vista Home Entertainment, Tohokushinsha Film, and Mitsubishi. Disney's 10% investment allowed for the right of first refusal for North American distribution. As with \"Princess Mononoke\", Miyazaki and the Studio Ghibli staff experimented with computer animation. With the use of more computers and programs such as Softimage 3D, the staff learned the software, but used the technology carefully so that it enhanced the story, instead of \"stealing the show\". Each character was mostly hand-drawn, with Miyazaki working alongside his animators to see if they were getting it just right. The biggest difficulty in making the film was to reduce its length. When production began, Miyazaki realized it would be more than three hours long if he made it according to his plot. He had to delete many scenes from the story, and tried to reduce the \"eye candy\" in the film because he wanted it to be simple. Miyazaki did not want to make the hero a \"pretty girl\". At the beginning, he was frustrated at how she looked \"dull\" and thought, \"She isn't cute. Isn't there something we can do?\" As the film neared the end, however, he was relieved to feel \"she will be a charming woman.\"\nDuring production, Miyazaki often sought inspiration by visiting the Edo-Tokyo Open Air Architectural Museum in Koganei, Tokyo. He based some of the buildings in the spirit world on the Pseudo-Western style buildings from the Meiji period that were available there. The museum made Miyazaki feel nostalgic, \"especially when I stand here alone in the evening, near closing time, and the sun is setting\u00a0\u2013 tears well up in my eyes.\" Another major inspiration was the , a traditional Japanese inn located in Yamagata Prefecture, famous for its exquisite architecture and ornamental features. While some guidebooks and articles claim that the old gold town of Jiufen in Taiwan served as an inspirational model for the film, Miyazaki has denied this. The D\u014dgo Onsen is also often said to be a key inspiration for the \"Spirited Away\" onsen/bathhouse.\nToshio Suzuki, the producer of the film, also cites European inspirations and influences in the production of \"Spirited Away\". He specifically invokes the structure of the film as European-inspired due to Miyazaki's own influences by European films such as \"The Snow Queen\" and \"The Shepherdess and the Chimney Sweep\".\nMusic.\nThe film score of \"Spirited Away\" was composed and conducted by Miyazaki's regular collaborator Joe Hisaishi, and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic. The soundtrack received awards at the 56th Mainichi Film Competition Award for Best Music, the Tokyo International Anime Fair 2001 Best Music Award in the Theater Movie category, and the 17th Japan Gold Disk Award for Animation Album of the Year. Later, Hisaishi added lyrics to \"One Summer's Day\" and named the new version of the song which was performed by Ayaka Hirahara.\nThe closing song, was written and performed by Youmi Kimura, a composer and lyre-player from Osaka. The lyrics were written by Kimura's friend Wakako Kaku. The song was intended to be used for , a different Miyazaki film which was never released. In the special features of the Japanese DVD, Hayao Miyazaki explains how the song in fact inspired him to create \"Spirited Away\". The song itself would be recognized as Gold at the 43rd Japan Record Awards.\nBesides the original soundtrack, there is also an image album, titled , that contains 10 tracks.\nEnglish dub.\nJohn Lasseter, Pixar animator and a fan and friend of Miyazaki, would often sit with his staff and watch Miyazaki's work when encountering story problems. After seeing \"Spirited Away\", Lasseter was ecstatic. Upon hearing his reaction to the film, Disney CEO Michael Eisner asked Lasseter if he would be interested in introducing \"Spirited Away\" to an American audience. Lasseter obliged by agreeing to serve as the executive producer for the English adaptation. Following this, several others began to join the project: \"Beauty and the Beast\" co-director Kirk Wise and \"Aladdin\" co-producer Donald W. Ernst joined Lasseter as director and producer of \"Spirited Away\", respectively. Screenwriters Cindy Davis Hewitt and Donald H. Hewitt penned the English-language dialogue, which they wrote in order to match the characters' original Japanese-language lip movements.\nThe cast of the film consists of Daveigh Chase, Jason Marsden, Suzanne Pleshette (in her final film role before her death in January 2008), Michael Chiklis, Lauren Holly, Susan Egan, David Ogden Stiers and John Ratzenberger (a Pixar regular). Advertising was limited, with \"Spirited Away\" being mentioned in a small scrolling section of the film section of \"Disney.com\"; Disney had sidelined their official website for \"Spirited Away\" and given the film a comparatively small promotional budget. Marc Hairston writing for FPS Magazine argues that this was a justified response to Studio Ghibli's retention of the merchandising rights to the film and characters, which limited Disney's ability to properly market the film.\nThemes.\nSupernaturalism.\nThe major themes of \"Spirited Away\", heavily influenced by Japanese Shinto-Buddhist folklore, centre on the protagonist, Chihiro, and her liminal journey through the realm of spirits. The central location of the film is a Japanese bathhouse where a great variety of Japanese folklore creatures, including kami, come to bathe. Miyazaki cites the solstice rituals when villagers call forth their local kami and invite them into their baths. Chihiro also encounters kami of animals and plants. Miyazaki says of this:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In my grandparents' time, it was believed that kami existed everywhere\u00a0\u2013 in trees, rivers, insects, wells, anything. My generation does not believe this, but I like the idea that we should all treasure everything because spirits might exist there, and we should treasure everything because there is a kind of life to everything.Chihiro's archetypal entrance into another world changes her status as one somewhere between child and adult. Chihiro also stands outside societal boundaries in the supernatural setting. The use of the word \"kamikakushi\" (literally 'hidden by gods') within the Japanese title, and its associated folklore, reinforces this liminal passage: \"Kamikakushi is a verdict of 'social death' in this world, and coming back to this world from Kamikakushi meant 'social resurrection.'\"\nAdditional themes are expressed through No-Face, who reflects the characters who surround him, learning by example and taking the traits of whomever he consumes. This nature results in No-Face's monstrous rampage through the bathhouse. After Chihiro saves No-Face with the emetic dumpling, he becomes timid once more. At the end of the film, Zeniba decides to take care of No-Face so he can develop without the negative influence of the bathhouse.\nFantasy.\nThe film has been compared to Lewis Carroll's \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" and \"Through the Looking Glass\", as the stories are set in fantasy worlds, involve disturbances in logic and stability, and there are motifs such as food having metamorphic qualities; though other developments and themes are not shared.\nYubaba has many similarities to the Coachman from the 1940 film \"Pinocchio\", in the sense that she mutates humans into pigs in a similar way that the boys of Pleasure Island were mutated into donkeys. Upon gaining employment at the bathhouse, Yubaba's seizure of Chihiro's true name symbolically kills the child, who must then assume adulthood. She then undergoes a rite of passage according to the monomyth format; to recover continuity with her past, Chihiro must create a new identity.\nTraditional Japanese culture.\n\"Spirited Away\" contains critical commentary on modern Japanese society concerning generational conflicts and environmental issues. Chihiro has been seen as a representation of the \"sh\u014djo\", whose roles and ideology had changed dramatically since post-war Japan. Just as Chihiro seeks her past identity, Japan, in its anxiety over the economic downturn occurring during the release of the film in 2001, sought to reconnect to past values. In an interview, Miyazaki has commented on this nostalgic element for an old Japan.\nJapanese philosophy plays a huge role in \"Spirited Away\", specifically through concepts like \"Kami\" and principles like \"Mottainai\" and \"On\". The concept of Kami, for instance, involves various spirits that each represent different elements and aspects of nature. The principle of Mottainai, which is deeply ingrained in Japanese culture, embodies a sense of regret towards waste, valuing the complete utilization of an object or resource. While the principle of On, a key tenet of Japanese ethics that signifies a sense of moral indebtedness, plays a significant role in Chihiro's character development.\nWestern consumerism.\nSimilar to the Japanese concept of \"On\", the film can be partly understood as an exploration of the effect of greediness and Western consumerism on traditional Japanese culture. For instance, Yubaba is stylistically unique within the bathhouse, wearing a Western dress and living among European d\u00e9cor and furnishings, in contrast with the minimalist Japanese style of her employees' quarters, representing the Western capitalist influence over Japan in its Meiji period and beyond. Along with its function within the ostensible coming of age theme, Yubaba's act of taking Chihiro's name and replacing it with Sen (an alternate reading of \"chi\", the first character in Chihiro's name, lit.\u2009'one thousand') can be thought of as symbolic of capitalism's single-minded concern with value.\nThe film's setting encapsulates Miyazaki's commentary on modern Japanese values and the erosion of cultural heritage. The bathhouse, situated within an abandoned theme park, symbolizes Japan's distorted cultural identity. This once-traditional locale is marred by neon signs and Westernization, exemplifying cultural degradation. Early scenes highlight economic concerns and consumerism. The film's visuals underscore the commercialization of Japanese culture. The failed theme park serves as a metaphor for the unsuccessful fusion of ideologies. The Meiji design of the park is the setting for Chihiro's parents' metamorphosis\u00a0\u2013 the family arrives in an imported Audi car and the father wears a European-styled polo shirt, reassuring Chihiro that he has \"credit cards and cash\", before morphing into literal consumerist pigs because of their bad habits. Miyazaki has stated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chihiro's parents turning into pigs symbolizes how some humans become greedy. At the very moment Chihiro says there is something odd about this town, her parents turn into pigs. There were people that \"turned into pigs\" during Japan's bubble economy (consumer society) of the 1980s, and these people still haven't realized they've become pigs. Once someone becomes a pig, they don't return to being human but instead gradually start to have the \"body and soul of a pig\". These people are the ones saying, \"We are in a recession and don't have enough to eat.\" This doesn't just apply to the fantasy world. Perhaps this isn't a coincidence and the food is actually (an analogy for) \"a trap to catch lost humans\".\nThe bathhouse of the spirits cannot be seen as a place free of ambiguity and darkness. Many of the employees are rude to Chihiro because she is human, and corruption is ever-present; it is a place of excess and greed, as depicted in the initial appearance of No-Face. In stark contrast to the simplicity of Chihiro's journey and transformation is the constantly chaotic carnival in the background.\nEnvironmentalism.\nCommentators have often referred to environmental themes in the films of Miyazaki. In \"Spirited Away\", two major instances of allusions to environmental issues have been noted. Pam Coats, for example, a Vice President of Walt Disney Feature Animation, describes Chihiro dealing with the \"stink spirit\", who, it turns out, is actually a river spirit but is so corrupted with filth that one cannot tell what it is at first glance. It only becomes clean again when Chihiro pulls out a huge amount of trash, including car tires, garbage, and a bicycle. This alludes to human pollution of the environment, and how people can carelessly toss away things without thinking of the consequences and of where the trash will go.\nThe second allusion is seen in Haku himself. Haku does not remember his name and lost his past, which is why he is stuck at the bathhouse. Eventually, Chihiro remembers that he used to be the spirit of the Kohaku River, which was destroyed and replaced with apartments. Because of humans' need for development, they destroyed a part of nature, causing Haku to lose his home and identity. This can be compared to deforestation and destruction of natural habitats; humans tear down nature, cause imbalance in the ecosystem, and demolish animals' homes to satisfy their want for more space (housing, malls, stores, etc.) but do not think about how it can affect other living things.\nRelease.\nBox office and theatrical release.\n\"Spirited Away\" was released theatrically in Japan on 20 July 2001 by distributor Toho. It grossed a record \u00a51.6 billion ($13.1 million) in its first three days, beating the previous record set by \"Princess Mononoke\". It was number one at the Japanese box office for its first eleven weeks and spent 16 weeks there in total. After 22 weeks of release and after grossing $224 million in Japan, it started its international release, opening in Hong Kong on 13 December 2001. It was the first film that had grossed more than $200 million at the worldwide box office excluding the United States. It went on to gross \u00a530.4 billion to become the highest-grossing film in Japanese history, according to the Motion Picture Producers Association of Japan. It also set the all-time attendance record in Japan, surpassing the 16.8 million tickets sold by \"Titanic\". Its gross at the Japanese box office has since increased to \u00a5, as of 2020[ [update]].\nIn February 2002, Wild Bunch, an international sales company that had recently spun off from its former parent company StudioCanal, picked up the international sale rights for the film outside of Asia and France. The company would then on-sell it to independent distributors across the world. On 13 April 2002, The Walt Disney Company acquired the Taiwanese, Singaporean, Hong Kong, French and North American sale rights to the film, alongside Japanese Home Media rights.\nDisney's English dub of the film, supervised by Lasseter, premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on 7 September 2002 and was later released in the United States on 20 September 2002. The film grossed $450,000 in its opening weekend from 26 theatres. \"Spirited Away\" had very little marketing, less than Disney's other B-films, with a maximum of 151 theatres showing the film in 2002. After the 2003 Oscars, it expanded to 714 theatres. It ultimately grossed around $10 million by September 2003. Outside of Japan and the United States, the movie was moderately successful in both South Korea and France, where it grossed $11 million and $6 million, respectively. In Argentina, it is in the top 10 anime films with the most tickets sold.\nIn the United Kingdom, then-independent based film distributor Optimum Releasing acquired the rights to the movie from Wild Bunch in January 2003. The company then released it theatrically on 12 September 2003. The movie grossed $244,437 on its opening weekend from 51 theatres, and by the end of its theatrical run in October, the movie has grossed $1,383,023 in the country.\nAbout 18 years after its original release in Japan, \"Spirited Away\" had a theatrical release in China on 21 June 2019. It followed the theatrical release in China of \"My Neighbour Totoro\" in December 2018. The delayed theatrical release in China was due to long-standing political tensions between China and Japan, but many Chinese became familiar with Miyazaki's films due to rampant video piracy. It topped the Chinese box office with a $ opening weekend, beating \"Toy Story 4\" in China. In its second weekend, \"Spirited Away\" grossed a cumulative $ in China, and was second only behind \"\" that weekend. As of 2019[ [update]], the film has grossed $ in China, bringing its worldwide total box office to $ as of 2019[ [update]].\n\"Spirited Away\"'s worldwide box office total stands at US$395,802,070.\nHome media.\n\"Spirited Away\" was first released on VHS and DVD formats in Japan by Buena Vista Home Entertainment on 19 July 2002. The Japanese DVD releases include storyboards for the film and the special edition includes a Ghibli DVD player. \"Spirited Away\" sold 5.5million home video units in Japan by 2007, and holds the record for most home video copies sold of all time in the country as of 2014[ [update]]. The movie was released on Blu-ray by Walt Disney Studios Japan on 14 July 2014, and DVD was also reissued on the same day with a new HD master, alongside several other Studio Ghibli movies.\nIn North America, the film was released on DVD and VHS formats by Walt Disney Home Entertainment on 15 April 2003. The attention brought by the Oscar win resulted in the film becoming a strong seller. The bonus features include Japanese trailers, a making-of documentary which originally aired on Nippon Television, interviews with the North American voice actors, a select storyboard-to-scene comparison and \"The Art of Spirited Away\", a documentary narrated by actor Jason Marsden. The movie was released on Blu-ray in North America by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on 16 June 2015. GKIDS and Shout! Factory re-issued the film on Blu-ray and DVD on 17 October 2017 following the expiration of Disney's previous deal with Studio Ghibli in the country in North America. On 12 November 2019, GKIDS and Shout! Factory issued a North-America-exclusive \"Spirited Away\" collector's edition, which includes the film on Blu-ray, and the film's soundtrack on CD, as well as a 40-page book with statements by Toshio Suzuki and Hayao Miyazaki, and essays by film critic Kenneth Turan and film historian Leonard Maltin. Along with the rest of the Studio Ghibli films, \"Spirited Away\" was released on digital markets in the United States for the first time, on 17 December 2019.\nIn the United Kingdom, the film was released on DVD and VHS as a rental release through independent distributor High Fliers Films PLC following the film's limited theatrical release. It was later officially released on DVD in the UK on 29 March 2004, with the distribution being done by Optimum Releasing themselves. In 2006, the DVD was reissued as a single-disc release (without the second one) with packaging matching other releases in Optimum's \"The Studio Ghibli Collection\" range. The then-renamed StudioCanal UK released the movie on Blu-ray on 24 November 2014, A British 20th Anniversary Collector's Edition, similar to other Studio Ghibli anniversary editions released in the UK, was released on 25 October 2021.\nIn the United States, the 2015 Blu-ray release grossed $9,925,660 from 557,613 physical units sold as of 2021[ [update]]. In the United Kingdom, the film's Studio Ghibli anniversary release appeared several times on the annual lists of best-selling foreign language film on home video, ranking number six in 2015, number five in 2016, and number one in 2019.\nTelevision.\nThe film was aired on Nippon TV (NTV) in Japan, on 24 January 2003. It became NTV's most-watched film of all time with a 46.9% audience rating, surpassing the 35.1% record previously set by \"Princess Mononoke\" in 1999.\nIn the United Kingdom, the film was watched by 670,000 viewers on BBC2 in 2010. This made it the year's most-watched foreign-language film on BBC, and the year's second highest foreign film on UK television (below the Indian Bollywood film \"Om Shanti Om\"). \"Spirited Away\" was later watched by 300,000 UK viewers on BBC2 in 2011, making it the year's most-watched foreign-language film on BBC2. Combined, the film drew a 970,000 UK television viewership on BBC2 between 2010 and 2011.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 96% approval rating based on 221 reviews, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"\"Spirited Away\" is a dazzling, enchanting, and gorgeously drawn fairy tale that will leave viewers a little more curious and fascinated by the world around them.\" The site ranked it 28th on their \"300 Best Movies of All Time\" list in 2025. On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 96 out of 100 based on reviews from 41 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film a full four stars, praising the work and Miyazaki's direction. Ebert also said that \"Spirited Away\" was one of \"the year's best films\", as well as adding it to his \"Great Movies\" list. Elvis Mitchell of \"The New York Times\" positively reviewed the film and praised the animation. Mitchell drew a favorable comparison to Lewis Carroll's \"Through the Looking-Glass\", and wrote that Miyazaki's \"movies are as much about moodiness as mood\" and that \"the prospect of animated figures' not being what they seem\u00a0\u2013 either spiritually or physically\u00a0\u2013 heightens the tension\". Derek Elley of \"Variety\" said that \"Spirited Away\" \"can be enjoyed by sprigs and adults alike\" and praised the animation and music. Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" praised Miyazaki's direction and the voice acting, as well as saying that the film is the \"product of a fierce and fearless imagination whose creations are unlike anything a person has seen before.\" \"Orlando Sentinel\"'s critic Jay Boyar also praised Miyazaki's direction and said the film is \"the perfect choice for a child who has moved into a new home.\"\nIn 2004, \"Cinefantastique\" listed the film as one of the \"10 Essential Animations\". In 2005, \"Spirited Away\" was ranked by IGN as the 12th-best animated film of all time. The film is also the ninth highest-rated film of all time on Metacritic, being the highest rated traditionally animated film on the site. The film ranked tenth in \"Empire\" magazine's \"The 100 Best Films of World Cinema\" in 2010. In 2010, Rotten Tomatoes ranked it as the thirteenth-best animated film on the site, and in 2012, as the seventeenth. In 2019, it topped the site's list of 140 essential animated films. The film was ranked at number 46 on \"Time Out\" magazine's list of \"The 100 Best Movies of All Time\". The film is listed within the top ten on the British Film Institute's list of \"Top 50 films for children up to the age of 14\". In 2016, it was voted the fourth-best film of the 21st century by the BBC, as picked by 177 film critics from around the world, making it the highest-ranking animated film on the list. In 2017, \"The New York Times\" ranked it as the second best film of the 21st Century so far. In 2021, the Writers Guild of America ranked \"Spirited Away\"'s screenplay the 67th greatest of the 21st century so far. In 2022, the film was ranked number 75 on \"Sight &amp; Sound\"'s greatest films list, being one of two animated films to make the list (alongside Miyazaki's own \"My Neighbor Totoro\"). In 2025, the film ranked number 9 on \"The New York Times\"' list of \"The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century.\" In July 2025, it ranked number 15 on \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of \"The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century.\"\nIn his book \"Otaku\", Hiroki Azuma observed: \"Between 2001 and 2007, the otaku forms and markets quite rapidly won social recognition in Japan,\" and cites Miyazaki's win at the Academy Awards for \"Spirited Away\" among his examples.\nImpact and legacy.\nFilm industry.\n\"Spirited Away\" is frequently regarded as one of the best films of the 21st century as well as one of the greatest animated films ever made. \"Comic Book Resources\" wrote that the film \"set the bar extremely high for all anime movies that followed it \u2013 including Studio Ghibli's\" and further explained that \"It's a movie many people re-watch due to its comfort and nostalgia, and since Netflix brought the Ghibli movies to North America last year, it's become even more accessible\". \"Vice\" also declared \"Spirited Away\" to be the all-time best animated film and wrote that the film \"showed how breathtaking, heartfelt, and serious animation can be\" that \"Pixar, Disney, and other mainstream animators have still failed to genuinely realize 15 years later\". In 2016, the BBC placed the film fourth on its list of the 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century.\nFilm director Steven Spielberg said that \"Spirited Away\" might be \"better than any Disney films\" he has ever seen. Rayna Denison, professor of film, television, and media studies, told \"Time\" that \"This is a film made by a master animator at the height of his powers and it is one where the quality of the animation really does set it apart from everything else around it. Nobody else was making films that looked like this or that were as inventive as this was at this time\". The film has been cited as influence for various Disney and Pixar animated films. Production designer Harley Jessup said that he initially looked at \"Spirited Away\" and was inspired by the spiritual feelings elements to utilize them in \"Coco\". Co-writers Ken and Ryan Firpo cited the film as one of the influences that helps them explore \"ideas of morality and humanity\" in \"Eternals\". \"Turning Red\"'s director Domee Shi named \"Spirited Away\" as one of her favorite animated films and one of the influences for her film.\nCommercial and cultural significance.\nAccording to \"Time\", \"Spirited Away\" \"arrived at a time when animation was widely perceived as a genre solely for children, and when cultural differences often became barriers to the global distribution of animated works\" but it \"shattered preconceived notions about the art form and also proved that, as a film created in Japanese with elements of Japanese folklore central to its core, it could resonate deeply with audiences around the world\". Denison emphasized that John Lasseter and Disney \"boosted \"Spirited Away\"'s visibility in America by heavily campaigning for the film to be considered for the Academy Awards\", and cited it as one of the reasons why it won Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. Writer Jonathan Clements, whose published works revolve around East Asian culture, anime, and Japanese television dramas, emphasized that the film's Oscar win was \"a wake-up call for a lot of people in the film business who had been disregarding Japanese animation for years\". Susan Napier, professor of Japanese studies at Tufts University, called \"Spirited Away\"'s wins at major Western award shows \"a very big shot in the arm to the Japanese animation industry\". She further explained that cartoons in the West have often been seen as \"childish, vulgar, things that you didn't take seriously\" but after the film took home the Academy Award, people were starting to see animation as \"a real art form\".\nStage adaptation.\nA stage adaptation of \"Spirited Away\" was announced in February 2021 with a world premiere planned in Tokyo on 28 February 2022. It is written and directed by John Caird, with Toho as the production company, with Studio Ghibli's blessing. The role of Chihiro is played by both Kanna Hashimoto and Mone Kamishiraishi. In August 2023, it was announced that the production would have its European premiere at the London Coliseum from April 2024, with most of the cast reprising their roles.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70092", "revid": "49779162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70092", "title": "Word usage", "text": "Way a word is used in a language\nWord usage is the way a word, phrase, or concept is used in a language or language variety. Lexicographers gather samples of written instances where a word is used and analyze them to determine patterns of regional or social usage as well as meaning. A word, for example the English word \"donny\" (a round rock about the size of a man's head), may be only a rare regional usage, or a word may be used worldwide by standard English speakers and have one or several evolving definitions.\nWord usage may also involve grammar."}
{"id": "70093", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70093", "title": "Karl Philipp Emanuel Bach", "text": ""}
{"id": "70095", "revid": "10239913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70095", "title": "Leopold Mozart", "text": "German composer (1719\u20131787)\nJohann Georg Leopold Mozart (14 November 1719 \u2013 28 May 1787) was a German composer, violinist, and music theorist. He is best known today as the father and teacher of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and for his violin textbook \"Versuch einer gr\u00fcndlichen Violinschule\" (1756).\nLife and career.\nChildhood and youth.\nMozart was born in Augsburg on 14 November 1719, son of Johann Georg Mozart, a bookbinder, and his second wife Anna Maria Sulzer. From an early age he sang as a choirboy. He attended a local Jesuit school, St. Salvator, where he studied logic, science, and theology, graduating \"magna cum laude\" in 1735. He studied then at the St. Salvator Lyzeum.\nWhile a student in Augsburg, he appeared in student theater productions as an actor and singer, and became a skilled violinist and organist. He also developed an interest, which he retained, in microscopes and telescopes. Although his parents had planned a career for Leopold as a Catholic priest, this apparently was not Leopold's own wish. An old school friend told Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart in 1777, \"Ah he [Leopold] was a great fellow. My father thought the world of him. And how he hoodwinked the clerics about becoming a priest!\"\nHe withdrew from the St. Salvator Lyzeum after less than a year. Following a year's delay, he moved to Salzburg to resume his education, enrolling in November 1737 at the Benedictine University (now University of Salzburg) to study philosophy and jurisprudence. At the time Salzburg was the capital of an independent state within the Holy Roman Empire (the Prince-Archbishopric of Salzburg), now part of Austria. Except for periods of travel, Leopold spent the rest of his life there.\nLeopold received the degree of Bachelor of Philosophy in 1738. However, in September 1739, he was expelled from the university for poor attendance, having \"hardly attended Natural Science more than once or twice\".\nEarly music career.\nIn 1740, Mozart began his career as a professional musician, becoming violinist and valet to one of the university's canons, Johann Baptist, Count of Thurn-Valsassina and Taxis. This was also the year of his first musical publication, the six Trio Sonatas, Opus 1. These were titled \"Sonate sei da chiesa e da camera\"; Leopold did the work of copper engraving himself. He continued to compose, producing a series of German Passion cantatas.\nIn 1747, he married Anna Maria Pertl, who bore him seven children, although only two of them survived past infancy:\nIn 1743, Leopold Mozart was appointed to a position (fourth violinist) in the musical establishment of Count Leopold Anton von Firmian, the ruling Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg. His duties included composition and the teaching of violin (later, piano) to the choirboys of the Salzburg cathedral. He was promoted to second violinist in 1758 and in 1763 to deputy Kapellmeister. He rose no further; others were repeatedly promoted over him to the head position of Kapellmeister.\nThe question of whether Leopold was successful as a composer (either in terms of artistic success or fame) is debated. The \"Grove Dictionary\" says that as of 1756, \"Mozart was already well-known. His works circulated widely in German-speaking Europe.\" However, biographer Maynard Solomon asserts that he \"failed to make his mark as a composer\", and Alfred Einstein \"judged him to be an undistinguished composer\".\nScholars agree, however, that Leopold was successful as a pedagogue. In 1755, he wrote his \"Versuch einer gr\u00fcndlichen Violinschule\", a comprehensive treatise on violin playing. This work was published in 1756 (the year of Wolfgang's birth), and went through two further German editions (1769, 1787), as well as being translated into Dutch (1766) and French (1770). Today, the work is consulted by musicians interested in 18th-century performance practice; see Historically informed performance. This work made a reputation in Europe for Leopold, and his name begins to appear around this time in music dictionaries and other works of musical pedagogy.\nAs teacher of Nannerl and Wolfgang.\nMozart discovered that his two children were child prodigies in about 1759, when he began with keyboard lessons for the seven-year-old Nannerl. The toddler Wolfgang immediately began imitating his sister, at first picking out thirds on the keyboard and then making rapid progress under Leopold's instruction. By 1762, the children were ready to work as concert performers, and Leopold began taking the family on extensive concert tours, performing for both aristocracy and public, throughout central and western Europe. This tour included Munich, Vienna, Pressburg (Bratislava), Paris and the Hague together with a lengthy stay in London; see Mozart family Grand Tour.\nThe discovery of his children's talent is considered to have been a life-transforming event for Mozart. He once referred to his son as the \"miracle which God let be born in Salzburg\". Of Leopold's attitude, the \"Grove Dictionary\" says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The recognition of this 'miracle' must have struck Leopold with the force of a divine revelation and he felt his responsibility to be not merely a father's and teacher's but a missionary's as well.\nBy \"missionary\", the \"Grove Dictionary\" refers to the family's concert tours.\nScholars differ on whether the tours made substantial profits. To be sure, often the children performed before large audiences and took in large sums, but the expenses of travel were also very high, and no money at all was made during the various times that Mozart and the children suffered serious illnesses. Mozart biographer Maynard takes the view that the tours were lucrative and produced long-term profits for Leopold; Ruth states to the contrary that their income generally only covered their travel and living expenses.\nSince the instruction took much of his time, and the touring kept him away from Salzburg for long periods, Mozart cut down his activities in other areas. Nannerl later claimed that he \"entirely gave up both violin instruction and composition in order to direct that time not claimed in service to the prince to the education of his two children\". After 1762, his compositional efforts seem to have been limited to revising his earlier work, and by 1771 he had ceased composing altogether.\nThe touring continued into the early 1770s. The last three trips were to Italy, with only the father accompanying Wolfgang. Leopold Mozart's failure to advance above his Vice-Kapellmeister position at Salzburg is attributed by the \"Grove Dictionary\" to the great amount of time that the journeys kept him away from Salzburg (the longest journey was about three-and-a-half years). After the final return from Italy in 1773, Leopold was repeatedly passed over for the Kapellmeister post.\nFamily life in Salzburg.\nAlthough Mozart is portrayed (notably by Halliwell 1998) as generally quite worried about money, the Mozart family evidently by 1773 felt prosperous enough to upgrade their living quarters. They left the home in the Getreidegasse where the children had been born and moved to rooms in the \"Tanzmeisterhaus\" (\"Dancing-Master's House\"), which had been the home of the recently deceased dancing master Franz Karl Gottlieb Sp\u00f6ckner. As tenants of Sp\u00f6ckner's cousin and heir Maria Anna Raab, the Mozarts had eight rooms, including the quite large room that Sp\u00f6ckner had used for dancing lessons. This the Mozarts used for teaching, for domestic concerts, for storing keyboard instruments sold by Leopold, and for \"B\u00f6lzlschiessen\", a form of recreation in which family and their guests shot airguns at humorously designed paper targets.\nStarting around this time, a major preoccupation was the lengthy and frustrating struggle to find a professional position for his son. His wife died in 1778 in Paris while accompanying Wolfgang on a job-hunting tour.\nRelations with his children in their adulthood.\nMozart is a controversial figure among his biographers, with the largest disagreements arising concerning his role as the parent of adult children. Mozart biographer Maynard Solomon has taken a particularly harsh view of Leopold, treating him as tyrannical, mendacious, and possessive; Ruth Halliwell adopts a far more sympathetic view, portraying his correspondence as a sensible effort to guide the life of a grossly irresponsible Wolfgang.\nRelations with Nannerl.\nWolfgang left home permanently in 1781 (see below), and from this time until 1784, his father lived in Salzburg with just Nannerl (now in her early thirties) and their servants. Nannerl had a number of suitors, of whom the most important was Franz Armand d'Ippold, with whom she was evidently in love. In the end she did not marry him, and the reason for this is unknown. One possibility, frequently entertained by biographers, is that the marriage was blocked by Leopold, who liked having Nannerl at home as the lady of the house. However, Halliwell observes that no written evidence on this point survives and insists that we simply do not know why Nannerl married so late. Nannerl finally did marry in August 1784, at age 33. She moved to the home of her new husband, Johann Baptist Franz von Berchtold zu Sonnenburg, in the small rural town of St. Gilgen, roughly six hours journey east of Salzburg.\nDuring his remaining years, Mozart spent a fair amount of his time trying to help Nannerl at a distance, as her new marriage situation, involving five apparently ill-educated stepchildren, was apparently not easy. According to Halliwell, Nannerl depended on him in many ways: he did \"shopping [and] the engagement of servants. ... He relayed news from Salzburg, Munich, and Vienna to divert her, did his best to organize the maintenance of her fortepiano, paid for Wolfgang's music to be copied and arranged for her to receive it; collected musicians together when she had visited him so that she could play it with most of the parts; .. tried to look after her health; and encouraged her to stand up to her husband when he was being unreasonable.\" Following Leopold's death in 1787, Nannerl had to do without this support, and Halliwell asserts that \"there is every reason to believe that Leopold's death was devastating\" to her.\"\nRaising Nannerl's child.\nIn July 1785, Nannerl came to Salzburg to give birth to her first child, a son. The infant stayed with his grandfather when she returned home, and with the assistance of his servants, he raised the child. He frequently sent letters to Nannerl (at least one per week) that usually began with the sentence \"Leopoldl is healthy\", (\"Leopoldl\" is \"Little Leopold\") and offered a full report on the child. Leopoldl stayed until his grandfather's death in May 1787. He apparently found raising his grandson a happy experience. Halliwell relates one repeated episode:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(As a toddler,) [he] was developing a will of his own, had to be cajoled into doing what Leopold wanted \u2013 Leopold's stratagem for persuading him to go to bed was to pretend to climb into Leopoldl's bed, whereupon Leopoldl would gleefully try to push him away and get in himself.\nMaynard Solomon suggests that in keeping his grandson in his home, Mozart may have hoped to train yet another musical prodigy. Halliwell notes a different possibility: that conditions for child-rearing in the Berchtold household were distinctly suboptimal.\nRelations with Wolfgang.\nWolfgang left home for good in 1781, when instead of returning from a stay in Vienna with his employer Archbishop Colloredo he remained in the city to pursue a freelance career. This effort was to a fair degree successful; Wolfgang achieved great fame and was for a time quite prosperous (though poor planning later changed this status). The move almost certainly aided Wolfgang's musical development; the great majority of his most celebrated works were composed in Vienna.\nAs indicated by Mozart's return letters (which alone survive), his father was strongly opposed to the Vienna move, wanting Wolfgang to return to Salzburg. A fairly harsh family quarrel resulted. He was also strongly opposed to Wolfgang's marriage to Constanze Weber in 1782, and gave his permission late, reluctantly, and under duress. Biographers differ on the extent that Constanze was later snubbed by Leopold, if at all, during her visit with Wolfgang (July \u2013 October 1783) to Salzburg; the \"Grove Dictionary\" calls the visit \"not entirely happy\".\nIn 1785, he visited Wolfgang and Constanze in Vienna, at a time when his son's career success was at its peak. He witnessed first hand his son's success as a performer, and on 12 February heard Joseph Haydn's widely quoted words of praise, upon hearing the string quartets Wolfgang dedicated to him, \"Before God and as an honest man I tell you that your son is the greatest composer known to me either in person or by name: He has taste, and, furthermore, the most profound knowledge of composition.\" The visit was the last time that Leopold saw his son, though they continued to correspond, and Wolfgang sometimes sent copies of his piano concertos and string quartets for Leopold and Nannerl to perform with friends.\nLater in 1785, when Leopold Mozart took in Nannerl's child, Wolfgang was not informed. However, in the following year Wolfgang found this out from a mutual acquaintance in Vienna. At this time, Wolfgang wrote to Leopold to ask if he would be willing to take care of his own two children while he and Constanze went on concert tour. Leopold turned him down, probably with harsh words. His letter to Wolfgang does not survive, but his summary to Nannerl of it does (17 November 1786):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today I had to answer a letter from your brother \"which cost me a lot of writing\", so I can write very little to you ... You'll readily understand that I had to write a very \"emphatic letter\", because he made no lesser suggestion than that I should take \"his 2 children\" into my care, since he would like to make a journey through Germany to England ... The good honest silhouette maker H[err] M\u00fcller had sung \"Leopoldl's\" praises to your brother, so he found out that the child is with me, which I'd never told him: so this was how the good idea occurred to him or perhaps his wife. that would certainly not be bad, \u2013 They could travel in peace, \u2013 could die, \u2013 \u2013 could stay in England, \u2013 \u2013 then I could run after them with the children etc: as for the payment he's offering me for the children, for servants and the children etc: \u2013 Basta! my excuse is forceful and instructive, if he cares to profit from it.\nFor interpretations of this letter, see , which takes a viewpoint sympathetic to Leopold, and , which takes a viewpoint sympathetic to Wolfgang.\nStarting around the time he wrote this letter and continuing through the first part of 1787, his health was failing. He had become seriously ill by 4 April. On this day, Wolfgang wrote to him in alarm at the news, though he did not travel to Salzburg to see him. When Leopold Mozart died on 28 May (see below), Wolfgang was unable to attend the funeral, the travel time to Salzburg being too long.\nLittle information is available on how Wolfgang took his father's death, but a postscript he included in a letter to his friend Gottfried von Jacquin suggests that, despite the quarrels and partial estrangement, his father's death was a blow to him: \"I inform you that on returning home today I received the sad news of my most beloved father's death. You can imagine the state I am in.\"\n\"See \"\nCompositions.\nLeopold Mozart's music is inevitably overshadowed by the work of his son Wolfgang, and in any case the father willingly sacrificed his own career to promote his son's. But his \"Cassation in G for Orchestra and Toys\" (Toy Symphony), (also variously attributed to Joseph Haydn, Michael Haydn, and Austrian Benedictine monk Edmund Angerer) remains popular, and a number of symphonies, a trumpet concerto, and other works also survive.\nA contemporary report described what he had composed prior to 1757:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;many contrapuntal and other church items; further a great number of symphonies, some only \u00e0 4 but others with all the customary instruments; likewise more than 30 large serenades in which solos for various instruments appear. In addition he has brought forth many concertos, in particular for the transverse flute, oboe, bassoon, Waldhorn, trumpet etc.: countless trios and divertimentos for various instruments; 12 oratorios and a number of theatrical items, even pantomimes, and especially certain occasional pieces such as martial music \u2026 Turkish music, music with 'steel keyboard' and lastly a musical sleigh ride; not to speak of marches, so-called 'Nachtst\u00fccke' and many hundreds of minuets, opera dances and similar items.\nLeopold Mozart was much concerned with a naturalistic feel to his compositions, his \"Jagdsinfonie\" (or \"Sinfonia da Caccia\" for four horns and strings) calls for shotguns, and his \"Bauernhochzeit\" (Peasant Wedding) includes bagpipes, hurdy-gurdy, a dulcimer, whoops and whistles (ad. lib.), and pistol shots. \"Musikalische Schlittenfahrt\" (musical sleigh ride) calls for bells and whips in addition to a rich orchestra.\nHis oeuvre was extensive, but only recently have scholars begun to assess the scope or the quality of it; much is lost, and it is not known how representative the surviving works are of his overall output. Cliff Eisen, who wrote a doctoral dissertation on Leopold Mozart's symphonies, finds in a Symphony in G major examples of his \"sensitivity to orchestral colour\" and a work that \"compares favourably with those of virtually any of Mozart's immediate contemporaries\".\nSome of his work was erroneously attributed to Wolfgang and some pieces attributed to Leopold were subsequently shown to be the work of Wolfgang. Much of what survives is light music but there is some more substantial work including his \"Sacramental Litany\" in D major (1762) and three fortepiano sonatas, all published in his lifetime.\nAssessment.\nThe assessment of Leopold Mozart as a person and as a father brings forth serious disagreement among scholars. The \"Grove Dictionary\" article, by Cliff Eisen, denounces \"his misrepresentation at the hands of later biographers\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A man of broad cultural achievement ... Leopold Mozart may have been haughty, difficult to please and at times intractable, ... but there is no compelling evidence that Mozart was excessively manipulative, intolerant, autocratic or jealous of his son's talent. On the contrary, a careful reading in context of the family letters reveals a father who cared deeply for his son but who was frequently frustrated in his greatest ambition: to secure for Wolfgang a worldly position appropriate to his genius.\nOther scholars have taken a harsher view. Solomon portrays Mozart as a man who loved his children but was unwilling to grant them their independence when they reached adulthood, resulting in considerable hardship for them. Daniel Steptoe makes a similar assessment, and particularly faults Leopold for having blamed Wolfgang for his mother's early death \u2013 not just immediately following the death in 1778 (\"a crushing reply to a young man grieving for his mother\"), but even later on in 1780.\nRobert Spaethling, who translated Mozart's letters, typically takes a position strongly sympathetic to Wolfgang in his struggles with his father; he describes Wolfgang's resignation of his Salzburg position and marriage to Constanze as a two-act \"drama of liberation from Salzburg, specially Wolfgang's liberation from Leopold Mozart\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70096", "revid": "39082743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70096", "title": "Joe Satriani", "text": "American guitarist (born 1956)\nJoseph Satriani (born July 15, 1956) is an American rock guitarist, composer, and songwriter. Early in his career he worked as a guitar instructor, with many of his former students achieving fame, including Steve Vai, Larry LaLonde, Rick Hunolt, Kirk Hammett, Andy Timmons, Charlie Hunter, Kevin Cadogan, and Alex Skolnick. Satriani went on to have a successful solo music career, starting in the mid-1980s. He is a 15-time Grammy Award nominee and has sold over ten million albums, making him the bestselling instrumental rock guitarist of all time.\nIn 1988, Satriani was recruited by Mick Jagger as lead guitarist for his first solo tour. Satriani briefly toured with Deep Purple, joining shortly after the second departure of Ritchie Blackmore, in 1993. He has worked with a range of guitarists during the G3 tour, which he founded in 1995. Satriani has been the guitarist for the supergroup Chickenfoot since joining the band in 2008.\nEarly life.\nSatriani was born to an Italian-American family in Westbury, New York. His paternal grandparents were from Piacenza and Bobbio, while his maternal grandparents were from Bari. He was raised Roman Catholic. He was inspired to play guitar at age 14, after hearing of the death of Jimi Hendrix. Satriani heard the news during football practice, where he then announced to his coach that he was quitting to become a guitarist.\nSatriani graduated from Carle Place High School. In 1974, he studied music with jazz guitarist Billy Bauer and with reclusive jazz pianist Lennie Tristano. The technically demanding Tristano greatly influenced Satriani's playing. He began teaching guitar, with his most notable student at the time being fellow Long Island native Steve Vai (who also went to Carle Place). While he was teaching Vai, he was attending Five Towns College for studies in music. In 1978, Satriani moved to Berkeley, California, to pursue a music career. Soon after, he resumed teaching. His students included Kirk Hammett of Metallica, David Bryson of Counting Crows, Kevin Cadogan from Third Eye Blind, Larry LaLonde of Primus and Possessed, Alex Skolnick of Testament, Rick Hunolt (ex-Exodus), Phil Kettner of L\u0227\u0227z Rockit, Geoff Tyson of T-Ride, Charlie Hunter, and Emit Bloch.\nCareer.\n1980s\u20132000.\nSatriani started playing in a San Francisco-based band called Squares, which he formed with his brother-in-law Neil Sheehan in the late 1970s. He was later invited to join the Greg Kihn Band, who were on the downside of their career, but whose generosity helped Satriani pay off the overwhelming credit card debt from recording his first album, \"Not of This Earth\", released in 1986. The same year, he also sang backing vocals on the self-titled Crowded House album.\nIn 1987, Satriani's second album, \"Surfing with the Alien\", produced radio hits and was the first all-instrumental release to chart so highly in many years. The track \"Crushing Day\" was featured on the soundtrack of a low-budget film titled \"It Takes Two\". In 1988, Satriani helped produce the EP \"The Eyes of Horror\" for the death metal band Possessed. That same year, he also released an EP titled \"Dreaming #11\", which featured the song \"The Crush of Love\". In 1989, Satriani released the album \"Flying in a Blue Dream\". It was said to be inspired by the death of his father, who died in 1989 during the recording of the album. \"One Big Rush\" featured on the soundtrack to the Cameron Crowe movie \"Say Anything...\". \"The Forgotten Part II\" was featured on a Molson Dry commercial in Canada in 1993. \"Can't Slow Down\" featured in a car chase sequence in the Don Johnson-starring show \"Nash Bridges\".\nIn 1992, Satriani released \"The Extremist\", his most commercially successful album to date. The album was certified Gold in the United States and peaked at number 22 on the \"Billboard\" 200. Radio stations across the US picked up \"Summer Song\", which got a major boost when Sony used it in a major commercial campaign for their Discman portable CD players. \"Cryin'\", \"Friends\", and the title track were regional hits on radio. In late 1993, Satriani joined Deep Purple as a temporary replacement for departed guitarist Ritchie Blackmore during the band's Japanese tour. The concerts were a success, and Satriani was asked to join the band permanently, but he declined, having just signed a multi-album solo deal with Sony, and Steve Morse took the guitarist slot in Deep Purple.\nIn 1996, Satriani founded G3, a concert tour intended to include a rotating trio of guitarists. The original lineup featured Satriani, Steve Vai, and Eric Johnson. The G3 tour has continued periodically since its inaugural version, with Satriani the only permanent member. Other guitarists who have performed in G3 include Yngwie Malmsteen, John Petrucci, Kenny Wayne Shepherd, Robert Fripp, Andy Timmons, Uli Jon Roth, Michael Schenker, Adrian Legg, Paul Gilbert, Steve Morse, and Steve Lukather. In 1998, Satriani recorded and released \"Crystal Planet\", followed by \"Engines of Creation\", one of his more experimental works featuring the electronica genre. Two shows at the Fillmore West in San Francisco were recorded in December 2000 and released as \"Live in San Francisco\", a two-disc live album and DVD.\n2000\u2013present.\nSatriani released \"Strange Beautiful Music\" in 2002 and \"Is There Love in Space?\" in 2004. In May 2005, the musician toured India for the first time, playing concerts in Delhi, Kolkata, and Mumbai. In 2006, he recorded and released \"Super Colossal\" and \"Satriani Live!\", another two-disc live album and DVD recorded May 3, 2006, at the Grove in Anaheim, California. In 2006, Satriani signed on as an official supporter of Little Kids Rock, a nonprofit organization that provides free musical instruments and instruction to children in underserved public schools throughout the US. The artist has personally delivered instruments to children in the program through a charity raffle for the organization, and like Steve Vai, sits on its board of directors as an honorary member.\nOn August 7, 2007, Epic/Legacy Recordings re-released \"Surfing with the Alien\" to celebrate the 20th anniversary of its publication. This was a two-disc set that includes a remastered album and a DVD of a never-before-seen live show filmed at the Montreux Jazz Festival in 1988. Satriani's next album, \"Professor Satchafunkilus and the Musterion of Rock\", was released on April 1, 2008.\nOn May 29, 2008, Satriani revealed that he was joining hard rock supergroup Chickenfoot, composed of former Van Halen members Sammy Hagar and Michael Anthony, and Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Chad Smith. They released their debut, self-titled album on June 5, 2009. A second album, titled \"Chickenfoot III\", followed on September 27, 2011.\nOn December 4, 2008, he filed a copyright infringement suit against Coldplay in the United States District Court for the Central District of California. Satriani's suit claims that the band's song \"Viva la Vida\" includes \"substantial original portions\" of the Satriani song \"If I Could Fly\" from his 2004 album, \"Is There Love in Space?\" The Coldplay song in question received two Grammy Awards. Coldplay denied the allegation. The case was dismissed in September 2009, with each party paying their own trial costs.\nThe artist released a live DVD recording of a concert in Paris titled \"\" and a companion two-CD set on February 2, 2010. In March 2010, he participated with other guitarists in the Experience Hendrix Tribute Tour, performing music written and inspired by Jimi Hendrix.\nIn May 2010, Satriani announced he was about to enter the studio to record a new album, and dates were released for an autumn tour. He also said that demos had been recorded for a second Chickenfoot record. Satriani released his 13th studio album, \"Black Swans and Wormhole Wizards\", on October 5, 2010.\nHe issued the DVD/Blu-ray of his three-dimensional concert film \"\" on April 24, 2012, after its limited showing in theaters. The film was shot in December 2010 in Montreal and was directed by award-winning filmmakers Fran\u00e7ois and Pierre Lamoureux. \"Satchurated 3D\" is the first Blu-ray concert film available with Dolby TrueHD 7.1.\nOn May 7, 2013, Satriani released his 14th studio album, titled \"Unstoppable Momentum\". A career retrospective box set titled \"\", which contains remastered editions of every studio album from \"Not of This Earth\" to \"Unstoppable Momentum\" was released on April 22, 2014. A book titled \"Strange Beautiful Music: A Memoir\" was also published, to coincide with the release of the box set.\nIn August 2014, Satriani participated in the G4 Experience\u2014a weeklong guitar camp\u2014with fellow guitarists Paul Gilbert and Andy Timmons, and keyboardist Mike Keneally.\nIn February 2015, the first dates were announced for the Shockwave World Tour, in support of Satriani's 15th studio album, slated for release in July. \"Shockwave Supernova\" was released on July 24, 2015. The album was conceived after Satriani found himself playing guitar with his teeth a lot during the \"Unstoppable Momentum\" tour, and had a daydream about an alter ego, \"Shockwave Supernova\", making him do it.\nOn September 16, 2017, Satriani teased his upcoming 16th studio album, \"What Happens Next\", through social media. The album was released on January 12, 2018. He collaborated with former Deep Purple bassist Glenn Hughes and Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Chad Smith, two Rock and Roll Hall of Fame members.\nOn April 5, 2019, the guitarist released an eponymous retrospective collection of songs he had recorded in the 1970s with his band Squares. The following April, he published his seventeenth solo album, \"Shapeshifting\".\nOn January 19, 2022, Satriani released \"Sahara\" as the first single from his eighteenth album, \"The Elephants of Mars\". The record was released on April 8, 2022, by earMUSIC, making it Satriani's first since his 1995 self-titled album to be released by a label other than Epic Records or its parent company, Sony Music.\nIn late 2022, Satriani announced a continuation of his G3 touring project, under the title \"G4 Experience V6.0\", which took place on January 3\u20137, 2023. The event was led by Satriani, together with Peter Frampton\u2014among his final performances before retirement, Steve Lukather, and Steve Morse, and included workshops and jam sessions led by Alex Skolnick, Andy James, Cory Wong, Eric Gales, John 5, Mateus Asato, and Nili Brosh.\nIn early 2024, Satriani, Steve Vai, and Eric Johnson embarked on a limited-run \"Reunion\" tour of the original G3 lineup. Subsequently, Satriani and Vai continued touring as a double bill under the name SATCHVAI Band. After more than fifty years of professional and personal friendship, the pair wrote and recorded their first single together, \"The Sea of Emotion, Pt.1\", which was released on March 29, 2024.\nChickenfoot.\nIn May 2008, Satriani joined hard rock supergroup Chickenfoot, composed of former Van Halen members Sammy Hagar and Michael Anthony, and Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer, Chad Smith. The band features Hagar on vocals, Satriani on guitar, Anthony on bass, and Smith on drums. Their eponymous debut album was released on June 5, 2009. The first single and video released was the track \"Oh Yeah\", which was played on \"The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien\" on June 5, 2009. Satriani received a co-writing credit on all the songs on the band's debut album. \"Broken Records\" magazine asked Satriani about his new band, and he enthusiastically mentioned, \"it was great fun\" and it gives him a \"kick in the music bone\" to play with such great talent. He said it felt natural to step back and play more rhythm than solo guitar. Chickenfoot's second album, \"Chickenfoot III\", was released on September 27, 2011. The album's first single was the track \"Bigfoot\".\nOther work.\nSatriani is credited on many other records, including on Blue \u00d6yster Cult's 1988 album, \"Imaginos\", Alice Cooper's 1991 album, \"Hey Stoopid\", Spinal Tap's 1992 album, \"Break Like the Wind\", and on band members Stu Hamm and Gregg Bissonette's solo works. He was credited with singing backing vocals on the 1986 debut album by Crowded House. In 2003, he played lead guitar on the Yardbirds's release \"Birdland\". In 2006, he made appearances on tracks for Deep Purple vocalist Ian Gillan's solo CD/DVD dual disc, \"Gillan's Inn\".\nOn Dream Theater's 2007 album, \"Systematic Chaos\", Satriani contributed spoken lyrics to the song \"Repentance\". He also contributed a guitar solo to Jordan Rudess' 2004 solo release, \"Rhythm of Time\". He composed much of the soundtrack for the racing video game \"\", while his song \"Crowd Chant\" was featured in \"NHL 2K10\" and \"Madden NFL 11\". In 2009, he played two characters in season three of Adult Swim's \"Metalocalypse\".\nSatriani has starred in several movies, including the 2006 Christopher Guest film \"For Your Consideration\", as the guitarist in the band that played for the late-night show. He appeared as himself in the film \"Moneyball\", playing \"The Star-Spangled Banner\".\nThe \"American Dad!\" episode \"Why Can't We Be Friends\" featured the song \"Always with Me, Always with You\". The song was also sampled in the Nicki Minaj single \"Right Thru Me\".\nSatriani joined Chickenfoot in voicing themselves in the \"Aqua Teen Hunger Force\" episode \"IAMAPOD\".\nStyle and influence.\nSatriani is considered a highly technical guitarist, and has been referred to as a top guitar virtuoso. He has mastered many playing techniques on electric guitar, including legato, two-handed tapping and arpeggio tapping, volume swells, harmonics, and extreme whammy bar effects. During fast passages, Satriani favors a legato technique (achieved primarily through hammer-ons and pull-offs) that yields smooth and flowing runs. He is also adept at other speed-related techniques such as rapid alternate picking and sweep picking.\nSatriani was influenced by Jimi Hendrix and by English rock guitarists such as Brian May, Eric Clapton, Jimmy Page, Ritchie Blackmore, and Jeff Beck. He was also influenced by jazz fusion guitarist Allan Holdsworth.\nEquipment.\nSatriani endorses Ibanez's JS Series guitars and the Marshall JVM410HJS amplifier. Both lines were designed specifically for him as signature products. The Ibanez JS1 (the original JS model) was based on, and replaced, the Ibanez 540 Radius model that Satriani first endorsed. Many of his guitars are made by the company, including the JS1000 and JS1200. These guitars typically feature the DiMarzio PAF Pro (which he used up until 1993 in both the neck and bridge positions), the DiMarzio Fred (which he used in the bridge position from 1993 to 2005), and the Mo' Joe and the Paf Joe (which he has used in the bridge and neck positions from 2005 to the present). He has more recently introduced the Satch Track single-coil pickup that he used in his humbucker/single coil-equipped signature Ibanez guitars. He has since replaced the Satch Track with the Sustainiac.\nThe JS line of guitars is Satriani's signature line, with the JS1000, JS1200, JS2400, JSBDG, and JS20th using Ibanez's original Edge double-locking tremolo bridge. The JS100 and JS120s both use Ibanez's Edge 3 tremolo bridge. The JS1600 is a fixed-bridge guitar with no tremolo system. The guitar he was most associated with during the 1990s was a chrome-finished guitar nicknamed \"Chrome Boy\". This instrument can be seen on the \"Live in San Francisco\" DVD. However, the guitar used for most of the concert was in fact a lookalike nicknamed \"Pearly\", which featured Seymour Duncan Pearly Gates pickups.\nSatriani uses a number of other JS models, such as the JS double neck model, JS700 (primary axe on his self-titled CD, seen on the 1995 \"Joe Satriani\" tour, which features a fixed bridge, P-90 pickups, and a matching mahogany body and neck), JS6/JS6000 (natural body), JS1 (the original JS model), JS2000 (fixed-bridge model), a variety of JS100s, JS1000s and JS1200s with custom paint work, and a large number of prototype JSs. All double-locking bridges have been the original Edge tremolo, not the newer models, which point to a more custom guitar than the off-the-shelf models. Satriani played a red 7-string JS model, seen in the \"G3 Live in Tokyo\" DVD from 2005. He also has a prototype 24-fret version of the JS, now called the JS\u20132400, which he has used with Chickenfoot. He has also used other prototypes featuring a Sustainiac or a JS model with three single coil-sized humbucker pickups.\nSatriani has used a wide variety of guitar amps, with Marshalls being his main amplifier (notably the limited-edition blue-colored 6100 LM model) up until 2001, and his Peavey signature series amps, the Peavey JSX, up until his time with Chickenfoot.\nThe JSX began life as a prototype Peavey XXX and developed into the Joe Satriani signature Peavey model. However, Satriani still used distortion pedals with the clean channel rather than the built-in overdrive channels. He has used other amplifiers over the years in the studio, such as the Peavey 5150 (used to record the song \"Crystal Planet\"), Cornford, and the Mesa/Boogie Mark IIC+ (used to record the song \"Flying in a Blue Dream\"), among others. He later switched to the Marshall JVM series, having used a modified JVM 410H in his \"Black Swans and Wormhole Wizards\" tour in 2010 and with Chickenfoot in 2010 and 2011.\nThese modified JVM Marshall amps were prototypes for a signature amp that Marshall scheduled for release in 2011. They replaced the reverb with noise gates that eliminate lag when switching channels. The clean channel was replaced by the clean channel of a 6100 LM model, which Satriani likes as an option to use distortion pedals with. The orange overdrive channel and the modern red overdrive channel have been better matched with each other as Satriani claims to prefer the organic overdrive of the JVM over pedals. The red overdrive channel was modified for a beefy rock rather than a nu metal sound. The effect loop has been simplified to be serial only.\nSatriani has used many amps in the studio when recording, including the Peavey Classic. He used Marshall heads and cabinets, including live, prior to his Peavey endorsement. Recently, he used the JSX head through a Palmer Speaker Simulator. He has released a Class-A 5-watt tube amp called the \"Mini Colossal\". In 2009, Satriani split from Peavey and returned to using Marshall amps. Live, he has been using a Marshall JVM410JS since 2009.\nHis effects pedals include the Vox wah, Dunlop Cry Baby wah, RMC Wizard wah, DigiTech Whammy, B.K. Butler Tube Driver, Boss DS-1, Boss CH-1, Boss CE-2, Boss DD-2 and a standard Boss DD-3 (used together to emulate reverb effects), Boss BF-3, Boss OC-2, Barber Burn Drive Unit, Fulltone Deja Vibe, Fulltone Ultimate Octave, and Electro-Harmonix POG (Polyphonic Octave Generator), the latter being featured prominently on the title cut to his 2006 \"Super Colossal\". He has collaborated with Vox on a range of signature-effect stompboxes. These include the \"Satchurator\" and \"Ice 9\" distortions, the \"Time Machine\" delay, and the \"Big Bad Wah\".\nSatriani's 2000 guitar rig has been documented in detail.\nMusical themes.\nSatriani's work frequently makes references to various science fiction stories and ideas. \"Surfing with the Alien\", \"Back to Shalla-Bal\", and \"The Power Cosmic 2000\" refer to the comic book character Silver Surfer, while \"Ice 9\" refers to the secret government ice weapon in Kurt Vonnegut's \"Cat's Cradle\". \"Borg Sex\" is a reference to \"Star Trek\", which features a cybernetic race known as the Borg. His albums and songs often have otherworldly titles, such as \"Not of this Earth\", \"Crystal Planet\", \"Is There Love in Space?\", and \"Engines of Creation\".\nOn the album \"Super Colossal\", the song titled \"Crowd Chant\" was originally called \"Party on the Enterprise\". It would have featured sampled sounds from the \"Starship Enterprise\" from \"\". But as Satriani explained in a podcast, legal issues regarding the samples could not be resolved, and he was unable to get permission to use them. He then removed the sounds from the song and called it \"Crowd Chant\". Its ending theme was inspired by composer Gabriel Faur\u00e9's \"Pavane in F-sharp minor, Op. 50\". The song is used as goal celebration music for a number of National Hockey League and Major League Soccer teams, including the Minnesota Wild (NHL), New York Islanders (NHL), and New England Revolution (MLS). The song is also used in the 2K Sports hockey video game \"NHL 2k10\".\n\"Redshift Riders\", another song from \"Super Colossal\", is \"...based on the idea that in the future, when people can travel throughout space, they will theoretically take advantage of the cosmological redshift effect so they can be swung around large planetary objects and get across [the] universe a lot faster than normal\", according to Satriani. On the album \"Professor Satchafunkilus and the Musterion of Rock\", the song \"I Just Wanna Rock\" is about a giant robot on the run who happens to stumble upon a rock concert.\nAwards and nominations.\nCalifornia Music Awards.\nOriginated by the now-defunct magazine \"BAM\" in 1977 as the Bay Area Music Awards, the \"Bammies\" were expanded and renamed in 1998 to honor music across California.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70097", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70097", "title": "Compiler-compiler", "text": "Program that generates parsers or compilers\nIn computer science, a compiler-compiler or compiler generator is a programming tool that creates a parser, interpreter, or compiler from some form of formal description of a programming language and machine.\nThe most common type of compiler-compiler is called a parser generator. It handles only syntactic analysis.\nA formal description of a language is usually a grammar used as an input to a parser generator. It often resembles Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF), extended Backus\u2013Naur form (EBNF), or has its own syntax. Grammar files describe a syntax of a generated compiler's target programming language and actions that should be taken against its specific constructs.\nSource code for a parser of the programming language is returned as the parser generator's output. This source code can then be compiled into a parser, which may be either standalone or embedded. The compiled parser then accepts the source code of the target programming language as an input and performs an action or outputs an abstract syntax tree (AST).\nParser generators do not handle the semantics of the AST, or the generation of machine code for the target machine.\nA metacompiler is a software development tool used mainly in the construction of compilers, translators, and interpreters for other programming languages. The input to a metacompiler is a computer program written in a specialized programming metalanguage designed mainly for the purpose of constructing compilers. The language of the compiler produced is called the object language. The minimal input producing a compiler is a metaprogram specifying the object language grammar and semantic transformations into an object program.\nVariants.\nA typical parser generator associates executable code with each of the rules of the grammar that should be executed when these rules are applied by the parser. These pieces of code are sometimes referred to as semantic action routines since they define the semantics of the syntactic structure that is analyzed by the parser. Depending upon the type of parser that should be generated, these routines may construct a parse tree (or abstract syntax tree), or generate executable code directly.\nOne of the earliest (1964), surprisingly powerful, versions of compiler-compilers is META II, which accepted an analytical grammar with output facilities that produce stack machine code, and is able to compile its own source code and other languages.\nAmong the earliest programs of the original Unix versions being built at Bell Labs was the two-part lex and yacc system, which was normally used to output C programming language code, but had a flexible output system that could be used for everything from programming languages to text file conversion. Their modern GNU versions are flex and bison.\nSome experimental compiler-compilers take as input a formal description of programming language semantics, typically using denotational semantics. This approach is often called 'semantics-based compiling', and was pioneered by Peter Mosses' Semantic Implementation System (SIS) in 1978. However, both the generated compiler and the code it produced were inefficient in time and space. No production compilers are currently built in this way, but research continues.\nThe Production Quality Compiler-Compiler (PQCC) project at Carnegie Mellon University does not formalize semantics, but does have a semi-formal framework for machine description.\nCompiler-compilers exist in many flavors, including bottom-up rewrite machine generators (see https://) used to tile syntax trees according to a rewrite grammar for code generation, and attribute grammar parser generators (e.g. ANTLR can be used for simultaneous type checking, constant propagation, and more during the parsing stage).\nMetacompilers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs a metacompiler's metalanguage will usually be a powerful string and symbol processing language, they often have strong applications for general-purpose applications, including generating a wide range of other software engineering and analysis tools.\nBesides being useful for domain-specific language development, a metacompiler is a prime example of a domain-specific language, designed for the domain of compiler writing.\nA metacompiler is a metaprogram \"usually written in its own metalanguage\" or an existing computer programming language. The process of a metacompiler, written in its own metalanguage, compiling itself is equivalent to self-hosting compiler. Most common compilers written today are self-hosting compilers. Self-hosting is a powerful tool, of many metacompilers, allowing the easy extension of their own metaprogramming metalanguage. The feature that separates a metacompiler apart from other compiler compilers is that it takes as input a specialized metaprogramming language that describes all aspects of the compiler's operation. A metaprogram produced by a metacompiler is as complete a program as a program written in C++, BASIC or any other general programming language. The metaprogramming metalanguage is a powerful attribute allowing easier development of computer programming languages and other computer tools. Command line processors, text string transforming and analysis are easily coded using metaprogramming metalanguages of metacompilers.\nA full featured development package includes a linker and a run time support library. Usually, a machine-oriented system programming language, such as C or C++, is needed to write the support library. A library consisting of support functions needed for the compiling process usually completes the full metacompiler package.\nThe meaning of metacompiler.\nIn computer science, the prefix \"meta\" is commonly used to mean \"about (its own category)\". For example, metadata are data that describe other data. A language that is used to describe other languages is a metalanguage. Meta may also mean \"on a higher level of abstraction\". A metalanguage operates on a higher level of abstraction in order to describe properties of a language. Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF) is a formal metalanguage originally used to define ALGOL 60. BNF is a weak metalanguage, for it describes only the syntax and says nothing about the semantics or meaning. Metaprogramming is the writing of computer programs with the ability to treat programs as their data. A metacompiler takes as input a metaprogram written in a specialized metalanguages (a higher level abstraction) specifically designed for the purpose of metaprogramming. The output is an executable object program.\nAn analogy can be drawn: That as a \"C++\" compiler takes as input a \"C++\" programming language program, a \"meta\"compiler takes as input a \"meta\"programming metalanguage program.\nForth metacompiler.\nMany advocates of the language Forth call the process of creating a new implementation of Forth a meta-compilation and that it constitutes a metacompiler. The Forth definition of metacompiler is:\n\"A metacompiler is a compiler which processes its own source code, resulting in an executable version of itself.\"\nThis Forth use of the term metacompiler is disputed in mainstream computer science. See Forth (programming language) and History of compiler construction. The actual Forth process of compiling itself is a combination of a Forth being a self-hosting extensible programming language and sometimes cross compilation, long established terminology in computer science. Metacompilers are a general compiler writing system. Besides the Forth metacompiler concept being indistinguishable from self-hosting and extensible language. The actual process acts at a lower level defining a minimum subset of forth \"words\", that can be used to define additional forth words, A full Forth implementation can then be defined from the base set. This sounds like a bootstrap process. The problem is that almost every general purpose language compiler also fits the Forth metacompiler description.\n When (self-hosting compiler) X processes its own source code, resulting in an executable version of itself, X is a metacompiler.\nJust replace X with any common language, C, C++, Java, Pascal, COBOL, Fortran, Ada, Modula-2, etc. And X would be a metacompiler according to the Forth usage of metacompiler. A metacompiler operates at an abstraction level above the compiler it compiles. It only operates at the same (self-hosting compiler) level when compiling itself. One has to see the problem with this definition of metacompiler. It can be applied to most any language.\nHowever, on examining the concept of programming in Forth, adding new words to the dictionary, extending the language in this way is metaprogramming. It is this metaprogramming in Forth that makes it a metacompiler.\nProgramming in Forth is adding new words to the language. Changing the language in this way is metaprogramming. Forth is a metacompiler, because Forth is a language specifically designed for metaprogramming. Programming in Forth is extending Forth adding words to the Forth vocabulary creates a new Forth dialect. Forth is a specialized metacompiler for Forth language dialects.\nHistory.\nDesign of the original compiler-compiler was started by Tony Brooker and Derrick Morris in 1959, with initial testing beginning in March 1962. The Brooker Morris Compiler Compiler (BMCC) was used to create compilers for the new Atlas computer at the University of Manchester, for several languages: Mercury Autocode, Extended Mercury Autocode, Atlas Autocode, ALGOL 60 and ASA Fortran. At roughly the same time, related work was being done by E. T. (Ned) Irons at Princeton, and Alick Glennie at the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment at Aldermaston whose \"Syntax Machine\" paper (declassified in 1977) inspired the META series of translator writing systems mentioned below.\nThe early history of metacompilers is closely tied with the history of SIG/PLAN Working group 1 on Syntax Driven Compilers. The group was started primarily through the effort of Howard Metcalfe in the Los Angeles area. In the fall of 1962, Howard Metcalfe designed two compiler-writing interpreters. One used a bottom-to-top analysis technique based on a method described by Ledley and Wilson. The other used a top-to-bottom approach based on work by Glennie to generate random English sentences from a context-free grammar.\nAt the same time, Val Schorre described two \"meta machines\", one generative and one analytic. The generative machine was implemented and produced random algebraic expressions. Meta I the first metacompiler was implemented by Schorre on an IBM 1401 at UCLA in January 1963. His original interpreters and metamachines were written directly in a pseudo-machine language. META II, however, was written in a higher-level metalanguage able to describe its own compilation into the pseudo-machine language.\nLee Schmidt at Bolt, Beranek, and Newman wrote a metacompiler in March 1963 that utilized a CRT display on the time-sharing PDP-l. This compiler produced actual machine code rather than interpretive code and was partially bootstrapped from Meta I.\nSchorre bootstrapped Meta II from Meta I during the spring of 1963. The paper on the refined metacompiler system presented at the 1964 Philadelphia ACM conference is the first paper on a metacompiler available as a general reference. The syntax and implementation technique of Schorre's system laid the foundation for most of the systems that followed. The system was implemented on a small 1401, and was used to implement a small ALGOL-like language.\nMany similar systems immediately followed.\nRoger Rutman of AC Delco developed and implemented LOGIK, a language for logical design simulation, on the IBM 7090 in January 1964. This compiler used an algorithm that produced efficient code for Boolean expressions.\nAnother paper in the 1964 ACM proceedings describes http://, developed by http:// and Johnson at UCLA for the IBM 7090. Meta III represents an attempt to produce efficient machine code, for a large class of languages. Meta III was implemented completely in assembly language. Two compilers were written in Meta III, CODOL, a compiler-writing demonstration compiler, and PUREGOL, a dialect of ALGOL 60. (It was pure gall to call it ALGOL).\nLate in 1964, Lee Schmidt bootstrapped the metacompiler EQGEN, from the PDP-l to the Beckman 420. EQGEN was a logic equation generating language.\nIn 1964, System Development Corporation began a major effort in the development of metacompilers. This effort includes powerful metacompilers, Bookl, and Book2 written in Lisp which have extensive tree-searching and backup ability. An outgrowth of one of the Q-32 systems at SDC is Meta 5. The Meta 5 system incorporates backup of the input stream and enough other facilities to parse any context-sensitive language. This system was successfully released to a wide number of users and had many string-manipulation applications other than compiling. It has many elaborate push-down stacks, attribute setting and testing facilities, and output mechanisms. That Meta 5 successfully translates JOVIAL programs to PL/I programs demonstrates its power and flexibility.\nRobert McClure at Texas Instruments invented a compiler-compiler called TMG (presented in 1965). TMG was used to create early compilers for programming languages like B, PL/I and ALTRAN. Together with metacompiler of Val Schorre, it was an early inspiration for the last chapter of Donald Knuth's \"The Art of Computer Programming\".\nThe LOT system was developed during 1966 at Stanford Research Institute and was modeled very closely after Meta II. It had new special-purpose constructs allowing it to generate a compiler which could in turn, compile a subset of PL/I. This system had extensive statistic-gathering facilities and was used to study the characteristics of top-down analysis.\nSIMPLE is a specialized translator system designed to aid the writing of pre-processors for PL/I, SIMPLE, written in PL/I, is composed of three components: An executive, a syntax analyzer and a semantic constructor.\nThe TREE-META compiler was developed at Stanford Research Institute in Menlo Park, California. April 1968. The early metacompiler history is well documented in the http:// TREE META paralleled some of the SDC developments. Unlike earlier metacompilers it separated the semantics processing from the syntax processing. The syntax rules contained tree building operations that combined recognized language elements with tree nodes. The tree structure representation of the input was then processed by a simple form of unparse rules. The unparse rules used node recognition and attribute testing that when matched resulted in the associated action being performed. In addition like tree element could also be tested in an unparse rule. Unparse rules were also a recursive language being able to call unparse rules passing elements of thee tree before the action of the unparse rule was performed.\nThe concept of the metamachine originally put forth by Glennie is so simple that three hardware versions have been designed and one actually implemented. The latter at Washington University in St. Louis. This machine was built from macro-modular components and has for instructions the codes described by Schorre.\nCWIC (Compiler for Writing and Implementing Compilers) is the last known Schorre metacompiler. It was developed at Systems Development Corporation by Erwin Book, Dewey Val Schorre and Steven J. Sherman With the full power of (lisp 2) a list processing language optimizing algorithms could operate on syntax generated lists and trees before code generation. CWIC also had a symbol table built into the language.\nWith the resurgence of domain-specific languages and the need for parser generators which are easy to use, easy to understand, and easy to maintain, metacompilers are becoming a valuable tool for advanced software engineering projects.\nOther examples of parser generators in the yacc vein are ANTLR, Coco/R, CUP, GNU Bison, Eli, FSL, SableCC, SID (Syntax Improving Device), and JavaCC. While useful, pure parser generators only address the parsing part of the problem of building a compiler. Tools with broader scope, such as PQCC, Coco/R and DMS Software Reengineering Toolkit provide considerable support for more difficult post-parsing activities such as semantic analysis, code optimization and generation.\nSchorre metalanguages.\nThe earliest Schorre metacompilers, META I and META II, were developed by D. Val Schorre at UCLA. Other Schorre based metacompilers followed. Each adding improvements to language analysis and/or code generation.\nIn programming it is common to use the programming language name to refer to both the compiler and the programming language, the context distinguishing the meaning. A C++ program is compiled using a C++ compiler. That also applies in the following. For example, META II is both the compiler and the language.\nThe metalanguages in the Schorre line of metacompilers are functional programming languages that use top down grammar analyzing syntax equations having embedded output transformation constructs.\nA syntax equation:\nis a compiled \"test\" function returning \"success\" or \"failure\". &lt;name&gt; is the function name. &lt;body&gt; is a form of logical expression consisting of tests that may be grouped, have alternates, and output productions. A \"test\" is like a \"bool\" in other languages, \"success\" being \"true\" and \"failure\" being \"false\".\nDefining a programming language analytically top down is natural. For example, a program could be defined as:\nDefining a program as a sequence of zero or more declaration(s).\nIn the Schorre META X languages there is a driving rule. The program rule above is an example of a driving rule. The program rule is a \"test\" function that calls declaration, a \"test\" rule, that returns \"success\" or \"failure\". The $ loop operator repeatedly calling declaration until \"failure\" is returned. The $ operator is always successful, even when there are zero declaration. Above program would always return success. (In CWIC a long fail can bypass declaration. A long-fail is part of the backtracking system of CWIC)\nThe character sets of these early compilers were limited. The character / was used for the alternant (or) operator. \"A or B\" is written as A / B. Parentheses ( ) are used for grouping.\n A (B / C)\nDescribes a construct of A followed by B or C. As a boolean expression it would be\n A \"and\" (B \"or\" C)\nA sequence X Y has an implied X and Y meaning. ( ) are grouping and / the or operator. The order of evaluation is always left to right as an input character sequence is being specified by the ordering of the tests.\nSpecial operator words whose first character is a \".\" are used for clarity. .EMPTY is used as the last alternate when no previous alternant need be present.\n X (A / B / .EMPTY)\nIndicates that X is optionally followed by A or B. This is a specific characteristic of these metalanguages being programming languages. Backtracking is avoided by the above. Other compiler constructor systems may have declared the three possible sequences and left it up to the parser to figure it out.\nThe characteristics of the metaprogramming metalanguages above are common to all Schorre metacompilers and those derived from them.\nMETA I.\nMETA I was a hand compiled metacompiler used to compile META II. Little else is known of META I except that the initial compilation of META II produced nearly identical code to that of the hand coded META I compiler.\nMETA II.\nEach rule consists optionally of tests, operators, and output productions. A rule attempts to match some part of the input program source character stream returning success or failure. On success the input is advanced over matched characters. On failure the input is not advanced.\nOutput productions produced a form of assembly code directly from a syntax rule.\nTREE-META.\nTREE-META introduced tree building operators :&lt;\"node_name\"&gt; and [&lt;\"number\"&gt;] moving the output production transforms to unparsed rules. The tree building operators were used in the grammar rules directly transforming the input into an abstract syntax tree. Unparse rules are also test functions that matched tree patterns. Unparse rules are called from a grammar rule when an abstract syntax tree is to be transformed into output code. The building of an abstract syntax tree and unparse rules allowed local optimizations to be performed by analyzing the parse tree.\nMoving of output productions to the unparse rules made a clear separation of grammar analysis and code production. This made the programming easier to read and understand.\nCWIC.\nIn 1968\u20131970, Erwin Book, Dewey Val Schorre, and Steven J. Sherman developed CWIC. (Compiler for Writing and Implementing Compilers) at System Development Corporation http://,\nCWIC is a compiler development system composed of three special-purpose, domain specific, languages, each intended to permit the description of certain aspects of translation in a straight forward manner. The syntax language is used to describe the recognition of source text and the construction from it to an intermediate tree structure. The generator language is used to describe the transformation of the tree into appropriate object language.\nThe syntax language follows Dewey Val Schorre's previous line of metacompilers. It most resembles TREE-META having tree building operators in the syntax language. The unparse rules of TREE-META are extended to work with the object based generator language based on LISP 2.\nCWIC includes three languages:\nGenerators language.\nGenerators Language had semantics similar to Lisp. The parse tree was thought of as a recursive list. The general form of a Generator Language function is:\nThe code to process a given tree included the features of a general purpose programming language, plus a form: &lt;stuff&gt;, which would emit (stuff) onto the output file. \nA generator call may be used in the unparse_rule. The generator is passed the element of unparse_rule pattern in which it is placed and its return values are listed in (). For example:\nThat is, if the parse tree looks like (ADD[&lt;something1&gt;,&lt;something2&gt;]), expr_gen(x) would be called with &lt;something1&gt; and return x. A variable in the unparse rule is a local variable that can be used in the production_code_generator. expr_gen(y) is called with &lt;something2&gt; and returns y. Here is a generator call in an unparse rule is passed the element in the position it occupies. Hopefully in the above x and y will be registers on return. The last transforms is intended to load an atomic into a register and return the register. The first production would be used to generate the 360 \"AR\" (Add Register) instruction with the appropriate values in general registers. The above example is only a part of a generator. Every generator expression evaluates to a value that con then be further processed. The last transform could just as well have been written as:\nIn this case load returns its first parameter, the register returned by getreg(). the functions load and getreg are other CWIC generators.\nCWIC addressed domain-specific languages before the term domain-specific language existed.\nFrom the authors of CWIC:\n\"A metacompiler assists the task of compiler-building by automating its non creative aspects, those aspects that are the same regardless of the language which the produced compiler is to translate. This makes possible the design of languages which are appropriate to the specification of a particular problem. It reduces the cost of producing processors for such languages to a point where it becomes economically feasible to begin the solution of a problem with language design.\"\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70098", "revid": "2414730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70098", "title": "Data logging", "text": ""}
{"id": "70099", "revid": "153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70099", "title": "Parser generator", "text": ""}
{"id": "70100", "revid": "1320128655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70100", "title": "Log", "text": "Log most often refers to:\nLog, LOG or LoG may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70101", "revid": "31526994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70101", "title": "National Rifle Association", "text": "American nonprofit organization\nThe National Rifle Association of America (NRA) is a gun rights advocacy group based in the United States. Founded in 1871 to advance rifle marksmanship, the modern NRA has become a prominent gun rights lobbying organization while continuing to teach firearm safety and competency. The organization also publishes several magazines and sponsors competitive marksmanship events. The group claimed nearly 5 million members as of December 2018,[ [update]] though that figure has not been independently confirmed.\nThe NRA is among the most influential advocacy groups in U.S. politics. The NRA Institute for Legislative Action (NRA-ILA) is its lobbying division, which manages its political action committee (PAC), the Political Victory Fund (PVF). Over its history, the organization has influenced legislation, participated in or initiated lawsuits, and endorsed or opposed various candidates at local, state, and federal levels. Some notable lobbying efforts by the NRA-ILA are the Firearm Owners Protection Act, which lessened restrictions of the Gun Control Act of 1968, and the Dickey Amendment, which blocks the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) from using federal funds to advocate for gun control.\nStarting in the mid- to late 1970s, the NRA has been increasingly criticized by gun control and gun rights advocacy groups, political commentators, and politicians. This criticism began following changes in the NRA's organizational policies, following what is now referred to as the Revolt at Cincinnati at the 1977 NRA annual convention. The changes, which deposed former NRA executive vice president Maxwell Rich and included new organizational bylaws, have been described as moving the organization away from its previous focuses of \"hunting, conservation, and marksmanship\" and toward a focus on the defense of the right to bear arms. The organization has been the focus of intense criticism in the aftermath of high-profile shootings, such as the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting and the Parkland High School shooting, after both of which they suggested adding armed security guards to schools.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nA few months after the Civil War began in 1861, a national rifle association was proposed by Americans in England. In a letter that was sent to President Abraham Lincoln and published in \"The New York Times\", R.G. Moulton and R.B. Perry recommended forming an organization similar to the National Rifle Association in Britain, which had formed a year and a half earlier. They suggested making a shooting range, perhaps on the base on Staten Island, and were offering Whitworth rifles for prizes for the first shooting competition with those rifles. They suggested a provisional committee to start the Association which would include: President Lincoln, Secretary of War, officers, and other prominent New Yorkers.\nThe \"National Rifle Association of America\" was chartered in the State of New York on November 17, 1871 by \"Army and Navy Journal\" editor William Conant Church and Captain George Wood Wingate. On November 25, 1871, the group voted to elect its first corporate officers. Union Army Civil War General Ambrose Burnside, who had worked as a Rhode Island gunsmith, was elected president. When Burnside resigned on August 1, 1872, Church succeeded him as president.\nUnion Army records for the Civil War indicate that its troops fired about 1,000 rifle shots for each Confederate hit, causing General Burnside to lament his recruits: \"Out of ten soldiers who are perfect in drill and the manual of arms, only one knows the purpose of the sights on his gun or can hit the broad side of a barn.\" The generals attributed this to the use of volley tactics, devised for earlier, less accurate smoothbore muskets.\nRecognizing a need for better training, Wingate sent emissaries to Canada, the United Kingdom, and Germany to observe militia and armies' marksmanship training programs. With plans provided by Wingate, the New York Legislature funded the construction of a modern range at Creedmoor, Long Island, for long-range shooting competitions. The range officially opened on June 21, 1873. The Central Railroad of Long Island established a railway station nearby, with trains running from Hunter's Point, with connecting boat service to 34th Street and the East River, allowing access from New York City. \nAfter beating England and Scotland to win the Elcho Shield in 1873 at Wimbledon, then a village outside London, the Irish Rifle Team issued a challenge through the \"New York Herald\" to riflemen of the United States to raise a team for a long-range match to determine an Irish-American championship. A team was organized through the subsidiary \"Amateur Club of New York City\". Remington Arms and Sharps Rifle Manufacturing Company produced breech-loading weapons for the team. Although muzzle-loading rifles had long been considered more accurate, eight American riflemen won the 1874 Irish-American Match firing breech-loading rifles. Publicity of the event generated by the \"New York Herald\" helped to establish breech-loading firearms as suitable for military marksmanship training, and promoted the NRA to national prominence.\nIn 1875, the NRA issued a challenge for an international rifle match as part of the 1876 Centennial celebrations of the founding of the nation. Australia, Ireland, Scotland and Canada accepted the challenge, and the Centennial Trophy was commissioned from Tiffany &amp; Co. (later known as the \"Palma Trophy\"). The United States won the 1876 match, and the Palma Match went on to be contested every four years as the World Long Range Rifle Championships.\nRifle clubs.\nThe NRA organized rifle clubs in other states, and many state National Guard organizations sought NRA advice to improve members' marksmanship. Wingate's marksmanship manual evolved into the United States Army marksmanship instruction program. Former president Ulysses S. Grant served as the NRA's eighth president and General Philip H. Sheridan as its ninth. The US Congress created the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice in 1901 to include representatives from the NRA, National Guard, and United States military services. A program of annual rifle and pistol competitions was authorized, and included a national match open to military and civilian shooters. In 1907, NRA headquarters moved to Washington, D.C. to facilitate the organization's advocacy efforts. Springfield Armory and Rock Island Arsenal began the manufacture of M1903 Springfield rifles for civilian members of the NRA in 1910. The director of civilian marksmanship began manufacture of M1911 pistols for NRA members in August 1912. Until 1927, the United States Department of War provided free ammunition and targets to civilian rifle clubs with a minimum membership of ten United States citizens at least 16 years of age.\n1934\u20131970s.\nAfter the passage of the National Firearms Act (NFA) of 1934, the first federal gun-control law in the US, the NRA formed its Legislative Affairs Division to update members with facts and analysis of upcoming bills. Karl Frederick, NRA president in 1934, during congressional NFA hearings testified \"I have never believed in the general practice of carrying weapons. I seldom carry one. I have when I felt it was desirable to do so for my own protection. I know that applies in most of the instances where guns are used effectively in self-defense or in places of business and in the home. I do not believe in the general promiscuous toting of guns. I think it should be sharply restricted and only under licenses.\" Four years later, the NRA backed the Federal Firearms Act of 1938.\nThe NRA supported the NFA along with the Gun Control Act of 1968 (GCA), which together created a system to federally license gun dealers and established restrictions on particular categories and classes of firearms. The organization opposed a national firearms registry, an initiative favored by then-President Lyndon Johnson.\n1970s\u20132000s.\nUntil the 1970s, the NRA was nonpartisan. Previously, the NRA mainly focused on sportsmen, hunters, and target shooters. During the 1970s, it became increasingly aligned with the Republican Party. After 1977, the organization expanded its membership by focusing heavily on political issues and forming coalitions with conservative politicians. Most of these are Republicans.\nHowever, the passage of the GCA galvanized a growing number of NRA gun rights activists, including Harlon Carter. In 1975, it began to focus more on politics and established its lobbying arm, the Institute for Legislative Action (NRA-ILA), with Carter as director. The next year, its political action committee (PAC), the Political Victory Fund, was created in time for the 1976 elections. The 1977 annual convention was a defining moment for the organization and came to be known as \"The Cincinnati Revolution\" (or as the Cincinnati Coup, the Cincinnati Revolt, or the Revolt at Cincinnati). Leadership planned to relocate NRA headquarters to Colorado and to build a $30\u00a0million recreational facility in New Mexico, but activists within the organization, whose central concern was Second Amendment rights, defeated the incumbents (i.e. Maxwell Rich) and elected Carter as executive director and Neal Knox as head of the NRA-ILA. Insurgents including Carter and Knox had demanded new leadership in part because they blamed incumbent leaders for existing gun control legislation like the GCA and believed that no compromise should be made.\nWith a goal to weaken the GCA, Knox's ILA successfully lobbied Congress to pass the Firearm Owners Protection Act (FOPA) of 1986 and worked to reduce the powers of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF). In 1982, Knox was ousted as director of the ILA, but began mobilizing outside the NRA framework and continued to promote opposition to gun control laws.\nAt the 1991 national convention, Knox's supporters were elected to the board and named staff lobbyist Wayne LaPierre as the executive vice president. The NRA focused its attention on the gun control policies of the Clinton administration. Knox again lost power in 1997, as he lost reelection to a coalition of moderate leaders who supported movie star Charlton Heston, despite Heston's past support of gun control legislation.\nIn 1994, the NRA unsuccessfully opposed the Federal Assault Weapons Ban (AWB), but successfully lobbied for the ban's 2004 expiration. Heston was elected president in 1998 and became a highly visible spokesman for the organization. In an effort to improve the NRA's image, Heston presented himself as the voice of reason in contrast to Knox.\n2018\u2013present.\nAckerman McQueen lawsuit.\nIn April 2019, the group unexpectedly sued its longtime public relations firm Ackerman McQueen, which was responsible for two decades of aggressive gun-rights advertising on behalf of the NRA. The lawsuit alleges that the firm refused to turn over financial records to support its billings to the NRA, which amounted to $40 million in 2017. The lawsuit questioned recent programming on NRATV, an online channel operated by Ackerman, which has taken political positions unrelated to the NRA's traditional focus on gun-related issues. There were also concerns about possible conflicts of interest, such as the $1 million contract to host NRATV between Ackerman and NRA president Oliver North. Leading up to the NRA's 2019 national convention in April, there were reports that North and LaPierre were at odds, with North demanding that LaPierre resign and LaPierre accusing North of extortion. At the convention a letter was read from North, saying he had been told he would not be granted a second term as NRA president and adding that he intended to create a committee to investigate allegations of financial mismanagement. A subsequent resolution to oust LaPierre over \"highly suspect\" financial practices was hotly debated for an hour before members voted not to discuss financial issues in public and to refer the resolution to the NRA board. On June 25, 2019, the NRA severed all ties with Ackerman McQueen and shut down the NRATV operation.\n2024 New York State corruption verdict; 2021 bankruptcy filing.\nFollowing an 18-month investigation, on August 6, 2020, New York attorney general Letitia James filed a civil lawsuit against the NRA, alleging fraud, financial misconduct, and misuse of charitable funds by some of its executives, including its long-time former CEO and EVP Wayne LaPierre, treasurer Wilson Phillips, former chief of staff and current executive director of general operations Joshua Powell, and general counsel and secretary John Frazer. The suit called for the dissolution of the NRA as being \"fraught with fraud and abuse\". On the same date, Attorney General for the District of Columbia Karl Racine filed a lawsuit against the NRA for misusing charitable funds.\nOn January 15, 2021, the NRA announced in a press release that it and one of its subsidiaries had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of Texas in Dallas. It also announced that it would reincorporate in Texas, subject to court approval, although its headquarters in Fairfax, Virginia, would not move. During the bankruptcy trial LaPierre stated that he had kept the bankruptcy filing secret from the NRA's board of directors and most of its senior officials. LaPierre's spending of NRA funds on himself and his wife, such as upscale suits, chartered jet flights, and a traveling \"glam squad\" for his wife, became a subject of testimony in the eleven-day Texas proceedings.\nOn May 11, 2021, Judge Harlin Hale of the federal bankruptcy court of the Northern District of Texas, dismissed the bankruptcy petition without prejudice, describing that it \"was not filed in good faith\", warning that if the NRA chose to file a new bankruptcy case, Hale's court would immediately revisit concerns about \"disclosure, transparency, secrecy, conflicts of interest of litigation counsel\", which could lead to the appointment of a trustee to oversee the organization's affairs. Hale doubted that the NRA was \"faced with financial difficulties\", instead ruling that the true purposes of the lawsuit were \"to gain an unfair litigation advantage\" against the New York Attorney General, and to \"avoid\" regulation from New York.\nOn March 2, 2022, New York state court in Manhattan ruled against Letitia James's effort to break up the NRA while allowing the portion of the legal actions against the NRA's leadership to continue. The judge found that dissolving the NRA would have a negative impact on the free speech and assembly rights of the organization's members. It was also found that the NRA as an organization did not benefit from the alleged misconduct of its leadership and \"less intrusive\" remedies against NRA officials could be sought instead.\nIn February 2024, NRA leaders were found guilty of financial misconduct and corruption by a Manhattan jury.\nLobbying and political activity.\nWhen the National Rifle Association of America was officially incorporated on November 16, 1871, its primary goal was to \"promote and encourage rifle shooting on a scientific basis\". The NRA's website says the organization is \"America's longest-standing civil rights organization\".\nOn February 7, 1872, the NRA created a committee to lobby for legislation in the interest of the organization. Its first lobbying effort was to petition the New York State legislature for $25,000 to purchase land to set up a range. Within three months, the legislation had passed and had been signed into law by Governor John T. Hoffman.\nIn 1934, the National Rifle Association created a Legislative Affairs Division and testified in front of Congress in support of the first substantial federal gun control legislation in the US, the National Firearms Act.\nThe Institute for Legislative Action (NRA-ILA), the lobbying branch of the NRA, was established in 1975. According to political scientists John M. Bruce and Clyde Wilcox, the NRA shifted its focus in the late 1970s to incorporate political advocacy, and started seeing its members as political resources rather than just as recipients of goods and services. Despite the impact on the volatility of membership, the politicization of the NRA has been consistent and its PAC, the Political Victory Fund established in 1976, ranked as \"one of the biggest spenders in congressional elections\" as of 1998.\nA 1999 \"Fortune\" magazine survey said that lawmakers and their staffers considered the NRA the most powerful lobbying organization three years in a row. Chris W. Cox was the NRA's chief lobbyist and principal political strategist, a position he held from 2002 until 2019. In 2012, 88% of Republicans and 11% of Democrats in Congress had received an NRA PAC contribution at some point in their career. Of the members of the Congress that convened in 2013, 51% received funding from the NRA PAC within their political careers, and 47% received NRA money in their most recent race. According to Lee Drutman, political scientist and senior fellow at the Sunlight Foundation, \"It is important to note that these contributions are probably a better measure of allegiance than of influence.\"\nInternationally, the NRA opposes the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). It has opposed Canadian gun registry, supported Brazilian gun rights, and criticized Australian gun laws.\nIn 2016, the NRA raised a record $366\u00a0million and spent $412\u00a0million for political activities. The NRA also maintains a PAC which is excluded from these figures. The organization donated to congressional races for both Republicans (223) and Democrats (9) to candidates for Congress.\nThe NRA has been described as influential in shaping American gun control policy. The organization influences legislators' voting behavior through its financial resources and ability to mobilize its large membership. The organization has not lost a major battle over gun control legislation since the 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban. At the federal level, the NRA successfully lobbied Congress in the mid-1990s to effectively halt governments-sponsored research into the public health effects of firearms, and to ensure the passage of legislation in 2005 largely immunizing gun manufacturers and dealers from lawsuits. At the same time, the NRA stopped efforts at the federal level to increase regulation of firearms. At the state and local level, the NRA successfully campaigned to deregulate guns, for example by pushing state governments to eliminate the ability of local governments to regulate guns and removing restrictions on guns in public places (such as bars and campuses).\nElections.\nThe NRA Political Victory Fund (PVF) PAC was established in 1976 to challenge gun-control candidates and to support gun-rights candidates. An NRA \"A+\" candidate is one who has \"not only an excellent voting record on all critical NRA issues, but who has also made a vigorous effort to promote and defend the Second Amendment\", whereas an NRA \"F\" candidate is a \"true enemy of gun owners' rights\".\nThe NRA endorsed a presidential candidate for the first time in 1980, backing Ronald Reagan over Jimmy Carter. The NRA has also made endorsements even when it viewed both candidates positively. For example, in the 2006 Pennsylvania Senate elections, the NRA endorsed Rick Santorum over Bob Casey Jr., even though they both had an \"A\" rating. Despite this endorsement, Santorum lost to Casey.\nRepublicans joined forces with the NRA and used the recently passed gun control measures to motivate voters in the 1994 midterm elections. In 1993, with Democrats in the majority of both the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives, President Bill Clinton signed the Brady Bill, named after the press secretary who was shot and paralyzed during the 1981 assassination attempt of President Reagan. The Brady Bill created a mechanism for background checks in order to enforce the GCA of 1968 and prevent criminals and minors from purchasing guns. In addition, the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 included a 10-year ban on the sale of assault weapons. In 1994, the ban was favored by 78% of Americans according to a CBS poll.\nAccording to Yale professor Reva Siegel, during the 1994 midterm elections, the NRA \"spent more than $3.2\u00a0million on GOP campaigns and helped win nineteen of twenty-four 'priority' races the organization targeted, leading to a House with a majority of members who were 'A-rated' by the NRA.\" Groups like the NRA seeking to expand interpretation of the Second Amendment to include an individual right to a gun, coincided with the 'New Right', a political movement concerned with gun control, and social issues such as school prayer and abortion. Leader of the new House Majority Leader Newt Gingrich stated that support for or against gun control defined ones partisan identity. NRA leader Knox echoed this sentiment, assuring members that Republicans would be defenders of Second Amendment rights and repeal recently passed gun control legislation.\nThe NRA spent $40\u00a0million on United States elections in 2008, including $10\u00a0million in opposition to the election of Senator Barack Obama in the 2008 presidential campaign.\nIn 2010, \"Citizens United v. FEC\" was decided by the U.S. Supreme Court, paving the way for dark money to flow into U.S. elections. As of mid-September 2018, the NRA has become one of just 15 groups which account for three-quarters of the anonymous cash.\nThe NRA spent over $360,000 in the Colorado recall election of 2013, which resulted in the ouster of state senators John Morse and Angela Giron. \"The Huffington Post\" called the recall \"a stunning victory for the National Rifle Association and gun rights activists.\" Morse and Giron helped to pass expanded background checks and ammunition magazine capacity limits after the 2012 Aurora, Colorado, and Sandy Hook, Connecticut, shootings.\nOn May 20, 2016, the NRA endorsed Donald Trump in the 2016 US presidential election. The timing of the endorsement, before Trump became the official Republican nominee, was unusual, as the NRA typically endorses Republican nominees towards the end of the general election. The NRA said its early endorsement was due to the strong gun control stance of Hillary Clinton In the 2016 United States presidential election the NRA reported spending more than $30\u00a0million in support of Donald Trump, more than any other independent group in that election, and three times what it spent in the 2012 presidential election.\nRussian influence.\nInvestigations by the FBI and Special Counsel Robert Mueller resulted in indictments of Russian nationals on charges of developing and exploiting ties with the NRA to influence US politics by using the NRA to gain access to Republican politicians. Russian politician and gun-rights activist Aleksandr Torshin, a lifetime NRA member who is close to Russian president Vladimir Putin, was suspected by some of illegally funneling money through the NRA to benefit Trump's 2016 campaign. In May 2018, Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee released a report stating it had obtained \"a number of documents that suggest the Kremlin used the National Rifle Association as a means of accessing and assisting Mr. Trump and his campaign\" through Torshin and his assistant Maria Butina, and that \"The Kremlin may also have used the NRA to secretly fund Mr. Trump's campaign.\"\nButina was arrested on July 15, 2018, and charged with conspiring to act as an unregistered agent of the Russian Federation and using Republican operative Paul Erickson for cover and connections as she developed an influence operation designed to \"advance the interests of the Russian Federation.\" The FBI acquired an email Erickson had sent to an acquaintance in 2016 stating, \"Unrelated to specific presidential campaigns, I've been involved in securing a VERY private line of communication between the Kremlin and key [GOP] leaders through, of all conduits, the [NRA].\" According to the affidavit, from 2015 through at least February 2017, Butina worked at the direction of Russian who was a high level government official and official at the Russian Central Bank. In December, Butina agreed in a plea deal to cooperate with federal prosecutors. Butina later denied accusations that she was a Russian agent.\nIn 2018, in a letter sent to Sen. Ron Wyden and addressed to Congress, the NRA acknowledged it had accepted approximately $2,000 in membership dues and magazine subscriptions and $525 in contributions from 23 Russian nationals or people associated with Russian addresses since 2015. In an earlier news interview the NRA's lawyers stated that the NRA had received less than $1000 from only one Russian donor. According to a Wyden aide, the NRA letter would be referred to the Federal Election Commission. NRA's general counsel John C. Frazer wrote to Senator Wyden: \"While we do receive some contributions from foreign individuals and entities, those contributions are made directly to the NRA for lawful purposes. Our review of our records has found no foreign donations in connection with a United States election, either directly or through a conduit.\"\nAccording to the minority Democratic staff of the Senate Finance Committee the NRA acted as \"a foreign asset\" of Russia during the 2016 election, putting its tax exempt status at risk. The allegations were made in a 77-page report on an 18-month investigation released on September 27, 2019. An 18-page rebuttal by majority committee Republicans said the Democratic report demonstrated \"little or nothing\".\nNeither the FBI nor special counsel investigations found any Russian money funneling. The FBI investigation resulted in the conviction of Butina, not on any money-related charges, and the Mueller Report does not mention the NRA. The Federal Election Commission has dismissed allegations of Russian money funneling as unsupported by the evidence.\nThe ATF and Senate confirmations.\nThe NRA has for decades sought to limit the ability of the ATF to regulate firearms by blocking nominees and lobbying against reforms that would increase the ability of the ATF to track gun crimes. For instance, the NRA opposed ATF reforms to trace guns to owners electronically; the ATF currently does so through paper records. In 2006, the NRA lobbied US Representative F. James Sensenbrenner to add a provision to the Patriot Act reauthorization that requires Senate confirmation of ATF director nominees. For seven years after that, the NRA lobbied against and \"effectively blocked\" every presidential nominee. First was President George W. Bush's choice, Michael Sullivan, whose confirmation was held up in 2008 by three Republican senators who said the ATF was hostile to gun dealers. One of the senators was Larry Craig, who was an NRA board member during his years in the Senate. Confirmation of President Obama's first nominee, Andrew Traver, stalled in 2011 after the NRA expressed strong opposition. Some Senators resisted confirming another Obama nominee, B. Todd Jones, because of the NRA's opposition, until 2013, when the NRA said it was neutral on Jones' nomination and that it would not include the confirmation vote in its grading system. Dan Freedman, national editor for Hearst Newspapers' Washington, D.C. bureau, stated that it, \"clears the way for senators from pro-gun states\u2014Democrats as well as at least some Republicans\u2014to vote for Jones without fear of political repercussions\".\nIn 2014, Obama weighed the idea of delaying a vote on his nominee for Surgeon General, Vivek Murthy, when Republicans and some conservative Democrats criticized Murthy, after the NRA opposed him. In February, the NRA wrote to Senate leaders Harry Reid and Mitch McConnell to say that it \"strongly opposes\" Murthy's confirmation, and told \"The Washington Times\"' Emily Miller that it would score the vote in its PAC grading system. \"The NRA decision\", wrote Miller, \"will undoubtedly make vulnerable Democrats up for reelection in the midterms reconsider voting party line on this nominee.\" \"The Wall Street Journal\" stated on March 15, \"Crossing the NRA to support Dr. Murthy could be a liability for some of the Democrats running for re-election this year in conservative-leaning states\". Murthy's nomination received broad support from over 100 medical and public health organizations in the U.S., including the American College of Physicians, the American Public Health Association, the American Cancer Society, the American Heart Association and the American Diabetes Association. On December 15, 2014, Murthy's appointment as Surgeon General was approved by the Senate.\nThe NRA also opposed the appointments of Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan as Supreme Court justices.\nLegislation.\nThe NRA initially opposed the 1934 National Firearms Act, but gave their support after several changes including the removal of pistols and revolvers and redefinition of machine gun, which regulated what were considered at the time \"gangster weapons\" such as machine guns, short-barreled rifles, short-barreled shotguns, and sound suppressors. However, the organization's position on suppressors has since changed.\nThe NRA supported the 1938 Federal Firearms Act (FFA) which established the federal firearms license (FFL) program. The FFA required all manufacturers and dealers of firearms who ship or receive firearms or ammunition in interstate or foreign commerce to have a license, and forbade them from transferring any firearm or most ammunition to any person interstate unless certain conditions were met.\nThe NRA supported and opposed parts of the Gun Control Act of 1968, which broadly regulated the firearms industry and firearms owners, primarily focusing on regulating interstate commerce in firearms by prohibiting interstate firearms transfers except among licensed manufacturers, dealers and importers. The law was supported by America's oldest manufacturers (Colt, Smith &amp; Wesson, etc.) in an effort to forestall even greater restrictions which were feared in response to recent domestic violence. The NRA supported elements of the law, such as those forbidding the sale of firearms to convicted criminals and the mentally ill.\nThe NRA influenced the writing of the Firearm Owners Protection Act and worked for its passage.\nIn 2004, the NRA opposed renewal of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994. The ban expired on September 13, 2004.\nIn 2005, President George W. Bush signed into law the NRA-backed Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act which partially shields firearms manufacturers and dealers from being held liable for negligence when crimes have been committed with their products. \nIn 2022, the NRA was involved in negotiations of Bipartisan Safer Communities Act but opposed it at the end of the negotiations. Enactment of the bill was the first major federal defeat for the NRA since the Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994.\nLitigation.\nIn November 2005, the NRA and other gun advocates filed a lawsuit challenging San Francisco Proposition H, which banned the ownership and sales of firearms. The NRA argued that the proposition overstepped local government authority and intruded into an area regulated by the state. The San Francisco County Superior Court agreed with the NRA position. The city appealed the court's ruling, but lost a 2008 appeal. In October 2008, San Francisco was forced to pay a $380,000 settlement to the National Rifle Association and other plaintiffs to cover the costs of litigating Proposition H.\nIn April 2006, New Orleans, Louisiana, police began returning to citizens guns that had been confiscated after Hurricane Katrina. The NRA, Second Amendment Foundation (SAF), and other groups agreed to drop a lawsuit against the city in exchange for the return.\nThe NRA filed an amicus brief with the Supreme Court in the 2008 landmark gun rights case of \"District of Columbia v Heller\". In a 5 to 4 vote, the Supreme Court ruled that the District of Columbia's gun laws were unconstitutional, and for the first time held that an individual's right to a gun was unconnected to service in a militia. Some legal scholars believe that the NRA was influential in altering the public's interpretation of the Second Amendment, providing the foundation for the majority's opinion in \"Heller\".\nIn 2009, the NRA again filed suit (\"Guy Montag Doe v. San Francisco Housing Authority\") in the city of San Francisco challenging the city's ban of guns in public housing. On January 14, 2009, the San Francisco Housing Authority reached a settlement with the NRA, which allows residents to possess legal firearms within a SFHA apartment building.\nIn 2010, the NRA sued the city of Chicago, Illinois, (\"McDonald v. Chicago\") and the Supreme Court ruled that like other substantive rights, the right to bear arms is incorporated via the Fourteenth Amendment to the Bill of Rights, and therefore applies to the states.\nIn March 2013, the NRA joined a federal lawsuit with other gun rights groups challenging New York's gun control law (the NY SAFE Act), arguing that Governor Andrew Cuomo \"usurped the legislative and democratic process\" in passing the law, which included restrictions on magazine capacity and expanding the state's assault weapons ban.\nIn November 2013, voters in Sunnyvale, California, passed an ordinance banning certain ammunition magazines along with three other firearm-related restrictions. The ordinance was passed by 66 percent in favor. The ordinance requires city residents to \"dispose, donate, or sell\" any magazine capable of holding more than ten rounds within a proscribed period of time once the measure takes effect. The following month, the NRA joined local residents in suing the city on second amendment grounds. A federal judge dismissed the suit three months later, upholding the Sunnyvale's ordinance.\nThe city of San Francisco then passed similar ordinances a short time later. The San Francisco Veteran Police Officers Association (SFVPOA), represented by NRA attorneys, filed a lawsuit challenging San Francisco's ban on the possession of high-capacity magazines, seeking an injunction. A federal judge denied the injunction in February 2014.\nIn 2014, the NRA lobbied for a bill in Pennsylvania which grants it and other advocacy groups legal standing to sue municipalities to overturn local firearm regulations passed in violation of a state law preempting such regulations, and which also allows the court to force cities to pay their legal fees. As soon as it became law, the NRA sued three cities: Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Lancaster. In Philadelphia, seven regulations the NRA sued to overturn included a ban on gun possession by those found to be a risk for harming themselves or others, and a requirement to report stolen guns to the police within twenty-four hours after discovery of the loss or theft. In Lancaster, a city of fewer than 60,000, mayor Rick Gray, who has chaired the pro-gun control group Mayors Against Illegal Guns, was also named in the suit. In that city, the NRA challenged an ordinance requiring gun owners to tell police when a firearm is lost or stolen within 72 hours or face jail time. The basis for the lawsuits is \"a 1974 state law that bars municipalities against passing restrictions that are pre-empted by state gun laws\". At least 20 Pennsylvania municipalities have rescinded regulations in response to threatened litigation.\nThe NRA has worked with the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) in opposing NSA collection of the call records of calls in the United States.\nOn September 4, 2019, the San Francisco Board of Supervisors passed a non-binding resolution which declared the NRA a domestic terrorist organization and said the city should \"take every reasonable step\" to limit vendors which do business with the city from also doing business with the NRA. On September 9, the NRA filed a lawsuit in response, accusing city officials of violating the organization's free speech rights by discriminating against the organization \"based on the viewpoint of their political speech.\" On September 23, mayor London Breed and city attorney Dennis Herrera announced in a memo that \"the city's contracting process and policies have not changed and will not change as a result of the resolution.\" On November 7, 2019, the NRA dropped their lawsuit against San Francisco. Los Angeles had passed a similar ordinance but the NRA won a preliminary injunction on December 11, 2019 and subsequently dropped the lawsuit after Los Angeles repealed the law.\nPrograms.\nThe National Rifle Association owns the National Firearms Museum in Fairfax County, Virginia, featuring exhibits on the evolution and history of firearms in America. In August 2013, the NRA National Sporting Arms Museum opened at an expansive Bass Pro Shops retail store in Springfield, Missouri. It displays almost 1,000 firearms, including historically significant firearms from the NRA and other collections. The NRA publishes a number of periodicals including \"American Rifleman\" and others.\nThe NRA sponsors a range of programs about firearm safety for children and adults, including a program for school-age children, the NRA's \"Eddie Eagle\". The organization issues credentials and trains firearm instructors.\nIn 1994, following disagreements between the NRA and athletes over control of the program of Olympic shooting sports, the US Olympic Committee recommended USA Shooting replace the NRA as the national governing body for Olympic shooting. The NRA dropped out just before the decision was announced, citing a lack of appreciation for their efforts.\nThe NRA supports marksmanship training as well as hosting the National Rifle and Pistol Matches at Camp Perry, events which are described by the El Paso Times as \"America's world series of competitive shooting\".\nIn 2014 the NRA temporarily moved the National Smallbore Matches to Bristol, Indiana in advance of Camp Perry hosting the 2015 Palma Match (Long Range World Championships). In 2015 it was announced the change was permanent. The move drew criticism from shooters as the Bristol ranges lacked affordable accommodation, trade stands per Camp Perry's \"Commercial Row\", or even interest from the NRA - whose own publications had only reported on the Camp Perry matches. A fall in participant numbers led to the foundation of the American Smallbore Shooting Association in 2016 as an apolitical match organiser to address the NRA's perceived lack of interest in smallbore competition shooting.\nThe National Rifle Association maintains ties with other organizations such as the Boy Scouts of America and 4-H and contributes to youth shooting programs.\nThe NRA hosts annual meetings. The 2018 meeting was held on May 3 in Dallas, Texas. More than 800 exhibitors and 80,000 people attended the event, making it the largest in NRA history. President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence addressed attendees.\nOrganizational structure and finances.\nLeadership.\nExecutive staff and spokespersons.\nFrom 1991 to 2024, Wayne LaPierre served as the organization's executive vice president, and functioned as the chief executive officer. LaPierre's compensation averaged $1\u00a0million per year and included a nearly $4\u00a0million retirement payout in 2015. Other previous notable holders of that office include: Milton Reckord, Floyd Lavinius Parks, Franklin Orth, Maxwell Rich, Harlon Carter, J. Warren Cassidy, and Gary Anderson.\nChris W. Cox was the executive director of the NRA's lobbying branch, the Institute for Legislative Action. He received more than $1.3\u00a0million in compensation in 2015. Kyle Weaver is executive director of general operations. Kayne B. Robinson is executive director of the General Operations Division and chairman of the Whittington Center.\nIn 2017, political commentator Dana Loesch was appointed as the NRA's national spokesperson, with the formal title of \"Special Assistant to the Executive Vice President for Public Communication.\" Loesch hosts \"The DL\" on NRATV and has featured prominently in other NRA-produced videos.\nActor Chuck Norris serves as the honorary chairman for the association's voter registration campaign. Colion Noir hosts a video program on the NRA's online video channel.\nIn May 2018, the NRA announced that Oliver North would become president of the organization. North served one tumultuous term, marked by multiple legal battles and a power struggle with LaPierre; he was replaced by Carolyn D. Meadows on April 29, 2019.\nBoard of directors.\nThe NRA is governed by a board of 76 elected directors, 75 of whom serve three-year terms and one who is elected to serve as a cross-over director. The directors choose a president and other officers from among the membership, as well as the executive director of the NRA General Operations and the executive director of the NRA Institute for Legislative Action (NRA-ILA). In 2015, 71 members were white and 65 were male. More came from Texas than any other state. Only 7 percent of eligible members vote. Most board nominations are vetted by an appointed nine-member Nominating Committee. One member is George Kollitides of the Freedom Group. The nomination committee has been called \"kingmakers\" by MSNBC and Jeff Knox says \"the process is front-loaded to give incumbents and Nominating Committee candidates a significant advantage\".\nMembership.\nAccording to the NRA, their membership reached 5.5 million total members in 2018, a record high, and membership dues went from $128,209,303 in 2017 to $170,391,374 in 2018; an increase of $42,182,071, or 33 percent.\nA 2017 Pew Research Center study found that 19% of US gun owners consider themselves NRA members. Journalist Megan Wilson stated that the Pew study places membership at 14 million, far higher than the NRA's own report of 5\u00a0million. According to the NRA, some non-members typically claim to be members when surveyed, as a show of support.\nNotable members.\nNine US presidents have been NRA members. In addition to Grant, they are: Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush (who resigned in 1995), and Donald Trump. Three US vice presidents, two chief justices of the US Supreme Court, and several US congressmen, as well as legislators and officials of state governments are or have been members.\nCurrent or past members also include journalist Hunter S. Thompson, Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh, documentarian Michael Moore (who joined with the intent of dismantling the organization), actor Rick Schroder, and singer James Hetfield.\nInterconnected organizations.\nThe National Rifle Association is composed of several financially interconnected organizations under common leadership, including the NRA Institute for Legislative Action (NRA-ILA) which manages the NRA's political action committee and the NRA Civil Defense Fund which does \"pro bono\" legal work for people with cases involving Second Amendment rights. The NRA Civil Rights Defense Fund was established in 1978. Harlon Carter and Neal Knox were responsible for its founding.\nIn 1994, the Fund spent over $500,000 on legal fees to support legal cases involving guns and gun control measures. It donated $20,000 in 1996 for the defense of New York City resident Bernhard Goetz when he was sued by a man he shot and left paralyzed. It paid the legal bills in the case of Brian Aitken, a New Jersey resident sentenced to seven years in state prison for transporting guns without a carry permit. On December 20, 2010, Governor Chris Christie granted Aitken clemency and ordered Aitken's immediate release from prison.\nNRA Foundation.\nThe NRA Foundation is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization that raises and donates money to outdoors groups and others such as ROTC programs, 4-H and Boy Scouts. In 2010, the NRA Foundation distributed $21.2\u00a0million in grants for gun-related training and education programs: $12.6 million to the NRA itself, and the rest to community programs for hunters, competitive shooters, gun collectors, and law enforcement, and to women and youth groups. The foundation has no staff and pays no salaries.\nFriends of NRA is a program that raises money for the NRA Foundation. Since its inception in 1992, Friends of NRA has held over 17,600 events, reached over 3.2\u00a0million attendees and raised over $600\u00a0million for The NRA Foundation.\nPolitical Victory Fund (NRA-PVF).\nBy 1976, as the NRA became more politically oriented, the Political Victory Fund (NRA-PVF), a PAC, was established as a subsidiary to the NRA, to support NRA-friendly politicians. Chris W. Cox, who is the NRA's chief lobbyist and principal political strategist, is also the NRA-PVF chairman. Through the NRA-PVF, the NRA began to rate political candidates on their positions on gun rights. An NRA \"A+\" candidate is one who has \"not only an excellent voting record on all critical NRA issues, but who has also made a vigorous effort to promote and defend the Second Amendment\", whereas an NRA \"F\" candidate is deemed a \"true enemy of gun owners' rights\".\nIn the 2008 elections, the PVF spent millions on \"direct campaign donations\" and \"grassroots operation\". In 2012, NRA-PVF income was $14.4\u00a0million and expenses were $16.1\u00a0million. By 2014, the NRA-PVF income rose to 21.9\u00a0million with expenses of 20.7\u00a0million.\nFinances.\nIn 2010, the NRA reported revenue of $227.8\u00a0million and expenses of $243.5\u00a0million, with revenue including roughly $115\u00a0million generated from fundraising, sales, advertising and royalties, and most of the rest from membership dues. Less than half of the NRA's income comes from membership dues and program fees; the majority is from contributions, grants, royalties, and advertising.\nCorporate donors include a variety of companies such as outdoors-supply and sporting-goods companies, and firearm manufacturers. From 2005 through 2011, the NRA received at least $14.8\u00a0million from more than 50 firearms-related firms. An April 2011 Violence Policy Center presentation stated that the NRA had received between $14.7\u00a0million and $38.9\u00a0million from the firearms industry since 2005. In 2008, Beretta exceeded $2\u00a0million in donations to the NRA, and in 2012 Smith &amp; Wesson gave more than $1\u00a0million. Sturm, Ruger &amp; Company raised $1.25\u00a0million through a program in which it donated $1 to the NRA-ILA for each gun it sold from May 2011 to May 2012. In a similar program, gun buyers and participating stores are invited to \"round up\" the purchase price to the nearest dollar as a voluntary contribution. According to the NRA's 2010 tax forms, the \"round-up\" funds have been allocated both to public-interest programs and to lobbying.\n2018 New York lawsuit.\nIn 2018, the NRA alleged in an official court document that it suffered tens of millions of dollars in damage from actions of Governor Andrew Cuomo and the State's financial regulator. The state's Department of Financial Services (DFS) was directed by the Cuomo administration to encourage institutions it oversees, insurance companies, banks and other financial services companies licensed in New York state, to review their business interactions with the NRA and \"other similar organizations\" and assess if they would pose \"reputational risk\". The NRA's suit states that Cuomo's actions violate the organization's first-amendment rights and the NRA had suffered tens of millions of dollars in financial losses. The ACLU has filed a brief with the Northern District of New York court supporting the NRA's case. The brief noted that if proven true, the allegations disclose an abuse of government regulatory authority to retaliate against a disfavored advocacy organization by imposing a burden on the NRA's ability to conduct lawful business.\nOn November 3, 2023, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the case \"National Rifle Association of America v. Vullo\" about whether the director of the New York DFS violated the First Amendment by instructing financial institutions not to do business with the NRA. The Court released its opinion on May 30, 2024, vacating the Second Circuit's decision and remanding the case to the lower court.\n2020 New York lawsuit.\nIn August 2020, on behalf of the State of New York, Attorney General Letitia James sued the NRA and four individuals involved with the organization: CEO Wayne LaPierre; former chief of staff and the executive director of general operations Joshua Powell; former treasurer and CFO Wilson \"Woody\" Phillips; and corporate secretary and general counsel John Frazer. James charged the organization with illegal conduct, stating that the NRA mismanaged funds and assets and failed to follow state and federal laws. The suit claims that money was diverted away from its charitable mission, and instead used to fund personal expenses for senior leadership, resulting in a loss to the NPO of $64 million over three years. While the NRA sought to dismiss the lawsuit, in June 2022, Manhattan judge Joel M. Cohen ruled that the lawsuit could move forward. NRA leadership was found guilty of corruption by a Manhattan jury in February 2024, with former vice-president and CEO LaPierre found to have cost the NRA $5.4 million in damages and ordered to pay restitution of $4.35 million.\nPublic opinion and image.\nA Reuters/Ipsos poll in April 2012 found that 82% of Republicans and 55% of Democrats saw the NRA \"in a positive light\". In seven of eight Gallup polls between 1993 and 2015, a majority of Americans reported holding a favorable opinion of the NRA. Its highest rating was at 60% favorability in 2005 (with 34% unfavorable), while its lowest rating was at 42% favorability in 1995 (with 51% unfavorable). In October 2015, 58% of Americans held a favorable opinion of the NRA, though there was a wide spread among political affiliations: 77% of conservatives, 56% of moderates and 30% of liberals held this view.\nA \"Washington Post\"/ABC News poll in January 2013 showed that only 36% of Americans had a favorable opinion of the NRA leadership.\nA 2017 poll conducted by the political action committee Americans for Responsible Solutions (since renamed to Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence), which supports gun control, exclusively questioned 661 gun owners. 26% of the respondents stated they were a member of the NRA. The ARS reported that less than 50% of gun owners polled believed the NRA represented their interests, while 67% of them somewhat or strongly agreed with the statement that it had been \"overtaken by lobbyists and the interests of gun manufacturers and lost its original purpose and mission.\" The NRA disputed the poll's veracity in an e-mail sent to \"Politico\", which had published the story.\nPolling trends since 2018 show a significant decline in NRA favorability. A 2018 NBC News/ Wall Street Journal poll found that \"for the first time since at least 2000, Americans hold a net unfavorable view of the NRA\"\u2014the poll showed respondents view of the NRA was 40% negative and 37% positive. The poll showed that compared to the same question in 2017, the favorability rating of the NRA overall dropped 5%, noting that the shift was largely due to favorability declines among certain demographics: married white women, urban residents, white women (overall), and moderate Republicans.\nA February 2018 Quinnipiac poll found that 51% of Americans believe that the policies supported by the NRA are bad for the U.S., a 4% increase since October 2017.\nThe NRA calls itself \"the oldest continuously operating civil liberties organization\" and is \"one of the largest and best-funded lobbying organizations\" in the United States. Its claim that it is one of the oldest civil rights organizations is disputed. While the NRA was founded in 1871, it did not pursue a gun rights agenda until 1934. The National Association for the Deaf (NAD, founded in 1880) and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP, founded in 1909) both originated as civil rights organizations according to other sources.\nCriticism.\nThe National Rifle Association has been criticized by newspaper editorial boards, gun control and gun rights advocacy groups, political commentators, and politicians. Democrats and liberals frequently criticize the organization. The NRA's oldest organized critics include the gun control advocacy groups the Brady Campaign, the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence (CSGV), and the Violence Policy Center (VPC). Twenty-first century groups include Everytown for Gun Safety (formerly Mayors Against Illegal Guns), Moms Demand Action, and Giffords.\nPolitical involvement.\nIn 1995, former US president George H. W. Bush resigned his life membership to the organization after receiving a National Rifle Association Institute of Legislative Action (NRA-ILA) fund-raising letter, signed by executive vice president Wayne LaPierre, that referred to ATF agents as \"jack-booted government thugs\". The NRA later apologized for the letter's language.\nIn December 2008, \"The New York Times\" editorial board criticized the NRA's attacks, which it called false and misleading, on Barack Obama's presidential campaign.\nAfter US president Donald Trump's election, the NRA closely aligned with him. At an event in February 2018, Trump said that he was a \"big fan of the NRA\" but said that \"doesn't mean we have to agree on everything.\"\nAlthough the NRA has previously donated to and endorsed Democratic candidates, it has become more closely affiliated with the Republican Party since the 1990s. In 2016, only two Democratic House candidates received donations from the NRA, compared to 115 in the 1992 elections, in a reflection of decreasing Democratic support for the NRA and its mission. Self-identified Republicans are far more likely to hold a positive view of the NRA than are Democrats.\nGun control.\nIn February 2013, \"USA Today\" editors criticized the NRA for flip-flopping on expansion of universal background checks to private and gun show sales, which the NRA now opposes.\n\"As early as March 23 (2013), POLITICO had reported on rumors that the NRA and (WV Sen. Joe) Manchin were engaged in secret talks over background checks. Two days later, the National Association for Gun Rights (NAGR) sent out a bulletin to its members: \"I've warned you from the beginning that our gravest danger was an inside-Washington driven deal,\" wrote NAGR executive Dudley Brown. He added that the deal was a \"Manchin-NRA compromise bill\". The Gun Owners of America followed suit a week later, urging its members to contact the NRA to voice their opinion. Neither of these groups had even a tenth of the NRA's membership, or its political power, but they threatened to chip away at the group's reputation. Whatever NRA HQ's position on the bill may have been, it was fast getting outflanked by ideologues on the right.\"\nIn March 2014, \"The Washington Post\" criticized the NRA's interference in government research on gun violence, and both \"Post\" and \"Los Angeles Times\" editors criticized its opposition of Vivek Murthy for US surgeon general. In November 2018, a social media dispute was seen, after a paper was published by the American College of Physicians that stated that medical professionals had a special responsibility to speak out on prevention of gun-related injuries and that they should support appropriate regulation of the purchase of legal weapons. In response to the paper the NRA tweeted against the paper and \"anti-gun doctors\" and claimed that \"half of the articles in Annals of Internal Medicine are pushing for gun control\", and medical professional began posting their experiences of caring for gun violence victims. Economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton have also noted that the NRA has been effective in pressuring Congress to not fund high-quality research on gun accessibility and suicide rates.\nA survey of NRA members found that the majority support certain gun control policies, such as a universal background check:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For instance, 84% of gun owners and 74% of NRA members (vs. 90% of non-gun owners) supported requiring a universal background-check system for all gun sales; 76% of gun owners and 62% of NRA members (vs. 83% of non-gun owners) supported prohibiting gun ownership for 10 years after a person has been convicted of violating a domestic-violence restraining order; and 71% of gun owners and 70% of NRA members (vs. 78% of non-gun owners) supported requiring a mandatory minimum sentence of 2 years in prison for a person convicted of selling a gun to someone who cannot legally have a gun.\nGun manufacturing industry.\nCritics have charged that the NRA represents the interests of gun manufacturers rather than gun owners. The NRA receives donations from gun manufacturers.\nMass shootings.\nSandy Hook Elementary School shooting.\nFollowing the high-profile 2012 shooting at the Sandy Hook Elementary School, the organization began to become the focus of intense criticism, due to its continued refusal to endorse any new restrictions on assault-style gun ownership, or to endorse any other types of new restrictions on gun ownership.\nWhile supporters say the organization advances their rights to buy and own guns according to the constitution's Second Amendment, some critics have described it as a \"terrorist organization\" for advocating policies that enable and permit the widespread distribution and sale of assault-style weapons, and for its opposition to any other types of restrictions on gun sales or use.\nIn December 2012, following the shooting, NRA broke its social media silence and media blackout to announce a press conference. At the event, LaPierre announced an NRA-backed effort to assess the feasibility of placing armed security officers in the nation's 135,000 public and private schools under a \"National School Shield Program\". He called on Congress \"to act immediately to appropriate whatever is necessary\". The announcement came in the same week after President Obama had stated his support for a ban on military-style assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.\nThe NRA has been criticized for their media strategy following mass shootings in the United States. Following the Sandy Hook shooting, the NRA released an online video which attacked Obama and mentioned Obama's daughters; New Jersey governor Chris Christie called it \"reprehensible\" and said that it demeaned the organization. A senior lobbyist for the organization later characterized the video as \"ill-advised\".\n2017 Las Vegas shooting.\nAfter the October 2017 shooting at a concert in Las Vegas, which left 58 people dead and 851 injured, the NRA was initially criticized for their silence. After four days they issued a statement opposing additional gun control laws, which they said would not stop further attacks, and called for a federal law allowing people who have a concealed carry permit in one state to carry concealed weapons in all other states. The organization also suggested additional regulations on so-called bump fire stocks, which allow a semi-automatic weapon to function like a machine gun; the Las Vegas shooter had used such a device.\nStoneman Douglas High School shooting.\nIn February 2018 a school shooting at a high school in Florida left 17 dead and another 17 injured, and student survivors organized a movement called Never Again MSD to demand passage of certain gun control measures. Many of the students blamed the NRA, and the politicians who accept money from the organization, for preventing enactment of any gun control proposals after previous high-profile shootings. An NRA spokesman responded by blaming the shooting on the FBI and the media. The NRA also issued a statement that the incident was proof that more guns were immediately required in schools in the hands of a bolstered force of armed security personnel in order to \"harden\" them against any further similar assaults. A Florida law passed in the wake of the shooting, which includes a provision to ban the sale of firearms to people under 21, was immediately challenged in federal court by the NRA on the grounds that it is \"violating the constitutional rights of 18- to 21-year-olds.\"\nIn May 2018, Cameron Kasky's father and other Parkland parents formed a super PAC, Families vs Assault Rifles PAC (FAMSVARPAC), with a stated goal of going \"up against NRA candidates in every meaningful race in the country\". The organization seeks federal legislation to ban \"the most dangerous firearms\", while not affecting the Second Amendment.\nBoycott.\nThe NRA offers corporate discounts to its members at various businesses through its corporate affiliate programs. For several years, and increasingly in the aftermath of the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting, \"affiliate companies\" have been targeted in social media as part of a boycott effort to terminate their business relationships with the NRA. As a result of this boycott movement, several major corporations such as Delta Air Lines, United Airlines, Hertz, Symantec, and MetLife have disaffiliated from the NRA, while others, such as FedEx have refused to disaffiliate.\nMedia campaigns.\nIn 2017, Zack Beauchamp of \"Vox\" and Mark Sumner of \"Daily Kos\" criticized a video advertisement from the NRA. In the video, Dana Loesch runs through a list of wrongs committed by an unspecified \"they\":\nThey use their media to assassinate real news. They use their schools to teach children that the president is another Hitler. They use their movie stars, and singers, and comedy shows, and award shows to repeat their narrative over and over again. And then they use their ex-president to endorse the resistance. All to make them march. Make them protest. Make them scream racism and sexism and xenophobia and homophobia. To smash windows, burn cars, shut down interstates and airports, bully and terrorize the law abiding. Until the only option left is for the police to do their jobs and stop the madness. And when that happens, they'll use it as an excuse for their outrage. The only way we stop this. The only way we save our country and our freedom, is to fight this violence of lies with the clenched fist of truth.\nSumner alleged the NRA was trying to boost gun sales by \"convincing half of America to declare war on the other half.\" Beauchamp wrote, \"It's a paranoid vision of American life that encourages the NRA's fans to see liberals not as political opponents, but as monsters.\"\nIn May 2018, the NRA ran an advertisement which criticized the media for giving too much coverage to school shooters by showing their faces and revealing their names, in effect causing a \"glorification of carnage in pursuit of ratings\", and satirically suggested that Congress pass legislation to limit such coverage in order to make provocative point about gun control. In response, critics suggested that this would violate the First Amendment right of free speech.\nPro-gun rights criticism.\nPro-gun rights critics include Gun Owners of America (GOA), founded in the 1970s because some gun rights advocates believed the NRA was too flexible on gun issues. Jews for the Preservation of Firearms Ownership (JPFO) has also disagreed with NRA for what it perceives as a willingness to compromise on gun control. The National Association for Gun Rights (NAGR) has been an outspoken critic of the NRA for a number of years. According to the Huffington Post, \"NAGR is the much leaner, more pugnacious version of the NRA. Where the NRA has looked to find some common ground with gun reform advocates and at least appear to be reasonable, NAGR has been the unapologetic champion of opening up gun laws even more.\" In June 2014, an open carry group in Texas threatened to withdraw its support of the NRA if it did not retract its statements critical of the practice. The NRA\u2013ILA's Chris Cox said the statements were a staffer's personal opinion and a mistake.\nLack of advocacy for black gun owners.\nThe NRA has been accused of insufficiently defending African-American gun rights and of providing muted and delayed responses in gun rights cases involving black gun owners. Others argue that the NRA's inaction in prominent gun rights cases involving black gun owners is a consequence of their reluctance to criticize law enforcement, noting NRA support for Otis McDonald and Shaneen Allen.\nIn a well-publicized 2016 case, Philando Castile, an African American and legal gun owner, was fatally shot by a police officer during a traffic stop while reaching for his wallet. Castile had a valid firearm permit and informed the police officer of his gun prior to the shooting. According to \"The Washington Post\", the NRA had typically \"been quick to defend other gun owners who made national news\", but stayed silent on the Castile shooting. Other gun rights advocates as well as some NRA members voiced similar criticisms. In a delayed response to the shooting the NRA stated the death was \"a terrible tragedy that could have been avoided.\"\nAdam Winkler, professor of constitutional law at the UCLA School of Law, has argued that there are historical precedents to the NRA's lack of advocacy for black gun owners, stating that the NRA promoted gun control legislation in the 1920s, 1930s, and 1960s with the intent to reduce gun ownership by immigrants and racial minorities.\nLists of past and present leaders.\nPresidents.\nPresidents of the NRA are elected by the board of directors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDirectors.\nNotable directors, past and present, include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70102", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70102", "title": "Parser generators", "text": ""}
{"id": "70103", "revid": "38198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70103", "title": "Amiga keyboard", "text": ""}
{"id": "70104", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70104", "title": "Simple LR parser", "text": "Computer mechanic\nIn computer science, a Simple LR or SLR parser is a type of LR parser with small parse tables and a relatively simple parser generator algorithm. As with other types of LR(1) parser, an SLR parser is quite efficient at finding the single correct bottom-up parse in a single left-to-right scan over the input stream, without guesswork or backtracking. The parser is mechanically generated from a formal grammar for the language.\nSLR and the more general methods LALR parser and Canonical LR parser have identical methods and similar tables at parse time; they differ only in the mathematical grammar analysis algorithms used by the parser generator tool. SLR and LALR generators create tables of identical size and identical parser states. SLR generators accept fewer grammars than LALR generators like yacc and Bison. Many computer languages don't readily fit the restrictions of SLR, as is. Bending the language's natural grammar into SLR grammar form requires more compromises and grammar hackery. So LALR generators have become much more widely used than SLR generators, despite being somewhat more complicated tools. SLR methods remain a useful learning step in college classes on compiler theory.\nSLR and LALR were both developed by Frank DeRemer as the first practical uses of Donald Knuth's LR parser theory. The tables created for real grammars by full LR methods were impractically large, larger than most computer memories of that decade, with 100 times or more parser states than the SLR and LALR methods.\nLookahead sets.\nTo understand the differences between SLR and LALR, it is important to understand their many similarities and how they both make shift-reduce decisions. (See the article LR parser now for that background, up through the section on reductions' lookahead sets.)\nThe one difference between SLR and LALR is how their generators calculate the lookahead sets of input symbols that should appear next, whenever some completed production rule is found and reduced.\nSLR generators calculate that lookahead by an easy approximation method based directly on the grammar, ignoring the details of individual parser states and transitions. This ignores the particular context of the current parser state. If some nonterminal symbol \"S\" is used in several places in the grammar, SLR treats those places in the same single way rather than handling them individually. The SLR generator works out codice_1, the set of all terminal symbols which can immediately follow some occurrence of \"S\". In the parse table, each reduction to \"S\" uses Follow(S) as its LR(1) lookahead set. Such follow sets are also used by generators for LL top-down parsers. A grammar that has no shift/reduce or reduce/reduce conflicts when using follow sets is called an SLR grammar. \nLALR generators calculate lookahead sets by a more precise method based on exploring the graph of parser states and their transitions. This method considers the particular context of the current parser state. It customizes the handling of each grammar occurrence of some nonterminal S. See article LALR parser for further details of this calculation. The lookahead sets calculated by LALR generators are a subset of (and hence better than) the approximate sets calculated by SLR generators. If a grammar has table conflicts when using SLR follow sets, but is conflict-free when using LALR follow sets, it is called a LALR grammar. \nExample.\nA grammar that can be parsed by an SLR parser but not by an LR(0) parser is the following:\n (0) S \u2192 E\n (1) E \u2192 1 E\n (2) E \u2192 1\nConstructing the action and goto table as is done for LR(0) parsers would give the following item sets and tables:\n S \u2192 \u2022 E\n + E \u2192 \u2022 1 E\n + E \u2192 \u2022 1\n E \u2192 1 \u2022 E\n E \u2192 1 \u2022\n + E \u2192 \u2022 1 E\n + E \u2192 \u2022 1\n S \u2192 E \u2022\n E \u2192 1 E \u2022\nThe action and goto tables:\nAs can be observed there is a shift-reduce conflict for state 1 and terminal '1'. This occurs because, when the action table for an LR(0) parser is created, reduce actions are inserted on a per-row basis. However, by using a follow set, reduce actions can be added with finer granularity. The follow set for this grammar:\nA reduce only needs to be added to a particular action column if that action is in the follow set associated with that reduce. This algorithm describes whether a reduce action must be added to an action column:\n function mustBeAdded(reduceAction, action) {\n ruleNumber = reduceAction.value;\n ruleSymbol = rules[ruleNumber].leftHandSide;\n return (action in followSet(ruleSymbol))\nfor example, is false, because the left hand side of rule 2 is \"E\", and 1 is not in E's follow set.\nContrariwise, is true, because \"$\" is in E's follow set.\nBy using mustBeAdded on each reduce action in the action table, the result is a conflict-free action table:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70105", "revid": "153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70105", "title": "Look-ahead LR parser", "text": ""}
{"id": "70106", "revid": "198939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70106", "title": "Amiga Recoverable Alert", "text": ""}
{"id": "70107", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70107", "title": "Athens, Ohio", "text": "Athens is a city in Athens County, Ohio, United States, and its county seat. The population was 23,849 at the 2020 United States census. Located along the Hocking River within Appalachian Ohio about southeast of Columbus, Athens is best known as the home of Ohio University, a large public research university with an undergraduate and graduate enrollment of more than 21,000 students. It is the principal city of the Athens micropolitan area.\nHistory.\nThe first permanent European settlers arrived in Athens in 1797, more than a decade after the United States victory in the American Revolutionary War. In 1800, the town site was first surveyed and plotted and incorporated as a village in 1811. Ohio had become a state in 1803. Ohio University was chartered in 1804, the first public institution of higher learning in the Northwest Territory. Previously part of Washington County, Ohio, Athens County was formed in 1805, named for the ancient center of learning, Athens, Greece.\nOhio University in Athens was established with the first federal endowment of an educational institution in the United States. In July 1787, the Congress of the Confederation gave to the Ohio Company of Associates \"two townships of good land for the support of a literary institution\" in the newly created Northwest Territory.\nDuring The First Session of the Second Territorial General Assembly, held in Chillicothe from November 23, 1801, to January 23, 1802, the General Assembly passed an act establishing the \"American Western University\" at Athens. The act was approved by Arthur St. Clair, Governor of the Northwest Territory on January 9, 1802. However, no university with the name of American Western University would be established. Ohio became a state in 1803 and on February 18, 1804, the state legislature passed an act establishing the \"Ohio University\" in the town of Athens. Athens received city status in 1912, following the 1910 census showing the population had passed 5,000 residents, the requirement for city status in Ohio.\nOriginally, large tracts of land in Athens and Alexander Townships were set aside through a contract between the Congress (under the Articles of Confederation) and the Ohio Company of Associates, a group of American Revolutionary War veterans. These lands were given to Ohio University by the Federal government. This was the first federal land grant for a university, pre-dating the Morrill Act by more than 70 years. At first, lands were mostly leased out, but the failure of many lessors to pay their rents resulted in most of the land being sold. The sale of these lands funded the growth of Ohio University. Today it is one of the largest institutions of higher learning in Ohio, with an enrollment of over 20,000 on the Athens campus and over 28,000 for all campuses.\nThe earliest industry in the area was salt production, followed by iron production and coal extraction. The largest employer in the county is Ohio University. In 1843, the Hocking Canal opened, enabling shipping from the Ohio River up the Hocking River, which passes through Athens, to Nelsonville, Ohio, and points beyond. However, the canal was closed during cold winters when it froze over.\nThe first railroad reached Athens in 1857. In the late 19th century, an interurban line opened between Athens and Nelsonville and operated for some years. The Athens Lunatic Asylum, later named the Athens State Hospital, opened in 1874. This was on high ground to the south of town and to the south of the Hocking River. In the late 19th century the hospital was the town's largest employer. The state hospital was eventually decommissioned and the property was deeded to Ohio University. It is now known as The Ridges. Much of the building space has been renovated for offices and research space or demolished, and most of the grounds have been set aside as open space, including a land lab.\nIn 1904, the U. S. Army and the Ohio National Guard conducted joint training exercises near the city. Multiple US army regulars became drunk and were arrested by National Guard Provosts for causing disturbances. The arrests angered the regulars; on Friday a large contingent set out from camp to free an arrested comrade. The armed regulars were stopped by provosts and the ensuing quarrel quickly escalated into a shoot-out on Washington Street, during which one guardsman was killed and five others were wounded.\nBy 1935, Athens was known as a coal and fruit-producing region and a state center of higher education and psychiatric care. The major manufactured goods included stoves, lumber, parquetry flooring, caskets, and flooring.\nThe university (and in turn, the city) saw large growth during the post-World War Two era and again during the Vietnam War era. Growth slowed in the 1980s with small increases in growth into present times.\nGeography.\nAthens is located in the unglaciated Allegheny Plateau about 47 miles from Chillicothe and 35 miles west of Marietta. Athens is surrounded by hills that rise about three hundred feet from river valley to the narrow ridge tops. The county extends west from the Ohio River, mostly centered around the lower Hocking River watershed.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the city has a total area of , of which (or 97.81%) is land and (or 2.19%) is water. Large sections of Athens and Ohio University are located in the floodplain of the Hocking River. Over the last two centuries the town suffered from many destructive floods, including notable floods in 1832, 1873, 1907, 1937, 1949, 1964 and 1968. In 1969 the Army Corps of Engineers completed a major work that rerouted and expanded the channel of the Hocking River, for a stretch of several miles around the town, moving the river hundreds of feet to the south. That project and the ongoing efforts to maintain the channel have greatly reduced the negative effects of seasonally high river levels.\nAthens is located mostly on and around a south-jutting ridge bordered by a loop in the Hocking River. The underlying geology is mostly sandstone and shale, including \"redbed\" shale that presents a severe slip hazard when structures are built over it on hillsides. However, there are safe zones above sandstone beds, most notably the Connelsville Sandstone that outcrops high on the hillsides. The old Athens Mental Hospital grounds (now part of the university) was built on the top of a hillside in the late 1860s, and is completely stable due to its position atop the hill rather than on a slope. The recent University Courtyard Apartments is also built on similar underlying geology across a small valley, but the hilltop was extensively removed in order to create a stable base. The city receives all its water supply from wells in unconsolidated river aquifers, and is reputed to be the largest city in the United States to do so.\nClimate.\nAthens has a hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), typical of most of Ohio.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 23,832 people, 6,903 households, and 1,842 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7,391 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 86.4% White, 4.4% African American, 0.2% Native American, 6.1% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 2.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.4% of the population.\nThere were 6,903 households, of which 11.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 20.5% were married couples living together, 4.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 2.1% had a male householder with no wife present, and 73.3% were non-families. 33.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 2.74.\nThe median age in the city was 21.6 years. 5.8% of residents were under the age of 18; 67.6% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 14.4% were from 25 to 44; 7.9% were from 45 to 64; and 4.3% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 50.0% male and 50.0% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 21,342 people, 6,271 households, and 1,906 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 6,715 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 89.16% White, 3.82% Black or African American, 0.15% Native American, 4.47% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.60% from other races, and 1.74% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.41% of the population.\nThere were 6,271 households, out of which 12.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 22.9% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 69.6% were non-families. 34.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.72.\nIn the city the population was spread out, with 6.7% under the age of 18, 66.7% from 18 to 24, 13.7% from 25 to 44, 8.0% from 45 to 64, and 4.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $17,122, and the median income for a family was $53,391. Males had a median income of $35,849 versus $28,866 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,061. About 14.8% of families and 51.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.1% of those under age 18 and 7.2% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nFrom the mid-1800s until the 1950s, coal and brick-making were major sources of employment in the county. They became a minor source after the best and most available coal had been extracted and cheaper brick-making became available outside the area. A former manufacturing company was the Midget Motors Corporation, makers of the small automobile, the King Midget.\nOhio University is the largest employer in Athens County. In addition to direct employment through the university, much of the local economy depends on tourism and events related to the university, through local restaurants, bars, stores and hotels. Manufacturing and technology related businesses, including Quidel Corporation (formerly Diagnostic Hybrids), Stewart-MacDonald, Sunpower, Mitchell Electronics, Fastenall, and Gorman-Redlich.\nArts and culture.\nAthens has a long musical tradition that includes local acts and events for touring musicians, performing at Ohio University and festivals in Athens. The folk song \"Athens County\" - words by Joe Dolce; music by Jonathan Edwards - refers to Athens, Ohio, where Edwards &amp; Dolce attended college in the late 60s. Edwards went on to have a Number 2 hit song nationally with 'Sunshine' while Dolce moved to Australia and had an international Number 1 hit with Shaddap You Face. Dolce is now an established poet and essayist in Melbourne. Bands hailing from Athens include The Headstone Circus, The Snapdragons, Appalachian Death Ride, She Bears, Southeast Engine, The Ridges and the metal band Skeletonwitch. Athens native Steve Reis, a founder of the Columbus, Ohio-based band McGuffey Lane named his band after a street in Athens.\nSeveral theater companies have operated in Athens over the years. Studio for Young Actors, aka Drama Club Youth Academy was a youth theater which operated from 2000 to approximately 2010. They performed both original and published plays and musicals featuring young actors. Their main venue was Stuart's Opera House in Nelsonville, Ohio They subsequently moved their performance venue to Arts/West a community arts space in Athens, Ohio, operated by the City of Athens. A university park on Richland Ave was designed by Athens' own Maya Lin.\nParks and recreation.\nAthens recreation facilities include a community recreation center, several city parks and play grounds, public gardens, soccer fields, an arts center called Arts West, two off-leash enclosed dog parks, and an extensive scenic trail system in the city lands, adjacent Strouds Run State Park, and the Blair Preserve owned by the Athens Conservancy. The Athens Skate Park is the second largest skate park in Ohio. The City of Athens Ohio Community Recreation center (Athens Community Center), known simply as \"The Rec Center\" to locals, offers programming in athletics, childcare, sports camps, community events and more. Located in the East State Street area, the center is accessible from the Hockhocking Adena Bikeway. Recreation facilities include an outdoor swimming pool, a skate park, fitness equipment, an indoor walking and running track, event rental facilities, and playgrounds. The Arts, Parks and Recreation Department actively supports a variety of community recreation initiatives. It sponsors adult summer and fall slow-pitch softball that is popular among residents in Athens and the county. The recreation department has organized men's, women's, and co-ed leagues, although the co-ed leagues have seen strongest participation in recent years. Soccer leagues are organized year round, with programs offered through the Community Recreation Center, Ohio University and the Athens Soccer Academy. Youth sports, such as soccer leagues, summer camps and little league, are also supported by local residents. Programming for the arts are facilitated through Arts West, the Dairy Barn, and Ohio University. Sells Park is located on the east side of Athens, near The City of Athens Ohio Community Recreation center. Sells Park comprises 22.5 acres (980,491.87\u00a0ft\u00b2), and includes Sells Pond, a pond. Strouds Run State Park is located just outside the city, bordering the city line. This park features of wooded hills, including many bluffs and rock shelters, centered around a man-made lake. Camping is available. Both Sells Park and Strouds Run State Park are part of The Athens Trail Network, a multi-use trail network branching out from Sells Park. The City of Athens has recently established the Strouds Ridge Preserve project, currently including some , to save land from development adjacent to the state park. This preserve includes an old-growth forest known as \"Hawk Woods\", or, more formally, the Dale &amp; Jacki Riddle State Nature Preserve. Also adjacent to the state park is the Blair Preserve, owned by the Athens Conservancy.\nThe Hockhocking Adena Bikeway is a multi-use asphalt trail with its main hub (mile marker 0) at the Athens Community Center on East State Street. The trail extends northwest to Robbins' Crossing and Hocking College in Nelsonville and on to the Rocky Brands complex near the Public Square, and approximately further east along East State Street and US Route 50 to South Canaan Road (Athens County Road 24A). Access points with parking are located at mile 4 at the West State Street Park, mile 10.2 off Rt. 682 in The Plains, and mile 16.4 at Robbins' Crossing and Hocking College. The trail, which generally follows the course of the Hocking River, provides access to the East State Street commercial areas, Ohio University's campus (at South Green and Peden Stadium), The Plains, and Hocking College. It is designed for walking, running, biking, cross-country skiing, skating, and wheelchairs. Additionally several city streets are marked as bike lanes.\nAthens is a qualified Tree City USA as recognized by the National Arbor Day Foundation.\nTrails.\nThe Athens Trail Network is a multi-use trail network branching out from Sells Park at the end of Avon Place. A series of twelve trails and connectors branch out into the surrounding woods, heading eastwards to eventually connect with the trails of Strouds Run State Park. The trails are designed for hiking, running, and biking, although some sections are off-limits to bicycles. The trails provide scenic views of the East State Street commercial area and travel past and through notable features such as Sells Pond, Riddle State Nature Preserve (also known as Hawk Woods), Boulder Cove, Turtlehead Cave (also known as Blue Ash Rockhouse), Finger Rock, Pioneer Cemetery, and Dow Lake at Strouds Run State Park. The trail network is maintained by community and university volunteers.\nGovernment.\nAthens is governed by a mayoral-council form of government. Elected officials include mayor, auditor, treasurer, seven council members, and council president. The mayor, auditor, and treasurer are elected for four-year terms. Council members and council president are elected for two-year terms. Four council members represent each of the city's four wards. Three council members are elected at-large. Council president only votes in case of a tie vote. City Hall is located in uptown on Washington Street.\nAthens is also covered by the Athens County Department of Health, the Athens County Planning Office, and Athens County Job and Family Services. The city of Athens has a strict parking policy. The city has a Police Department since 1911 working 24/7 year round. Today the force is made up of about 30 police officers plus a like number of reserve officers and support staff. According to ODMP, 2 officers of the Athens Police Department have been police department. Ohio University also has a police force with about 25 officers. According to ODMP, 1 officer of the Ohio University Police Department was killed in the line of duty. Each of these departments work well together and support each other. Both have additional help when needed by the county sheriff department. Athens Fire department founded in 1830 and became full-time in the 1930s has two stations, a staff of about 30. They work 24 on 48 hours off. The department not only covers the city's fire department needs but also that of Ohio University. The city is part of the county-wide Enhanced 911 system. This system is able to locate landline or registered cell phone users, and send a text or phone call message of alert to those who sign up.\nThe city has a large number of rental homes/apartments which are inspected by the Housing Code Office.\nThe city of Athens is the county seat making it the home of many county government offices and the county courthouse at the corner of Court and Washington streets. Each of Athens County's three commissioners are usually from the city of Athens. Athens is a stronghold of the Democratic Party. President Barack Obama visited the city and Ohio University late during the 2012 re-election campaign. The city and Athens County have voted Democratic during all presidential elections since 1972 except for 1984.\nThe current mayor is Steve Patterson. A Democrat, Patterson would be elected to his third term as mayor in 2023. As of January 2, 2025, Patterson also serves as President of the National League of Cities.\nEducation.\nOhio University is a public university located in Athens (30,000+ students) that is situated on an campus. Founded in 1804, it is the oldest university in Ohio, oldest in the Northwest Territory, and ninth oldest public university in the United States. Known as the Bobcats, Ohio University hosts over 250 academic programs, 5,300 employees, and has been recognized by the John Templeton Foundation as one of the top character building institutions in the country. In addition to its main campus in Athens, Ohio University also operates regional campuses in Chillicothe, Cleveland, Dublin, Ironton (Ohio University - Southern), Lancaster, Pickerington, Proctorville, St. Clairsville (Ohio University - Eastern), and Zanesville.\nOutside of Ohio University, the residents of Athens are served by the Athens City School District, founded in the late 1840s. Currently it consists of 5 schools: East Elementary (PK-3), Morrison Gordon Elementary (PK-3), The Plains Intermediate School (4-6), Athens Middle School (grades 7\u20138), and Athens High School home of the 'Bulldogs' and Joe Burrow Stadium. East Elementary and Morrison Gordon Elementary were replaced with new buildings on the same locations, and opened in Fall 2021, and The Plains Intermediate was significantly remodeled for a re-opening in Fall 2022. In 2019, a new Athens High School was scheduled to begin design and construction in 2024 with a planned Fall 2026 opening. As a result of COVID and other work-related delays, work has not yet begun, but as a result of a tax-funded levy passed in November 2023 giving a $24 million bond to the Athens City School District (ACSD), as well as $28.5 million from the OFCC CFAP, construction will begin in 2025 and be completed within an estimated 18 to 30 months.\nOn the city's east side, Athens has a public library, a branch of the Athens County Public Libraries.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nRailroad came to the city in the 1850s, with the last passenger train ending in 1981. That left a few freight trains passing near the city. Until 1981, Amtrak's \"Shenandoah\" (Cincinnati - Washington, D.C.) stopped at Athens station. In earlier years, the daily B&amp;O trains, \"Diplomat\" (St. Louis - Jersey City, NJ) and \"National Limited\" (St. Louis - Jersey City, NJ) stopped at the station.\nThe first 4-lane road into and out of the city came in the early 1970s. SR 32 from Athens to Cincinnati was completed in the early 1980s. Four lanes from Athens to Belpre/Parkersburg was completed in the late 1990s on US-50, SR-32 &amp; 7 hooking up with I-77. In the early 2000s, SR-33 'Super-2' highway was complete, linking Athens to I-77 at Ravenswood, WVa. In October 2013, the last section of the 4-lane highway was completed, bypassing Nelsonville's two lane road on SR-33, linking Athens with Columbus.\nOhio University has a modern regional airport about 15 miles southwest of the city near Albany off US-50/SR-32 called Gordon K. Bush Airport. The runway is just over 5,000 feet long with landing system, lighting and hangars. The nearest airports with commercial flights are Mid-Ohio Valley Regional Airport near Parkersburg, West Virginia and John Glenn Columbus International Airport and Rickenbacker International Airport near Columbus.\nAthens has a public bus system which is free to OU students and staff and at a reduced price for seniors and school age students. It has several routes inside the city and one to The Plains. OU has a bus system that links with a city bus system. Many student apartment complexes have their own bus shuttle. Athens also has an inter-city bus line from Athens to Columbus, Cincinnati, Marietta, Ohio, and Cleveland\u2013the GoBus\u2013running twice a day with stops in-between.\nHealth care.\nAt Ohio University the Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine was established in 1975. It is currently the only osteopathic medical school in the state and offers the degree Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.). The college is accredited by the American Osteopathic Association. In 1993, Barbara Ross-Lee, D.O., was appointed to the position of dean of the Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine; she was the first African-American woman to serve as the dean of a U.S. medical school. The Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine has 814 students enrolled across three campuses in Athens, Cleveland, and Dublin. Ohio University partners with University Medical Associates (UMA), which was founded in 2003, and is a wide-ranging medical service provider in multiple locations around the Athens area, both on campus and off. UMA's mission is to deliver health care services to the residents of southeastern Ohio while providing clinical training opportunities for future osteopathic physicians.\nOhio University also runs Campus Care, which is an on-campus clinic for enrolled students.\nAdditionally, Athens is served by OhioHealth O'Bleness Memorial Hospital a 140+ bed non-profit community hospital founded in the early 1920s as Sheltering Arms Hospital. O'Bleness, built in the early 1970s, overlooks the Hocking River and is near the university campus. O'Bleness emergency department (as well as the lab &amp; radiology) is open 24/7 365 days at year. The hospital has a helipad located near the ED. On the hospital grounds is the Cornwell Center, which houses a catheterization lab, cardiac/pulmonary rehabilitation program as well as medical offices. The Castrop Center houses Athens Cancer Center, medical offices plus a public pharmacy. A new 2 story Doctor's Park building open in 2021 with doctor offices, including exams and Lab. O'Bleness was in a management agreement with OhioHealth from 2010 until early 2014 when O'Bleness became a whole part of the OhioHealth system. In early 2021 a new 2 story Medical Office building opened. Between 2019 and 2021 a new ICU opened, numerous equipment and facilities upgrades, and major expansion and renovation of the ED.\nhttps:// operate several health care facilities in Athens, including Athens Behavioral Health and Primary Care Clinic (90 Hospital Drive), Respite Adult Crisis Program (7976 Dairy Lane), Athens County WIC Program (215 Columbus Road, Suite 106), and Early Childhood Program (9 Kenny Drive). Hopewell Health Centers offer comprehensive behavioral health care, dental health care, and primary health care. A sliding fee scale is available for dental health care, primary health care, and some behavioral health care services. Board Certified/Board Eligible health professionals include family practice physicians, dentists, adult psychiatrists, child and adolescent psychiatrists, nurse practitioners, and advanced practice nurses. Hopewell also employs social workers, counselors, psychologists, chemical dependency counselors, and a registered dietician.\nhttps://, (2131 East State Street) employs 42 health care professionals at its clinic. Their service line includes allergy and immunology, anesthesiology, audiology, breast health, cancer care, chiropractic care, ear, nose &amp; throat, eye care, gastroenterology, gynecology, heart &amp; vascular care, imaging &amp; radiology, kidney care, lab services, low-dose CT, men's health, midwifery, occupational health &amp; wellness, orthopedics, pain management, pediatrics, pharmacy, podiatry, pregnancy &amp; birth, primary care, sleep medicine, sports medicine, surgery, therapy services, urgent care, women's health, and work health &amp; wellness.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70109", "revid": "48803042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70109", "title": "Evergreen (disambiguation)", "text": "Evergreen refers to plants that have leaves all year round.\nEvergreen or Ever green may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70110", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70110", "title": "Clarksville", "text": "Clarksville may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "70111", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70111", "title": "Land lab", "text": "Outdoor laboratory for biological study\nA land lab is an area of land that has been set aside for use in biological studies. Thus, it is literally an outdoor laboratory based on an area of land.\nStudies may be elementary or advanced. For instance, students may simply be given the task of identifying all the tree species in a land lab, or an advanced student may be doing an intensive survey of the microbial life forms found in a soil sample.\nHands on, tangible, project-base learning is a key aspect of land labs within an educational context. Land labs can exist anywhere with outdoor access: educational campuses, residential neighborhoods, peri-urban settings, urban settings, or even a small courtyard. The driving principle behind land lab education is getting outside and interacting with the world directly.\nLand labs are often marked out in plots or transects for studies. A plot may be any size, usually marked out in square meters. This allows for more intensive, delimited studies of changes and inventories of biota. Transects are straight lines at which, at intervals, measurements are taken for a profile of the ecological community.\nLand labs serve an important role in giving students access to a natural environment to observe native plants and wildlife, apply STEM concepts with hands on projects, and build a better understanding of how critical biodiversity is for ecological health.\nStudying humans needs and sustainability in land labs.\nLearning to produce food, fiber and energy in sustainable ways is a tremendous opportunity for students of all ages within land labs. Students can explore biomass energy, biogas fuels, solar energy, permaculture, composting, organic gardening, and many other facets of sustainability through land labs.\nBy designing systems that mimic natural processes (biomimicry), we are able to produce food, fiber, and energy in more sustainable ways for local communities. Numerous environmental and economic benefits exist to growing food locally and producing energy locally. These biomimicry inspired systems are circular in nature. Nothing is wasted, as the outputs of one circular system become the inputs of another.\nCircular systems in land labs.\nCircular system experiments, promoting a circular economy, are a natural fit for educational land labs. Circular systems function by ensuring that nothing is wasted. Every output of a system becomes an input for another system.\nFor example: Food scraps feed chickens, chicken manure fertilizes the garden, the garden grows more vegetables, food scraps are then available from the vegetables to feed chickens.\nCircular systems that are well-suited for land labs include:\nMulti-disciplinary environment within land labs.\nLand labs help to form an ecosystem well suited for long-term project-based learning. Students, teachers, and community members can participate in multi-disciplinary activities ranging from land restoration, animal husbandry, gardening, weather analysis to outdoor art studies.\nThe multi-disciplinary context within a land lab is perfect for cross-curricular education. The following disciplines and subjects can all tie into land lab activities in an integrated fashion:\nGoals and outcomes of land lab education experiences.\nLand labs exist as perpetual educational projects that can span years to decades or more. Common goals within a land lab are often:\nFootprints and Sizes of Land Labs.\nLand labs can be designed in all shapes and sizes. The key attributes of a land lab are typically the following:\nA small land lab could be as little as a courtyard, balcony garden, or a designated patch of land outside of a classroom window. Conversely, larger land lab could encompass hundreds of acres. The ideal size for a flexible land lab space allowing for many different ecological activities and circular systems is between 1/4 of an acre to 5 acres.\nSustainable societal solutions originating from land labs.\nLand labs are real-life environments by design. The project-based environment encourages students, teachers, and community members to experiment with ecological solutions that can be implemented on a small scale.\nIdeally, the solutions and systems implemented in a land lab are transferred beyond the land lab and into the surrounding community. Composting, rainwater catchment, food-waste upcycling with methane digesters and BSF, local food production, harnessing of solar power, and other land lab systems can all be implemented throughout a community at various scales: residential, schools, community gardens, and local businesses.\nThe purpose of a land lab is to allow students to develop, implement, and learn about practical, sustainable solutions for addressing the five basic physiological needs all humans have:\nOur industrial systems of providing food, water, energy, shelter, and sanitation have inherent weaknesses to their centralized models. Long supply chains, fossil-fuel dependance, environmental damage, and the fragmented production of goods are common traits to industrial models. Land labs tie these 5 basic human needs together in integrated systems.\nPermaculture is a concept of integrating these human needs into local, ecological, human-scale systems. Land labs can be thought of as an education area for promoting creative solutions for meeting these needs, while ensuring the land and local ecology are being restored in the process.\nLand labs provide students with real-world experiences to help change their behavior as consumers, and get them more involved with meeting their 5 physiological needs.\nLand labs are focused on production rather than just consumption. Western consumer culture makes the provision of our 5 basic physiological needs very abstract and far removed from the daily life of most people.\nWhen these 5 basic needs are abstracted away from consumers, it is easier for the underlying systems providing these needs to operate without supervision to ensure they are ethical and sustainable.\nMental health benefits for students being outside.\nIn today's digital world, many students spend inordinate amounts of time on a screen both at home and at school. Inherent limits exist to project based learning that takes place entirely behind a screen or within a classroom.\nLand labs help break students out of a digital environment by providing much needed time outdoors. Studies have shown that as our digital landscape of social media has exploded in popularity, depression and mental struggles have increased dramatically in students.\nStudies also show that student's mental health benefits immensely from being outdoors and participating in hands on projects with meaningful outcomes.\nWaste streams used in land labs.\nMultiple types of local \"waste\" streams, that can often be obtained freely, can be used to supply a land lab with the raw materials to build soil, generate power, grow food, and restore biodiversity.\nPart of the process of building a land lab is developing relationships with local businesses, neighbors, restaurants, and community members to begin upcycling these wastes into the materials and systems needed within a land lab. Many people have a desire to help students who are working hard on a meaningful community project. Much of the materials listed above can be had for little to no cost as relationships are formed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70112", "revid": "593397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70112", "title": "Sandusky", "text": "Sandusky may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70113", "revid": "43990906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70113", "title": "Cicero (disambiguation)", "text": "Cicero (106\u201343 BC), full name Marcus Tullius Cicero, was a Roman statesman, lawyer, political theorist, philosopher and one of Rome's greatest orators.\nCicero may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70114", "revid": "48649018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70114", "title": "Beloit", "text": "Beloit may refer to\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70115", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70115", "title": "Juneau (disambiguation)", "text": "Juneau is the capital city of Alaska, United States.\nJuneau may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70116", "revid": "7792224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70116", "title": "Carnegie Medal for Writing", "text": "Annual award for writing a children's book published in the UK\nThe Carnegie Medal for Writing, established in 1936 as the Carnegie Medal, is an annual British literary award for English-language books for children or young adults. It is conferred upon the author by the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP), who in 2016 called it \"the UK's oldest and most prestigious book award for children's writing\".\nNominated books must be written in English and first published in the UK during the preceding school year (September to August). Until 1969, the award was limited to books by British authors first published in England. The first non-British medalist was Australian author Ivan Southall for \"Josh\" (1972). The original rules also prohibited winning authors from future consideration. The first author to win a second Carnegie Medal was Peter Dickinson in 1981, who won consecutively for \"Tulku\" and \"City of Gold\". As of 2024, eight authors had received the Medal more than once.\nThe winner is awarded a gold medal and \u00a3500 worth of books donated to the winner's chosen library. In addition, since 2016 the winner has received a \u00a35,000 cash prize from the Colin Mears bequest.\nHistory.\nThe Medal is named after the Scottish-born American philanthropist Andrew Carnegie (1835\u20131919), who founded more than 2,800 libraries in the English-speaking world, including at least one in more than half of British library authorities. It was established in 1936 by the British Library Association, to celebrate the centenary of Carnegie's birth, and inaugurated in 1937 with the award to Arthur Ransome for \"Pigeon Post\" (1936) and the identification of two \"commended\" books. This first Medal was dated 1936, but since 2007 the award has been dated by its year of presentation, not year of publication.\nIn 1955, the Kate Greenaway Medal, for \"distinguished illustration in a book for children\", was established as a companion to the Carnegie Medal.\nBoth awards were established and administered by the Library Association, which was succeeded by the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP) in 2002. In 2022, the two awards were renamed to the Carnegie Medal for Writing and the Carnegie Medal for Illustration.\nFrom 2022 to 2024, the award was sponsored by the audio technology company Yoto and was called the Yoto Carnegie Medal for Writing. As of 2025 the awards are sponsored by Scholastic and the Authors' Licensing and Collecting Society (ALCS).\nProcess.\nCILIP members may nominate books each September and October, with the full list of valid nominations published in November. The longlist, chosen by the judges from the nominated books, is published in February. The judging panel comprises 12 children's librarians, all of whom are members of CILIP's Youth Libraries Group (YLG). The shortlist is announced in March and the winner in June.\nTitles must be English-language works first published in the UK during the preceding year (1 September to 31 August). According to CILIP, \"all categories of books, including poetry, non-fiction and graphic novels, in print or ebook format, for children and young people are eligible\". Multiple-author anthologies are excluded; however, co-authored single works are eligible.\nYoung people from across the UK take part in shadowing groups organised by secondary schools and public libraries, to read and discuss the shortlisted books.\nCILIP instructs the judging panel to consider plot, characterisation, and style. Furthermore, it states that \"the book that wins the Carnegie Medal should be a book of outstanding literary quality. The whole work should provide pleasure, not merely from the surface enjoyment of a good read, but also the deeper subconscious satisfaction of having gone through a vicarious, but at the time of reading, a real experience that is retained afterwards.\"\nA diversity review in 2018 led to changes in the nomination and judging process to promote better representation of ethnic minority authors and books.\n2024 award.\nJoseph Coelho won the 2024 Carnegie Medal for \"The Boy Lost in the Maze\", a verse novel that uses the legend of the Minotaur in a tale of a teenager searching for his biological father. \nThere were eight books on the 2024 shortlist:\nWinners.\nFrom 1936 to 2025, 86 medals were awarded. No eligible book published in 1943, 1945, or 1966 was considered suitable by the judging panel.\nFrom 2007 onward, the medals are dated by the year of presentation. Before this, they were dated by the calendar year of their British publication.\nForty-one winning books were illustrated in their first editions, including every one during the first three decades. Six from 1936 to 1953 were illustrated or co-illustrated by their authors; none since then.\nCarnegie of Carnegies.\nTo commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Carnegie Medal in 2007, CILIP created a 'Living Archive' on the Carnegie Medal website with information about each of the winning books and conducted a poll to identify the nation's favourite Carnegie Medal winner, to be named the \"Carnegie of Carnegies\". The winner, announced on 21 June 2007 at the British Library, was \"Northern Lights\" by Philip Pullman (1995). It was the expected winner, garnering 40% of the votes in the UK, and 36% worldwide.\n70th Anniversary Top Ten\n\"Northern Lights\", with 40% of the public vote, was followed by 16% for \"Tom's Midnight Garden\" by Philippa Pearce and 8% for \"Skellig\" by David Almond. As those three books had won the 70-year-old Medal in its year 60, year 23, and year 63, some commentary observed that \"Tom's Midnight Garden\" had passed a test of time that the others had not yet faced.\nHonorees.\nBefore 2007, the selection process for the award was structured such that the year in which the award was given aligned with the year of publication for the books being considered. The books would be nominated and chosen during the year following their release, with the winners being announced and the medals presented in the early months of the subsequent year.\n2000s.\nBeginning in 2003, commendations were not presented, only short and longlists; only the shortlists are presented below.\nRepeat honorees.\nEight authors have won two Carnegie Medals, which was prohibited for many years. Additionally, several authors have been shortlisted and/or commended multiple times.\nThe table below provides a list of authors who have been honoured, sorted first by number of honors and the rank of the honor (e.g., win is higher than commendation), then by the authors' last name. For the sake of ease, shortlists are considered of equal rank to commendations, though lower than high commendations. The table was last updated in March 2024.\nMultiple award recipients.\nSix books have won both the Carnegie Medal and the annual Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, which was inaugurated 1967.(Dates are years of UK publication, and Carnegie award dates before 2006.)\nOnly \"A Monster Calls\", written by Patrick Ness and illustrated by Jim Kay, has won both the Carnegie and Greenaway Medals (2012).\nOnly \"The Graveyard Book\" by Neil Gaiman (2009) has won both the Carnegie Medal and the equivalent American award, the Newbery Medal.\nSharon Creech, who won the Carnegie for \"Ruby Holler\" (2002), previously won the Newbery and two UK awards for \"Walk Two Moons\" (1994).\nFour writers have won both the Carnegie and the US Michael L. Printz Award. The Printz Award is an American Library Association literary award that annually recognises the \"best book written for teens, based entirely on its literary merit\". The four writers are David Almond, Aidan Chambers, Geraldine McCaughrean, and Meg Rosoff. Chambers alone has won both for the same book, the 1999 Carnegie and 2003 Printz for the novel \"Postcards from No Man's Land\".\nIn its scope, books for children or young adults, the British Carnegie corresponds to the American Newbery and Printz awards.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70117", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70117", "title": "Floodplain", "text": "Land adjacent to a water body which is flooded during periods of high water\nA floodplain or flood plain or bottomlands is an area of land adjacent to a river. Floodplains stretch from the banks of a river channel to the base of the enclosing valley, and experience flooding during periods of high discharge. The soils usually consist of clays, silts, sands, and gravels deposited during floods.\nBecause of regular flooding, floodplains frequently have high soil fertility since nutrients are deposited with the flood waters. This can encourage farming; some important agricultural regions, such as the Nile and Mississippi river basins, heavily exploit floodplains. Agricultural and urban regions have developed near or on floodplains to take advantage of the rich soil and freshwater. However, the risk of inundation has led to increasing efforts to control flooding.\nFormation.\nMost floodplains are formed by deposition on the inside of river meanders and by overbank flow.\nWherever the river meanders, the flowing water erodes the river bank on the outside of the meander. At the same time, sediments are simultaneously deposited in a bar on the inside of the meander. This is described as \"lateral accretion\" since the deposition builds the point bar laterally into the river channel. Erosion on the outside of the meander usually closely balances deposition on the inside so that the channel shifts in the direction of the meander without changing significantly in width. The point bar is built up to a level very close to that of the river banks. Significant net erosion of sediments occurs only when the meander cuts into higher ground. The overall effect is that, as the river meanders, it creates a level flood plain composed mostly of point bar deposits. The rate at which the channel shifts varies greatly, with reported rates ranging from too slow to measure to as much as per year for the Kosi River of India.\nOverbank flow takes place when the river is flooded with more water than can be accommodated by the river channel. Flow over the banks of the river deposits a thin veneer of sediments that is coarsest and thickest close to the channel. This is described as \"vertical accretion\", since the deposits build upwards. In undisturbed river systems, overbank flow is frequent, typically occurring every one to two years, regardless of climate or topography. Sedimentation rates for a three-day flood of the Meuse and Rhine Rivers in 1993 found average sedimentation rates in the floodplain of between 0.57 and 1.0\u00a0kg/m2. Higher rates were found on the levees (4\u00a0kg/m2 or more) and on low-lying areas (1.6\u00a0kg/m2).\nSedimentation from the overbank flow is concentrated on natural levees, crevasse splays, and in wetlands and shallow lakes of flood basins. Natural levees are ridges along river banks that form from rapid deposition from the overbank flow. Most of the suspended sand is deposited on the levees, leaving the silt and clay sediments to be deposited as floodplain mud further from the river. Levees are typically built up enough to be relatively well-drained compared with nearby wetlands, and levees in non-arid climates are often heavily vegetated.\nCrevasses are formed by breakout events from the main river channel. The river bank fails, and floodwaters scour a channel. Sediments from the crevasse spread out as delta-shaped deposits with numerous distributary channels. Crevasse formation is most common in sections of rivers where the river bed is accumulating sediments (aggrading).\nRepeated flooding eventually builds up an alluvial ridge, whose natural levees and abandoned meander loops may stand well above most of the floodplain. The alluvial ridge is topped by a channel belt formed by successive generations of channel migration and meander cutoff. At much longer intervals, the river may abandon the channel belt and build a new one at another position on the floodplain. This process is called avulsion and occurs at intervals of 10\u20131000 years. Historical avulsions leading to catastrophic flooding include the 1855 Yellow River flood and the 2008 Kosi River flood.\nFloodplains can form around rivers of any kind or size. Even relatively straight stretches of river are capable of producing floodplains. Mid-channel bars in braided rivers migrate downstream through processes resembling those in point bars of meandering rivers and can build up a floodplain.\nThe quantity of sediments in a floodplain greatly exceeds the river load of sediments. Thus, floodplains are an important storage site for sediments during their transport from where they are generated to their ultimate depositional environment.\nWhen the rate at which the river is cutting downwards becomes great enough that overbank flows become infrequent, the river is said to have abandoned its floodplain. Portions of the abandoned floodplain may be preserved as fluvial terraces.\nEcology.\nFloodplains support diverse and productive ecosystems. They are characterized by considerable variability in space and time, which in turn produces some of the most species-rich of ecosystems. From the ecological perspective, the most distinctive aspect of floodplains is the \"flood pulse\" associated with annual floods, and so the floodplain ecosystem is defined as the part of the river valley that is regularly flooded and dried.\nFloods bring in detrital material rich in nutrients and release nutrients from dry soil as it is flooded. The decomposition of terrestrial plants submerged by the floodwaters adds to the nutrient supply. The flooded littoral zone of the river (the zone closest to the river bank) provides an ideal environment for many aquatic species, so the spawning season for fish often coincides with the onset of flooding. Fish must grow quickly during the flood to survive the subsequent drop in water level. As the floodwaters recede, the littoral experiences blooms of microorganisms, while the banks of the river dry out and terrestrial plants germinate to stabilize the bank.\nThe biota of floodplains has high annual growth and mortality rates, which is advantageous for the rapid colonization of large areas of the floodplain. This allows them to take advantage of shifting floodplain geometry. For example, floodplain trees are fast-growing and tolerant of root disturbance. Opportunists (such as birds) are attracted to the rich food supply provided by the flood pulse.\nFloodplain ecosystems have distinct biozones. In Europe, as one moves away from the river, the successive plant communities are bank vegetation (usually annuals); sedge and reeds; willow shrubs; willow-poplar forest; oak-ash forest; and broadleaf forest. Human disturbance creates wet meadows that replace much of the original ecosystem. The biozones reflect a soil moisture and oxygen gradient that in turn corresponds to a flooding frequency gradient. The primeval floodplain forests of Europe were dominated by oak (60%) elm (20%) and hornbeam (13%), but human disturbance has shifted the makeup towards ash (49%) with maple increasing to 14% and oak decreasing to 25%.\nSemiarid floodplains have a much lower species diversity. Species are adapted to alternating drought and flood. Extreme drying can destroy the ability of the floodplain ecosystem to shift to a healthy wet phase when flooded.\nFloodplain forests constituted 1% of the landscape of Europe in the 1800s. Much of this has been cleared by human activity, though floodplain forests have been impacted less than other kinds of forests. This makes them important refugia for biodiversity. Human destruction of floodplain ecosystems is largely a result of flood control, hydroelectric development (such as reservoirs), and conversion of floodplains to agriculture use. Transportation and waste disposal also have detrimental effects. The result is the fragmentation of these ecosystems, resulting in loss of populations and diversity and endangering the remaining fragments of the ecosystem. Flood control creates a sharper boundary between water and land than in undisturbed floodplains, reducing physical diversity. Floodplain forests protect waterways from erosion and pollution and reduce the impact of floodwaters.\nThe disturbance by humans of temperate floodplain ecosystems frustrates attempts to understand their natural behavior. Tropical rivers are less impacted by humans and provide models for temperate floodplain ecosystems, which are thought to share many of their ecological attributes.\nFlood control.\nExcluding famines and epidemics, some of the worst natural disasters in history (measured by fatalities) have been river floods, particularly in the Yellow River in China \u2013 see list of deadliest floods. The worst of these, and the worst natural disaster (excluding famine and epidemics), was the 1931 China floods, estimated to have killed millions. This had been preceded by the 1887 Yellow River flood, which killed around one million people and is the second-worst natural disaster in history.\nThe extent of floodplain inundation depends partly on flood magnitude, defined by the return period.\nIn the United States, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) manages the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP offers insurance to properties located within a flood-prone area, as defined by the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), which depicts various flood risks for a community. The FIRM typically focuses on the delineation of the 100-year flood inundation area, also known within the NFIP as the Special Flood Hazard Area.\nWhere a detailed study of a waterway has been done, the 100-year floodplain will also include the floodway, the critical portion of the floodplain which includes the stream channel and any adjacent areas that must be kept free of encroachments that might block flood flows or restrict storage of flood waters. Another commonly encountered term is the Special Flood Hazard Area, which is any area subject to inundation by a 100-year flood. A problem is that any alteration of the watershed upstream of the point in question can potentially affect the ability of the watershed to handle water, and thus potentially affects the levels of the periodic floods. A large shopping center and parking lot, for example, may raise the levels of 5-year, 100-year, and other floods, but the maps are rarely adjusted and are frequently rendered obsolete by subsequent development.\nIn order for a flood-prone property to qualify for government-subsidized insurance, a local community must adopt an ordinance that protects the floodway and requires that new residential structures built in Special Flood Hazard Areas be elevated to at least the level of the 100-year flood. Commercial structures can be elevated or floodproofed to or above this level. In some areas without detailed study information, structures may be required to be elevated to at least two feet above the surrounding grade. Many State and local governments have, in addition, adopted floodplain construction regulations which are more restrictive than those mandated by the NFIP. The US government also sponsors flood hazard mitigation efforts to reduce flood impacts. California's Hazard Mitigation Program is one funding source for mitigation projects. A number of whole towns such as English, Indiana, have been completely relocated to remove them from the floodplain. Other smaller-scale mitigation efforts include acquiring and demolishing flood-prone buildings or flood-proofing them.\nIn some floodplains, such as the Inner Niger Delta of Mali, annual flooding events are a natural part of the local ecology and rural economy, allowing for the raising of crops through recessional agriculture. However, in Bangladesh, which occupies the Ganges Delta, the advantages provided by the richness of the alluvial soil of the floodplain are severely offset by frequent floods brought on by cyclones and annual monsoon rains. These extreme weather events cause severe economic disruption and loss of human life in the densely populated region.\nFloodplain soils.\nOxygen in floodplain soils.\nFloodplain soil composition is unique and varies widely based on microtopography. Floodplain forests have high topographic heterogeneity which creates variation in localized hydrologic conditions. Soil moisture within the upper 30 cm of the soil profile also varies widely based on microtopography, which affects oxygen availability. Floodplain soil stays aerated for long periods in between flooding events, but during flooding, saturated soil can become oxygen-depleted if it stands stagnant for long enough. More soil oxygen is available at higher elevations farther from the river. Floodplain forests generally experience alternating periods of aerobic and anaerobic soil microbe activity, affecting fine root development and desiccation.\nPhosphorus cycling in floodplain soils.\nFloodplains have high buffering capacity for phosphorus to prevent nutrient loss to river outputs. Phosphorus nutrient loading is a problem in freshwater systems. Much of the phosphorus in freshwater systems comes from municipal wastewater treatment plants and agricultural runoff. Stream connectivity controls whether phosphorus cycling is mediated by floodplain sediments or by external processes. Under conditions of stream connectivity, phosphorus is better able to be cycled, and sediments and nutrients are more readily retained. Water in freshwater streams ends up in either short-term storage in plants or algae or long-term in sediments. Wet/dry cycling within the floodplain greatly impacts phosphorus availability because it alters water level, redox state, pH, and physical properties of minerals. Dry soils that were previously inundated have reduced availability of phosphorus and increased affinity for obtaining phosphorus. Human floodplain alterations also impact the phosphorus cycle. Particulate phosphorus and soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP) can contribute to algal blooms and toxicity in waterways when the nitrogen-to-phosphorus ratios are altered farther upstream. In areas where the phosphorus load is primarily particulate phosphorus, like the Mississippi River, the most effective ways of removing phosphorus upstream are sedimentation, soil accretion, and burial. In basins where SRP is the primary form of phosphorus, biological uptake in floodplain forests is the best way of removing nutrients. Phosphorus can transform between SRP and particulate phosphorus depending on ambient conditions or processes like decomposition, biological uptake, redoximorphic release, and sedimentation and accretion. In either phosphorus form, floodplain forests are beneficial as phosphorus sinks, and the human-caused disconnect between floodplains and rivers exacerbates the phosphorus overload.\nEnvironmental pollutants in floodplain soils.\nFloodplain soils tend to be high in eco-pollutants, especially persistent organic pollutant (POP) deposition. Proper understanding of the distribution of soil contaminants is complex because of high variation in microtopography and soil texture within floodplains.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70118", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70118", "title": "Bath", "text": "Bath may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70120", "revid": "1245705168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70120", "title": "Paralympics", "text": ""}
{"id": "70121", "revid": "14672439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70121", "title": "Sycamore", "text": "Sycamore is a name which has been applied to several types of trees, but with somewhat similar leaf forms. The name derives from the Ancient Greek () meaning 'fig-mulberry'.\nSpecies of otherwise unrelated trees known as sycamore:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Index of plants with the same common nameThis page is an index of articles on plant species (or higher taxonomic groups) with the same common name (vernacular name). "}
{"id": "70122", "revid": "31", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70122", "title": "Senate of the United States", "text": ""}
{"id": "70124", "revid": "16819248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70124", "title": "Constitution of the Netherlands", "text": "Basic law of the Netherlands\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Constitution of the Kingdom of the Netherlands of 24 August 1815 () is one of two fundamental documents governing the Kingdom of the Netherlands as well as the fundamental law of the Netherlands proper (the territory of the Kingdom mainly situated in Europe). The Kingdom of the Netherlands also includes Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten: there is an overarching instrument of the entire kingdom that has constitution characteristics: the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Sint Maarten is the only country in the Kingdom of the Netherlands that has a constitutional court to govern the Sint Maarten legislature.\nThe constitution of the Netherlands is only applicable to the Netherlands proper, i.e. the territory in Europe and its public bodies of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba, the latter three since 2010 special municipalities, in the Caribbean, except when the Charter does not cover a certain legal subject. It is generally seen as directly derived from the one issued in 1815, constituting a constitutional monarchy; it is the third oldest constitution still in use worldwide. A revision in 1848 instituted a system of parliamentary democracy. In 1983, the most recent major revision of the Constitution of the Netherlands was undertaken, almost fully rewriting the text and adding new civil rights. \nThe text is sober, devoid of legal or political doctrine and includes a bill of rights. It prohibits the judiciary from testing laws and treaties against the constitution, as this is considered a prerogative of the legislature. There is no constitutional court in the Netherlands.\nHistory.\nThe first constitution of the Netherlands as a whole, in the sense of a fundamental law which applied to all its provinces and cities, is the 1579 constitution, which established the confederal Dutch Republic. The constitution was empowered by the Union of Utrecht, thus by treaty. Article XIII of the treaty granted each inhabitant of the Republic freedom of conscience.\nAfter the French invasion of 1795, the Batavian Republic was proclaimed. On 31 January 1795 it issued a bill of rights, the Verklaring van de rechten van de mens en van de burger. The newly-established National Assembly was tasked with drafting a constitution, the first of the Netherlands in the modern formal sense. Its members disagreed about the extent of suffrage and about whether to organise the republic as a federal or unitary state. A compromised constitution was rejected in a referendum, and a coup d'\u00e9tat was carried out by those favouring a unitary state with a powerful central government, similar to that of the revolutionary French First Republic. The Constitution for the Batavian People was enacted after it received support from an overwhelming majority in another April 1798 referendum. Only those who swore allegiance to the coup were allowed to vote. The constitution outlined the organisation of the national government, and it enshrined equality between citizens and included civil rights such as freedom of speech, assembly, and religion. The Napoleonic Kingdom of Holland, a constitutional monarchy, was established by the \"\" on 7 August 1806. In 1810 the kingdom was annexed by the French Empire.\nEstablishment of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nAfter the French troops were driven out by Russian Cossacks, the new Sovereign Principality of the United Netherlands was established by the constitution of 29 March 1814, the \"Grondwet van den Staat der Ver\u00ebenigde Nederlanden\". William VI of Orange was instated on 2 December 1813 as \"Sovereign Prince\" by acclamation, but and only accepted \"under the safeguard of a free constitution, assuring your freedom against possible future abuses.\" He first appointed 600 men of good standing as electors (Assembly of Notables) and these approved the constitution, written by a commission headed by Gijsbert Karel van Hogendorp. On 24 August 1815 William \u2014 since 16 March King William I of the Netherlands \u2014 having proclaimed himself King of the larger United Netherlands six days earlier, issued the first version of the current constitution, the ' or ', establishing the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, now expanding his realm with the territory of the present state of Belgium, which would again secede from it in 1830. It included a limited unentrenched bill of rights, with freedom of religion, the principle of habeas corpus, the right of petition and freedom of the press as its main points. In the Treaty of London of 1814 the Allies ordered that the original Dutch state would devise a new constitution. It was approved by the new States General (consisting of 55 members) of the Northern Netherlands, but rejected by the majority of appointed electors (796 against 527) of the Southern Netherlands. However, 126 appointed members indicated that they objected to the new constitution because they believed in stronger provisions for freedom of religion. Since freedom of religion was guaranteed under the Treaty of Vienna, their votes and abstaining votes were counted in support of the new constitution instead. This infamous \"Hollandic Arithmetic\" left William feeling justified in his proclamation of the new kingdom.\nRegarding the government's political structure, the 1815 constitution did not diverge much from the situation during the Republic: the 110 members of House of Representatives (lower house) of the States General, the \"Second Chamber\" as it is still called, were still appointed by the States-Provincial (for three years; each year a third was replaced), who themselves were filled with nobility members or appointed by the city councils, just like under the ancien r\u00e9gime. However, the new constitution provided for some rural delegates, elected through electoral colleges and appointed to all States-Provincial (first only true for Friesland) and the city councils. The electoral colleges, in turn, were elected by a select group of male citizens of good standing and paying a certain amount of taxes. Thus, a modicum of democracy was indirectly introduced into the system. Generally, however, the administration was monarchical: the King had control over appointments to the Senate, also known as the \"First Chamber\" and mockingly referred to as the \"\". In 1840, when a new revision was made necessary by the independence of Belgium, a first step to a more parliamentary system was taken by the introduction of penal ministerial responsibility.\nConstitutional Reform of 1848.\nThe constitution as it was revised on 11 October 1848 is often described as the original of the version still in force today. Under pressure from the Revolutions of 1848 in surrounding countries, King William II accepted the introduction of full ministerial responsibility in the constitution, leading to a system of parliamentary democracy, with the House of Representatives directly elected by the voters within a system of single-winner electoral districts. Parliament was accorded the right to amend government bills and to hold investigative hearings. The States-Provincial, themselves elected by voters, appointed by majorities for each province the members of the Senate from a select group of upper class citizens. A commission chaired by Johan Rudolph Thorbecke was appointed to draft the new proposed constitution, which was finished on 19 June. Suffrage was expanded (though still limited to census suffrage), as was the bill of rights with the freedom of assembly, the privacy of correspondence, freedom of ecclesiastical organisation and the freedom of education.\nExpansion of suffrage.\nIn 1884 there was a minor revision. In 1887 the census suffrage system was replaced by one based on minimal wealth and education, which allowed an ever-growing share of the male population to be given the right to vote; therefore this provision was at the time nicknamed the \"caoutchouc-article\". The election interval for the House of Representatives was changed from two (with half of it replaced) to four years (with full a replacement of now hundred members). Eligibility for the Senate was broadened. Any penal measure not based on formal law was prohibited.\nIn 1917, which was, as in 1848, influenced by the tense international situation, universal manhood suffrage was introduced combined with a system of proportional representation to elect the House of Representatives, the States-Provincial and the municipality councils. The Senate continued to be elected by the States-Provincial, but now also employing a system of proportional representation, no longer by majorities per province. The Christian democratic parties agreed to universal manhood suffrage in exchange for a complete constitutional equality in state funding between public and denominational schools, thus ending the school struggle. By the revision of 1922 universal suffrage was explicitly adopted in the constitution, after it had already been introduced by law in 1919. Each three years, half of the members of the Senate were to be elected by the States-Provincial for a period of six years, using a system of proportional representation.\nLater revisions.\nIn 1938 there was a minor revision, introducing some elements of the then fashionable corporatism by giving a constitutional base to public bodies regulating sectors of the economy. A proposal to make it possible to impeach \"revolutionary\" members of representative bodies, directed against communists and fascists, failed to get a two-thirds majority.\nAfter World War II in 1946 a revision failed attempting to simplify the revisional procedure. However, a change was accepted allowing to send conscripts to the colonial war in the Dutch East Indies. In the revision of 1948 a complete new chapter was added to facilitate the incorporation of the new state of Indonesia within the Kingdom under the Netherlands-Indonesia Union. Soon it would become irrelevant as Indonesia severed all ties with the Netherlands in 1954. The revision also created the office of secretary of state, a kind of junior minister but one fully subordinate to a certain minister. In 1953 new articles were introduced concerning international relations, as the Netherlands was abandoning its old policy of strict neutrality. In the revision of 1956 the constitution was changed to accommodate the full independence of Indonesia. The number of members of the House of Representatives members was brought up to 150, of Senate members to 75. The revision of 1963 accommodated the loss of Dutch New Guinea to Indonesia. The voting age was lowered from 23 to 21. In 1972 there was a minor revision; the main change was a lowering of the voting age to 18.\nIn 1983 the constitution was almost entirely rewritten. Many articles were abolished. Social rights were included, most articles were reformulated (the main exception being article 23 about the still sensitive freedom of education) using a new uniform legal terminology and their sequence was changed. The bill of rights was expanded with a prohibition of discrimination, a prohibition of the death penalty, a general freedom of expression, the freedom of demonstration and a general right to privacy.\nIn 1987 there was a minor revision. In the revision of 1995 the introduction of a professional army, replacing the conscript army, was regulated. In the revision of 1999 a proposal to introduce an advisory referendum was rejected by the Senate. After a minor revision in 2002, the last changes were made in 2005; a proposal to introduce an elected mayor was rejected by the Senate.\nRevision.\nThere are substantial safeguards to prevent carefree revision of the constitution. A revision of the constitution is submitted to both chambers of the States General, the House of Representatives and the Senate where the proposed revision has to pass with a (normal) majority. The proposed revision needs to be subsequently be supported by both chambers with a 2/3 majority, after general elections for the house of representatives (in practice most revision are submitted shortly before planned elections). The general elections and the new house of representatives guarantees citizens can indirectly vote for or against a revision.\nContent.\nSystematics and terminology.\nCivil law systems are characterized by their emphasis on abstract rules and methodology. Since the Second World War there has been a dominant movement within the Dutch legal community to be fully consistent in this and incorporate the total of case law accumulated over the years, while the old law books derived from the French Code Napoleon remained basically unchanged, into a completely new set of modern codes. There has been a general tendency to strive for economy of style, clarity of expression, conceptual coherence and unity of terminology. The complete revision of the Dutch constitution in 1983 is part of this process. Combined with an absence of explicit legal doctrine the result can be deceptive, as the simple phrasing hides the underlying implicit doctrine.\nBecause there is no Constitutional Court testing laws and acts against the constitution, much of the systematics are centered on the problem of delegation. If the legislative were allowed to delegate its powers to the government or to lower decentralized bodies, this would threaten democratic legitimacy and the constitutional protection of the citizen (as citizens have no recourse to a Constitutional Court). Therefore, delegation is only allowed if articles contain the terms \"regulate\" or \"by force of law\"; otherwise it is forbidden. This rule itself, however, being legal doctrine, is not explicitly included anywhere within the written law and is only found in the official commission reports and ministerial commentaries accompanying the bill.\nChapters.\nChapter 1: Basic rights.\nChapter 1 is mainly a bill of rights. There is no normative hierarchy indicated by the constitution: all basic rights are principally equal in value and importance. Some rights are absolute, most can be limited by parliamentary or \"formal\" law, many can be limited by delegation of limiting powers. They include:\nThese first eight rights (excluding present Article 8) were the only ones present in the original 1815 document. The remainder were added starting in the 20th century.\nIn addition to these classic rights the revision of 1983 introduced a number of social rights. The distinction between the two categories is not strictly based on any legal doctrine and in fact the social right articles contain many freedom rights. The social rights are:\nChapter 2: Government.\nDutch constitutional doctrine holds that the King and ministers together form the government and this indivisibly, so that the King in any of his public acts always acting under ministerial responsibility is not the Head of Government, but embodies it fully. The King \"is\", however, head of state, and so a special paragraph is dedicated to the King in this quality.\n\u00a71: King.\nArticle 24 stipulates that there is kingship and that this kingship is held by William I of the Netherlands and his lawful successors. Articles 25 and 26 regulate the line of succession to the Dutch throne; since 1983 female successors have equal rights to the throne. Further articles regulate abdication (Article 27); parliamentary approval of royal marriage on penalty of loss of the right to the throne (Art. 28); the exclusion of unfit possible heirs (Art. 29); appointment of a successor if heirs are absent (Art. 30 and 31); the oath and inauguration in the capital of the Netherlands, Amsterdam (Art. 32); the age of royal majority at eighteen (Art. 33); guardianship over a minor King (Art. 34); declaration by Parliament of the King's inability (Art. 35); temporary relinquishment of the exercise of royal authority (Art. 36); regency (Art. 37 and 38); the membership of the Royal House (in practice mainly consisting of members of the House of Orange) (Art. 39); its payment (Art. 40) and the organisation of the royal household by the King (Art. 41).\n\u00a72: King and ministers.\nArticle 42 states the main principles of Dutch government: that it is formed by King and ministers (Subarticle 1) and that \"the King is inviolate; the ministers are responsible\" (Subarticle 2). Before 1848 the inviolacy of the King was interpreted as a judicial one: he could never be tried in court for whatever reason. This remains true, but ministerial responsibility implies there is since the revision of 1848 primarily a political inviolacy. This means that the King cannot act in a public capacity without ministerial approval: externally the governmental policy is always represented by the responsible minister who, should he feel that the King's personal influence in it threatens to become too predominant, has to resign if he cannot prevent it; what happens internally between King and ministers is the Crown Secret, never to be divulged. What little of it nevertheless has come to the public attention, shows that the common conception that the kingship since the reign of William III of the Netherlands has in fact been almost fully ceremonial, is not supported by the facts. Often it is assumed that there is a \"derived ministerial responsibility\" for all members of the Royal House.\nThe Prime Minister and the ministers are appointed and dismissed by Royal Decree (Article 43). Such decrees are also signed by the Prime Minister himself, who signs his own appointment and those of the others (Article 48). Royal decree also institutes the ministries (Article 44), which have tended to be very variable in number and scope, and non-departmental ministers (Subarticle 2), who officially have no ministry but whom in fact is assigned the necessary personnel and who sign and are responsible for a partial budget. The ministers together form the Council of Ministers (Article 45), presided by the Prime Minister (Subarticle 2), which assembles (in fact weekly) to promote the unity of the general governmental policy (Subarticle 3). Though existing since 1823, this council has only been mentioned since the revision of 1983; its constitutional powers as such are almost nil. The proceedings are secret for a period of fifty years. Outwardly the council acts as if there were complete agreement between all ministers: the so-called \"homogeneity\". By Royal Decree are appointed secretaries of state (Article 46); these are subordinate to a certain minister who is fully responsible for their acts (Subarticle 2). All laws and Royal Decrees have to be countersigned by the responsible minister(s) or secretaries of state (Article 47). The countersign has been mandatory since the revision of 1840. Since 1983 such laws and decrees also have to be affirmed by a signed affirmation; it is usually assumed these acts coincide. All ministers and secretaries of state have to swear an oath of purification (declaring to not having bribed anyone to obtain their office, nor having been bribed to commit certain acts when in office) and swear allegiance to the Constitution (Article 49).\nThe individual ministers do not have a (general) executive power, other than that which is attributed to them by special law.\nChapter 3: States General.\n\u00a71: Organisation and composition.\nArticle 50 states that there are States General and that these represent the whole of the people of the Netherlands. Thus a clear distinction is made to the situation under the confederal Dutch Republic when the States General represented the provinces. Doctrine holds that the article also entails that political parties have to give priority to the public interest, as opposed to the particular interests of their constituents. Article 51 specifies that the States General consist of a House of Representatives of the Netherlands (lower house), the Second Chamber of 150 members and a Senate (upper house), the First Chamber of 75 members \u2014 the constitution deliberately mentions the House of Representatives first to emphasize its political primate. Subarticle 4 mentions that both Houses can gather in an indivisible United Assembly of 225 members, a joint session necessary to perform some acts, such as the appointment of a new King in absence of royal heirs. When in United Assembly the President of the Senate is President of the States General (Article 62); the House of Representatives has tried to change this in the revision of 1983 but has twice been defeated by the Senate defending its privilege. The Houses sit for four years (Article 52). They are elected on basis of proportional representation (Article 53) and by a secret ballot (Subarticle 2). The House of Representatives is elected by all Dutch citizens over the age of eighteen (Article 54), except those who have been disqualified by a court sentence as part of their punishment for a crime or those who have been declared incapable by court because of insanity (Subarticle 2). Formal law can limit the right to vote to resident nationals only but presently does not. The Senate is elected by the States Provincial (Article 55).\nTo be eligible to be elected it is necessary to be of Dutch nationality, to be over eighteen in age and not to have been excluded from the right to vote (Article 56); there are also certain incompatibilities of function (Article 57), the most important of which is that a minister not belonging to a demissionary cabinet cannot be a member of the States General, a stark contrast with the situation in United Kingdom or Germany, but in line with the United States. This principle underlies the political dualism of Dutch politics. The Houses investigate the Letters of Credence of new members, in this case a written affirmation by the central voting office that they have indeed obtained the necessary number of votes. After the investigation new members swear four oaths: the oath of purification, the oath of allegiance to the Constitution and the oath of loyal discharge of their office are demanded by Article 60; the oath of loyalty to King and Statute is demanded by Article 47 of the Statute of the Kingdom, the higher Constitution of the Realm. All other issues pertaining the elections are regulated by formal law; delegation is possible (Article 59).\nEach House appoints its own President from its members (Article 61) and a clerk, not from its own members; no officials of the States General may be member of the States (Subarticle 2). Law regulates the remuneration of the members; delegation is possible; such law can only be approved by a two-thirds majority (Article 63).\nArticle 64 states that government can dissolve each House by Royal Decree. Within three months elections have to be held (Subarticle 2). The duration of a new House of Representatives after dissolution is determined by law and not to exceed five years (Subarticle 4). The dissolution only takes effect when the new House meets, to avoid a period without representation. Dissolution of Parliament was in the 19th century an instrument for government to decide a conflict with the House of Representatives by submitting the issue to the voter. Unwritten law developed between 1866 and 1868 that this should not be done more than once over the same issue. The last instance occurred in 1894. In the 20th century such \"conflict resolution\" was replaced by \"crisis resolution\" whenever a political coalition fell apart and could not be reconciled; the government then resigns and instead of trying to find a new coalition majority, decides on holding new elections, normally in accordance with the wishes of parliament itself. Earlier typically an \"interim cabinet\" was formed to arrange for the elections, but this hasn't happened since 1982.\n\u00a72: Procedures.\nArticle 65 states that the parliamentary year is opened on the third Tuesday of September (\"Prinsjesdag\") by the King holding the Speech from the Throne. The same day the minister of finance presents the yearly national budget. The sessions of the States General are public (Article 66), but the session will be secret (\"In camera\") when the House in question so decides (Subarticle 3) which can be proposed by a tenth of the quorum or the President, on which proposal the doors are closed immediately for the vote (Subarticle 2). Normally there is a quorum of a half to start a session or to take any decision (Article 67). Decisions are taken by majority (more than half of the votes, Subarticle 2) and without mandate (Subarticle 3) \u2014 a reference to the situation under the Republic when each delegate had to vote on instruction from the nobles or city councils he represented. On demand of a single member the vote must be oral and by roll call; no member may abstain.\nThe States General have an absolute right to information from the government in writing or in person, only constitutionally limited by State interests, such as the national security (Article 68). Doctrine holds that there can also be \"natural impediments\" justifying that a minister fails in answering questions, such as the circumstance that he simply doesn't know the answer, that he has already answered or that he is about to answer much more completely by issuing a written report on the question. Another doctrinal limitation is the ministerial responsibility: a minister is not obliged to give information about a subject for which not he is responsible but his colleague. Government members have access to the sessions and can freely partake in the discussions (Article 69); they can also be invited to do so by the Houses (Subarticle 2). Such an invitation is in fact an order: government members are not at liberty to refuse. They do however have the right to invite any expert to assist them in the discussions (Subarticle 3). All persons partaking in the deliberations of parliament or in the parliamentary commission meetings have legal immunity regarding any communication they made, either in speech or in writing (Article 71). Otherwise the members have no parliamentary immunity.\nThe States General have the right of inquiry (Article 70). They can by majority vote empower a commission that in public or secret hearings can investigate any subject. Any person in the Realm is obliged to appear and answer their questions; it is a crime not to obey. This right can be limited by formal law; delegation is possible. Sixteen such inquiries have been held since 1848, one of them, about the events in the Second World War, lasting from 1947 till 1956.\nThe Houses each determine their own Rules of Procedure (Article 72). As the legislative is in the Netherlands formed by parliament and government in cooperation, these Rules of Procedure are not formal laws but have a \"sui generis\" \"legal\" status.\nChapter 4: Council of State, Court of Audit, National Ombudsman and Permanent Advisory Colleges.\nChapter 4 covers certain other High Councils of State apart from parliament. The most important of these is the Council of State (\"Raad van State\"). Any proposal of law in the broadest sense and any proposed treaty is in principle first submitted to the Council of State for legal comment; this can be limited by formal law, which however only does so for trivial cases (Article 73). Though officially such comment is merely an advice, it is very rare for law proposals to remain unchanged if the judgment of the council is negative. The council is seen as the guardian of legislative quality; no minister can ignore its opinion without dire effects on his own reputation. Thus the Council in fact codetermines the legislative process. The council also acts as the highest court for administrative appeal (Subarticle 2 and 3); it thus has the final say on the way the country is actually ruled, though this is limited by the fact such appeals can only be made on formal or procedural grounds. The large influence of the council is not always appreciated by external and internal observers. If the King is unable to exert the royal authority and there is as yet no regent, the Council exerts the royal authority (Article 38). The council is officially presided by the King (Article 74); in view of the ministerial responsibility he in fact only does so on special occasions: normally the current chairman is the vice-president of the council, some times by journalists called the \"Viceroy of the Netherlands\". The probable heir becomes a member of the Council when he reaches the age of eighteen and often does attend the meetings. Law can give other members of the Royal House the right to attend; it in fact determines that they nor the heir have voting powers. The members of the council, the \"Staatsraden\", are appointed by Royal Decree for life (Subarticle 2); they can be dismissed on demand by Decree, or in cases determined by law by the Council itself, and law can determine an age limit (Subarticles 3 and 4). The competence, organisation and composition of the council are regulated by law; delegation is possible (Article 75). This competence may exceed the functions indicated in Article 73; in this case no delegation is allowed (Subarticle 2). The number of \"Staatsraden\" is determined by law at a maximum of 29 ordinary members and 50 extraordinary members.\nThe second is the Court of Audit (\"Algemene Rekenkamer\"). Its task is to perform financial audits (Article 76). The members are appointed for life by Royal Decree from a shortlist of three, proposed by the House of Representatives (Article 77). They can be dismissed on demand by Decree or when reaching an age determined by law (Subarticle 2); or dismissed by the Supreme Court in certain other cases determined by law (Subarticle 3). Law determines the organisation, composition and competence of the Court of Audit (Article 78); delegation is possible; this may exceed the functions indicated by Article 76; in this case no delegation is allowed (Subarticle 2). In fact the Court of Audit not only performs financial audits but also \"value for money\" efficiency analyses; it also reports on the effectiveness of all governmental policy via performance audits. Dutch legal doctrine believes in a clear distinction between efficiency and effectiveness reports and this is reflected in two separate types of investigation carried out. The budget as such is always officially approved, be it with \"comments\" when irregularities have been discovered; these then have to be remedied by special law. The effectiveness reports, carried out in great detail, in full independence and without the slightest regard for political sensitivities, have given the Court of Audit a large political influence, even more so than the British National Audit Office.\nThe third is the National Ombudsman, a relatively new function; he may investigate by his own initiative or on request of anyone, the actions of State bodies or other governmental bodies indicated by law; this indication can be delegated (Article 78a). The ombudsman and his substitute are appointed by the House of Representatives for a certain period of time, to be determined by law. They are in any case dismissed by the House of Representatives on demand and when reaching a certain age (Subarticle 2). Law determines the competence of the ombudsman and the way he proceeds; delegation is allowed (Subarticle 3). His competence may by law be determined to exceed that given in Subarticle 1; delegation is allowed (Subarticle 4) \u2014 in contrast with the arrangement given for the Council of State and the Court of Audit.\nThe constitution has a general Article 79 founding the establishment of other advisory bodies, the \"permanent advisory colleges\". The law regulates the organisation, composition and competence of these bodies (Subarticle 2); other competences than mere advisory ones may be attributed by law (Subarticle 3); in both cases delegation is allowed. There used to be a great many of these advisory bodies; after 1996 their number was brought back to a few to economise. The advice of all bodies indicated in Chapter 4 is in principle public; the law regulates the way it is published; delegation is allowed (Article 80); it is submitted to the States General (subarticle 2).\nChapter 5: Legislation and Administration.\n\u00a71: Laws and other prescripts.\nThe Legislative is formed by Government (i.e. King and ministers) and the States General in cooperation (Article 81), although the term \"legislative\" is not actually used: the article simply states that government and the States General together make laws. This means that the Dutch concept of \"formal law\" cannot simply be equated to \"Act of Parliament\", as government and parliament act in unison in creating laws. In the Dutch constitutional system there is no decisive referendum, although sometimes consultative referendums are held, like the one in 2005 in which the people advised to reject the European Constitution; the Dutch people is thus not a direct lawgiver.\nBills are presented by the King or by the House of Representatives, which thus has the right of initiative (Article 82). Some bills have to be presented by the States General in United Assembly (subarticle 2). The Senate cannot propose law. The ministers can but in fact act through the King who sends a Royal Missive (Article 83), containing the proposal, which is only signed by himself, thus without countersign. The House of Representatives has the right of amendment; government too may amend (Article 84). The Senate only can pass or reject laws in full (Article 85), defended by the responsible minister or by members of the House of Representatives having taken the initiative to propose the law; however, in practice it can send the proposal back asking for a \"novelle\" to be passed by the House of Representatives, in fact an amendment of law. Bills may be withdrawn by the proposer until passed (Article 86), but only by a majority of the House of Representatives if the bill has been presented by some members of the House of Representatives and has been passed by the House of Representatives. Bills become valid law once they have been passed by Parliament and have been affirmed by the King (Article 87). It is generally assumed that this also fulfills the demand of signature by Article 47. The affirmation needs sign and ministerial countersign but also the older Royal Order has to be signed and countersigned, ordering to publish the law in a special publication, the \"Staatsblad van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden\" (\"Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees of the Kingdom of the Netherlands\", also called \"Bulletin of Acts and Decrees\"). Only after such publication the law has an external binding force (Article 88).\nIn the Dutch constitutional system there is not only formal law; also other general governmental regulations are recognised, binding the citizen; the overarching concept is called \"material law\". These other regulations are the \"other prescripts\" mentioned in the heading of \u00a71. Only the most important subcategory of these is explicitly mentioned in the constitution, in Article 89: the \"Algemene maatregelen van bestuur\", \"General Administrative Orders\". To avoid doctrinal strive over what orders exactly are covered by this concept, a consensus has developed that a strict formal definition can be applied: all general orders made by Royal Decree (Subarticle 1) that have been submitted to the Council of Ministers and to the Council of State and have been published by the \"Staatsblad\", are General Administrative Orders. Since the Second World War a doctrinal consensus has gradually developed that all general Royal Decrees have to conform to these conditions to be valid and that earlier practices to issue general Royal Decrees without meeting these three formalities \u2014 such Decrees, general or otherwise, are called \"minor Royal Decrees\" \u2014 can no longer result in regulations with binding force towards the citizen. Since 1889 the constitution determines that all prescripts with a penal character have to be based on formal law and that this law imposes the penalty (Subarticles 2 and 4). This includes the Royal Decrees and thus the General Administrative Orders. A doctrinal consensus has developed, however, that all General Administrative Orders, not just those with penal content, have to be based on formal law to be valid, with the competence to regulate delegated by such law.\n\u00a72: Other prescripts.\nThe second paragraph of Chapter 5 contains several articles of disparate administrative content; but they are not the same as the \"other prescripts\" of \u00a71; the redaction of the headings is generally seen as confusing and infelicitous on this point. Most articles in \u00a72 are combined in coherent groups.\nThe first of these groups consists of articles pertaining to international law and treaties. Article 90 states that it is the duty of government to promote the international rule of law. The Netherlands is home to several International Courts. Doctrine holds that this article also attributes the general right to conclude treaties. Article 91 states that the Kingdom shall not be bound by treaty without prior approval of the States General, except for those cases where law determines no such approval is necessary. Such approval may be tacit (Subarticle 2). Despite this, if not either a reservation of approval is made on conclusion of the treaty, or the treaty contains a ratification clause, treaties are according to international law binding upon conclusion. The article must thus be seen as imposing a duty upon government to arrange for such reservation or clause. Subarticle 3 determines that if a treaty conflicts with the Constitution, it has to be approved by a two-thirds majority of both Houses. Whether such conflict exists is decided by the States General; article 6 of the lower \"Rijkswet goedkeuring en bekendmaking verdragen\" determines that this decision has again to be made by special formal law. A special implementation by law of the 1992 Treaty of Maastricht determines that certain European Community decisions having force of treaty have to be approved by Parliament prior to even the conclusion itself. By treaty legislative, administrative and judicial powers may be conferred on organisations established under international law (Article 92). This has been done on many occasions, e.g. on the Benelux, the European Community, the United Nations, the Council of Europe and NATO.\nAccording to present doctrine, that of \"treaty monism\", treaties are in the Dutch legal system in principle self-executing; no special transformation is needed by implementing special law, as in countries with a \"dualistic\" system (such as the United Kingdom). However, when the present articles covering this subject were last revisioned, in 1953, doctrine was divided and some defended a more dualistic position, that of \"limited monism\". They demanded the constitution to be neutral on this issue and this has led to some infelicitous results. Government originally intended that Article 93, stating that treaties of a generally binding nature would only have such binding force after they had been published, to be simply a safeguard, protecting the citizen against duties imposed on him by such treaty. However, the \"limited monists\" held that only such published treaties are self-executing and that thus Article 93 is the basis for all treaty monism; to appease them government stated that the article should in any case be read as covering also the treaties conferring rights on the citizen and imposing duties upon government. The unintended result was that government might thus in principle withhold rights to the citizen by not publishing the treaty. Article 94 determines that legal prescripts are inapplicable if they conflict with treaties of a generally binding nature. This means that laws can be tested against treaty norms and obligations. Dutch courts have however been very reluctant to do so, limiting this to cases where government has been left no freedom of policy at all by the treaty, or to severe formal and procedural defects. The case law is very complex and contradictory, complicated by the fact that the phrase \"generally binding nature\" is assumed to have exactly the same meaning in both articles. Article 95 states that law regulates the publication of treaties or (binding) decisions of international organisations; delegation is allowed.\nA second group of articles consists of those pertaining to the national security. Before the revision of 1983 these were combined in a separate Chapter 10; the articles as such remained largely unchanged in 1983, but were finally fully revised in 2000. Article 96 states that a prior approval of the States General is necessary for the government (since 1983 no longer the King) to declare that the Kingdom is in a state of war. This approval must be given by the United Assembly (Subarticle 3), as it would be most embarrassing if the House of Representatives approved but the Senate withheld approval. If the existing war conditions make such an approval impossible it is not required. Indeed, the approval has little value in any case: the subject of the article is not the classic declaration of war, as such a declaration according to doctrine might constitute a war crime by implying a war of aggression forbidden by international law. It is a simple declarative statement of fact, without legal consequences, that a war situation has come to exist. The doctrine of many other nations makes no such distinction. Article 97 states that a defence force exists to defend the Kingdom and its interests and to maintain and promote the international rule of law; Subarticle 2 determines that the supreme authority over this defence force is exercised by the government; there is thus no constitutional supreme commander. This defence force consists of volunteers and may contain conscripts (Article 98). Since Napoleonic times conscription had been the rule and voluntary service the exception; this has now been inverted to accommodate the creation of a fully professional army in 1997. However, the old laws regulating conscription have only been suspended, to be reactivated in case of emergency; this is given a constitutional basis by Subarticle 2; delegation is allowed. A provision that has remained unchanged is Article 99, stating that law regulates the exemption of military service for conscientious objectors; delegation is allowed. In 2000 a new Article 99a was inserted, that law has to regulate civil defence; the older legal system regulating this issue had been largely abolished since the end of the Cold War. Delegation is allowed. Government has to inform the States General about any intended foreign deployment of Dutch forces outside of defence treaty obligations, thus to protect the international rule of law and for humanitarian missions (Article 100). In an emergency situation such information can be given after the facts. Both government and parliament tended to present this duty as a kind of implicit approval, as parliament could in principle force government to call off the mission, but the Council of State has made clear this is at least formally not the case. Article 101 (mobilisation) has been abrogated in 1995, Article 102 (defence budget and prohibition of billeting) in 2000. Article 103 states that law has to determine in which cases a Royal Decree may declare a state of emergency to maintain external or internal security; delegation is allowed. The powers of lower administrative bodies can be limited; the basic rights expressed in Articles 6,7,8,9, 12 Subarticle 2, 13 and 113 Subarticle 1 and 3 can be infringed upon (Subarticle 2). Royal Decree may end the state of emergency. The States General decide in United Assembly whether the state of emergency must be maintained, immediately after its declaration and as often as they see fit afterwards (Subarticle 3).\nThe third group consists of articles pertaining to financial issues. Imposed taxation must be based on formal law (Article 104). Delegation is allowed. However, to indicate this must be done hesitantly, parliament insisted on a slightly different terminology: instead of \"krachtens de wet\", the phrase \"uit kracht van wet\" was used; both mean \"by force of law\" or \"pursuant to law\"; but the second expression puts somewhat more emphasis on the \"force\" of the law and thus on the fact all delegation is ultimately derived from law. A yearly budget is on \"Prinsjesdag\" presented to the States General, its balance sheet approved by the Court of Audit (Article 105). Delegation is not allowed. The budget debates are held by the House of Representatives, with a separate treatment of each departmental budget and of special interdepartmental budgets; since 1971, the Senate immediately approves the budget formally in exchange for full policy debates. Article 106 states that formal law regulates the monetary system. Delegation is allowed. The article has lost its relevance by the introduction of the euro in 2002; doctrine holds that the constitution does not demand a purely national system.\nA fourth and last group of articles pertains to judicial issues. Article 107 is the \"codification article\". It imposes that that private law, penal law and the separate procedural laws covering these subjects must indeed be formal law and treated in a general Civil Code and a Penal Code, although certain subject might be covered by special laws. Delegation is allowed but doctrine holds that criminal law (which is seen as a more limited field than general penal law) must be determined by formal law only. This means provinces and municipalities cannot create their own criminal codes and government cannot make a certain act a crime by a Royal Decree not based on formal law. As the administrative law of the Netherlands is so complex, it was deemed impossible to incorporate it in a single code, but its general rules must be covered in a general code (Subarticle 2) as has indeed gradually been done since the nineties, be it with great difficulty. Article 108 (investigative bodies for civil complaints) has been abrogated in 1999. Article 109 states that the position of civil servants, including their protection and workers' participation must be determined by law. This has as yet not been done in any general way. Doctrine holds that civil servants enjoy full protection by constitutional basic rights. Article 110 imposes a duty upon government to safeguard by formal law sufficient public access to information regarding governmental activities. Delegation is allowed. The government does not see this as some general \"right to public access to information\" and this has been the reason not to insert it into Chapter 1, but this interpretation is quite popular in doctrine as the right does even more resemble a freedom right than a social right.\nArticle 111, the last of this paragraph, stands alone; it determines that formal law shall instate honorary Royal Orders of Knighthood. These are in fact the Order of William, the Order of the Netherlands Lion and the Order of Orange-Nassau. They do not include Royal House Orders, which are the personal prerogative of the King, such the House Order of Orange and the later Order of the Crown and The Order for Loyalty and Merit. Each year many thousands are honoured by the constitutional orders.\nChapter 6: Administration of justice.\nThis chapter regulates the Dutch judicial system. The central subject is the relation between the judiciary and other courts. The term \"judiciary\" is not meant to indicate the Judicial of the Trias politica, but rather a purely organisational complex of judicial institutions: those courts are simply part of the judiciary that are designated as such by formal law (Article 116). Their organisation, composition and competence is regulated by law; delegation is possible (Subarticle 2). However, one safeguard that is typical of the Judicial, to guarantee its independence, is also characteristic of the Dutch judiciary: its members are appointed for life (Article 117); they can resign voluntarily or will be fired at an age determined by law (Subarticle 2); present law prescribes an age of seventy. Other principles, like impartiality, are not explicitly mentioned in the constitution. The law regulates to which extent persons who are not members of the judiciary, partake in its rulings; delegation is possible (Article 116, sub 3). This refers to (scientific or other) experts on a certain subject, not to a system of jury trials, which is absent in the Netherlands.\nArticle 112 states the main principle: the power to judge disputes of private law and the law of obligations is exclusively attributed to the judiciary (subarticle 1); formal law can attribute other judicial powers to either the judiciary or other courts; delegation is possible as regards the regulation of the procedures and the implementation of rulings (subarticle 2). Doctrine holds that the competence of the court is determined by the nature of the legal rule on which the plaintiff founds his claim. This implies that even in administrative disputes the citizen can always assure some legal resort, simply by bringing a tort action against the State: the judiciary is then competent. Article 115 states that in the cases covered by Article 112, sub 2, always \"some\" administrative appeal is possible. However, it does not guarantee a decision by an independent court: on 23 October 1985 the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the Crown Appeal by the Council of State, then by exclusion the highest administrative appeal court, lacked the necessary independence. This necessitated a complete revision of the Dutch administrative court system, resulting in a much expanded access to independent administrative courts.\nArticle 113 exclusively attributes also the power to judge offences to the judiciary. However, law can regulate the establishment by government of disciplinary courts outside of the judiciary. Delegation is possible (Subarticle 2). The judiciary is attributed the exclusive right to impose a punishment entailing a deprivation of liberty (Subarticle 3). This does not refer to forms of detention that are not punitive in nature. Law may regulate exceptions to the provisions of Article 113 in case of trials held outside of the European territory of the Netherlands or of proceedings of martial law; delegation is possible (Subarticle 4).\nArticle 114 entails a civil right: the prohibition of the death penalty, included by the constitutional revision of 1983 after the death penalty itself had already been abolished in 1870. The article is not a guarantee, as doctrine holds that in a state of emergency any right might be suspended by unwritten constitutional emergency law; also in principle some treaty might oblige the judge to impose the death penalty. However, in fact the Netherlands has ratified the Sixth Protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights, also containing a prohibition and having precedence over any other treaty. Therefore, since 1986 no Dutch judge has any formal competence to impose the death penalty. Nevertheless, the Dutch government might by treaty be obligated to cooperate with some international tribunal with the powers to impose the death penalty, such as the International Military Tribunal once was.\nArticle 118 regulates the Dutch Supreme Court, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden. Their members are appointed from a shortlist of three, made by the House of Representatives of the States General (Subarticle 1). Formal law determines in which cases the Supreme Court may reverse judgments of lower courts (cassation) for violation of the law (Subarticle 2). The Supreme Court in revision only decides points of law, not substantial matters. Other duties may be attributed by formal law (Subarticle 3). These other duties in fact include the resolving of conflicts of competence between courts, penal trials against judges for offences committed in office, disciplinary and advisory tasks and the decision in disputes about prizes taken by Dutch vessels. Article 119 attributes the exclusive right to the Supreme Court of trying members of the States General, ministers and secretaries of state, whether incumbent or formal, for offences committed in office. It also states such a trial is instigated by either a Royal Decree or a decision by the House of Representatives.\nArticle 120 states that no judge will judge the constitutionality of laws and treaties. Therefore, no constitutional review of formal laws is possible; the Netherlands lack a Constitutional Court. However, regulations of lower administrative bodies may be tested against the constitution by the courts. Also any law may be tested against any self-executing treaty, though this rarely happens.\nArticle 121 states three safeguards for a fair trial: the first is that trials are public. The second is that judgments must specify the considerations and grounds upon which they are based. The third is that any judgment must be pronounced in public. Any exception to these principles can only be made by formal law; no delegation is possible. Article 122 states that pardon is granted by Royal Decree, on advice by a court indicated by law. Formal law regulates the procedure; delegation is possible. Also, an amnesty is possible by a special law or by force of such law; delegation is possible (Subarticle 2).\nChapter 7: Provinces, municipalities, water boards and other public bodies.\nThe Netherlands form a decentralised unitary state, meaning that although the state is not a federation, some bodies have an autonomous power of regulation, either based on a territorial division or on a functional division.\nArticle 123 states that provinces and municipalities can be established and abolished by formal law, hereby indicating the two levels of territorial division. The twelve Dutch provinces still largely coincide with their medieval predecessors, with the exception of Flevoland, and North and South Holland, which were created in 1815 from Holland; the municipalities have recently been greatly decreased in number. Formal law regulates changes in their boundaries, delegation is allowed (Subarticle 2).\nArticle 124 states the main principles of decentralisation: provinces and municipalities are competent to regulate and administrate their internal affairs (Subarticle 1), delegation is possible \u2014 but only by the provinces and municipalities themselves (Article 128); nevertheless demands, regulated by formal law, can be made by the central government on such regulative and administrative powers; delegation is allowed (Article 124 sub 2). So the lower territorial administrative bodies have on the one hand a relative autonomy \u2014 but on the other hand they must work within the national legal framework, loyally implement national government policy and are subject to central control. This is further covered by Article 132: the standard organisation of provinces and municipalities and the composition and competence of their administrative organs is regulated by formal law (Subarticle 1); how they are controlled is regulated by law (Subarticle 2); their decisions shall only be subject to prior supervision in cases determined by law or by force of law (Subarticle 3); their decisions shall only be quashed by Royal Decree and on grounds that they violate the law (in the broadest sense: the \"recht\") or conflict with the public interest (Subarticle 4). Law will in general regulate the kind of provisions to be made if provinces or municipalities fail to meet the demands of Article 124 sub 2 (Subarticle 5). Which taxes may be levied by provinces and municipalities and their financial relationship with the state, are determined by law (Subarticle 6).\nArticle 125 indicates the main administrative organs of the lower territorial administrative bodies: in the case of the provinces these are the States-Provincial; the municipalities are administrated by the municipal councils. Their sessions are public, except in cases regulated by formal law; delegation is allowed (Subarticle 1). The sessions of the States-Provincial are presided by the Commissioner of the King, those of the municipal councils by the mayor (Subarticle 3). The Commissioner of the King is also part of the provincial administration as are the Deputised States; the mayor is also part of the municipal administration, as is the College of Mayor and Aldermen (Subarticle 2). In this system the administrative organs exert the function of both the executive and legislative (Article 127); however, to form the daily administration they appoint Deputised States (for provinces) or the Colleges of Mayor and Aldermen (municipalities). In 2002 the system underwent a major revision the \"aldermen\" (\"wethouders\") and States Deputised were no longer allowed to be members of the municipal councils or States Provincial respectively. This makes their function designation a misnomer, although the etymology of the word \"wethouder\" or \"deputised\" is no longer commonly understood. The Commissioner of the King and the mayor are officials, appointed by Royal Decree (Article 131). A proposed revision to introduce an elected mayor, recently was rejected by the Senate. The mayor has some legal executive powers of his own, mainly regarding the protection of public order, but these have no direct constitutional basis, they are delegated by the national legislator. Article 126 states, however, that formal law may determine that instructions regarding his office may be given to the Commissioner of the King by the national government. For cases of gross neglect of administrative duty, formal law will regulate the kind of provisions to be made in deviation of Articles 125 and 127 (Article 132, sub 4)\nThe members of the States-Provincial and the municipal council are directly elected by their constituents. The conditions of the right to elect and be elected are the same as those regarding the elections of the House of Representatives (Article 129 sub 1). However, formal law may give inhabitants of municipalities, that do not have the Dutch nationality, the right to elect, and be elected in, the municipal council, if they meet the other conditions (Article 130). This right has indeed been given to certain categories of foreign nationals, e.g. all citizens of the European Union. The elections take place within a system of proportional representation (Article 129 sub 2); the vote is secret and the organisation of the voting is regulated by law (Subarticle 3). The term of the States-Provincial and the municipal council is four years, unless formal law determines otherwise (Subarticle 4) Law determines possible incompatibilities of function, and may determine that family ties, marriage or the commission of acts indicated by such law may lead to a loss of membership (Subarticle 5). E.g. membership of a municipal council is incompatible with that of the Council of Ministers; a lawyer will lose his membership of a municipal council if he represents his municipality in court. All members vote without mandate (Subarticle 6). This is a reference to the situation under the Republic when the members of the States of a province voted on instruction from the city councils they represented.\nChapter 8: Amending the constitution.\nTo amend the constitution, the proposed changes must first be approved by both the House of Representatives and the Senate of the States General with a simple majority (more than 50%). This law is called a \"voorstelwet\" or 'law to propose changes to the constitution' (lit. \"proposal law\") and does not alter the constitution, but declares there are sufficient grounds for a certain proposal to change the constitution to be considered. The House of Representatives must then be dissolved and general elections held. The proposed changes to the constitution are then discussed a second time, this time needing a two-thirds majority in both houses of the States General to approve them. This is intended to give voters a say in the matter, by allowing them the opportunity to elect a parliament to vote down the changes if desired. In practice, however, instead of disbanding the House of Representatives and having early elections, the proposal law is simply considered after the next regularly scheduled elections have been held. Consequently, unless early elections are held for some reason (e.g. following the collapse of the government) changes to the constitution can only occur once every four years. In earlier versions of the amendment process, the Senate was also dissolved whenever general elections were held and both Houses had approved a law to propose changes to the constitution. This was deemed a pointless addition to procedure, however, as the Senate is elected by the States-Provincial and the States-Provincial are not dissolved following the adoption of a proposal in parliament (see elections in the Netherlands). The Senate will therefore invariably have the same composition unless provincial elections are held as well. Neither holding provincial elections specially for this purpose, nor postponing consideration of the proposal to change the constitution until after the regularly scheduled provincial elections is considered a desirable alternative. Changes that involve the relations between the countries of the Kingdom must be proposed by a law formulated by the Government of the Realm.\nAdditional articles.\nThere used to be several additional articles with Roman numbering; however, all except articles IX and XIX are now abrogated.\nCharter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nEach of the four countries within the Kingdom of the Netherlands (The Netherlands, Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten) has its own constitution or \"basic law\". These constitutions are legally subjected to the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which is the constitution of the entire Kingdom. The Charter however, mainly describes the relations between the different parts of the Kingdom. In addition it stipulates that each country is obliged to promote human rights, listed in a special bill of rights, and decent governance. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a federacy, where the central government gives considerable autonomy to some parts of the kingdom (Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten), but retains control over a large part (European Netherlands). There is a Government of the Realm, a Legislative of the Realm and a Supreme Court of the Realm. However, these bodies are only fully formed on special occasions and by appointing special Antillian members to the normal Dutch government, parliament and Supreme Court. One of the members of the Dutch council of ministers is always also appointed a permanent \"Minister of Antillian Affairs\". Since 1998 this is the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations; when he is acting in this capacity the council has the status of the Government of the Realm to treat minor issues. Though the Charter is in principle higher than the Dutch Constitution, there is no legal mechanism to enforce this. The Dutch Supreme Court has consistently ruled that it is forbidden for judges to test laws and administrative acts against the Charter. However the Government of the Realm can strike void any law of Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten for being incompatible with the Statute. This asymmetry and the fact that foreign affairs and the defence of the Kingdom are administered by the Dutch Government in its capacity of Government of the Realm show that the frame of government of the Kingdom has also elements of a decentralised unitary state. The Charter can only be changed with the consent of all countries within the Kingdom; the laws to this effect can be adopted with a simple absolute majority in each of their parliaments.\nGeneral precepts.\nAlthough the constitution itself is the primary body of constitutional law in the Netherlands, it is not the only law that contains constitutional codification. A number of general precepts are encoded in a separate law known as the \"Law on general precepts\" (the \"Wet Algemene bepalingen\"). These precepts cover a number of varying topics ranging from applicability of different types of laws to persons or territories, to regulations mandating that judges must hear all cases brought before them.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70125", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70125", "title": "Stock Market Downturn of 2002", "text": ""}
{"id": "70126", "revid": "46993000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70126", "title": "Speculative", "text": "Speculative may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70127", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70127", "title": "Equity investor", "text": ""}
{"id": "70128", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70128", "title": "E3", "text": "American video game industry event (1995\u20132021)\nE3 (short for Electronic Entertainment Expo) was an annual trade event for the video game industry organized and presented by the Entertainment Software Association (ESA). It was held principally in Los Angeles from 1995 to 2019, with its final iteration held virtually in 2021. The event hosted developers, publishers, hardware manufacturers, and other industry professionals who used the occasion to introduce and advertise upcoming games, hardware, and merchandise to the press. During its existence, E3 was the world's largest and most prestigious annual gaming expo. \nE3 included an exhibition floor for developers, publishers, and manufacturers to showcase their titles and products for sale in the upcoming year. Before and during the event, publishers and hardware manufacturers usually held press conferences to announce new games and products. Before 2017, E3 was an industry-only event; the ESA required individuals wishing to attend to verify a professional relationship with the video game industry. With the rise of streaming media, several press conferences were broadcast to the public to increase their visibility. E3 2017 became open to the public for the first time, with 15,000 general-admittance passes for those who wanted to attend.\nWhen hosted in Los Angeles, E3 was held in the Los Angeles Convention Center. The event was cancelled for the first time in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the event in 2021 was held as a virtual event to mixed reception. The 2022 event was cancelled also due to the pandemic, and with no virtual event held. The ESA had planned to return to a full in-person convention in 2023 with a new format, including a fan convention component at a separate venue in collaboration with ReedPop. \nThe pandemic further accelerated the use of standalone presentations by individual publishers and media outlets to promote upcoming games directly to consumers, development timelines usually aligned around the convention had been disrupted, and publishers were increasingly concerned over the costs of exhibiting at the convention. E3 2023 was cancelled after all major publishers pulled out of the event. E3 2024 was also cancelled in September 2023 in order to evaluate plans for 2025. However, on December 12, 2023, the ESA announced that the E3 would no longer be held.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nBefore E3, game publishers went to other trade shows like the Consumer Electronics Show and the European Computer Trade Show to display new or upcoming products as well as to pre-sell shipments to retailers for the rest of the year including the late-year holiday season as well as to view for press coverage of upcoming games. As the game industry grew rapidly during the early 1990s, industry professionals felt that it had outgrown the older trade shows. According to Tom Kalinske, CEO of Sega of America, \"The CES organizers used to put the video game industry way, way in the back. In 1991, they put us in a tent, and you had to walk past all the porn vendors to find us. That particular year it was pouring rain, and the rain leaked right over our new Genesis system. I was just furious with the way CES treated the video game industry, and I felt we were a more important industry than they were giving us credit for.\" Sega did not return to CES the following year, and several other companies exited from further CES shows.\nSeparately, in 1994, the video game industry had formed the Interactive Digital Software Association (IDSA, later becoming the Entertainment Software Association, ESA, in 2003) in response to attention the industry had drawn from the United States Congress over a lack of a ratings system in late 1993. The IDSA was formed to unify the video game industry and establish a commission, the Entertainment Software Ratings Board (ESRB) to create a voluntary standard rating system that was approved by Congress.\nThe industry recognized that it needed some type of trade show for retailers. According to Eliot Minsker, chairman and CEO of Knowledge Industry Publications (which produced and promoted the show with Infotainment World), \"Retailers have pointed to the need for an interpretive event that will help them make smarter buying decisions by interacting with a wide range of publishers, vendors, industry influentials, and opinion leaders in a focused show setting.\" Attempts were made between the video game companies and the Consumer Electronics Association (CEA) which ran CES, to improve how video games were treated at CES, but these negotiations failed to produce a result. Pat Ferrell, creator of \"GamePro\" which was owned by International Data Group (IDG), conceived of an idea for starting a dedicated trade show for video games, building off IDG's established experience in running the Macworld convention. Ferrell contacted the IDSA who saw the appeal of using their position in the industry to create a video game-specific tradeshow, and offered to co-found the Electronic Entertainment Expo with IDG.\nThough several companies agreed to present at this E3 event, Ferrell discovered that CEA had offered video game companies a dedicated space at the next CES, which would have conflicted with the planned E3 event, requiring the companies to pick one or the other. Most of the IDSA members supported E3, while Nintendo and Microsoft were still supportive of the CES approach. After about three to four months, Ferrell was told by CEA's CEO Gary J. Shapiro that he had \"won\" and that they had canceled the CES video game event, effectively making E3 the premier trade show for the video game industry.\n1995\u20132006: Growth and success through first decade.\nThe first event was held from May 11\u201313, 1995 at the Los Angeles Convention Center, which would generally be the convention's location in future years. The organizers were unsure of how successful this would be, but by the end of the convention, they had booked most of the space at the Convention Center, and saw more than 40,000 attendees. In the aftermath of its first year, E3 was already regarded as the biggest event in the video game industry. The IDSA realized the strength of a debut trade show, and subsequently renegotiated with IDG to allow the IDSA to take full ownership of the show and the intellectual property associated with the name, while hiring IDG to help with execution of the event. During this E3, Sega had introduced the Sega Saturn, priced at $399. Sony also introduced the first PlayStation console, with Sony Computer Entertainment North America's president Steve Race coming on stage during their press event to simply say \"$299\" before leaving the stage to applause. The surprise undercutting price had a significant impact on Sega and the current console war between Sega, Sony, and Nintendo. From then on, E3 was seen to play a major part in other console wars, with journalists reporting on which manufacturer \"won\" E3 based on their product offerings.\nIn 1996, IDG and the IDSA tried a Japanese version of E3, in preparation for a worldwide series of events, at the Makuhari Messe in Tokyo (as E3 Tokyo '96) in association with TV Asahi. Although Sony Computer Entertainment was the show's original sponsor, the company withdrew its support in favor of its PlayStation Expo. Sega then pulled out at the last minute, leaving Nintendo the only big-three company to appear. Held November 1\u20134, 1996, the presence of several other gaming expos and lack of support from Japanese game manufacturers led to reportedly poor turnout and rumored E3 events in Singapore and Canada did not take place.\nDue to failed negotiations for the convention space in Los Angeles, the E3 conventions in 1997 and 1998 were held at the Georgia World Congress Center in Atlanta, Georgia. Turnout at these shows was dramatically lower than at the first two E3s, which has been attributed to a declining number of game developers and the fact that many video game companies were based on the West Coast, making the cost of sending staff and equipment to Atlanta prohibitive. The show returned to the Los Angeles Convention Center in 1999, and continued to grow in attendance, ranging from 60,000 to 70,000 attendees.\nIn addition to the event, E3 started to support (or became associated with) several websites. One was E365, introduced in 2006, an online community which attendees used to network and schedule meetings.\n2007\u20132008: \"Media and Business Summit\".\nFollowing the 2006 convention, the IDSA\u2014now ESA\u2014found that many exhibitors were worried about the high costs of presenting at the event, spending between $5\u2013$10 million for their booths. They had also found that a larger proportion of attendees were bloggers and attendees who were not perceived to be industry professionals by vendors, managing to secure access to the conference. These additional attendees diluted the vendors' ability to reach out to their target audience, retailers and journalists. Both of these reasons had previously caused the COMDEX trade show to shut down. Several large vendors told the ESA that they were going to pull out of the next E3, which would have had a domino effect on other vendors.\nTo avoid this, the ESA announced in July 2006 that E3 would be downsized and restructured due to the overwhelming demand from the exhibitors, and would limit attendees to those from the media and retail sectors. For 2007 and 2008, E3 was renamed to the E3 Media and Business Summit, and moved into the July timeframe, about two months later in the year than previous shows. The 2007 show was held at the Barker Hangar at the Santa Monica Airport and other nearby hotels in Santa Monica, California with attendance limited to about 10,000, and was the last time the show was not physically held at the Los Angeles Convention Center. The 2008 event returned to the Los Angeles Convention Center, but also capped attendance at about 5,000.\nESA was harshly criticized for these smaller events. Industry analyst Michael Pachter said that because consumers had been eliminated from attending the events, there was little external media coverage of these E3s, reducing the visibility and commercialization opportunities for publishers, and suggested that without a change, E3 would become extinct. Pachter also found that retailers were less interested in E3 due to the later calendar date. Activision, which had been a member of the ESA since its start, opted to leave the ESA in 2008 and to no longer participate in the E3 event, with their CEO Robert Kotick stating the company was too big for the E3 and ESA at that point, riding on revenue from \"World of Warcraft\".\n2009\u20132015: Return to larger format.\nResponding to the complaints from the previous two years, the ESA announced that E3 2009 would be more open, but capping attendance at about 45,000 and closed to the public, as to achieve a balance between the two extremes. All subsequent E3s took place in June of the calendar year at the Los Angeles Convention Center.\nStarting in 2013, some of the major video game companies, particularly Nintendo and Electronic Arts, have opted not to showcase at E3. In Nintendo's case, they have foregone a large keynote presentation and instead have used pre-recorded Nintendo Direct and live video events during the E3 week since 2013 to showcase their new products, though they still run floor booths for hands-on demonstrations. Since 2014, there also have been Nintendo Treehouse Live streams that focused on several different games as well as tournaments for different titles. Electronic Arts, since 2016, have set up a separate EA Play event in a nearby locale to announce and exhibit their titles, citing the move as a result of the lack of public access to the main E3 show. Other vendors, like Microsoft and Sony have used pre-E3 events to showcase hardware reveals, leaving the E3 event to cover new games for these systems.\nBy 2015, traditional video game marketing had been augmented by the use of publicity through word-of-mouth by average gamers, persons not normally part of the \"professional\" development community. The ESA began to seek ways to allow these people to attend E3 in limited numbers without overwhelming the normal attendees. For E3 2015, 5,000 tickets were distributed to vendors to be given to fans to be able to attend the event. That same year also marked the introduction of the \"PC Gaming Show\", featuring games for personal computers across a range of developers and publishers.\n2016\u20132019: Opening to the public.\nE3 2016 featured a separate but free \"E3 Live\" event at the nearby L.A. Live space that was to help provide a small-scale version of the E3 experience. While it drew about 20,000 people, it was found to be underwhelming. In 2017, the ESA reserved 15,000 tickets to the convention for members of the public to buy; these were all sold, leading to more than 68,000 attendees during E3 2017, which led to noticeable crowding and floor management issues. ESA confirmed that E3 2018 would include public passes, but that for two of the days, the event would be open only to industry attendees for three hours prior to admitting the public.\nThe ESA unveiled the new logo for E3, replacing its previous one using three-dimensional block letters with a flatter, stylized graphic, in October 2017.\nWhile the ESA has the Convention Center space reserved through 2019, ESA's CEO Mike Gallagher said, following the 2017 event, that they were considering other options due to lack of modernization and upgrades that the center has had to make the space more appropriate for their needs. Gallagher said that the ESA was working with the City and Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) which owns the Los Angeles Convention Center and the space around it, with plans to have nearly of additional exhibition space added by 2020, but that they would judge this in the 2018 show. During 2018, the event drew 69,200 attendees, the largest since 2005.\nWith announcements of the dates for E3 2019, the ESA declined to state where they had planned to hold the 2020 event. Sony Interactive Entertainment had announced that it would not be participating in E3 2019, having had participated in every E3 since its launch. Sony stated that they \"are exploring new and familiar ways to engage our community in 2019\". Sony's CEO Shawn Layden stated in a February 2019 interview that with changes in retailer procurement, their own switch to fewer but more quality titles, and the rapid spread of news via the Internet that having a trade show as late as June is no longer helpful, and that Sony had to create its own Destination PlayStation experience in February as to secure retailer sales. Industry analyst Michael Pachter, speaking to GamingBolt, said, \"I think it's a mistake to skip the show, they will probably be there without a big booth. It was a surprise to me\".\nAs of 2016, revenues from running E3 accounted for about 48% of the organization's annual budget, with another 37% coming from membership dues. With Sony's withdrawal from the conference and the controversies surrounding outgoing ESA president Mike Gallagher, some member companies criticized the ESA for splitting its focus between producing E3 and acting as a legislative advocacy group, with neither focus receiving adequate attention. This led to calls advocating for the business of running E3 to be split out into a separate company. Developers and publishers complained of the increasing cost to have a booth presence at E3 compared to simply holding a digital event streamed online, saying the exposure afforded by E3 was not always worth the price. Sony and Electronic Arts' departure and Nintendo's move to a digital-only keynote diminished E3's status as the premier game announcement event, which further eroded its ability to attract exhibitors. E3 lost nearly 1/3 of its exhibitors between 2017 and 2019, going from 293 to 209.\nData leak.\nOn August 3, 2019, it was found that an unsecured list of personal attendee data was publicly accessible from the ESA's site. The list contained the information of over 2,000 people, most of them being the press and social media influencers that had attended E3 2019. ESA removed the list after it was found, and apologized for allowing the information to become public. However, using similar techniques to access the 2019 data, users found similar data for over 6,000 attendees of past E3 events still available on user-authenticated portions of their website; these too were subsequently pulled by the ESA once notified. A number of journalists on the lists reported that they were subsequently harassed and had received death threats due to their private information being released as part of the leak. Ahead of E3 2020, the ESA stated they were taking stricter security measures to protect the privacy of those registering for E3 as a result of the leak. ESA president Stanley Pierre-Louis stated they plan to collect less data from attendees and take measures such as securing the data on separate servers to avoid this type of leak from occurring again.\n2020\u20132023: Impact of COVID-19 and discontinuation.\nDuring the last day of the event in 2019, it was confirmed that E3 would be held at the LACC for at least another year, with the 2020 edition. The ESA affirmed they had renegotiated use of the LACC through 2023, but retained the rights to break that contract if desired.\nThe ESA's membership approved an increase in the number of public passes from 15,000 to 25,000 for the 2020 show. Alongside this, the ESA had presented proposed, but not finalized, plans to make the 2020 event a \"fan, media, and influencer festival\". To mitigate the longer lines caused by increased public attendance, they aimed to use \"queuetainment\" to advertise to attendees while they wait, as well as a FastPass-like system of reserving game demos in advance similar to the one employed by Disney Parks. They planned to give priority to \"influencers\" by providing them appointment-only presentations on new games. Additionally, with these changes, the ESA were considering adding an extra day on the Tuesday of the convention week that would be an industry-only day before the floor of the convention was opened to public passes. Sony affirmed it would not attend the 2020 show, stating that the vision for E3 2020 did not meet their goals, and instead would showcase their games at other events throughout the year. In the wake of Sony's announcement, ESA affirmed that the 2020 show \"will be an exciting, high-energy show featuring new experiences, partners, exhibitor spaces, activations, and programming that will entertain new and veteran attendees alike\". On February 12, 2020, Geoff Keighley, host of E3 Coliseum and The Game Awards, released a statement announcing that he would also be forgoing his attendance of E3 for the first time in the expo's 25-year history, citing his discomfort with the direction planned for the event in 2020.\nHowever, in the months leading to the 2020 event, the COVID-19 pandemic created concerns related to large gatherings such as E3. As late as March 4, 2020, the ESA had still intended to hold E3 2020, though said they were monitoring the situation around the outbreak. On March 11, 2020, the ESA announced that E3 2020 had been cancelled due to the pandemic. The ESA also claimed that they would both fully refund prospective attendees and exhibitors and devise a virtual event that would enable exhibitors to hold digital presentations during the same week in lieu of a physical meeting. However, by April 7, 2020, the ESA stated that the disruption caused by the pandemic made it impossible to host an online equivalent, fully cancelling the event, though the ESA would help its partners to present individual announcements via E3's website. Keighley would organize \"Summer Game Fest\"\u2014an event series encompassing various publisher-led digital presentations and demo offerings from May to August 2020.\nDespite cancelling the 2020 event, the ESA stated it still planned to hold the 2021 event, announcing its normal June dates to partners in April 2020. While the ESA had planned for a combined in-person and virtual event, the organization notified its partners in February 2021 that it was dropping the in-person event but maintaining the virtual event plans. According to \"Video Games Chronicle\", the ESA still planned to use the LACC to broadcast some of these virtual events during E3 2021, as well as planning on further use of the space in 2022 and 2023. The virtual event faced a mixed reception among users and the industry, including issues with the event's official mobile app, and assessments that E3 as a virtual event was redundant to streaming presentations that could be held as standalone events by publishers.\nWhile Mayor Eric Garcetti stated that the ESA had planned E3 2022 to be an in-person event, on January 7, 2022, the ESA announced that the in-person version of E3 2022 had been cancelled due to COVID-19, with no immediate confirmation of a virtual event. Although this announcement came amid spread of the Omicron variant, \"IGN\" reported that unlike past years, E3 2022 had no dates publicized by either the ESA or the LACC\u2014which had cast doubt (especially amid the internal issues surrounding the 2020 event, and the aforementioned reception to E3 2021) over whether the event was even being planned at all. Furthermore, \"IGN\" reported via anonymous sources that the ESA had made a decision to cancel the event as early as late-2021. The ESA formally announced on March 31, 2022, that they had fully cancelled E3 2022.\nIn June 2022, the ESA stated that they still planned to return with a physical and virtual show in 2023. One month later, the ESA confirmed that E3 2023 would occur at the Los Angeles Convention Center during the second week of June 2023, and that they have partnered with ReedPop, who operate conventions such as PAX events, New York Comic Con, and the \"Star Wars\" Celebration, to help manage the event. In September 2022, the ESA announced that the event would also include three \"Business Days\" where the floor would be limited to developers, publishers, retailers, and recognized journalists, while two days at a separate location would be held as \"Fan Days\" for all members of the public. In January 2023, \"IGN\" reported that none of Microsoft, Nintendo, or Sony would exhibit at E3 2023, with Nintendo confirming their absence the following month, citing that \"this year's E3 show didn't fit into our plans.\" Microsoft confirmed in March 2023 they would not be on the E3 showfloor, but would be holding the digital events. In the same month, Ubisoft also announced that they would not be attending E3 2023, and would be hosting their own presentation event in June instead. On March 29, \"IGN\" reported that both Sega and Tencent would be skipping E3 2023.\nOn March 30, 2023, the 2023 event was cancelled because of a lack of \"sustained interest\". According to ESA's president, Stanley Pierre-Louis, the choice to cancel the 2023 show was a result of three factors: that the COVID-19 pandemic had impacted the typical development cycle for most companies; that the current economy had publishers and developers re-evaluate the need for attending E3; and that, as a result, there has been more exploration of the mix of in-person and digital marketing events that individual companies have run. While Pierre-Louis stated that ESA was intending to hold E3 in 2024, they were looking themselves to find a balance that works for the industry. \nThe ESA affirmed in September 2023 that there would be no E3 2024, that they would not be using the LACC in the immediate future, and that ReedPop was no longer working to help organize future events. The ESA stated they were still in discussions with their partners on E3 2025 and future shows, with the former reportedly planned to have a \"complete reinvention\". On December 12, 2023, the ESA announced that E3 had been discontinued, citing \"the new opportunities our industry has to reach fans and partners\". Pierre-Louis said that other live events were not responsible for the decision to end E3, while the increasing number of publisher-specific showcases was a reason. He further stated that ReedPop's departure was not solely responsible for their decision to end E3 but helped to inform their choice.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70129", "revid": "50985984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70129", "title": "Mistletoe", "text": "Common name for various parasitic plants\nMistletoe is the common name for obligate hemiparasitic plants in the order Santalales. They are attached to their host tree or shrub by a structure called the haustorium, through which they extract water and nutrients from the host plant. There are hundreds of species which mostly live in tropical regions.\nThe name mistletoe originally referred to the species \"Viscum album\" (European mistletoe, of the family Santalaceae in the order Santalales); it is the only species native to the British Isles and much of Europe. A related species with red fruits, rather than white, \"Viscum cruciatum\", occurs in Southwest Spain and Southern Portugal, as well as in Morocco in North Africa and in southern Africa. There is also a wide variety of species in Australia. The genus \"Viscum\" is not native to North America, but \"Viscum album\" was introduced to Northern California in 1900.\nThe eastern mistletoe native to North America, \"Phoradendron leucarpum\", belongs to a distinct genus of the family Santalaceae.\nEuropean mistletoe has smooth-edged, oval, evergreen leaves borne in pairs along the woody stem, and waxy, white berries that it bears in clusters of two to six. The eastern mistletoe of North America is similar, but has shorter, broader leaves and longer clusters of ten or more berries.\nOver the centuries, the term mistletoe has been broadened to include many other species of parasitic plants with similar habits, found in other parts of the world, that are classified in different genera and families such as the Misodendraceae of South America and the mainly southern hemisphere tropical Loranthaceae.\nEtymology.\nThe word 'mistletoe' derives from the older form 'mistle' adding the Old English word (twig). 'Mistle' is from Common Germanic (cf. Old High German , Middle High German , Old English , Old Norse ). Further etymology is uncertain, but may be related to the Germanic base for 'mash'.\n\"Online Etymology Dictionary\" claims a similar theory, noting, \"The alteration of the ending... is perhaps from a mistaking of the final \"-n\" for a plural suffix after \"tan\" fell from use as a separate word, but \"Oxford\" finds it a natural evolution in West Saxon based on stress.\"\nGroups.\nParasitism has evolved at least twelve times among the vascular plants. Molecular data show the mistletoe habit has evolved independently five times within the Santalales\u2014first in the Misodendraceae, but also in the Loranthaceae and three times in the Santalaceae (in the former Santalalean families Eremolepidaceae and Viscaceae, and the tribe Amphorogyneae).\nThe largest family of mistletoes, the Loranthaceae, has 73 genera and more than 900 species. Subtropical and tropical climates have markedly more mistletoe species; Australia has 85, of which 71 are in Loranthaceae, and 14 in Santalaceae.\nLife cycle.\nMistletoe species grow on a wide range of host trees, some of which experience side effects including reduced growth, stunting, and loss of infested outer branches. A heavy infestation may also kill the host plant. \"Viscum album\" successfully parasitizes more than 200 tree and shrub species.\nAll mistletoe species are hemiparasites because they do perform some photosynthesis for some period of their life cycle. However, in some species its contribution is very nearly zero. For example, some species, such as \"Viscum minimum\", that parasitize succulents, commonly species of Cactaceae or Euphorbiaceae, grow largely within the host plant, with hardly more than the flower and fruit emerging. Once they have germinated and attached to the circulatory system of the host, their photosynthesis reduces so much that it becomes insignificant.\nMost of the Viscaceae bear evergreen leaves that photosynthesise effectively, and photosynthesis proceeds within their green, fleshy stems as well. Some species, such as \"Viscum capense\", are adapted to semi-arid conditions and their leaves are vestigial scales, hardly visible without detailed morphological investigation. Therefore, their photosynthesis and transpiration only take place in their stems, limiting their demands on the water supply of its host, but also limiting their intake of carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. Accordingly, their contribution to the metabolic balance of its host becomes trivial and the idle parasite may become quite yellow or golden as it grows, having practically given up photosynthesis.\nAt another extreme, other species have vigorous green leaves. Not only do they photosynthesize actively, but a heavy infestation of mistletoe plants may take over whole host tree branches, sometimes killing practically the entire crown and replacing it with their own growth. In such a tree the host is relegated purely to the supply of water and mineral nutrients and the physical support of the trunk. Such a tree may survive as a \"Viscum\" community for years; it resembles a totally unknown species unless one examines it closely, because its foliage does not look like that of any tree. An example of a species that behaves in this manner is \"Viscum continuum\".\nA mistletoe seed germinates on the branch of a host tree or shrub, and in its early stages of development it is independent of its host. It commonly has two or even four embryos, each producing its hypocotyl, that grows toward the bark of the host under the influence of light and gravity, and potentially each forming a mistletoe plant in a clump. Possibly as an adaptation to assist in guiding the process of growing away from the light, the adhesive on the seed tends to darken the bark. On having made contact with the bark, the hypocotyl, with only a rudimentary scrap of root tissue at its tip, penetrates it, a process that may take a year or more. In the meantime the plant is dependent on its own photosynthesis. Only after it reaches the host's conductive tissue may it begin to rely on the host for its needs. Later, it forms a haustorium that penetrates the host tissue and takes water and nutrients from the host plant.\nSpecies more or less obligate include the leafless quintral, \"Tristerix aphyllus\", which lives deep inside the sugar-transporting tissue of a spiny cactus, appearing only to show its tubular red flowers, and the genus \"Arceuthobium\" (dwarf mistletoe; Santalaceae) that has reduced photosynthesis; as an adult, it manufactures only a small proportion of the sugars it needs from its own photosynthesis, but as a seedling actively photosynthesizes until a connection to the host is established.\nSome species of the largest family, Loranthaceae, have small, insect-pollinated flowers (as with Santalaceae), but others have spectacularly showy, large, bird-pollinated flowers.\nMost mistletoe seeds are spread by birds who eat the 'seeds' (in actuality drupes). Of the many bird species that feed on them, the mistle thrush is the best-known in Europe, the phainopepla in southwestern North America, and \"Dicaeum\" flowerpeckers in Asia and Australia. Depending on the species of mistletoe and the species of bird, the seeds are regurgitated from the crop, excreted in their droppings, or stuck to the bill and causing the bird to have to wipe it off onto a branch. The seeds are coated with a sticky material called viscin. Some viscin remains on the seed and when it touches a stem, it sticks tenaciously. The viscin soon hardens and attaches the seed firmly to its future host, where it germinates and its haustorium penetrates the sound bark.\nSpecialist mistletoe eaters have adaptations that expedite the process; some pass the seeds through their unusually shaped digestive tracts so fast that a pause for defecation of the seeds is part of the feeding routine. Others have adapted patterns of feeding behavior; the bird grips the fruit in its bill and squeezes the sticky-coated seed out to the side. The seed sticks to the beak and the bird wipes it off onto the branch and consumes the remainder of the fruit. An example of a bird with this adapted method is the blackcap (\"Sylvia atricapilla\").\nBiochemically, viscin is a complex adhesive mix containing cellulosic strands and mucopolysaccharides.\nOnce a mistletoe plant is established on its host, it usually is possible to save a valuable branch by pruning and judicious removal of the wood invaded by the haustorium, if the infection is caught early enough. Some species of mistletoe can regenerate if the pruning leaves any of the haustorium alive in the wood.\nToxicity.\nThere are 1500 species of mistletoe, varying widely in toxicity to humans; the European mistletoe (\"Viscum album\") is more toxic than the American mistletoe (\"Phoradendron serotinum\").\nThe primary active toxic compounds in American mistletoe are phoratoxins (in \"Phoradendron\") and their effects can include blurred vision, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting, although these rarely occur. Their primary mechanism of action is through disruption of cell membranes which causes lysis and cell death at high concentrations.\nIn European mistletoe (\"Viscum\"), viscumin is the more dangerous active toxin. It acts by irreversibly inhibiting ribsomal protein synthesis in cells, which leads to the death of the affected cell, tissue damage in the area of exposure from mass cell death in the very short term, with the potential for organ failure and death depending on the level of exposure. Early symptoms depend mostly on the route of exposure as the first cells it contacts (thus the first to have their protein synthesis deactivated by it) will be the first to die. Its toxic effects take place through the same mechanism as ricin and other ribosome-inactivating proteins but it enters the cells by a different mechanism than ricin and is toxic even to cultured ricin-resistant cells. \nMistletoe has been used historically in medicine for its supposed value in treating arthritis, high blood pressure, epilepsy, and infertility.\nEcological importance.\nMistletoes are often considered pests that kill trees and devalue natural habitats, but some species have recently been recognized as ecological keystone species, organisms that have a disproportionately pervasive influence over their community. A broad array of animals depend on mistletoe for food, consuming the leaves and young shoots, transferring pollen between plants and dispersing the sticky seeds. In western North America their juicy berries are eaten and spread by birds (notably the phainopepla) while in Australia the mistletoebird behaves similarly. When eaten with the fruit, some seeds pass unharmed through their digestive systems, emerging in extremely sticky droppings which the bird deposits on tree branches, where some may stick long enough to germinate. As the plants mature, they grow into masses of branching stems that suggest the popular name \"witches' brooms\".\nThe dense evergreen witches' brooms formed by the dwarf mistletoes (\"Arceuthobium\" species) of western North America also make excellent locations for roosting and nesting of the northern spotted owl and the marbled murrelet. In Australia the diamond firetail and painted honeyeater are recorded as nesting in different mistletoes.\nA study of mistletoe in junipers concluded that more juniper berries sprout in stands where mistletoe is present, as the mistletoe attracts berry-eating birds who also eat juniper berries.\nCultural importance.\nMistletoe is relevant to several cultures. Pagan cultures regarded the white berries as symbols of male fertility, with the seeds resembling semen. The Celts, particularly, saw mistletoe as the semen of Taranis, while the Ancient Greeks referred to mistletoe as \"oak sperm\". Also in Roman mythology, mistletoe was used by the hero Aeneas to reach the underworld.\nMistletoe may have played an important role in Druidic mythology in the Ritual of Oak and Mistletoe, although the only ancient writer to mention the use of mistletoe in this ceremony was Pliny. Evidence taken from bog bodies makes the Celtic use of mistletoe seem medicinal rather than ritual. It is possible that mistletoe was originally associated with human sacrifice and only became associated with the white bull after the Romans banned human sacrifices.\nAccording to Norse mythology the god Baldr had a dream of his own death and his mother, Frigg, had the same dream. Since dreams were usually prophetic, this depressed him, and so Frigg made every object on earth vow never to hurt Baldr. All objects made this vow, save for the mistletoe\u2014a detail which has traditionally been explained with the idea that it was too unimportant and nonthreatening to bother asking it to make the vow, but which Merrill Kaplan has instead argued echoes the fact that young people were not eligible to swear legal oaths, which could make them a threat later in life.\nWhen Loki, the mischief-maker, heard of this, he made a magical spear from this plant (in some later versions, an arrow). He hurried to the place where the gods were indulging in their new pastime of hurling objects at Baldr, which would bounce off without harming him. Loki gave the spear to Baldr's brother, the blind god H\u00f6\u00f0r, who then inadvertently killed his brother with it (other versions suggest that Loki guided the arrow himself). For this act, Odin and the \"\u00e1synja\" Rindr gave birth to V\u00e1li, who grew to adulthood within a day and slew H\u00f6\u00f0r\nThe Romans associated mistletoe with peace, love, and understanding and hung it over doorways to protect the household.\nIn the advent of the Christian era, mistletoe in the Western world became associated with Christmas as a decoration under which lovers are expected to kiss, as well as with protection from witches and demons. Mistletoe continued to be associated with fertility and vitality through the Middle Ages, and by the eighteenth century it had also become incorporated into Christmas celebrations around the world. The custom of kissing under the mistletoe is referred to as popular among servants in late eighteenth-century England.\nThe serving class of Victorian England is credited with perpetuating the tradition. The tradition dictated that a man was allowed to kiss any woman standing underneath mistletoe, and that bad luck would befall any woman who refused the kiss. One variation on the tradition stated that with each kiss a berry was to be plucked from the mistletoe, and the kissing must stop after all the berries had been removed.\nFrom at least the mid-nineteenth century, Caribbean herbalists of African descent have referred to mistletoe as \"god-bush\".\nIn Nepal, diverse mistletoes are used for a variety of medical purposes, particularly for treating broken bones.\nMistletoe is the floral emblem of the U.S. state of Oklahoma and the flower of the UK county of Herefordshire. Every year, the UK town of Tenbury Wells holds a mistletoe festival and crowns a 'Mistletoe Queen'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70131", "revid": "50223766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70131", "title": "Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1933 amendment repealing prohibition of alcohol\nThe Twenty-first Amendment (Amendment XXI) to the United States Constitution repealed the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which had mandated nationwide prohibition on alcohol. The Twenty-first Amendment was proposed by the 72nd Congress on February 20, 1933, and was ratified by the requisite number of states on December 5, 1933. It is unique among the 27 amendments of the U.S. Constitution for being the only one to repeal a prior amendment, as well as being the only amendment to have been ratified by state ratifying conventions.\nThe Eighteenth Amendment was ratified on January 16, 1919, after years of advocacy by the temperance movement. The subsequent enactment of the Volstead Act established federal enforcement of the nationwide prohibition on alcohol. As many Americans continued to drink despite the amendment, Prohibition gave rise to a profitable black market for alcohol, fueling the rise of organized crime. Throughout the 1920s, Americans increasingly came to see Prohibition as unenforceable, and a movement to repeal the Eighteenth Amendment grew until the Twenty-first Amendment was ratified in 1933.\nSection 1 of the Twenty-first Amendment expressly repeals the Eighteenth Amendment. Section2 bans the importation of alcohol into states and territories that have laws prohibiting the importation or consumption of alcohol. Several states continued to be \"dry states\" in the years after the repealing of the Eighteenth Amendment, and some continue to this day to closely regulate the distribution of alcohol. Many states delegate their power to ban the importation of alcohol to counties and municipalities, and there are numerous dry communities throughout the United States. Section2 has occasionally arisen as an issue in Supreme Court cases that touch on the Commerce Clause.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSection 1. The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.\nSection 2. The transportation or importation into any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.\nSection 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.\nBackground.\nThe Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution had ushered in a period known as Prohibition, during which the manufacture, distribution, and sale of alcoholic beverages was illegal. The enactment of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919 was the crowning achievement of the temperance movement, but it soon proved highly unpopular. Crime rates soared under Prohibition as gangsters, such as Chicago's Al Capone, became rich from a profitable, often violent, black market for alcohol. The federal government was incapable of stemming the tide: enforcement of the Volstead Act proved to be a nearly impossible task and corruption was rife among law enforcement agencies. In 1932, wealthy industrialist John D. Rockefeller Jr. stated in a letter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"When Prohibition was introduced, I hoped that it would be widely supported by public opinion and the day would soon come when the evil effects of alcohol would be recognized. I have slowly and reluctantly come to believe that this has not been the result. Instead, drinking has generally increased; the speakeasy has replaced the saloon; a vast army of lawbreakers has appeared; many of our best citizens have openly ignored Prohibition; respect for the law has been greatly lessened; and crime has increased to a level never seen before.\"\nAs more and more Americans opposed the Eighteenth Amendment, a political movement grew for its repeal. However, repeal was complicated by grassroots politics. Although the U.S. Constitution provides two methods for ratifying constitutional amendments, only one method had been used up until that time: ratification by the state legislatures of three-fourths of the states. However, the wisdom of the day was that the lawmakers of many states were either beholden to or simply fearful of the temperance lobby.\nProposal and ratification.\nThe Congress adopted the Blaine Act, which proposed the Twenty-first Amendment, on February 20, 1933.\nThe proposed amendment was adopted on December 5, 1933. It is the only amendment to have been ratified by state ratifying conventions, specifically selected for the purpose.\nThe Twenty-first Amendment ending national prohibition also became effective on December 5, 1933. The Acting Secretary of State William Phillips certified the amendment as having been passed by the required three-fourths of the states at 5:49 p.m. EST, just 17 minutes after the passage of the amendment by the Utah convention. President Roosevelt then issued a proclamation following the passage and certification of the amendment which stated in part the following: \"I trust in the good sense of the American people that they will not bring upon themselves the curse of excessive use of intoxicating liquors to the detriment of health, morals and social integrity. The objective we seek through a national policy is the education of every citizen towards a greater temperance throughout the nation.\" The end of prohibition was thought to be responsible for the creation of a half million jobs.\nThe various responses of the 48 states is as follows:\nThe following states ratified the amendment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe amendment was officially added to the U.S. Constitution on December 5, 1933, when Utah's state convention unanimously ratified the amendment.\nThe amendment was subsequently ratified by conventions in the following states:\nThe amendment was unanimously rejected by South Carolina's state convention on December 4, 1933. On November 7, 1933, North Carolina held a vote, and approximately 70% of its voters rejected holding a convention to consider the amendment.\nImplementation.\nState and local control.\nMississippi was the last state to remain entirely dry. In August 1966, 19 of Mississippi's counties voted to legalize alcohol. Kansas continued to prohibit public bars until 1987. Many states now delegate the authority over alcohol granted to them by this Amendment to their municipalities or counties (or both).\nCourt rulings.\nEarly rulings suggested that Section2 enabled states to legislate with exceptionally broad constitutional powers. In \"State Board of Equalization v. Young's Market Co.\", the Supreme Court recognized that \"Prior to the Twenty-first Amendment it would obviously have been unconstitutional\" for a state to require a license and fee to import beer anywhere within its borders. First, the Court held that Section2 abrogated the right to import intoxicating liquors free of a direct burden on interstate commerce, which otherwise would have been unconstitutional under the Commerce Clause before passage of the Twenty-first Amendment. In its second holding, the Court rejected an equal protection claim because \"A classification recognized by the Twenty-first Amendment cannot be deemed forbidden by the Fourteenth.\" \nIn \"Craig v. Boren\" (1976), the Supreme Court found that analysis under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment had not been affected by the passage of the Twenty-first Amendment. Although the Court did not specify whether the Twenty-first Amendment could provide an exception to any other constitutional protections outside of the Commerce Clause, it acknowledged \"the relevance of the Twenty-first Amendment to other constitutional provisions becomes increasingly doubtful\". Likewise, it has been held that Section2 of the Twenty-first Amendment does not affect the Supremacy Clause or the Establishment Clause. However, the \"Craig v. Boren\" Court did distinguish two characteristics of state laws permitted by the Amendment, which otherwise might have run afoul of the Constitution. The constitutional issues in each centered or touched upon: (1) \"\"importation of intoxicants\", a regulatory area where the State's authority under the Twenty-first Amendment is transparently clear\"; and (2) \"\"purely economic matters\" that traditionally merit only the mildest review under the Fourteenth Amendment\". As to the Dormant Commerce Clause in particular, the Court clarified that, while not a \"pro tanto\" repeal, the Twenty-First Amendment nonetheless \"primarily created an exception to the normal operation of the Commerce Clause\".\nIn \"South Dakota v. Dole\" (1987), the Supreme Court upheld the withholding of some federal highway funds to South Dakota, because beer with an alcohol content below a specified percentage could be lawfully sold to adults under the age of 21 within the state. In a 7\u20132 majority opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist, the Court held that the offer of benefits is not coercion that inappropriately invades state sovereignty. The Twenty-first Amendment could not constitute an \"independent constitutional bar\" to the spending power granted to Congress under Article I, section 8, clause 1 of the Constitution. Justice Brennan, author of the majority opinion in \"Craig v. Boren\", provided a brief but notable dissent based solely on Section 2. Justice O'Connor also dissented, arguing that \"the regulation of the age of the purchasers of liquor, just as the regulation of the price at which liquor may be sold, falls squarely within the scope of those powers reserved to the States by the Twenty-first Amendment.\"\nIn \"44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island\" (1996), the Court held states cannot use the Twenty-first Amendment to abridge freedom of speech protections under the First Amendment. Rhode Island imposed a law that prohibited advertisements disclosing the retail prices of alcoholic beverages sold to the public. In declaring the law unconstitutional, the Court reiterated that \"although the Twenty-first Amendment limits the effect of the Dormant Commerce Clause on a State's regulatory power over the delivery or use of intoxicating beverages within its borders, the Amendment does not license the States to ignore their obligations under other provisions of the Constitution\".\nMost recently, however, \"Granholm v. Heald\" (2005) held that the Twenty-first Amendment does not overrule the Dormant Commerce Clause with respect to alcohol sales, and therefore states must treat in-state and out-of-state wineries equally. The Court criticized its earliest rulings on the issue, (including \"State Board of Equalization v. Young's Market Co.\") and promulgated its most limited interpretation to date:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The aim of the Twenty-first Amendment was to allow States to maintain an effective and uniform system for controlling liquor by regulating its transportation, importation, and use. The Amendment did not give States the authority to pass nonuniform laws in order to discriminate against out-of-state goods, a privilege they had not enjoyed at any earlier time.\nIn a lengthy dissent, Justice Thomas argued that the plain meaning of Section2 removed \"any doubt regarding its broad scope, the Amendment simplified the language of the Webb\u2013Kenyon Act and made it clear that States could regulate importation destined for in-state delivery free of negative Commerce Clause restraints\". \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70132", "revid": "50905670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70132", "title": "Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1951 amendment limiting presidents to two terms\nThe Twenty-second Amendment (Amendment XXII) to the United States Constitution limits the number of times a person can be elected to the office of President of the United States to twice, and sets additional eligibility conditions for presidents who succeed to the unexpired terms of their predecessors. Congress approved the Twenty-second Amendment on March 21, 1947, and submitted it to the state legislatures for ratification. That process was completed on February 27, 1951, when the requisite 36 of the 48 states had ratified the amendment (neither Alaska nor Hawaii had yet been admitted as a state), and its provisions came into force on that date.\nThe amendment prohibits anyone who has been elected president twice from being elected to the office again. Under the amendment, someone who fills an unexpired presidential term lasting more than two years is also prohibited from being elected president more than once. Scholars debate whether the amendment prohibits affected individuals from succeeding to the presidency under any circumstances or whether it applies only to presidential elections. Until the amendment's ratification, the president had not been subject to term limits, but both George Washington and Thomas Jefferson (the first and third presidents) decided not to run for a third term, establishing a two-term tradition. In the 1940 and 1944 presidential elections, Franklin D. Roosevelt became the only president to be elected for a third and fourth term, giving rise to concerns about a president serving unlimited terms.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Section 1. No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who has held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once. But this Article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this Article was proposed by the Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as President, during the term within which this Article becomes operative from holding the office of President or acting as President during the remainder of such term.\nSection 2. This Article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission to the states by the Congress.\nBackground.\nThe Twenty-second Amendment was a reaction to Franklin D. Roosevelt's election to an unprecedented four terms as president, but presidential term limits had long been debated in American politics. Delegates to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 considered the issue extensively (alongside broader questions, such as who would elect the president, and the president's role). Many, including Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, supported lifetime tenure for presidents, while others favored fixed terms. Virginia's George Mason denounced the life-tenure proposal as tantamount to elective monarchy. An early draft of the U.S. Constitution provided that the president be restricted to one seven-year term. Ultimately, the Framers approved four-year terms with no restriction on how many times a person could be elected president.\nThough dismissed by the Constitutional Convention, term limits for U.S. presidents were contemplated during the presidencies of George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. As his second term entered its final year in 1796, Washington was exhausted from years of public service, and his health had begun to decline. He was also bothered by his political opponents' unrelenting attacks, which had escalated after the signing of the Jay Treaty, and believed he had accomplished his major goals as president. For these reasons, he decided not to run for a third term, a decision he announced to the nation in his September 1796 \"Farewell Address\". Eleven years later, as Thomas Jefferson neared the halfway point of his second term, he wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If some termination to the services of the chief magistrate be not fixed by the Constitution, or supplied by practice, his office, nominally for years, will in fact, become for life; and history shows how easily that degenerates into an inheritance.\nSince Washington made his historic announcement, numerous academics and public figures have looked at his decision to retire after two terms, and have, according to political scientist Bruce Peabody, \"argued he had established a \"two-term tradition\" that served as a vital check against any one person, or the presidency as a whole, accumulating too much power\". Various amendments aimed at changing informal precedent to constitutional law were proposed in Congress in the early to mid-19th century, but none passed. Three of the next four presidents after Jefferson\u2014Madison, James Monroe, and Andrew Jackson\u2014served two terms, and each adhered to the two-term principle; Martin Van Buren was the only president between Jackson and Abraham Lincoln to be nominated for a second term, though he lost the 1840 election and so served only one term. At the outset of the Civil War, the seceding states drafted the Constitution of the Confederate States of America, which in most respects resembled the United States Constitution, but limited the president to a single six-year term.\nIn spite of the strong two-term tradition, a few presidents before Roosevelt attempted to secure a third term. Following Ulysses S. Grant's reelection in 1872, there were serious discussions within Republican political circles about the possibility of his running again in 1876. But interest in a third term for Grant evaporated in the light of negative public opinion and opposition from members of Congress, and Grant left the presidency in 1877 after two terms. Even so, as the 1880 election approached, he sought nomination for a (non-consecutive) third term at the 1880 Republican National Convention, but narrowly lost to James A. Garfield, who won the 1880 election.\nTheodore Roosevelt succeeded to the presidency on September 14, 1901, following William McKinley's assassination ( days into his second term), and was handily elected to a full term in 1904. He declined to seek a third (second full) term in 1908, but did run again in the 1912 election, losing to Woodrow Wilson. Wilson himself, despite his ill health following a serious stroke, aspired to a third term. Many of his advisers tried to convince him that his health precluded another campaign, but Wilson nonetheless asked that his name be placed in nomination for the presidency at the 1920 Democratic National Convention. Democratic Party leaders were unwilling to support Wilson, and the nomination went to James M. Cox, who lost to Warren G. Harding. Wilson again contemplated running for a (non-consecutive) third term in 1924, devising a strategy for his comeback, but again lacked any support. He died in February of that year.\nFranklin Roosevelt spent the months leading up to the 1940 Democratic National Convention refusing to say whether he would seek a third term. His vice president, John Nance Garner, along with Postmaster General James Farley, announced their candidacies for the Democratic nomination. When the convention came, Roosevelt sent a message to the convention saying he would run only if drafted, saying delegates were free to vote for whomever they pleased. This message was interpreted to mean he was willing to be drafted, and he was renominated on the convention's first ballot. Roosevelt won a decisive victory over Republican Wendell Willkie, becoming the only president to exceed eight years in office. His decision to seek a third term dominated the election campaign. Willkie ran against the open-ended presidential tenure, while Democrats cited the war in Europe as a reason for breaking with precedent.\nFour years later, Roosevelt faced Republican Thomas E. Dewey in the 1944 election. Near the end of the campaign, Dewey announced his support of a constitutional amendment to limit presidents to two terms. According to Dewey, \"four terms, or sixteen years [a direct reference to the president's tenure in office four years hence] is the most dangerous threat to our freedom ever proposed.\" He also discreetly raised the issue of the president's age. Roosevelt exuded enough energy and charisma to retain voters' confidence and was elected to a fourth term.\nWhile he quelled rumors of poor health during the campaign, Roosevelt's health was deteriorating. On April 12, 1945, only days after his fourth inauguration, , and was succeeded by Vice President Harry S. Truman. In the midterm elections months later, Republicans took control of the House and the Senate. As many of them had campaigned on the issue of presidential tenure, declaring their support for a constitutional amendment that would limit how long a person could serve as president, the issue was given priority in the 80th Congress when it convened in January 1947.\nProposal and ratification.\nProposal in Congress.\nThe House of Representatives took quick action, approving a proposed constitutional amendment (House Joint Resolution\u00a027) setting a limit of two four-year terms for future presidents. Introduced by Earl C. Michener, the measure passed 285\u2013121, with support from 47 Democrats, on February 6, 1947. Meanwhile, the Senate developed its own proposed amendment, which initially differed from the House proposal by requiring that the amendment be submitted to state ratifying conventions for ratification, rather than to the state legislatures, and by prohibiting any person who had served more than 365 days in each of two terms from further presidential service. Both of these provisions were removed when the full Senate took up the bill; however, a new provision was added. Put forward by Robert A. Taft, it clarified procedures governing the number of times a vice president who succeeded to the presidency might be elected to office. The amended proposal was passed 59\u201323, with 16 Democrats in favor, on March 12.\nOn March 21, the House agreed to the Senate's revisions and approved the resolution to amend the Constitution. Afterward, the amendment imposing term limitations on future presidents was submitted to the states for ratification. The ratification process was completed on February 27, 1951, after it was sent to the states.\nRatification by the states.\nOnce submitted to the states, the 22nd Amendment was ratified by:\nConversely, two states\u2014Massachusetts and Oklahoma\u2014rejected the amendment, while five (Arizona, Kentucky, Rhode Island, Washington, and West Virginia) took no action.\nEffect.\nBecause of the grandfather clause in Section 1, the amendment did not apply to Harry S. Truman, who was the incumbent president at the time it was submitted to the states by the Congress. This full exemption allowed Truman to run again in 1952. He had served nearly all of Franklin Roosevelt's unexpired 1945\u20131949 term and had been elected to a full four-year term beginning in 1949. But with his job approval rating at around 27%, and after a poor performance in the 1952 New Hampshire primary, Truman chose not to seek his party's nomination. Since becoming operative in 1951, the amendment has barred six twice-elected presidents from election to a third term: Dwight D. Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama. The incumbent president, Donald Trump, who has been elected to two non-consecutive terms, is also constitutionally barred from being elected to a third presidential term.\nInteraction with the Twelfth Amendment.\nAs worded, the focus of the 22nd Amendment is on limiting individuals from being elected to the presidency more than twice. Questions have been raised about the amendment's meaning and application, especially in relation to the 12th Amendment, ratified in 1804, which states, \"But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.\" While the 12th Amendment stipulates that the constitutional qualifications of age, citizenship, and residency apply to the president and vice president, it is unclear whether someone who is ineligible to be elected president due to term limits could be elected vice president. Because of the ambiguity, a two-term former president could possibly be elected vice president and then succeed to the presidency as a result of the incumbent's death, resignation, or removal from office, or succeed to become Acting President from another stated office in the presidential line of succession.\nIt has been argued that the 22nd Amendment and 12th Amendment bar any two-term president from later serving as vice president as well as from succeeding to the presidency from any point in the presidential line of succession. Others contend that the original intent of the 12th Amendment concerns qualification for service (age, residence, and citizenship), while the 22nd Amendment concerns qualifications for election, and thus a former two-term president is still eligible to serve as vice president. Neither amendment restricts the number of times someone can be elected to the vice presidency and then succeed to the presidency to serve out the balance of the term, although the person could be prohibited from running for election to an additional term.\nThe practical applicability of this distinction has not been tested, as no person has been elected president and vice president in that order, regardless of terms served. However, in striking down term limits imposed by state governments on members of Congress in \"U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton\" (1995), the Supreme Court held that term limits amount to a qualification for holding public office referencing the 22nd Amendment, stating that \"the Nation as a whole... has imposed a limit on the number of terms that the President may serve. Term limits, like any other qualification for office, unquestionably restrict the ability of voters to vote for whom they wish.\"\nAttempts at repeal or reform.\nOver the years, several presidents have voiced their antipathy toward the amendment. After leaving office, Harry S. Truman described the amendment as stupid and one of the worst amendments of the Constitution with the exception of the Prohibition Amendment. A few days before leaving office in January 1989, Ronald Reagan said he would push for a repeal of the 22nd Amendment because he thought it infringed on people's democratic rights. In a November 2000 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Bill Clinton suggested that the 22nd Amendment should be altered to limit presidents to two consecutive terms but then allow for non-consecutive terms, because of longer life expectancies.\nThe first efforts in Congress to repeal the 22nd Amendment were undertaken in 1956, five years after the amendment's ratification. Over the next 50 years, 54 joint resolutions seeking to repeal the two-term presidential election limit were introduced. Between 1997 and 2013, Representative Jos\u00e9 E. Serrano introduced nine resolutions (one per Congress, all unsuccessful) to repeal the amendment.\nIn January 2025, Representative Andy Ogles introduced a joint resolution proposing a constitutional amendment that would allow a president to serve a third term, provided that their first two are non-consecutive. The language of the bill was intended to specifically allow incumbent president Donald Trump to serve a third term, as he is the only living president to serve non-consecutive terms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70133", "revid": "36761478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70133", "title": "Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1961 amendment granting presidential electors to the District of Columbia\nThe Twenty-third Amendment (Amendment XXIII) to the United States Constitution extends the right to participate in presidential elections to the District of Columbia. The amendment grants to the district electors in the Electoral College, as though it were a state, though the district can never have more electors than the least-populous state. How the electors are appointed is to be determined by Congress. The Twenty-third Amendment was proposed by the 86th Congress on June 16, 1960; it was ratified by the requisite number of states on March 29, 1961.\nThe Constitution provides that each state receives presidential electors equal to the combined number of seats it has in the Senate and the House of Representatives. As the District of Columbia is not a state, it was not entitled to any electors before the adoption of the Twenty-third Amendment. As early as 1888, some journalists and members of Congress favored a constitutional amendment to grant the district electoral votes. Still, such an amendment did not win widespread support until the rise of the civil rights movement in the 1950s. The amendment was not seen as a partisan measure; ratification of the amendment was endorsed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower and both major party candidates in the 1960 presidential election. The amendment's ratification made the district the only entity other than the states to have any representation in the Electoral College.\nThe first presidential election in which the District of Columbia participated was the election of 1964. Starting with that election, the District of Columbia has consistently had three members in the Electoral College, this being the constitutionally implied minimum number it is entitled to; notwithstanding the constitutionally entrenched limitation on its number of electors, the District's population has never reached the threshold where it otherwise would have been entitled to more than three. Since the passage of the Twenty-third Amendment, all but one of the district's electoral votes have been cast for the Democratic Party's presidential candidates. The Twenty-third Amendment did not grant the district voting rights in Congress, nor did it give the district the right to participate in the process that allows the Constitution to be amended. A constitutional amendment to do this was proposed by Congress in 1978, but not enough states ratified it for it to be adopted. Many citizens of the district favor statehood or further constitutional amendments to address these issues.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Section 1. The District constituting the seat of Government of the United States shall appoint in such manner as the Congress may direct:\nA number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the States, but they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.\nSection 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.\nBackground.\nThe United States Constitution's rules for the composition of the House of Representatives and the Senate explicitly grant seats to states and no other entities. Similarly, electors (i.e., members of the Electoral College) are apportioned to states, not to territories or the federal district. The main reference to the federal district is in Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution, which gives Congress the power \"To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the United States.\" In the early existence of the District, it was too small and rural to merit a hypothetical seat in the House of Representatives anyway, with fewer than 30,000 inhabitants.\nIn 1888, a bill to amend the Constitution was introduced in Congress by Senator Henry Blair of New Hampshire to grant the District of Columbia voting rights in presidential elections, but it did not proceed. Theodore W. Noyes, a writer of the \"Washington Evening Star\", published several stories in support of D.C. voting rights. Noyes also helped found the Citizens' Joint Committee on National Representation for the District of Columbia, a group which lobbied Congress to pass an amendment expanding D.C. voting rights. Noyes died in 1946, but the Citizens' Joint Committee continued onward, and the issue of district voting rights began to be seen as similar to the civil rights movement. A split developed between advocates for greater power for the district after World War II. The \"Evening Star\", continuing in the Noyes mold, supported D.C. representation in Congress and the electoral college but opposed \"home rule\" (locally elected mayors and councils with actual power rather than direct rule by Congress). \"The Washington Post\", however, supported \"home rule\" and civil rights but opposed full-fledged representation for the district. Additionally, while many of the people leading the push were liberal Democrats, the District of Columbia in the 1950s was fairly balanced in its potential voting impact; Democrats had only a slight edge over Republicans, although district Republicans in the 1950s were liberal by national standards. Thus, an amendment to grant the district increased voting powers could gain bipartisan support in a way that would have been more difficult later. Only 28% of the district was African-American according to the 1940 census, and the black population was young compared to other residents, making the voting electorate even smaller due to the voting age of 21. This grew to 54% in the 1960 census, but according to political scientist Clement E. Vose, \"various factors\u2014inexperience in voting, educational handicaps, residency requirements, welfare laws, and social ostracism before the Voting Rights Act of 1965\u2014minimized black registration and voting\".\nProposal and ratification.\nAdoption by the Congress.\nSenate Joint Resolution\u201339, which would eventually become the Twenty-third Amendment, was introduced in 1959 by Tennessee Democratic senator Estes Kefauver. His proposal would provide for the emergency functioning of Congress and continuity of the legislative process by authorizing governors to fill vacancies in the House of Representatives \"on any date that the total number of vacancies ... exceeds half of the authorized membership.\" The governor's appointive authority would have been limited to 60 days, and the appointee would have served until a successor was elected in a special election. The bill was amended twice on the Senate floor. One added provision, proposed by New York Republican Kenneth Keating, would grant the District of Columbia electoral votes in national elections and non-voting delegate(s) to the House. The other, offered by Florida Democrat Spessard Holland, would eliminate the poll tax or other property qualification as a prerequisite for voting in federal elections. The Senate passed SJR\u201339 in this three-amendment form on February 2, 1960, by a vote of 70\u201318, and sent it to the House.\nThe House Judiciary Committee, after setting aside the anti-poll tax and House emergency appointment provisions of SJR\u201339, sent its own proposal, House Joint Resolution\u2013757, devoted solely to presidential electors for the District of Columbia, to the House floor for consideration. This was adopted in the House without amendment, by voice vote, on June 14, 1960. Then, by unanimous consent, the text of HJR\u2013757 was inserted into SJR\u201339, the original language of which was removed. The Senate adopted the revised resolution by voice vote on June 16, 1960.\nRatification by the states.\nTo become valid as part of the Constitution, the Twenty-third Amendment needed to be ratified by the legislatures of three-quarters of the states (38, following the admission of Alaska and Hawaii to the union in 1959) within seven years from its submission to the states by Congress (June 16, 1967). President Eisenhower, along with both major party candidates in the 1960 presidential election, Vice President Richard Nixon and Senator John F. Kennedy from Massachusetts, endorsed the proposal. Amendment supporters ran an effective ratification campaign, mobilizing persons in almost every state to press for its approval.\nThe following states ratified the amendment:\nRatification was completed on March 29, 1961, 9 months and 12 days after being proposed by Congress. The following states subsequently ratified the amendment:\n39. New Hampshire \u2013 March 30, 1961 (Date in the official notice; preceded by ratification on March 29, 1961, as the 37th state to ratify, which was annulled and then repeated later that same day.)\n40. Alabama \u2013 April 11, 2002\nOn April 3, 1961, John L. Moore, Administrator of General Services, certified that the amendment had been adopted by the requisite number of States and had become a part of the Constitution.\nThe amendment was rejected by Arkansas on January 24, 1961. Nine states took no action on the amendment: Florida, Kentucky, Mississippi, Georgia, South Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, North Carolina, and Virginia.\nImplementing legislation.\nThe Amendment granted Congress the power to determine how the District of Columbia's electors should be appointed. In October 1961, Congress enacted legislation to amend the DC Code by providing that the District's electors should be appointed based on a popular vote, with all electors awarded to the presidential ticket prevailing in the ballot.\nIn 1973, Congress enacted the District of Columbia Home Rule Act, delegating to the Council of the District of Columbia certain legislative powers over the District (subject to Congressional override). The DC Council subsequently passed legislation affecting the appointment of DC's presidential electors, most notably by adopting the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact in 2010.\nPolitical impact.\nWhile perceived as politically neutral and only somewhat liberal-leaning at the time of passage in 1961, the district swung dramatically toward the Democratic Party in the years after passage. African Americans voted in more significant numbers than they had in the 1940s and 1950s with the clearing away of restrictions on the vote, and their share of the district electorate increased; according to the 1970 census, 71% of the federal district was black, a dramatic jump. In line with black voters' strong support for the Democrats, the district has sent its three electoral votes to the Democratic candidate in every single presidential election since 1964, including the 1984 landslide re-election of President Reagan, where only the District of Columbia and Minnesota voted for Democratic candidate Walter Mondale. The district's electoral votes have never proven decisive in a presidential election; the smallest Electoral College majority won by a Democratic president since the Twenty-third Amendment's ratification was Jimmy Carter's 57 point win in 1976.\nUnaddressed by the Twenty-third Amendment were the parallel issues of congressional representation and \"home rule\" for the district. On December 24, 1973, Congress approved the District of Columbia Home Rule Act, which established an elected office of mayor and a 13-member elected council for the district. These officials were empowered to pass laws and enact administrative policies for the district, though Congress retained veto power if they chose to intervene. On September 22, 1970, President Nixon signed the District of Columbia Delegate Act, which authorized voters in the district to elect one non-voting delegate to represent them in the House of Representatives. The election to fill the seat was held on March 23, 1970. On August 22, 1978, Congress submitted the District of Columbia Voting Rights Amendment to the states for ratification. This sweeping proposal would have granted the District of Columbia full representation in the United States Congress as if it were a state, repealed the Twenty-third Amendment and granted the district full representation in the Electoral College plus participation in the process by which the Constitution is amended as if it were a state. The amendment failed to become part of the Constitution, however, as it was not ratified by the required number of states (38) prior to its August 22, 1985 ratification deadline. The campaign for the proposed amendment ran into much fiercer conservative opposition due to the open and obvious fact that by 1978 the proposed amendment would have practically guaranteed two Democratic senators for some time; the amendment was criticized on various other grounds as well, and was not ratified even by several more \"liberal\" states.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70134", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70134", "title": "Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1964 amendment prohibiting poll taxes\nThe Twenty-fourth Amendment (Amendment XXIV) of the United States Constitution prohibits both Congress and the states from requiring the payment of a poll tax or any other tax to vote in federal elections. The amendment was proposed by Congress to the states on August 27, 1962, and was ratified by the states on January 23, 1964.\nSouthern states of the former Confederate States of America adopted poll taxes both in their state laws and in their state constitutions throughout the late-19th and early-20th centuries. This became more widespread as the Democratic Party regained control of most levels of government in the South in the decades after Reconstruction. The purpose of poll taxes was to prevent African Americans and poor whites from voting. Use of the poll tax by states was held to be constitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States in the 1937 case \"Breedlove v. Suttles\".\nWhen the 24th Amendment was ratified in 1964, five states still retained a poll tax: Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, Texas and Virginia. The amendment prohibited a poll tax for voters in federal elections; in 1966 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6\u20133 in \"Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections\" that poll taxes for any level of elections were unconstitutional. It stated that these violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Subsequent litigation related to potential discriminatory effects of voter registration requirements has generally been based on application of this clause.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.\nSection 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.\nBackground.\nSouthern states had adopted the poll tax as a requirement for voting as part of a series of laws in the late 19th century intended to exclude black Americans from politics so far as practicable without violating the Fifteenth Amendment. This required that voting not be limited by \"race, color, or previous condition of servitude\". All voters were required to pay the poll tax, but in practice it most affected the poor. Notably this affected both African Americans and poor white voters, some of whom had voted with Populist and Fusionist candidates in the late 19th century, temporarily disturbing Democratic rule. Proponents of the poll tax downplayed this aspect and assured white voters they would not be affected. Passage of poll taxes began in earnest in the 1890s, as Democrats wanted to prevent another Populist-Republican coalition. Despite election violence and fraud, African Americans were still winning numerous local seats. By 1902, all eleven states of the former Confederacy had enacted a poll tax, many within new constitutions that contained other provisions as barriers to voter registration, such as literacy or comprehension tests administered subjectively by white workers. The poll tax was used together with other devices such as grandfather clauses and the \"white primary\" designed to exclude blacks, as well as threats and acts of violence. For example, potential voters had to be \"assessed\" in Arkansas, and blacks were utterly ignored in the assessment.\nFrom 1900 to 1937, such use of the poll tax was nearly ignored by the federal government. Several state-level initiatives repealed poll taxes during this period for two reasons: firstly that they encouraged corruption since wealthy persons could and would pay other people's poll taxes; secondly, because they discouraged white voting more than many populist Southern politicians desired. The poll tax survived a legal challenge in the 1937 Supreme Court case \"Breedlove v. Suttles\", which unanimously ruled that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe issue remained prominent, as most African Americans in the South were disenfranchised. President Franklin D. Roosevelt spoke out against the tax. He publicly called it \"a remnant of the Revolutionary period\" that the country had moved past. However, Roosevelt's favored liberal Democrats in the South lost in the 1938 primaries to the reigning conservative Southern Democrats, and he backed off the issue. He felt that he needed Southern Democratic votes to pass New Deal programs and did not want to further antagonize them. Still, efforts at the Congressional level to abolish the poll tax continued. A 1939 bill to abolish the poll tax in federal elections was tied up by the Southern Bloc, lawmakers whose long tenure in office from a one-party region gave them seniority and command of numerous important committee chairmanships. A discharge petition was able to force the bill to be considered, and the House passed the bill 254\u201384. However, the bill was unable to defeat a filibuster in the Senate by Southern senators and a few Northern allies who valued the support of the powerful and senior Southern seats. This bill would be re-proposed in the next several Congresses. It came closest to passage during World War II, when opponents framed abolition as a means to help overseas soldiers vote. However, after learning that the U.S. Supreme Court decision \"Smith v. Allwright\" (1944) banned the use of \"white primary\", the Southern block refused to approve abolition of the poll tax.\nIn 1946, the Senate came close to passing the bill. 24 Democrats and 15 Republicans approved an end to debate, while 7non-southern Democrats and 7Republicans joined the 19 Southern Democrats in opposition. The result was a 39\u201333 vote in favor of the bill, but a cloture vote to end the filibuster required a two-thirds supermajority of 48 votes at the time, and so the bill was not brought to a vote. Those in favor of abolition of the poll tax considered a constitutional amendment after the 1946 defeat, but that idea did not advance either.\nThe tenor of the debate changed in the 1940s. Southern politicians tried to re-frame the debate as a constitutional issue, but private correspondence indicates that black disenfranchisement was still the true concern. For instance, Mississippi Senator Theodore Bilbo declared, \"If the poll tax bill passes, the next step will be an effort to remove the registration qualification, the educational qualification of Negroes. If that is done we will have no way of preventing the Negroes from voting.\" This fear explains why even Southern Senators from states that had abolished the poll tax still opposed the bill; they did not want to set a precedent that the federal government could interfere in state elections.\nPresident Harry S. Truman established the President's Committee on Civil Rights, which among other issues investigated the poll tax. Considering that opposition to federal poll tax regulation in 1948 was claimed as based on the Constitution, the Committee noted that a constitutional amendment might be the best way to proceed. Still, little occurred during the 1950s. Members of the anti-poll tax movement laid low during the anti-Communist frenzy of the period; some of the main proponents of poll tax abolition, such as Joseph Gelders and Vito Marcantonio, had been committed Marxists.\nPresident John F. Kennedy returned to this issue. His administration urged Congress to adopt and send such an amendment to the states for ratification. He considered the constitutional amendment the best way to avoid a filibuster, as the claim that federal abolition of the poll tax was unconstitutional would be moot. Still, some liberals opposed Kennedy's action, feeling that an amendment would be too slow compared to legislation. Spessard Holland, a conservative Democrat from Florida, introduced the amendment to the Senate. Holland had opposed most civil rights legislation during his career, and his support helped splinter monolithic Southern opposition to the amendment. Holland had tried several times earlier in his Senate career to ban the poll tax, but had been unsuccessful. Ratification of the amendment was relatively quick, taking slightly more than a year; it was rapidly ratified by state legislatures across the country from August 1962 to January 1964.\nPresident Lyndon B. Johnson called the amendment a \"triumph of liberty over restriction\" and \"a verification of people's rights\". States that had maintained the poll tax were more reserved. Mississippi's attorney general, Joseph Turner Patterson, complained about the complexity of two sets of voters\u00a0\u2013 those who had paid their poll tax and could vote in all elections, and those who had not and could vote only in federal elections. Additionally, non-payers could still be deterred by such requirements as having to register far in advance of the election and retain records of such registration. Some states also continued to exercise discrimination in the application of literacy tests.\nProposal and ratification.\nCongress proposed the Twenty-fourth Amendment on August 27, 1962. The amendment was submitted to the states on September 24, 1962, after it passed with the requisite two-thirds majorities in the House and Senate. The final vote in the House was 295\u201386 (132\u201315 in the House Republican Conference and 163\u201371 in the House Democratic Caucus) with 54 members voting present or abstaining, while in the Senate the final vote was 77\u201316 (30\u20131 in the Senate Republican Conference and 47\u201315 in the Senate Democratic Caucus) with 7members voting present or abstaining. The following states ratified the amendment:\nRatification was completed on January 23, 1964. The Georgia legislature did make a last-second attempt to be the 38th state to ratify. This was a surprise as \"no Southern help could be expected\" for the amendment. The Georgia Senate quickly and unanimously passed it, but the House did not act in time. Georgia's ratification was apparently dropped after South Dakota's ratification.\nThe amendment was subsequently ratified by the following states:\nThe following state rejected the amendment:\nThe following states have not ratified the amendment:\nPost-ratification law.\nArkansas effectively repealed its poll tax for all elections with Amendment 51 to the Arkansas Constitution at the November 1964 general election, several months after this amendment was ratified. The poll-tax language was not completely stricken from its Constitution until Amendment 85 in 2008. Of the five states originally affected by this amendment, Arkansas was the only one to repeal its poll tax; the other four retained their taxes. These were struck down in 1966 by the US Supreme Court decision in \"Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections\" (1966), which ruled poll taxes unconstitutional even for state elections. Federal district courts in Alabama and Texas, respectively, struck down these states' poll taxes less than two months before the \"Harper\" ruling was issued.\nThe state of Virginia accommodated the amendment by providing an \"escape clause\" to the poll tax. In lieu of paying the poll tax, a prospective voter could file paperwork to gain a certificate establishing a place of residence in Virginia. The papers would have to be filed six months in advance of voting, and the voter had to provide a copy of that certificate at the time of voting. This measure was expected to decrease the number of legal voters. In the 1965 Supreme Court decision \"Harman v. Forssenius\", the Court unanimously found such measures unconstitutional. It declared that for federal elections, \"the poll tax is abolished absolutely as a prerequisite to voting, and no equivalent or milder substitute may be imposed.\"\nWhile not directly related to the Twenty-fourth Amendment, the \"Harper\" case held that the poll tax was unconstitutional at every level, not just for federal elections. The \"Harper\" decision relied upon the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, rather than the Twenty-fourth Amendment. As such, issues related to whether burdens on voting are equivalent to poll taxes in discriminatory effect have usually been litigated on Equal Protection grounds since.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70135", "revid": "50335409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70135", "title": "Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1967 amendment enumerating presidential succession\nThe Twenty-fifth Amendment (Amendment XXV) to the United States Constitution addresses issues related to presidential succession and disability.\nIt clarifies that the vice president becomes president if the president dies, resigns, or is removed from office by impeachment. It also establishes the procedure for filling a vacancy in the office of the vice president. Additionally, the amendment provides for the temporary transfer of the president's powers and duties to the vice president, either on the president's initiative alone or on the initiative of the vice president together with a majority of the president's cabinet. In either case, the vice president becomes the acting president until the president's powers and duties are restored.\nThe amendment was submitted to the states on July 6, 1965, by the 89th Congress, and was adopted on February 10, 1967, the day the requisite number of states (38) ratified it.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nText and effect.\nSection 1: Presidential succession.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSection 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.\nSection 1 clarifies that in the enumerated situations the vice president becomes president, instead of merely assuming the powers and duties of the presidency as acting president. It operates automatically, without needing to be explicitly invoked.108\nSection 2: Vice presidential vacancy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSection 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.\nSection 2 provides a mechanism for filling a vacancy in the vice presidency. Before the Twenty-fifth Amendment, a vice-presidential vacancy continued until a new vice president took office at the start of the next presidential term; the vice presidency had become vacant several times due to death, resignation, or succession to the presidency, and these vacancies had often lasted several years.\nSection 3: President's declaration of inability.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSection 3. Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.\nSection 3 allows the president to voluntarily transfer presidential authority to the vice president (for example, in anticipation of a medical procedure) by declaring in writing his inability to discharge the presidency's powers and duties. The vice president then assumes those powers and duties as acting president. The vice president does not \"become\" president; the president remains in office, though without authority. The president regains those powers and duties upon declaring in writing his ability to discharge them.112-3\nSection 4: Declaration by vice president and cabinet members of president's inability.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSection 4. Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.\nThereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department [\"sic\"]\n or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.\nSection 4 addresses the case of a president who cannot discharge the powers and duties of the presidency but also cannot, or does not, execute the voluntary declaration contemplated by Section3.117 It allows the vice president, together with a \"majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide\", to issue a written declaration that the president is unable to discharge his duties. When such a declaration is sent to Congress, the vice president immediately becomes acting president, while (as with Section3) the president remains in office, temporarily divested of authority.\nJohn Feerick, the principal draftsman of the amendment,xii, xx5 writes that Congress deliberately left the terms \"unable\" and \"inability\" undefined \"since cases of inability could take various forms not neatly fitting into [a rigid] definition... The debates surrounding the Twenty-fifth Amendment indicate that [those terms] are intended to cover all cases in which some condition or circumstance prevents the President from discharging his powers and duties\".\u200a112 A survey of scholarship on the amendment found\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmong potential examples of such unforeseen emergencies, legal scholars have listed kidnapping of the president and \"political emergencies\" such as impeachment. Traits such as unpopularity, incompetence, impeachable conduct, poor judgment, or laziness might not in themselves constitute inability, but should such traits \"rise to a level where they prevented the President from carrying out his or her constitutional duties, they still might constitute an inability, even in the absence of a formal medical diagnosis.\" In addition, a president who already manifested disabling traits at the time he was elected is not thereby immunized from a declaration of inability.21n63,22n67\nThe \"principal officers of the executive department[s]\" are the 15 Cabinet members enumerated in the United States Code at \u00a0https://:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nActing secretaries can participate in issuing the declaration.117-813\nIf the president subsequently issues a declaration claiming to be able, then a four-day period begins during which the vice president remains acting president.118-9 If, by the end of this period, the vice president and a majority of the \"principal officers\" have not issued a second declaration of the president's inability, the president resumes his powers and duties; but if they do issue a second declaration within the four days, then the vice president remains acting president while Congress considers the matter. Then, if within 21 days the Senate and the House determine, each by a two-thirds vote, that the president is unable, the vice president continues as acting president; otherwise the president resumes his powers and duties.\nSection 4's requirement of a two-thirds vote in both the House and the Senate is stricter than the Constitution's requirement for impeachment and removal of the president for \"high crimes and misdemeanors\"\u2014a \"majority\" of the House followed by two-thirds of the Senate.120n In addition, an impeached president retains his authority unless and until the Senate votes to remove him or her at the end of an impeachment trial; in contrast, should Congress be called upon to decide the question of the president's ability or inability under Section4, presidential authority remains in the hands of the vice president (as acting president) unless and until the question is resolved in the president's favor.\nHistorical background.\n of the Constitution reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis provision is ambiguous as to whether, in the enumerated circumstances, the vice president becomes the president or merely assumes the \"powers and duties\" of the presidency. It also fails to define what constitutes \"inability\" or how questions concerning inability are to be resolved. The Twenty-fifth Amendment addresses these deficiencies. The ambiguities in ArticleII, Section1, Clause6 of the Constitution regarding death, resignation, removal, or disability of the president created difficulties several times:\nThe 1951 novel \"The Caine Mutiny\" and its 1954 film version influenced the amendment's drafters. John D. Feerick told \"The Washington Post\" in 2018 that the film was a \"live depiction\" of the type of crisis that could arise \"if a president ever faced questions about physical or mental inabilities but disagreed completely with the judgment\", a situation the Constitution did not address. Lawmakers drafting the amendment intentionally omitted any wording that could be exploited by the vice president or other officials to depose the president merely by saying that he was \"disabled\", as the crew in the novel did to Captain Queeg.\nProposal, enactment, and ratification.\nKeating\u2013Kefauver proposal.\nIn 1963, Senator Kenneth Keating of New York proposed a Constitutional amendment that would have enabled Congress to enact legislation providing for how to determine when a president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the presidency, rather than, as the Twenty-fifth Amendment does, having the Constitution so provide.345 This proposal was based upon a recommendation of the American Bar Association in 1960.27\nThe text of the proposal read:350\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the said office shall devolve on the Vice President. In case of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the said powers and duties shall devolve on the Vice President, until the inability be removed. The Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then be President, or, in case of inability, act as President, and such officer shall be or act as President accordingly, until a President shall be elected or, in case of inability, until the inability shall be earlier removed. The commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress shall by law provide.\nSenators raised concerns that the Congress could either abuse such authority30 or neglect to enact any such legislation after the adoption of this proposal.34\u201335 Tennessee senator Estes Kefauver, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, a longtime advocate for addressing the disability question, spearheaded the effort until he died in August 1963.28 Keating was defeated in the 1964 election, but Senator Roman Hruska of Nebraska took up Keating's cause as a new member of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments.\nKennedy assassination.\nBy the 1960s, medical advances had made it increasingly plausible that an injured or ill president might live a long time while incapacitated. The assassination of John F. Kennedy in 1963 underscored the need for a clear procedure for determining presidential disability, particularly since the new president, Lyndon B. Johnson, had once suffered a heart attack and\u2014with the office of vice president to remain vacant until the next term began on January 20, 1965\u2014the next two people in the line of succession were the 71-year-old speaker of the House, John McCormack, and the 86-year-old Senate president pro tempore, Carl Hayden. Senator Birch Bayh succeeded Kefauver as chairman of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments and set about advocating a detailed amendment dealing with presidential disability.\nBayh\u2013Celler proposal.\nOn January 6, 1965, Senator Birch Bayh proposed S.J. Res.1 in the Senate and Representative Emanuel Celler (Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee) proposed H.J. Res.1 in the House of Representatives. Their proposal specified the process by which a president could be declared \"unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office\", thereby making the vice president an acting president, and how the president could regain the powers of his office. Their proposal also provided a way to fill a vacancy in the office of vice president before the next presidential election. This was as opposed to the Keating\u2013Kefauver proposal, which provided neither for filling a vacancy in the office of vice president before the next presidential election nor a process for determining presidential disability. In 1964, the American Bar Association endorsed the type of proposal Bayh and Celler advocated.348\u2013350 On January 28, 1965, President Johnson endorsed S.J. Res.1 in a statement to Congress. The proposal received bipartisan support.6\nOn February 19, the Senate passed the amendment, but the House passed a different version of the amendment on April13. On April22 it was returned to the Senate with revisions. There were four areas of disagreement between the House and Senate versions:\nOn July 6, after a conference committee ironed out differences between the versions, the amendment's final version passed both houses of Congress and was presented to the states for ratification.354\u2013358\nRatification.\nNebraska was the first state to ratify the amendment, on July12, 1965, and ratification became complete when Nevada became the 38th state to ratify it, on February10, 1967.\nWhen President Lyndon B. Johnson underwent planned surgery in 1965, he was unable to temporarily transfer power to Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey because the amendment's ratification remained incomplete. On February23, 1967, at the White House ceremony certifying the ratification, Johnson said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was 180 years ago, in the closing days of the Constitutional Convention, that the Founding Fathers debated the question of Presidential disability. John Dickinson of Delaware asked this question: \"What is the extent of the term 'disability' and who is to be the judge of it?\" No one replied. It is hard to believe that until last week our Constitution provided no clear answer. Now, at last, the 25th amendment clarifies the crucial clause that provides for succession to the Presidency and for filling a Vice Presidential vacancy.\nInvocations.\nSections 1 and 2: Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Nelson Rockefeller.\nOn October 10, 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned, following a controversy over his personal taxes; two days later, President Richard Nixon nominated Representative Gerald Ford to replace Agnew as vice president pursuant to Section2. Ford was confirmed by the Senate and the House on November27 and December6, respectively, and sworn in on December6.\nOn August 9, 1974, Nixon resigned due to the Watergate scandal and Ford became president under Section1, the only president never to have been elected to either the presidency or the vice presidency. The office of vice president was thus again vacant, and on August20 Ford nominated former New York governor Nelson Rockefeller. Rockefeller was confirmed by the Senate and the House on December 10 and 19, respectively, and sworn in on December 19.\nFeerick writes that the Twenty-fifth Amendment helped pave the way for Nixon's resignation during the Watergate scandal. Nixon and Agnew were Republicans, and in the months immediately following Agnew's resignation, with the vice presidency empty, Nixon's removal or resignation would have transferred the presidential powers to House Speaker Carl Albert, a Democrat. But once Ford, a Republican, became vice president under Section 2, Nixon's removal became more palatable because it would not change the party holding the presidency, and therefore \"the momentum for exposing the truth about Nixon's involvement in Watergate increased\".\u200a158\nSection 3.\nOn December 22, 1978, President Jimmy Carter considered invoking Section3 in advance of hemorrhoid surgery. Since then, presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, Barack Obama, and Donald Trump also contemplated invoking Section3 at various times without doing so.\n1985: Ronald Reagan - George H. W. Bush as acting president.\nOn July 12, 1985, President Ronald Reagan underwent a colonoscopy and was diagnosed with bowel cancer. He elected to have the lesion removed immediately, and consulted with White House counsel Fred Fielding about whether to invoke Section3, and in particular about whether doing so would set an undesirable precedent. Fielding and White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan recommended that Reagan transfer power, and two letters were drafted: one specifically invoking Section3, the other mentioning only that Reagan was mindful of its provisions. On July 13, Reagan signed the letter mentioning that he was mindful of Section 3 before being placed under general anesthesia for a colectomy, and Vice President George H. W. Bush was acting president from 11:28\u00a0a.m. until 7:22\u00a0pm, when Reagan transmitted a letter declaring himself able to resume his duties.\nIn the \"Fordham Law Review\", commentator John Feerick asserted that although Reagan disclaimed any use of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in his letter (likely out of \"fear of the reaction of the country and the world to a 'President' who admitted to being disabled, and concern ... [over] set[ting] a harmful precedent\"), he followed the process set forth in Section3. Furthermore, Feerick noted that \"no constitutional provision except the Twenty-Fifth Amendment would have allowed\" him to designate the vice president as acting president. Reagan later wrote in a memoir that he had, in fact, invoked the Twenty-fifth Amendment.\n2002 and 2007: George W. Bush - Dick Cheney as acting president.\nOn June 29, 2002, President George W. Bush explicitly invoked Section3 in temporarily transferring his powers to Vice President Dick Cheney before undergoing a colonoscopy, which began at 7:09\u00a0am. Bush awoke about forty minutes later, but refrained from resuming his presidential powers until 9:24\u00a0a.m. to ensure that no aftereffects remained. According to his staff, Cheney (as acting president) held his regular national security and homeland security meetings with aides at the White House, but made no appearances and took no recorded actions while acting president.\nOn July 21, 2007, Bush invoked Section3 before another colonoscopy. Cheney was acting president from 7:16\u00a0a.m. until 9:21\u00a0am. During that time, Cheney remained at home. Neither invocation received much attention in the press.\nIn the view of commentator Adam Gustafson, George W. Bush's unambiguous application of Section3 \"rectified\" President Reagan's \"ambivalent invocation\" and provided an example of a \"smooth and temporary transition\" under Section3 that paved the way for future applications. The two invocations established the reasonableness of invocation for relatively minor inabilities, promoting continuity in the Executive Branch.\n2021: Joe Biden - Kamala Harris as acting president.\nOn November 19, 2021, President Joe Biden temporarily transferred his powers and duties to Vice President Kamala Harris before undergoing a colonoscopy, making her acting president from 10:10\u00a0a.m. until 11:35\u00a0a.m. This is the first time a woman held the powers and duties of the president of the United States.\nSection 4.\nSection 4 has never been invoked.\nConsidered invocations of Section\u00a04.\n1981: Reagan assassination attempt.\nFollowing the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan on March30, 1981, Vice President George H. W. Bush did not assume the presidential powers and duties as acting president. Reagan had been rushed into surgery with no opportunity to invoke Section3; Bush did not invoke Section4 because he was on a plane at the time of the shooting, and Reagan was out of surgery by the time Bush landed in Washington. In 1995, Birch Bayh, the primary sponsor of the amendment in the Senate, wrote that Section4 should have been invoked. Physician to the President Daniel Ruge, who supervised Reagan's treatment immediately after the shooting, said he had erred by not having Reagan invoke Section3 because Reagan needed general anesthesia and was in an intensive care unit.\n2021: Trump and the Capitol attack.\nAfter the January 6 United States Capitol attack, President Donald Trump was accused of having incited the incident, and by evening some of his Cabinet members were reportedly considering trying to get Vice President Mike Pence to agree to invoke Section4. According to multiple sources, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi was reluctant to impeach Trump a second time and, as an alternative disciplinary measure, asked Pence to agree to invoke the 25th Amendment in early 2021. Pence refused.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70136", "revid": "1319319676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70136", "title": "Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1971 amendment granting suffrage to 18-year-old citizens\nThe Twenty-sixth Amendment (Amendment XXVI) to the United States Constitution establishes a nationally standardized minimum age of 18 for participation in state and federal elections. It was proposed by Congress on March 23, 1971, and three-fourths of the states ratified it by July 1, 1971.\nVarious public officials had supported lowering the voting age during the mid-20th century, but were unable to gain the legislative momentum necessary for passing a constitutional amendment.\nThe drive to lower the voting age from 21 to 18 grew across the country during the 1960s and was driven in part by the military draft held during the Vietnam War. The draft conscripted young men between the ages of 18 and 21 into the United States Armed Forces, primarily the U.S. Army, to serve in or support military combat operations in Vietnam. This means young men could be required to fight and possibly die for their nation in wartime at 18. However, these same citizens could not have a legal say in the government's decision to wage that war until the age of 21. A youth rights movement emerged in response, calling for a similarly reduced voting age. A common slogan of proponents of lowering the voting age stated \"old enough to fight, old enough to vote\".\nDetermined to get around inaction on the issue, congressional allies included a provision for the 18-year-old vote in a 1970 bill that extended the Voting Rights Act. The Supreme Court subsequently held in the case of \"Oregon v. Mitchell\" that Congress could not lower the voting age for state and local elections. Recognizing the confusion and costs that would be involved in maintaining separate voting rolls and elections for federal and state contests, Congress quickly proposed and the states ratified the Twenty-sixth Amendment.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSection 1. The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age.\nSection 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.\nBackground.\nThe framers of the U.S. Constitution did not establish specific criteria for national citizenship or voting qualifications in state or federal elections. Before the Twenty-sixth Amendment, states had the authority to set their own minimum voting ages, which was typically 21 as the national standard.\nAn effort to reduce the age limit to 18 nationally began to gain serious traction during World War II. The age limit was not reduced nationally during the war due to a variety of factors including: a perceived lack of maturity, President Franklin D. Roosevelt not regarding youth suffrage as an important issue and most members of Congress believed it would interfere in the rights of states with regards to setting their own rules about voting. Senator Harley Kilgore began advocating for a lowered voting age in 1941 in the 77th Congress. Despite the support of fellow senators, representatives, and First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, Congress failed to pass any national change. However, public interest in lowering the voting age became a topic of interest at the local level. In 1943 and 1955 respectively, the Georgia and Kentucky legislatures approved measures to lower the voting age to 18. President Harry S. Truman did not publicly indicate whether he supported lowering the voting age to 18 years old.\nPresident Dwight D. Eisenhower, in his 1954 State of the Union address, became the first president to publicly support prohibiting age-based denials of suffrage for those 18 and older. During the 1960s, both Congress and the state legislatures came under increasing pressure to lower the minimum voting age from 21 to 18. This was in large part due to the Vietnam War, in which many young men who were ineligible to vote were conscripted to fight in the war, thus lacking any means to influence the people sending them off to risk their lives. \"Old enough to fight, old enough to vote\" was a common slogan used by proponents of lowering the voting age. The slogan traced its roots to World War II, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt lowered the military draft age to 18.\nIn 1963, the President's Commission on Registration and Voting Participation, in its report to President Lyndon Johnson, encouraged lowering the voting age. Johnson proposed an immediate national grant of the right to vote to 18-year-olds on May 29, 1968. Historian Thomas H. Neale argues that the move to lower the voting age followed a historical pattern similar to other extensions of the franchise; with the escalation of the war in Vietnam, constituents were mobilized and eventually a constitutional amendment passed.\nThose advocating for a lower voting age drew on a range of arguments to promote their cause, and scholarship increasingly links the rise of support for a lower voting age to young people's role in the civil rights movement and other movements for social and political change of the 1950s and 1960s. Increasing high-school graduation rates and young people's access to political information through new technologies also influenced more positive views of their preparation for the most important right of citizenship.\nBetween 1942, when public debates about a lower voting age began in earnest, and the early 1970s, ideas about youth agency increasingly challenged the caretaking model that had previously dominated the nation's approaches to young people's rights. Characteristics traditionally associated with youth\u2014idealism, lack of \"vested interests\", and openness to new ideas\u2014came to be seen as positive qualities for a political system that seemed to be in crisis.\nIn 1970, Senator Ted Kennedy proposed amending the Voting Rights Act of 1965 to lower the voting age nationally. On June 22, 1970, President Richard Nixon signed an extension of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that required the voting age to be 18 in all federal, state, and local elections. In his statement on signing the extension, Nixon said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Despite my misgivings about the constitutionality of this one provision, I have signed the bill. I have directed the Attorney General to cooperate fully in expediting a swift court test of the constitutionality of the 18-year-old provision.\nSubsequently, Oregon and Texas challenged the law in court, and the case came before the Supreme Court in 1970 as \"Oregon v. Mitchell\". By this time, four states had a minimum voting age below 21: Georgia, Kentucky, Alaska, and Hawaii.\n\"Oregon v. Mitchell\".\nDuring debate of the 1970 extension of the Voting Rights Act, Senator Ted Kennedy argued that the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed Congress to pass national legislation lowering the voting age. In \"Katzenbach v. Morgan\" (1966), the Supreme Court had ruled that if Congress acted to enforce the 14th Amendment by passing a law declaring that a type of state law discriminates against a certain class of persons, the Supreme Court would let the law stand if the justices could \"perceive a basis\" for Congress's actions.\nPresident Nixon disagreed with Kennedy in a letter to the Speaker of the House and the House minority and majority leaders, asserting that the issue was not whether the voting age should be lowered, but how. In his own interpretation of \"Katzenbach\", Nixon argued that to include age as a possible parameter of discrimination would overstretch the concept, and voiced concerns that the damage of a Supreme Court decision to overturn the Voting Rights Act could be disastrous.\nIn \"Oregon v. Mitchell\" (1970), the Supreme Court considered whether the voting-age provisions Congress added to the Voting Rights Act in 1970 were constitutional. The Court struck down the provisions that established 18 as the voting age in state and local elections. However, the Court upheld the provision establishing the voting age as 18 in federal elections. The Court was deeply divided in this case, and a majority of justices did not agree on a rationale for the holding.\nThe decision resulted in states being able to maintain 21 as the voting age in state and local elections, but being required to establish separate voter rolls so that voters between 18 and 21 years old could vote in federal elections.\nOpposition.\nAlthough the Twenty-sixth Amendment passed faster than any other constitutional amendment, about 17 states refused to pass measures to lower their minimum voting ages after Nixon signed the 1970 extension to the Voting Rights Act. Opponents to extending the vote to youths questioned the maturity and responsibility of people at the age of 18. Representative Emanuel Celler of New York, one of the most vocal opponents of a lower voting age from the 1940s through 1970 (and Chair of the powerful House Judiciary Committee for much of that period), insisted that youth lacked \"the good judgment\" essential to good citizenship and that the qualities that made youth good soldiers did not also make them good voters.\nProfessor William G. Carleton wondered why the vote was proposed for youth at a time when the period of adolescence had grown so substantially rather than in the past when people had more responsibilities at earlier ages. Carleton further criticized the move to lower the voting age, citing American preoccupations with youth in general, exaggerated reliance on higher education, and equating technological savvy with responsibility and intelligence. He denounced the military service argument as well, calling it a \"cliche\". Considering the ages of soldiers in the Civil War, he asserted that literacy and education were not the grounds for limiting voting; rather, common sense and the capacity to understand the political system grounded voting-age restrictions.\nJames J. Kilpatrick, a political columnist, asserted that the states were \"extorted\" into ratifying the Twenty-sixth Amendment. In his article, he claims that, by passing the 1970 extension to the Voting Rights Act, Congress effectively forced the States to ratify the amendment lest they be forced to financially and bureaucratically cope with maintaining two voting registers. George Gallup also mentions the cost of registration in his article showing percentages favoring or opposing the amendment, and he draws particular attention to the lower rates of support among adults aged 30\u201349 and over 50 (57% and 52% respectively) as opposed to those aged 18\u201320 and 21\u201329 (84% and 73% respectively).\nProposal and ratification.\nPassage by Congress.\nSenator Birch Bayh's subcommittee on constitutional amendments began hearings on extending voting rights to 18-year-olds in 1968.\nAfter \"Oregon v. Mitchell\", Bayh surveyed election officials in 47 states and found that registering an estimated 10million young people in a separate system for federal elections would cost approximately $20million. Bayh concluded that most states could not change their state constitutions in time for the 1972 election, mandating national action to avoid \"chaos and confusion\" at the polls.\nOn March 2, 1971, Bayh's subcommittee and the House Judiciary Committee approved the proposed constitutional amendment to lower the voting age to 18 for all elections.\nOn March 10, 1971, the Senate voted 94\u20130 in favor of proposing a constitutional amendment to guarantee the minimum voting age could not be higher than 18. On March 23, 1971, the House of Representatives voted 401\u201319 in favor of the proposed amendment.\nRatification by the states.\nHaving been passed by the 92nd United States Congress, the proposed Twenty-sixth Amendment was sent to the state legislatures for their consideration. Which state was the first to officially ratify the amendment was a matter of dispute: the Minnesota legislature approved the amendment at 3:14 p.m. CST (4:14 p.m. EST), minutes before U.S. Senate president pro tempore Allen J. Ellender officially approved the federal law at approximately 4:35 or 4:40\u00a0pm. EST. Legislators in Delaware, which ratified the amendment at 4:51\u00a0pm, argued that Minnesota's ratification was invalid because the amendment had not yet been sent to the states. The U.S. Senate parliamentarian ruled that Minnesota acted prematurely, but the legality of its ratification of the amendment was never officially challenged.\nRatification was completed on June 30, 1971, after the amendment had been ratified by thirty-eight states. Which state was the 38th to ratify and thus put the amendment into effect has also been disputed. Contemporaneous reports agree that Ohio's House of Representatives cast the decisive vote on the evening of June 30, and that Alabama and North Carolina had ratified the amendment earlier in the day. As of 2013, however, the Government Printing Office states that North Carolina did not complete its ratification of the amendment until July 1, at which time it became the 38th state to ratify. Additionally, Alabama governor George Wallace claimed that his state was the 38th to ratify, because he did not sign the ratification resolution until after North Carolina and Ohio completed their ratifications; however, the approval of the governor is not required to ratify an amendment.\nHaving been ratified by three-fourths of the States (38), the Twenty-sixth Amendment became part of the Constitution. On July 5, 1971, the Administrator of General Services, Robert Kunzig, certified its adoption. President Nixon and Julianne Jones, Joseph W. Loyd Jr., and Paul S. Larimer of the \"Young Americans in Concert\" also signed the certificate as witnesses. During the signing ceremony, held in the East Room of the White House, Nixon talked about his confidence in the youth of America:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As I meet with this group today, I sense that we can have confidence that America's new voters, America's young generation, will provide what America needs as we approach our bicentennial, not just strength and not just wealth but the 'Spirit of '76' a spirit of moral courage, a spirit of high idealism in which we believe in the American dream, but in which we realize that the American dream can never be fulfilled until every American has an equal chance to fulfill it in their own life.\nThe amendment was subsequently ratified by 5 more states, bringing the total number of ratifying states to 43:\n 39. Oklahoma: July 1, 1971\n 40. Virginia: July 8, 1971\n 41. Wyoming: July 8, 1971\n 42. Georgia: October 4, 1971\n 43. South Dakota: March 4, 2014\nNo action has been taken on the amendment by the states of Florida, Kentucky, Mississippi, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, or Utah.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70138", "revid": "38104346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70138", "title": "Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution", "text": "1992 amendment delaying congressional salary changes\nThe Twenty-seventh Amendment (Amendment XXVII, also known as the Congressional Pay Amendment or the Congressional Compensation Act of 1789) to the United States Constitution states that any law that increases or decreases the salary of members of Congress may take effect only after the next election of the House of Representatives has occurred. It is the most recently adopted amendment but was one of the first proposed.\nThe 1st Congress submitted the amendment to the states for ratification on September 25, 1789, along with 11 other proposed amendments (\"Articles I\u2013XII\"). The last ten Articles were ratified in 1791 to become the Bill of Rights, but the first two, the Twenty-seventh Amendment and the proposed Congressional Apportionment Amendment, were not ratified by enough states to come into force with them.\nThe proposed congressional pay amendment was largely forgotten until 1982, when Gregory Watson, a 19-year-old student at the University of Texas at Austin, wrote a paper for a government class in which he claimed that the amendment could still be ratified. He later launched a nationwide campaign to complete its ratification. The amendment eventually became part of the United States Constitution, effective May 5, 1992. \nThe idea behind this amendment is to reduce corruption in the legislative branch by requiring an election before a congressperson's salary increase takes effect. The public can thus remove members of Congress from office before their salaries increase. It is unclear whether the amendment has produced any change in congressional behavior. An unintended consequence of the amendment is that, unlike executive branch employees or Congressional staff, all members of Congress continue to get paid during a shutdown. The interpretation of a cease in pay for cease of work as a decrease in salary, which is prohibited by the amendment, has not been ruled upon.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No law, varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall have intervened.\nHistorical background.\nSeveral states raised the issue of Congressional salaries as they debated whether to ratify the Constitution.\nNorth Carolina's ratifying convention proposed several amendments to the Constitution, including the following: \"The laws ascertaining the compensation of senators and representatives, for their services, shall be postponed in their operation until after the election of representatives immediately succeeding the passing thereof; that excepted which shall first be passed on the subject.\" Virginia's ratifying convention recommended an identical amendment.\nNew York's declaration of ratification was accompanied by a similar amendment proposal: \"That the Compensation for the Senators and Representatives be ascertained by standing law; and that no alteration of the existing rate of Compensation shall operate for the Benefit of the Representatives, until after a subsequent Election shall have been had.\"\nProposal by Congress.\nThis amendment was one of several proposed amendments to the Constitution that Representative James Madison of Virginia introduced in the House of Representatives on June 8, 1789. Madison's original intent was that it be added to the end of of the Constitution (\"The Senators and Representatives shall receive a Compensation for their Services, to be ascertained by Law, and paid out of the Treasury of the United States\"). This and Madison's other proposals were referred to a committee consisting of one representative from each state. After emerging from committee, the full House debated the issue and, on August 24, 1789, passed it and 16 other articles of amendment. Next, the proposals went to the Senate, which made 26 substantive alterations. On September 9, 1789, the Senate approved a culled and consolidated package of 12 articles of amendment.\nOn September 21, 1789, a House\u2013Senate conference committee convened to resolve numerous differences between the House and Senate Bill of Rights proposals. On September 24, 1789, the committee issued its report, which finalized 12 proposed amendments for the House and Senate to consider. The House agreed to the conference report that day, and the Senate concurred the next day.\nWhat would become the Twenty-seventh Amendment was listed second among the 12 proposals sent on September 25, 1789, to the states for their consideration. Ten of these, numbers 3\u201312, were ratified 27 months later and are known as the Bill of Rights. The remaining proposal, the Congressional Apportionment Amendment, has not been ratified by enough states to become part of the Constitution.\nThe article on Congressional compensation was initially ratified by seven states through 1792 (including Kentucky), but was not ratified by another state for eighty years. The Ohio General Assembly ratified it on May 6, 1873, in protest of an unpopular Congressional pay raise. A century later, on March 6, 1978, the Wyoming Legislature also ratified the article.\nRevival of interest.\nThis proposed amendment was largely forgotten until Gregory Watson, an undergraduate student at the University of Texas at Austin, wrote a paper on the subject in 1982 for a political science course. In the paper, Watson argued that the amendment was still \"live\" and could be ratified. Watson received a \"C\" grade for his paper from one of the course's teaching assistants. Watson appealed the grade to the course instructor, Sharon Waite, who declined to overrule the teaching assistant. Waite has said, \"I kind of glanced at it, but I didn't see anything that was particularly outstanding about it and I thought the C was probably fine\". Watson responded by starting a new push for ratification with a letter-writing campaign to state legislatures.\nIn \"Dillon v. Gloss\", the Supreme Court remarked that \"ratification [of a proposed constitutional amendment] must be within some reasonable time after the proposal\", and suggested that it was \"quite untenable\" to view proposed amendments from 1789, 1810, and 1861 as still pending.\nBut in \"Coleman v. Miller\", the court ruled that the validity of state ratifications of a constitutional amendment is a political matter, and thus not properly assigned to the judiciary. It also held that for a political question, it was up to Congress to determine whether an amendment with no time limit for ratification is still viable after a long time based on \"the political, social and economic conditions which have prevailed during the period since the submission of the amendment\".\nWatson used $6,000 of his own money to sponsor his nationwide effort. When Watson began his campaign in early 1982, he was aware of ratification by only six states and erroneously believed that Virginia's 1791 approval was the last action a state had taken. He discovered in 1983 that Ohio had approved the amendment in 1873 as a means of protest against the Salary Grab Act and learned in 1984 that Wyoming had done the same in 1978, as a protest against a 1977 congressional pay raise. Watson also did not know until 1997, well after the amendment's adoption, that Kentucky had ratified the amendment in 1792. Neither did Kentucky lawmakers themselves\u00a0\u2013 in Watson's desire for a 50-state sweep, the Kentucky General Assembly post-ratified the amendment in 1996 (Senate Joint Resolution No. 50), at Watson's request, likewise unaware that the task had already been attended to 204 years earlier.\nIn April 1983, Maine became the first state to ratify the amendment as a result of Watson's campaign, followed by Colorado in April 1984. Numerous state legislatures followed suit, with some reaffirming the amendment despite having affirmed it centuries ago. Michigan and New Jersey rushed to be the 38th state to ratify the amendment, but Michigan was faster, ratifying the amendment on May 7, 1992, resulting in the certification of the amendment. New Jersey ratified the amendment regardless, overturning its rejection of the amendment centuries earlier.\nIn 2016, Zach Elkins, a professor in the University of Texas at Austin Department of Government, became interested in Watson's story and began to document its origins. He tracked down Sharon Waite, who had left academia in the 1980s to work on her family's citrus farm. Elkins suggested to Waite that they change Watson's grade. In 2017, Elkins submitted a grade change form with Waite's signature and a grade change to A+. In an interview, Waite said, \"Goodness, he certainly proved he knew how to work the Constitution and what it meant and how to be politically active, [...] So, yes, I think he deserves an A after that effort\u00a0\u2013 A-plus!\" A+ is not a valid grade at UT, so Watson's grade may have been changed to an A, though Elkins urged the registrar to leave it as the only A+ ever recorded at the University of Texas. In the same year, the Texas Legislature passed a congratulatory resolution in response to Watson's successful grade change and his overall political participation.\nRatification by the states.\nThe following states ratified the Twenty-seventh Amendment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOn May 18, 1992, the Archivist of the United States, Don W. Wilson, certified that the amendment's ratification had been completed. Michigan's May 7, 1992, ratification was believed to be the 38th state, but it later came to light that the Kentucky General Assembly had ratified the amendment during that state's initial month of statehood, making Alabama (which acted after Missouri on May 5, 1992) the state to finalize the amendment's addition to the Constitution.\nThe amendment was subsequently ratified by:\nFour states have not ratified the Twenty-seventh Amendment: Massachusetts, Mississippi, New York, and Pennsylvania.\nAffirmation of ratification.\nOn May 19, 1992, the Twenty-seventh Amendment's certificate of ratification, signed by the Archivist of the United States, Don W. Wilson, on May 18, 1992, was printed and published in the \"Federal Register\".\nIn certifying that the amendment had been duly ratified, the Archivist of the United States had acted under statutory authority granted to his office by the Congress under \u00a0https://, which states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whenever official notice is received at the National Archives and Records Administration that any amendment proposed to the Constitution of the United States has been adopted, according to the provisions of the Constitution, the Archivist of the United States shall forthwith cause the amendment to be published, with his certificate, specifying the States by which the same may have been adopted, and that the same has become valid, to all intents and purposes, as a part of the Constitution of the United States.\nThe response in Congress was sharp. Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia scolded Wilson for certifying the amendment without congressional approval. Although Byrd supported congressional acceptance of the amendment, he contended that Wilson had deviated from \"historic tradition\" by not waiting for Congress to consider the ratification's validity, given the extremely long time since the amendment had been proposed. Speaker of the House Tom Foley and others called for a legal challenge to the ratification.\nOn May 20, 1992, under the authority recognized in \"Coleman\", and in keeping with the precedent established by the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment, each house of the 102nd Congress passed its own version of a concurrent resolution agreeing that the amendment was validly ratified, despite the more than 202 years the task took. The Senate's approval of the resolution was unanimous (99 to 0) and the House vote was 414 to 3.\nLegal issues.\nCost-of-living adjustments.\nCongressional cost-of-living adjustments (COLA) have been upheld against legal challenges based on this amendment. In \"Boehner v. Anderson\", the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that the first COLA was in accord with the amendment because it took effect after the election that followed its vote. The court declined to rule on the constitutionality of COLAs in general. In \"Schaffer v. Clinton\", the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit ruled (explicitly disagreeing with \"Boehner\") that receiving such a COLA does not grant members of the Congress standing in federal court to challenge it; the Supreme Court did not hear either case, and so has never ruled on this amendment's effect on COLAs.\nNo Budget, No Pay Act.\nThe No Budget, No Pay Act was proposed in 2012 and again in 2013 to prevent lawmakers from being paid during a government shutdown. The bill received limited bipartisan support, but concerns were raised that it violated the twenty-seventh amendment saying that Congress may not \"vary\" the compensation of its members until the next election. The bill did not pass and the Supreme Court has not addressed its constitutionality.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70139", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70139", "title": "Israeli-Palestinian Conflict", "text": ""}
{"id": "70140", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70140", "title": "Click-to-donate site", "text": "Type of website\nA click-to-donate site is a website where users can click a button to generate a donation for a charity without spending any of their own money. The money for the donation comes from advertisers whose banners are displayed each time a user clicks the button. While not directly contributing (though many sites offer additional ways of support), visitors are making a difference in the sense that, had they not visited, no donation would have been given.\nIn most cases, the donation generated by each user only amounts to a few cents, but the goal is to accumulate enough clicks to add up to a significant amount.\nMany charities launched this style of program in the late 1990s. However, the constriction of online advertising spending around 2001 following the dot-com collapse caused many sites to be closed. Yet there are still many in operation, notably Freerice, The Hunger Site, and Por Los Chicos.\nFlattr and CentUp (now defunct) used click-to-donate technology on many sites instead of being centralized on just one.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70142", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70142", "title": "Imclone Systems", "text": ""}
{"id": "70143", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70143", "title": "Platanaceae", "text": "Family of flowering plants\nPlatanaceae, the plane family, is a family of flowering plants in the order Proteales. The family consists of only a single extant genus \"Platanus\", with twelve known species. The plants are tall trees, native to temperate and subtropical regions of the Northern Hemisphere. The hybrid London plane is widely planted in cities worldwide.\nEcology.\nPollination is anemophilous; flowering begins at the start of spring when the new leaves are sprouting. The heads that sustain the fruit normally shed the year after they have matured, during the autumn. Dispersion of the individual fruiting bodies, with their thistledown, is anemochorous (they are sometimes dispersed by water as a secondary mechanism).\nThe plants grow in cool situations in temperate climates and are frequently found on the banks of rivers and streams. They are totally absent from dry or excessively cold areas.\nPhytochemistry.\nThey contain cyanogenic glycosides derived from tyrosine, flavonoids belonging to the proanthocyanidins group (e.g. prodelphinidin) and flavonols (kaempferol, quercetin, myricetin), in addition to triterpenols (including betulinic acid). They lack ellagic acid, saponins, and sapogenins.\nCultivation.\nThe main use for a number of the species is to provide shade in pedestrian areas in temperate regions, particularly the London plane (\"Platanus \u00d7 hispanica\"), which is widely distributed throughout Europe and North America. It is highly resistant, probably due to so-called hybrid vigour, although its use requires caution due to their allergy-producing thistledown. The parent species are also grown for the same effect, but with poorer results as they are less resistant to contamination, among other reasons. The wood is used in cabinetmaking, paneling, and other interior work, and is also prized for its long burn time.\nFossils.\nA large number of fossils of this family have been recorded from the Lower Cretaceous (98-113 million years ago, \"Platanocarpus\"). The examples from that time had very small pollen (8-10 \u03bcm) and a developed perianth and they lacked hairs at the base of the nucule. It is thought to have had entomophilous pollination. During the mid Cretaceous, the fossilized forms with platanoid leaves became mixed with pinnate leaves (\"Sapindopsis\") or pedatisect leaves (\"Debeya\", \"Dewalquea\"), and these forms lasted until the Eocene. The leaves with typical stipules belonging to the sub-genus \"Platanus\" are very common in Palaeocene formations (60 M years ago). It is thought that the only modern genus, \"Platanus\", is a relict that can be considered a living fossil. It must have been polyploid during its evolution judging by the size of its stomata.\nSystematic position.\nThe APG II system (2003) allows the option of including it in the family Proteaceae, or treating it as distinct as a segregate family. In as far as APG II accepts the family, it is placed in the order Proteales, in the clade eudicots. This represents a slight change from the APG system of 1998, which did accept this family. The Cronquist system of 1981 recognized the family and placed it in order Hamamelidales, in subclass Hamamelidae [\"sic\"] in class Magnoliopsida (dicotyledons). The Dahlgren system and Thorne system (1992) also recognized this family and placed it in the order Hamamelidales in superorder Rosanae in subclass Magnoliidae \"sensu\" Dahlgren and Thorne (dicotyledons). The Engler system, in its 1964 update, also recognized the family and placed it in the order Rosales in subclass Archichlamydeae of class Dicotyledoneae. The Wettstein system, last revised in 1935, also recognized the family and placed it in the order Hamamelidales in the Monochlamydeae in subclass Choripetalae of the class Dicotyledones. Based on molecular and morphological data the APW (Angiosperm Phylogeny Website) places the family in the order Proteales as a sister family to the Proteaceae, making them the Northern Hemisphere version of this family (cf. http://).\n\"Theoretical introduction to Taxonomy\"\nTaxa included.\nThe only extant genus, \"Platanus\" L., 1753, has the type species \"Platanus orientalis\" L., 1753. It is divided into two subgenera: the subgenus \"Castaneophyllum\" J.-F. Leroy, 1982, with elliptical, penninerved leaves with small scarious, stipules, that only includes \"Platanus kerrii\" Gagnep., 1939, an isolated relict species that represents the genus\u2019 evolutionary basal branch and which is the sister group of the other species, which comprise the subgenus \"Platanus\".\nHybrids.\nThe London plane or hybrid plane has long been considered a hybrid derived from the cross between \"P. occidentalis\" and \"P. orientalis\", despite this its origin is not clear. Some experts think it originated in London and others in Spain or even in natural or cultivated hybrid form (or not) in Turkey. The question has not been investigated with modern molecular methods. As a consequence, even its nomenclature is hotly debated, to the extent that until recently, some anglophone authors denied the priority of the name used by Otto von M\u00fcnchhausen (following Maria da Luz de Oliveira Tavares Monteiro da Rocha Afonso, 1990, see References). The plant is not found in the wild, though it appears in a naturalised form along the banks of rivers and streams.\nHybrid \"Platanus \u00d7 hispanica\" (= \"P. orientalis\" var. \"acerifolia\" ; \"P. hybrida\" ; \"P. vulgaris\" ; \"P. \u00d7 acerifolia\".\nOther names proposed for hybrids that are probably synonymous with the above, which is the only name in English, and which represent smaller minorities are:\nThe references consulted do not agree as to whether the fruit is a nucule or achene, the difference between the two ultimately depends on the size of the pericarp and the extent of its lignification. The fruit is dry, indehiscent, monocarpelar and monospermatic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70144", "revid": "35508256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70144", "title": "Cypriniformes", "text": "Order of fishes\nCypriniformes is an order of ray-finned fish, which includes many families and genera of cyprinid (carps and their kin) fish, such as barbs, loaches, botias, and minnows (among others). Cypriniformes is an \"order-within-an-order\", placed under the superorder Ostariophysi\u2014which is also made up of cyprinid, ostariophysin fishes. The order contains 11\u201312 families (with some authorities having listed as many as 23), over 400 genera, and more than 4,250 named species; new species are regularly described, and new genera are recognized frequently. Cyprinids are most diverse in South and Southeast Asia and are entirely absent from Australia and South America. At 112 years old, the longest-lived cypriniform fish documented is the bigmouth buffalo.\nTheir closest living relatives are the Characiformes (characins, tetras and their kin), the Gymnotiformes (electric eel and American knifefishes), and the Siluriformes (catfishes).\nDescription.\nLike other orders of the Ostariophysi, fishes of Cypriniformes possess a Weberian apparatus. They differ from most of their relatives in having only a dorsal fin on their backs; most other fishes of Ostariophysi have a small, fleshy adipose fin behind the dorsal fin. Other differences are the Cypriniformes' unique kinethmoid, a small median bone in the snout, and the lack of teeth in the mouth. Instead, they have convergent structures called pharyngeal teeth in the throat. While other groups of fish, such as cichlids, also possess pharyngeal teeth, the cypriniformes' teeth grind against a chewing pad on the base of the skull, rather than an upper pharyngeal jaw.\nThe most notable family placed here is the Cyprinidae (carps and minnows), which make up two-thirds of the order's diversity. This is one of the largest families of fish, and is widely distributed across Eurasia, North America, and Africa. Most species are strictly freshwater inhabitants, but some are found in brackish water, such as roach and bream. At least one species is found in saltwater, the Pacific redfin (\"Pseudaspius brandtii\"). Brackish water and marine cyprinids are invariably anadromous, swimming upstream into rivers to spawn. Sometimes separated as family Psilorhynchidae, they seem to be specially adapted fishes of the Cyprinidae.\nThe Balitoridae and Gyrinocheilidae are families of mountain-stream fishes feeding on algae and small invertebrates. They are found only in tropical and subtropical Asia. While the former are a speciose group, the latter contain only a handful of species. The suckers (Catostomidae) are found in temperate North America and eastern Asia. These large fishes are similar to carps in appearance and ecology. Members of the Cobitidae are common across Eurasia and parts of North Africa. A midsized group like the suckers, they are rather similar to catfish in appearance and behaviour, feeding primarily off the substrate and equipped with barbels to help them locate food at night or in murky conditions. Fishes in the families Cobitidae, Balitoridae, Botiidae, and Gyrinocheilidae are called loaches, although the last do not seem to belong to the lineage of \"true\" loaches, but are related to the suckers.\nSystematics.\nHistorically, these included all the forms now placed in the superorder Ostariophysi except the catfish, which were placed in the order Siluriformes. By this definition, the Cypriniformes were paraphyletic, so recently, the orders Gonorhynchiformes, Characiformes (characins and allies), and Gymnotiformes (knifefishes and electric eels) have been separated out to form their own monophyletic orders.\nThe families of Cypriniformes are traditionally divided into two suborders. Superfamily Cyprinioidea contains the carps and minnows (Cyprinidae) and also the mountain carps as the family Psilorhynchidae. In 2012, Maurice Kottelat reviewed the superfamily Cobitoidei and under his revision it now consists of the following families: hillstream loaches (Balitoridae), Barbuccidae, Botiidae, suckers (Catostomidae), true loaches (Cobitidae), Ellopostomatidae, Gastromyzontidae, sucking loaches (Gyrinocheilidae), stone loaches (Nemacheilidae), Serpenticobitidae, and long-finned loaches (Vaillantellidae).\nCatostomoidea is usually treated as a junior synonym of the Cobitoidei, but it could be split off the Catostomidae and Gyrinocheilidae in a distinct superfamily; the Catostomoidea might be closer relatives of the carps and minnows than of the \"true\" loaches. While the Cyprinioidea seem more \"primitive\" than the loach-like forms, they were apparently successful enough never to shift from the original ecological niche of the basal Ostariophysi. Yet, from the ecomorphologically conservative main lineage apparently at least two major radiations branched off. These diversified from the lowlands into torrential river habitats, acquiring similar habitus and adaptations in the process.\nThe mountain carps are the highly apomorphic Cyprinidae, perhaps close to true carps (Cyprininae), or maybe to the danionins. While some details about the phylogenetic structures of this massively diverse family are known \u2013 e.g. that Cultrinae and Leuciscinae are rather close relatives and stand apart from Cyprininae \u2013 no good consensus exists yet on how the main lineages are interrelated. A systematic list, from the most ancient to the most modern lineages, can thus be given as:\nPhylogeny.\nPhylogeny based on the work of the following works\nEvolution.\nCypriniformes include the most primitive of the Ostariophysi in the narrow sense (i.e. excluding the Gonorynchiformes). This is evidenced not only by physiological details, but also by their great distribution, which indicates they had the longest time to spread. The earliest that Cypriniformes might have diverged from Characiphysi (Characiformes and relatives) is thought to be about the Early Triassic, about 250 million years ago (mya). However, their divergence probably occurred only with the splitting-up of Pangaea in the Jurassic, maybe 160 million years ago (Mya). By 110 Mya, the plate tectonics evidence indicates that the Laurasian Cypriniformes must have been distinct from their Gondwanan relatives.\nThe Cypriniformes are thought to have originated in South-east Asia, where the most diversity of this group is found today. The alternative hypothesis is that they began in South America, similar to the other otophysans. If this were the case, they would have spread to Asia through Africa or North America before the continents split up, for these are purely freshwater fishes. As the Characiformes began to diversify and spread, they may have outcompeted South American basal cypriniforms in Africa, where more advanced cypriniforms survive and coexist with characiforms.\nUntil 2025, no cypriniform fossil remains were known predating the Cenozoic. In 2025, multiple fossil remains of an indeterminate cypriniform, including jaws, tooth plates, and vertebrae, were identified from the early Maastrichtian-aged (71\u201369 Mya) Prince Creek Formation of Alaska. This occurrence suggests that in contrast to previous hypotheses, cypriniforms may have originated in high-latitude regions and radiated southwards during the Cenozoic. The next-oldest cypriniform fossils are already assignable to the living family Catostomidae; from the Paleocene-aged Paskapoo Formation of Alberta, they are roughly 60 million years old. During the Eocene (55\u201335 Mya), catostomids and cyprinids spread throughout Asia; the earliest members of the cyprinid subfamilies Barbinae and Danioninae are known from the Eocene Sangkarewang Formation of Indonesia, in addition to possibly Smilogastrinae and Labeoninae. The extinct family Jianghanichthyidae is known from the Eocene of China. In the Oligocene, around 30 Mya, advanced cyprinids began to outcompete catostomids wherever they were sympatric, causing a decline of the suckers. Cyprinids reached North America and Europe about the same time, and Africa in the early Miocene (some 23\u201320 Mya). The cypriniforms spread to North America through the Bering land bridge, which formed and disappeared again several times during the many millions of years of cypriniform evolution.\nRelationship with humans.\nThe Cyprinidae in particular are important in a variety of ways. Many species are important food fish, particularly in Europe and Asia. Some are also important as aquarium fish, of which the goldfish and koi are perhaps the most celebrated. The other families are of less commercial importance. The Catostomidae have some importance in angling, and some \"loaches\" are bred for the international aquarium fish trade.\nAccidentally or deliberately introduced populations of common carp (\"Cyprinus carpio\") and grass carp (\"Ctenopharyngodon idella\") are found on all continents except Antarctica. In some cases, these exotic species have a negative impact on the environment. Carp in particular stir up the riverbed, reducing the clarity of the water, making plant growth difficult.\nIn science, one of the most famous members of the Cypriniformes is the zebrafish (\"Danio rerio\"). The zebrafish is one of the most important vertebrate model organisms in biological and biochemical sciences, being used in many kinds of experiments. During early development, the zebrafish has a nearly transparent body, so it is ideal for studying developmental biology. It is also used for the elucidation of biochemical signaling pathways. They are also good pets, but can be shy in bright light and crowded tanks.\nThreats and extinction.\nHabitat destruction, damming of upland rivers, pollution, and in some cases overfishing for food or the pet trade have driven some Cypriniformes to the brink of extinction or even beyond. In particular, Cyprinidae of southwestern North America have been severely affected; a considerable number went entirely extinct after settlement by Europeans. For example, in 1900 the thicktail chub (\"Gila crassicauda\") was the most common freshwater fish found in California; 70 years later, not a single living individual existed.\nThe well-known red-tailed black shark (\"Epalzeorhynchos bicolor\") from the Mae Klong River of \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\" fame possibly only survives in captivity. Ironically, while pollution and other forms of overuse by humans have driven it from its native home, it is bred for the aquarium fish trade by the thousands. The Yarqon bleak (\"Acanthobrama telavivensis\") from the Yarqon River had to be rescued into captivity from imminent extinction; new populations have apparently been established again successfully from captive stock. The Balitoridae and Cobitidae, meanwhile, contain a very large number of species about which essentially nothing is known except how they look and where they were first found.\nGlobally extinct Cypriniformes species are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70145", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70145", "title": "ImClone Systems", "text": "Biopharmaceutical company\nImClone Systems LLC was a biopharmaceutical company dedicated to developing biologic medicines in the area of oncology. It was founded in 1984 and had its corporate headquarters in Bridgewater, New Jersey, and its research headquarters in New York City. On October 6, 2008, it accepted a $6.5 billion acquisition offer from Eli Lilly and Company, and became a fully owned subsidiary of Eli Lilly and Company on November 24, 2008. Prior to the acquisition, it was traded on the NASDAQ stock exchange under the symbol IMCL. Imclone lost its separate identity in 2014 when its former ImClone research and manufacturing sites were renamed as \"Eli Lilly and Company\".\nInsider trading scandal.\nImClone's stock price dropped sharply at the end of 2001 when its drug Erbitux, an experimental monoclonal antibody, failed to get the expected Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. It was later revealed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that numerous executives sold their stock before the announcement of the decision after the close of trading on December 28.\nIts founder, Samuel D. Waksal, was arrested in 2002 on insider trading charges for informing friends and family to sell their stock, and attempting to sell his own. His daughter, Aliza Waksal, sold $2.5 million in shares on December 27. His father, Jack Waksal, sold $8.1 million in shares over the 27th and 28th. Company executives had done the same. John B. Landes, the general counsel, sold $2.5 million in shares on December 6. Ronald A. Martell, the vice president for marketing and sales, sold $2.1 million in shares on December 11. Four other executives sold shares in the following weeks as well. Later, Samuel Waksal pleaded guilty to various charges, including securities fraud, and on June 10, 2003, was sentenced to seven years and three months in prison.\nMartha Stewart, the founder of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia (Waksal had dated Stewart's daughter) also became embroiled in the scandal after it emerged that she sold about $230,000 in ImClone shares on December 27, just a day before the announcement of FDA decision. Although Stewart maintained her innocence, she was found guilty and sentenced on July 16, 2004, to five months in prison, five months of home confinement, and two years probation for lying about a stock sale, conspiracy, and obstruction of justice.\nUltimately a new clinical trial and FDA filing prepared by Imclone's partner Merck KGaA (\"German Merck,\" not to be confused with the US company of similar name) resulted in an FDA approval of Erbitux in 2004 for use in colon cancer.\nA Congressional hearing on improprieties at ImClone, held in October 2002, unveiled a culture of corruption dating back to 1986. This was the year that ImClone CEO Waksal first forged the signature of the company's general counsel John Landes (one of the three original employees of the company) for financial gain. Nonetheless, Landes defended Waksal's illegal actions at the hearings before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, portraying the forgery as \"a good-faith misunderstanding,\" to which Representative James Greenwood replied \"My children know better than that, Mr. Landes.\" Further questioning about this and subsequent forgeries on Waksal's part revealed that neither Landes, the chief legal officer of the company, nor the company's outside directors reported Waksal's actions to proper authorities or made any moves to have Waksal removed as CEO. Instead, testimony revealed that they initiated their own internal investigation, which was never concluded. The decades-long tolerance for Waksal's fraud, starting from the company's earliest days, provoked Representative Peter Deutsch to refer to the ongoing misconduct as \"wacky.\"\nThe FDA's February 2004 announcement of approval for use of Erbitux for treatment of colorectal cancer reported that conclusions were drawn from a trial involving 329 patients, of which 10.8% responded when Erbitux was used by itself, delaying tumor growth by 1.5 months. When used in conjunction with a standard chemotherapy treatment, irinotecan, 22.9% of patients responded and tumor growth was delayed by approximately 4.1 months.\nIn September 2001, Bristol-Myers Squibb committed $2 billion (including a $1 billion up-front cash payment) for less than 20% of ImClone due to what was called at the time the drug's \"blockbuster\" potential.\nIn January 2006, the company was put up for sale but failed to find any buyers, likely due to the fact that Erbitux by that time faced significant competition in the medical marketplace. ImClone directors withdrew the sale of the company in mid-2006.\nIn April 2007, The Wall Street Journal reported that \"Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and ImClone Systems Inc. said their cancer drug, Erbitux, failed to significantly prolong the lives of people with pancreatic cancer in a new study, marking yet another setback in the drug industry's efforts to find a better treatment for this deadly disease.\"\nCompassionate use controversy.\nThe FDA approved the aforementioned colorectal cancer drug, Erbitux, on February 12, 2004. In May 2001, while ImClone was still seeking approval for the drug (then known as IMC-C225), the CBS news program \"60 Minutes\" aired a story about two cancer patients' struggles to obtain \"compassionate use\" of the drug. One ultimately succeeded; the other failed despite repeated pleas to ImClone officials. It was alleged in the story that ImClone was arbitrary in who received the drug and had no written criteria for compassionate use.\nCarl Icahn acquisition.\nOn October 25, 2006, a group led by billionaire investor Carl Icahn acquired a majority of stock thereby giving him control of the board. Within hours of the announcement, interim CEO Joseph Fischer resigned, and Icahn announced that other members of the Board of Directors would not be re-elected.\nYeda/Aventis/Imclone patent dispute.\nYeda Research and Development, a company set up to commercialize and market the products of research at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel, challenged the Aventis-owned patent, licensed by Imclone, for the use of anti-Epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies in combination with chemotherapy, to slow the growth of certain tumors. This is the so-called '866' patent, which was filed in 1989 by Rhone-Poulenc-Rorer, issued in 2001, and on which Joseph Schlessinger was listed as first-named inventor.\nJoseph Schlessinger's former colleagues at the Weizmann Institute, in particular Michael Sela, claimed to have come up with this concept alongside Schlessinger when they worked together there years earlier, and Yeda challenged the Aventis patent in the United States. Schlessinger testified in court that the idea of combining the anti-EGFR antibody that his lab had developed with chemotherapy in cancer treatment was his own idea. However, the Weizmann Institute scientists provided extensive documentation that they had been developing this idea using an antibody against EGFR that Schlessinger's laboratory had developed and generated, and that he had given them for these studies. Schlessinger claims to have initiated the idea of this use in combination therapy, but had not documented his research and ideas as thoroughly, leaving him forced to rely on his recollections of the events that led to the patent filing some 17 years before Yeda mounted their challenge.\nThe court ruled that Yeda are the sole owners of the disputed patent in the U.S., while Yeda and Sanofi-Aventis co-own the 866 Patent's foreign counterparts. Following the ruling, ImClone and Sanofi-Aventis agreed to settle the dispute with Yeda, for $120 million, with each company paying Yeda $60 million. In return, ImClone were also granted a worldwide license to technology covered by the 866 Patent, and agreed to pay a small royalty on Erbitux sales to Yeda.\nTakeover offer from Bristol-Myers Squibb, and subsequent bidding showdown.\nOn July 31, 2008, Bristol-Myers Squibb offered to take over ImClone for $60 a share cash. The offer was made by letter addressed to ImClone's chairman of the board, Carl Icahn.\nOn September 10, 2008, an undisclosed company and CEO offered to take over ImClone for $70 a share, financing approach was not disclosed. The offer was conditional on the results of a due diligence review of ImClone's business and technology by the undisclosed party, to be completed September 28, 2008.\nOn September 23, 2008, Bristol-Myers Squibb upped its offer to take over ImClone to $62 a share. In addition, Bristol threatened to take the offer to the share holders for a proxy battle with the intention of replacing the current Board of Directors headed by Carl Icahn.\nOn October 6, 2008, ImClone agreed to be acquired by Eli Lilly for $6.5 billion ($70/share). On November 24, 2008, ImClone was formally acquired by Eli Lilly, with all NASDAQ IMCL shares tendered for $6.5 billion ($70/share). ImClone is now a fully owned subsidiary of Eli Lilly and Company. In 2014 a drug developed by ImClone, tumor angiogenesis inhibitor Cyramza, was approved by the FDA for gastric cancer. Lilly acquired the drug through its purchase of ImClone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70146", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70146", "title": "Samuel D. Waksal", "text": "American immunologist, businessman and convicted insider trader\nSamuel D. Waksal (born September 8, 1947) is the founder and former CEO of the biopharmaceutical company ImClone Systems. He is also the founder of Kadmon Pharmaceuticals, which was financed with private capital and commenced operations in New York City in 2010. At ImClone, Waksal led the company to develop the cancer drug Erbitux (cetuximab). During the course of its review process with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Waksal became involved in an insider trading scandal revolving around improper communications with personal friends and family members. He was convicted of several securities violations, served time in federal prison, and was released.\nEducation and early career.\nWaksal was born on September 8, 1947, in Paris, France, to a Jewish family, the son of Holocaust survivors. He earned a bachelor's degree in 1969 and a doctorate in immunobiology in 1974, both from The Ohio State University.\nOver the next 15 years, he worked as a medical researcher at Stanford University, the National Cancer Institute, Tufts University and Mount Sinai Hospital, New York. However, he often faced scrutiny for misrepresenting the source of material and fabricating lab results.\nImClone Systems.\nWaksal founded ImClone Systems in 1984. The company was engaged in several research and development projects before filing its first Biologic License Application with the FDA in 2001. When it won the rights to develop Erbitux, a cancer antibody, the drug's clinical success caused ImClone's stock to reach a high of $70 a share. In September 2001, Bristol-Myers Squibb was intrigued enough by Erbitux to sign a $2 billion deal with the company in return for the marketing rights to the drug. In December 2001, however, the FDA issued a \"Refuse to File\" decision effectively turning down ImClone's application due to concerns about the structure of the clinical trials. In 2004, Erbitux was approved by the FDA. In 2008, the drug generated over $1.5 billion in sales and was credited with aiding thousands of cancer patients. That same year, ImClone was sold to Eli Lilly and Company for $6.5 billion.\nCriminal activity and conviction.\nWaksal became aware of the FDA's rejection on Christmas Day 2001. Unable to get the FDA to reconsider, ImClone began drafting a press release announcing the Erbitux rejection. This was due to be released at the close of business on December 28. Until then, under federal securities law, Waksal was barred from selling his ImClone stock or telling anyone about the pending rejection. However, public release of the Erbitux rejection would expose Waksal to a number of financial problems beyond the near-certainty of ImClone's stock sliding. For example, Waksal had pledged a warrant to buy ImClone shares as collateral for a loan from Bank of America despite having already executed the warrant in 2000. If Bank of America discovered the warrant was no longer valid, Waksal could be charged with bank fraud. He tipped off several of his friends and family to sell their ImClone stock. When Waksal's broker at Merrill Lynch, Peter Bacanovic, became aware of the pending rejection, he alerted their mutual friend, Martha Stewart, that ImClone was about to lose a good deal of its value.\nWaksal was arrested June 12, 2002 on insider trading charges. On October 15, he pleaded guilty to charges of securities fraud, bank fraud, obstruction of justice, and perjury.\nOn March 3, 2003, he pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy and wire fraud for avoiding $1.2 million in sales taxes on $15 million in artwork. The art included works by Mark Rothko, Richard Serra, Roy Lichtenstein, and Willem de Kooning, purchased between June 2000 and October 2001.\nOn June 10, 2003, Waksal was sentenced to seven years and three months in prison and ordered to pay more than $4 million in fines and back taxes, all the maximum punishments allowable under law. Waksal wanted to go to Federal Prison Camp, Eglin, but instead he went to Federal Correctional Institution, Schuylkill. He was later transferred to the Federal Correctional Institution, Milan. On February 9, 2009, Waksal, Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) # 53803-054, was released from BOP custody.\nKadmon Pharmaceuticals.\nIn 2009, upon his release from prison Waksal began fundraising and launched the company Kadmon Pharmaceuticals in New York City. Waksal was forced to step down from the CEO position in 2014 as the company planned an IPO, because his sentence also ruled that he was banned from serving as an officer or director to any public company for life. With Waksal leaving the role, his brother Harlan began serving as CEO. Waksal remained with the company and transitioned into the role of Chief of Innovation. In February 2016, Waksal left the Kadmon Pharmaceuticals but remained a shareholder in the company. In June 2016, the company announced it had filed the paperwork to undergo an IPO. In July 2016, the company raised $75 million in its IPO.\nPersonal life.\nWaksal is divorced from Cynthia F. Waksal; they had two children: Aliza and Elana. His daughter, Elana, is married to Jarrett Posner, son of Steven Posner and grandson of Victor Posner. Waksal dated Martha Stewart's daughter, Alexis, for several years prior to his criminal conviction. As of 2016 he was reported to hold executive positions with the New York Biotechnology Association and the New York Council for the Humanities, and is also a member of the board of advisors of Rockefeller University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70147", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70147", "title": "Joan Beaufort, Countess of Westmorland", "text": "English noblewoman (c. 1377\u20131440)\nJoan Beaufort (c. 1377 \u2013 13 November 1440) was the youngest of the four legitimised children and only daughter of John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster (third surviving son of King Edward III), by his mistress, later wife, Katherine de Roet. She married Ralph de Neville, 1st Earl of Westmorland and in her widowhood became a powerful landowner in the north of England.\nEarly life.\nThe year and place of Joan's birth is unknown. She may have been born at Kettlethorpe in Lincolnshire, the seat of the Swynford family, or at Pleshey in Essex, the home of Joan Fitzalan, Countess of Hereford. The usual date given for Joan's birth is 1379, as wine was ordered by John of Gaunt to be sent with all speed to Kettlethorpe in that year and he dated a couple of documents at that time from Kettlethorpe; thus, Joan's father may have been present for her birth or arrived shortly thereafter. Alison Weir, however, believes 1377 may be more accurate. Joan may have been named after Joan of Kent, at the time of her birth Dowager Princess of Wales. In September 1396 she, together with her siblings, the children of John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford, were legitimised by papal bull.\nMarriages and issue.\nFirst marriage.\nIn 1386 her father arranged for her to be betrothed to Robert Ferrers, 5th Baron Boteler of Wem (d. c. 1395). The marriage took place in 1391/2 at Beaufort-en-Vall\u00e9e, Anjou and the couple remained in the household of her father. Ferrers died only three years after the marriage, having had two daughters by Joan:\nSecond marriage.\nIn November 1396 Joan married, secondly, to the recently widowed Ralph Neville, 1st Earl of Westmorland (d. 1425), who had twelve children by his first wife and fathered a further fourteen by Joan. On the marriage her father settled on the couple for life an annuity of \u00a3206 13s 4d. The couple's primary residence was the ancient Neville seat of Raby Castle in the county of Durham. Joan Beaufort and Ralph Neville had the following 14 children:\nLife.\nIn 1399 Joan was made a Lady of the Order of the Garter by King Richard II. Although that king had created Ralph as the first Earl of Westmorland, Ralph sided with Joan's half-brother Henry Bolingbroke, who deposed Richard in 1399 and assumed the throne as King Henry IV. Joan and Ralph were granted numerous offices, lands, wardships and pensions under Henry IV. Joan was named in royal grants as \"the King's sister.\"\nRalph and Joan used their relationship with Henry IV to seek out the best marriages for their children, often purchasing the wardships and marriages of children orphaned by aristocratic rebellions. For example, in 1423, Ralph purchased the wardship of Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York who lived with the family at Raby Castle and was accordingly later married to Cecily Neville, one of the daughters of Ralph and Joan. J. R. Lander called these machinations \"the most amazing series of child marriages in English history.\" By the time of her death, Joan was the mother of an earl, three barons, a countess, three duchesses and a bishop.\nIn about 1413 Joan invited the mystic Margery Kempe to the family home and it is likely that she helped to fund Margery's pilgrimage to Jerusalem. In 1422 Joan acquired an indult permitting her to stay with any order of nuns attended by \"eight honest women.\"\nLater life and death.\nAfter Ralph's death in 1425, the title Earl of Westmorland passed to Ralph's eldest grandson from his first marriage but many of the Neville lands were transferred to Joan's eldest son Richard Neville, 5th Earl of Salisbury. This sparked the Neville\u2013Neville feud between the two lines descended from Ralph, which continued into the Wars of the Roses.\nDuring her widowhood Joan became a patron of literature. In about 1430 Joan and her family were depicted by Pol de Limbourg in the \"Neville Book of Hours\". In 1428 Joan undertook a religious pilgrimage and joined the Sisterhood of the Abbey of St. Alban's. At some point during her widowhood Joan swore a vow of chastity.\nDeath and burial.\nJoan died on 13 November 1440 at Howden in Yorkshire and was buried beside her mother in Lincoln Cathedral.\nDescendants.\nJoan Beaufort was the mother of Cecily, Duchess of York, and thus was a grandmother of kings Edward IV and Richard III. The latter was defeated in 1485 at the Battle of Bosworth by Henry VII who replaced him as king. Henry then married Elizabeth of York, daughter of Edward IV, and their second son later became King Henry VIII. Henry VIII's sixth wife, Catherine Parr, was also a descendant of Joan through her eldest son Richard Neville, 5th Earl of Salisbury, thus Henry's third cousin. The 5th Earl of Salisbury was father to Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick, \"the Kingmaker\" (father of queen consort Anne Neville and Isabel Neville, Duchess of Clarence).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70149", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70149", "title": "Les Automatistes", "text": "Canadian art group\nLes Automatistes were a group of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois artistic dissidents from Montreal, Quebec, Canada. The movement was founded in the early 1940s by painter Paul-\u00c9mile Borduas. Les Automatistes were so called because they were influenced by Surrealism and its theory of automatism. Members included Marcel Barbeau, Roger Fauteux, Claude Gauvreau, Jean-Paul Riopelle, Pierre Gauvreau, Fernand Leduc, Jean-Paul Mousseau, Guy Borremans, Marcelle Ferron and Fran\u00e7oise Sullivan.\nThe movement may have begun with an exhibition Borduas gave in Montreal in 1942. Held at the Ermitage, an exhibition hall owned by the Coll\u00e8ge de Montr\u00e9al, the show featured gouaches that illustrated the artist's experimentation with non-figurative painting. Initially, les Automatistes exhibited in makeshift venues, since no commercial gallery was willing to show the work of all the members. However, the group was soon being exhibited in Paris and New York also. Though it began as a visual arts group, it also spread to other forms of expression, such as drama, poetry and dance. The title \"les Automatistes\" came from journalist Tancr\u00e8de Marcil Jr., in a review of their second exhibit in Montreal (February 15 to March 1, 1947), which appeared in \"Le Quartier Latin\" (the Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al's student journal).\nIn 1948, Borduas published a collective manifesto called the Refus global, an important document in the cultural history of Quebec and a declaration of artistic independence and the need for expressive freedom. The decision to write the manifesto was partly influenced by Jean Paul Riopelle, who had recently signed the Surrealist manifesto \"Rupture inaugurale\" during a visit to Paris. \"Refus global\" was published in a first edition of four hundred copies, which went on sale at the Librairie Tranquille in Montreal on August 9, 1948. The manifesto's denunciation of the Catholic Church's authority was particularly scandalous and resulted in the group's public humiliation. This ultimately led to a kind of martyrdom but was initially devastating. Borduas was dismissed from his position at the \u00c9cole du meuble and, unable to find work, left Quebec permanently in 1953. Although the group dispersed soon after the manifesto was published, the movement continues to have influence, and may be considered a forerunner of the Quiet Revolution.\nAlongside Lyrical Abstract painters in France, the Automatistes favoured a fluid, painterly technique over the comparatively reserved, hard-edge abstraction so popular in the U.S. and Eastern Europe at the time. Much like a nonobjective Group of Seven, they were looking to create a distinctively Canadian artistic identity. Heavily influenced by Surrealist manifestos and poetry, their work was largely stream-of-consciousness inspired, believing this to be a truer means of communicating subconscious emotions and sensory experiences; they wanted to be liberated from intention, reason, and any kind of structure, in order to communicate a universal human experience without bias. This resulted in increasingly crude or intuitive methods such as applying paint with palette knives and fingers and painting blindfolded, their efforts contradicting their claims of working without intention.\nMedia.\nIn 1954, the Automatistes were the subject of the NFB/CBC documentary series \"On the Spot\" in an episode entitled \"Artist in Montreal.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70153", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70153", "title": "The Human Stain", "text": "2000 novel by Philip Roth\nThe Human Stain is a novel by Philip Roth, published May 5, 2000. The book is set in Western Massachusetts in the late 1990s. Its narrator is 65-year-old author Nathan Zuckerman, who appears in several earlier Roth novels, including two books that form a loose trilogy with \"The Human Stain,\" \"American Pastoral\" (1997) and \"I Married a Communist\" (1998). Zuckerman acts largely as an observer as the complex story of the protagonist, Coleman Silk, a retired professor of classics, is slowly revealed.\nA national bestseller, \"The Human Stain\" was adapted in 2003 as a film by the same name directed by Robert Benton.\nSynopsis.\nColeman Silk is a former professor and dean of the faculty at Athena College, a fictional institution in the Berkshires of western Massachusetts, where he still lives. The story is narrated by Roth's recurring character Nathan Zuckerman, a writer and a neighbor of Silk.\nIn 1996, two years before the main action of the novel, Silk is accused of racism by two African-American students after he wonders aloud whether the reason they have missed all his classes so far is that they are \"spooks\". Though Silk has no idea they are black, they and others at the college see the term as a racial epithet. When the uproar is about to die down, in Silk's view, he resigns. Soon afterward, his wife, Iris, dies of a stroke that Silk feels is caused by the stress of defending him.\nIn the summer of 1998, just after Iris dies, the 71-year-old Silk approaches Zuckerman and asks him to write a book on the incident. Ranting about it, Silk blames the widespread condemnation of him on, among other things, anti-semitism. Zuckerman is uninterested, but the two begin a brief friendship and Silk tells him his life story. Zuckerman is surprised to learn that Silk is in a relationship with Faunia Farley, a 34-year-old woman who works as a janitor at the college and who everyone including Silk believes (falsely, as it turns out) is illiterate.\nZuckerman's version of the story starts when Coleman Silk is a light-skinned black boy in East Orange, New Jersey. Coleman becomes a straight-A student and, in defiance of his father, a quick and clever boxer. A boxing coach suggests that he pass as a Jew. During World War II he drops out of Howard University and joins the Navy, listing his race as white.\nAfter the war he studies at New York University and lives in Greenwich Village. When he introduces a white girlfriend to his family and they realize he is \"passing\", his brother cuts him off from the family. Silk marries Iris, a non-religious Jewish woman, and has four children. His wife and children are unaware of his ancestry; he invents a Jewish background and tells them he's unable to get in touch with his few living relatives.\nA successful academic career in classics leads to his position of dean, where he raises the faculty's standards by forcing out less academically accomplished professors. Decades later, he returns to teaching and is accused of racism as described above.\nSome time after his approach to Zuckerman, Silk loses most contact with the people other than Faunia whom he is on good terms with, including his children and Zuckerman. In November, Silk and Faunia Farley are killed in a car accident, which Zuckerman suspects was caused by Farley's jealous and abusive ex-husband Lester Farley, a Vietnam War veteran suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. At Silk's funeral, his sister Ernestine reveals his secret to Zuckerman. The novel ends with an encounter between Les Farley and Zuckerman, who is en route to New Jersey to have dinner with the Silk family.\nEspecially in the second half of the novel, there are scenes detailing the thoughts and feelings of other characters, notably Faunia, Les Farley, and Delphine Roux, Silk's main antagonist at Athena. Zuckerman gives his sources for some conversations at which he was not present, but he also says, \"I imagine. I am forced to imagine. [...] It is my job. It's now all I do.\"\nBackground.\n\"The Human Stain\" is set in 1998 in the United States, during the period of President Bill Clinton's impeachment hearings and scandal over Monica Lewinsky. It is the third of Roth's novels that take on large social themes.\nRoth described in a 2012 piece for \"The New Yorker\" how his novel was inspired by an event in the life of his friend Melvin Tumin, a \"professor of sociology at Princeton for some thirty years.\" Tumin was subject to a \"witch hunt\" but was ultimately found blameless in a matter involving use of allegedly racial language concerning two African American students.\nCritical response.\nThemes.\n\"The Human Stain\" is the third in a trilogy, following \"American Pastoral\" and \"I Married a Communist\", in which Roth explores American morality and its effects. Here he examines the cut-throat and, at times, petty, atmosphere in American academia, in which \"political correctness\" was upheld. Roth said he wrote the trilogy to reflect periods in the 20th century\u00a0\u2013 the McCarthy years, the Vietnam War, and President Bill Clinton's impeachment\u00a0\u2013 that he thinks are the \"historical moments in post-war American life that have had the greatest impact on my generation.\"\nJournalist Michiko Kakutani said that in \"The Human Stain\", Roth \"explores issues of identity and self-invention in America which he had long explored in earlier works.\" She wrote the following interpretation:\nIt is a book that shows how the public Zeitgeist can shape, even destroy, an individual's life, a book that takes all of Roth's favorite themes of identity and rebellion and generational strife and refracts them not through the narrow prism of the self but through a wide-angle lens that exposes the fissures and discontinuities of 20th-century life.\u00a0... When stripped of its racial overtones, Roth's book echoes a story he has told in novel after novel. Indeed, it closely parallels the story of Nathan Zuckerman, himself another dutiful, middle-class boy from New Jersey who rebelled against his family and found himself exiled, 'unbound' as it were, from his roots.\nMark Shechner writes in his 2003 study that in the novel, Roth \"explores issues in American society that force a man such as Silk to hide his background, to the point of not having a personal history to share with his children or family. He wanted to pursue an independent course unbounded by racial restraints, but became what he once despised. His downfall to some extent is engineered by Delphine Roux, the young, female, elite, French intellectual who is dismayed to find herself in a New England outpost of sorts, and sees Silk as having become deadwood in academia, the very thing he abhorred at the beginning of his own career.\"\nAlleged resemblance to Anatole Broyard.\nIn the reviews of the book in both the daily and the Sunday \"New York Times\" in 2000, Kakutani and Lorrie Moore suggested that the central character of Coleman Silk might have been inspired by Anatole Broyard, a well-known New York literary editor of the \"Times\". Other writers in the academic and mainstream press made the same suggestion. After Broyard's death in 1990, it had been revealed that he racially passed during his many years employed as a critic at \"The New York Times\". He was of Louisiana Creole ancestry.\nRoth himself stated that he had not known of Broyard's ancestry when he started writing the book and only learned of it months later. In Roth's words, written in \"An Open Letter to Wikipedia\" and published by \"The New Yorker\": \"Neither Broyard nor anyone associated with Broyard had anything to do with my imagining anything in \"The Human Stain\".\" Roth stated that Coleman Silk was inspired \"by an unhappy event in the life of my late friend Melvin Tumin.\"\nReception.\nIn choosing it for its \"Editors' Choice\" list of 2000, \"The New York Times\" wrote:\nWhen Zuckerman and Silk are together and testing each other, Roth's writing reaches an emotional intensity and a vividness not exceeded in any of his books. The American dream of starting over entirely new has the force of inevitability here, and Roth's judgment clearly is that you can never make it all the way. There is no comfort in this vision, but the tranquility Zuckerman achieves as he tells the story is infectious, and that is a certain reward.\nIn April 2013, \"GQ\" listed \"The Human Stain\" as one of the best books of the 21st century. The \"New York Times\" likewise, in 2024, listed the novel as one of the best books of the 21st century.\nAfter Roth died, \"The New York Times\" asked several prominent authors to name their favorite work by him. Thomas Chatterton Williams chose \"The Human Stain\", writing that \"Roth achieves something here that is very difficult to imagine his mostly domesticated descendants even attempting: He steps fully out of his own backyard and dares to imagine what he cannot possibly know by means of his own personal identity. I came to this gem late, as a 33-year-old 'mixed-race' black man who'd just become the father of a blond-haired, blue-eyed 'black' daughter who could pass for Swedish. Flipping through my paperback now, I smile as I reread the dog-eared pages, their margins overflowing with comments to the effect of: \"How can he possibly know that?\" There are many ways to display brilliance through narrative, but one of the most difficult \u2014 and courageous \u2014 is to render the I-who-is-not-I as vividly as one can render the self.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70154", "revid": "40619394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70154", "title": "Resin identification code", "text": "Symbol to identify the type of plastic\nA resin identification code (RIC) is a symbol embedded on plastic products, used to sort plastic waste for recycling. They consist of a triangle of clockwise \"chasing arrows\", around a number indicating what type of resin it is made of (01 for PET, 02 for HDPE, 03 for PVC, 04 for LDPE, 05 for polypropylene, 06 for polystyrene, or 07 for Other).\nThese symbols were originally created in 1988 by the Plastics Industry Association in the United States, amid growing concerns about plastic pollution. Since 2008, they are administrated by the ASTM and comprise the technical standard D7611/D7611M-21 \"Standard Practice for Coding Plastic Manufactured Articles for Resin Identification\". The European Commission Decision 97/129/EC \"Identification System For Packaging Materials\" extends this system with recycling codes for other materials like batteries, paper, and glass.\nDespite their similarity to the recycling symbol, resin codes do not indicate whether a product is recyclable. They are frequently misinterpreted by consumers, and contribute to wishcycling (the contamination of recycling bins with unrecyclable goods). At the US Environmental Protection Agency's recommendation, a 2013 revision to the ASTM standard replaced the \"chasing arrows\" with a solid equilateral triangle, but the old symbols are still more widely used among manufacturers.\nHistory.\nThe Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) first introduced the system in 1988 as the \"Voluntary Plastic Container Coding System\". The SPI stated that one purpose of the original SPI code was to \"Provide a consistent national system to facilitate recycling of post-consumer plastics.\" The system has been adopted by a growing number of communities implementing recycling programs, as a tool to assist in sorting plastics. In order to deal with the concerns of recyclers across the U.S., the RIC system was designed to make it easier for workers in materials recovery and recycling facilities to sort and separate items according to their resin type. Plastics must be recycled separately, with other like materials, in order to preserve the value of the recycled material, and enable its reuse in other products after being recycled.\nWhen a number is omitted, the arrows arranged in a triangle resemble the universal recycling symbol, a generic indicator of recyclability. Subsequent revisions to the RIC have replaced the arrows with a solid triangle, in order to address consumer confusion about the meaning of the RIC, and the fact that the presence of a RIC symbol on an item does not necessarily indicate that it is recyclable any more than its absence means the plastic object is necessarily \"un\"recyclable.\nIn 2008, ASTM International took over the administration of the RIC system and eventually issued ASTM D7611\u2014Standard Practice for Coding Plastic Manufactured Articles for Resin Identification. In 2013 this standard was revised to change the graphic marking symbol of the RIC from the \"chasing arrows\" of the Recycling Symbol to a solid triangle instead.\nPossible new codes.\nModifications to the RIC are currently being discussed and developed by ASTM's D20.95 subcommittee on recycled plastics.\nIn the U.S. the Sustainable Packaging Coalition has also created a \"How2Recycle\" label in an effort to replace the RIC with a label that aligns more closely with how the public currently uses the RIC. Rather than indicating what type of plastic resin a product is made out of, the four \"How2Recycle\" labels indicate whether a plastic product is\nThe \"How2Recycle\" labels also encourage consumers to check with local facilities to see what plastics each municipal recycling facility can accept.\nList.\nThe different resin identification codes are part of the Unicode block called Miscellaneous Symbols and have the following codes: \u2673 (U+2673), \u2674 (U+2674), \u2675 (U+2675), \u2676 (U+2676), \u2677 (U+2677), \u2678 (U+2678), and \u2679 (U+2679). \u267a (U+267A).\nBelow are the RIC symbols after ASTM's 2013 revision\nCriticism.\nIn the United States, use of the RIC in the coding of plastics has led to ongoing consumer confusion about which plastic products are recyclable. When many plastics recycling programs were first being implemented in communities across the United States, only plastics with RICs \"1\" and \"2\" (polyethylene terephthalate and high-density polyethylene, respectively) were accepted to be recycled. The list of acceptable plastic items has grown since then, and in some areas municipal recycling programs can collect and successfully recycle most plastic products regardless of their RIC. This has led some communities to instruct residents to refer to the form of packaging (i.e. \"bottles\", \"tubs\", \"lids\", etc.) when determining what to include in a curbside recycling bin, rather than instructing them to rely on the RIC. To further alleviate consumer confusion, the American Chemistry Council launched the \"Recycling Terms &amp; Tools\" program to promote standardized language that can be used to educate consumers about how to recycle plastic products.\nHowever, even when it is technically possible to recycle a particular plastic, it is often economically unfeasible to recycle it, and this can mislead consumers into thinking that more plastic is recycled than really is. In the U.S. in 2018, only 8.5% of plastic waste was recycled.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70155", "revid": "3080835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70155", "title": "Toronto Maple Leafs", "text": "National Hockey League team in the Greater Toronto Area\nThe Toronto Maple Leafs, officially the Toronto Maple Leaf Hockey Club and colloquially known as the Leafs, are a professional ice hockey team based in Toronto. The Maple Leafs compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Atlantic Division in the Eastern Conference. The club is owned by Maple Leaf Sports &amp; Entertainment, a company that owns several professional sports teams in the city, while the team's broadcasting rights are split between BCE Inc. and Rogers Communications.\nThe club was founded as the Toronto Arenas for the inaugural 1917\u201318 NHL season and rebranded to the Toronto St. Patricks two years later. Conn Smythe renamed the franchise to the Maple Leafs after buying it in 1927. The team played home games at the Mutual Street Arena for its first 14 seasons before moving to Maple Leaf Gardens in 1931. Since February 1999, the Maple Leafs play at Scotiabank Arena, which was formerly known as \"Air Canada Centre.\"\nToronto has won more Stanley Cup championships and played more NHL seasons than any team other than the Montreal Canadiens. The club had two recognized dynasties which spanned the 1946\u201347 to 1950\u201351 seasons and the 1961\u201362 to 1966\u201367 seasons, during which the Leafs won a combined eight of eleven Stanley Cup championships. These successes were followed by an extended championship drought, which at 57 seasons is the longest in league history. The Maple Leafs have rivalries with the Boston Bruins, Buffalo Sabres, Detroit Red Wings, the Montreal Canadiens, and the Ottawa Senators. The team's American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate is the Toronto Marlies.\nSeveral individuals who hold an association with the club have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. Nineteen players have had their numbers retired by the Maple Leafs, including the first in professional sports.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1917\u20131927).\nThe National Hockey League (NHL) was formed in 1917 in Montreal by teams formerly belonging to the National Hockey Association (NHA) that had a dispute with Eddie Livingstone, owner of the Toronto Blueshirts. The owners of the other four clubs\u2014the Montreal Canadiens, Montreal Wanderers, Quebec Bulldogs and the Ottawa Senators\u2014wanted to replace Livingstone, but discovered that the NHA constitution did not allow them to simply vote him out of the league. Instead, they opted to create a new league, the NHL, and did not invite Livingstone to join them. They also remained voting members of the NHA, and thus had enough votes to suspend the other league's operations, effectively leaving Livingstone's league with one team.\nThe NHL had decided that it would operate a four-team circuit, made up of the Canadiens, Montreal Maroons, Ottawa, and one more club in either Quebec City or Toronto. Toronto's inclusion in the NHL's inaugural season was formally announced on November 26, 1917, with concerns over the Bulldogs' financial stability surfacing. The League granted temporary franchise rights to the Arena Company, owners of the Arena Gardens. The NHL granted the Arena responsibility of the Toronto franchise for only the inaugural season, with specific instructions to resolve the dispute with Livingstone or transfer ownership of the Toronto franchise back to the League at the end of the season.\nThe franchise did not have an official name but was informally called \"the Blueshirts\" or \"the Torontos\" by the fans and press. Although the inaugural roster was made up of players leased from the NHA's Toronto Blueshirts, including Harry Cameron and Reg Noble, the Maple Leafs do not claim the Blueshirts' history as their own. During the inaugural season, the club performed the first trade in NHL history, sending Sammy Hebert to the Senators, in return for cash. Under manager Charlie Querrie, and head coach Dick Carroll, the team won the Stanley Cup in the inaugural 1917\u201318 season.\nFor the next season, rather than return the Blueshirts' players to Livingstone as originally promised, on October 19, 1918, the Arena Company formed the Toronto Arena Hockey Club, which was readily granted full membership in the NHL. The Arena Company also decided that year that only NHL teams were allowed to play at the Arena Gardens\u2014a move that effectively killed the NHA. Livingstone sued to get his players back. Mounting legal bills from the dispute forced the Arenas to sell some of their stars, resulting in a horrendous five-win season in 1918\u201319. With the company facing increasing financial difficulties, and the Arenas officially eliminated from the playoffs, the NHL agreed to let the team forfeit their last two games. Operations halted on February 20, 1919, with the NHL ending its season and starting the playoffs. The Arenas' .278 winning percentage that season remains the worst in franchise history. However, the 1919 Stanley Cup Final ended without a winner due to the worldwide flu epidemic.\nThe legal dispute forced the Arena Company into bankruptcy, and it was forced to sell the team. On December 9, 1919, Querrie brokered the team's purchase by the owners of the St. Patricks Hockey Club (Percy and Fred Hambly), allowing him to maintain an ownership stake in the team. The new owners renamed the team the Toronto St. Patricks (or St. Pats for short), which they used until 1927. Changing the colours of the team from blue to green, the club won their second Stanley Cup championship in 1922. Babe Dye scored four times in the 5\u20131 Stanley Cup-clinching victory against the Vancouver Millionaires.\nIn 1924, the team's ownership changed again, as movie theatre impresario Nathan Nathanson and mining magnate Jack Bickell purchased the shares of the Hamblys. Bickell invested CA$ in the St. Pats as a favour to his friend Querrie, who needed to financially reorganize his hockey team.\nConn Smythe era (1927\u20131961).\nAfter several financially difficult seasons, the St. Patricks' ownership group (Querrie and Nathan Nathanson) seriously considered selling the team to C. C. Pyle for CA$. Pyle sought to move the team to Philadelphia. However, Toronto Varsity Blues coach Conn Smythe put together a group of his own and made a CA$) offer. With the support of minority shareholder Bickell, Smythe persuaded Querrie and Nathanson to accept their bid, arguing that civic pride was more important than money. Bickell would become team president.\nSmythe took control on February 14, 1927; installing himself as governor and general manager. He immediately renamed the team the Maple Leafs, after the national symbol of Canada, but the team was forced to play out the remainder of the 1926\u201327 season as St. Patricks. He attributed his choice of a maple leaf for the logo to his experiences as a Canadian Army officer and prisoner of war during World War I. Viewing the maple leaf as a \"badge of courage\", and a reminder of home, Smythe decided to give the same name to his hockey team, in honour of the many Canadian soldiers who wore it. However, the team was not the first to use the name. A Toronto minor-league baseball team had used the name \"Toronto Maple Leafs\" since 1895. Although Smythe would not acquire controlling interest in the team until 1947, he would be the franchise's dominant voice for the next four decades.\nInitial reports were that the team's colours were to be red and white, but the Leafs wore white sweaters with a green maple leaf for their first game on February 17, 1927. On September 27, 1927, it was announced that the Leafs had changed their colour scheme to blue and white. Although Smythe later stated he chose blue because it represents the Canadian skies and white to represent snow, these colours were also used on the trucks for his gravel and sand business. The colour blue was also a colour historically associated with the City of Toronto. The use of blue by top-level Toronto-based sports clubs began with the Argonaut Rowing Club in the 19th century, later adopted by their football team, the Toronto Argonauts, in 1873.\nOpening of Maple Leaf Gardens (1930s).\nBy 1930, Smythe saw the need to construct a new arena, viewing the Arena Gardens as a facility lacking modern amenities and seating. Finding an adequate number of financiers, he purchased land from the Eaton family, and construction of the arena was completed in five months.\nThe Maple Leafs debuted at their new arena, Maple Leaf Gardens, with a 2\u20131 loss to the Chicago Black Hawks on November 12, 1931. The opening ceremonies for Maple Leaf Gardens included a performance from the 48th Highlanders of Canada Pipe and Drums. The military band has continued to perform in every subsequent season home opening game, as well as other ceremonies conducted by the hockey club. The debut also featured Foster Hewitt in his newly constructed press box above the ice surface, where he began his famous \"Hockey Night in Canada\" radio broadcasts that eventually came to be a Saturday-night tradition. The press box was often called \"the gondola\", a name that emerged during the Gardens' inaugural season when a General Motors advertising executive remarked how it resembled the gondola of an airship.\nBy the 1931\u201332 NHL season, the Maple Leafs were led by the \"Kid Line\" consisting of Busher Jackson, Joe Primeau and Charlie Conacher and coached by Dick Irvin. The team captured their third Stanley Cup that season, vanquishing the Chicago Black Hawks in the first round, the Montreal Maroons in the semifinals, and the New York Rangers in the 1932 Stanley Cup Final. Smythe took particular pleasure in defeating the Rangers that year. He had been tapped as the Rangers' first general manager and coach for their inaugural season (1926\u201327), but had been fired in a dispute with Madison Square Garden management before the season had begun.\nMaple Leafs star forward Ace Bailey was nearly killed during the 1933\u201334 season when Eddie Shore of the Boston Bruins checked him from behind at full speed into the boards. Maple Leafs' defenceman Red Horner knocked Shore out with a punch, but Bailey, writhing on the ice, had his career ended. The Leafs held the Ace Bailey Benefit Game, the NHL's first All-Star Game, to collect medical funds to help Bailey. His jersey was retired later the same night. The Leafs reached the Stanley Cup Final five times in the next seven years but bowed out to the now-disbanded Maroons in 1935, the Detroit Red Wings in 1936, Chicago in 1938, Boston in 1939 and the Rangers in 1940. After the end of the 1939\u201340 season, Smythe allowed Irvin to leave the team as head coach, replacing him with former Maple Leafs' captain Hap Day.\nThe first dynasty (1940s).\nIn the 1942 Stanley Cup Final, the Maple Leafs were down three games to none in the best-of-seven series against Detroit. Fourth-line forward Don Metz then galvanized the team, to score a hat-trick in game four and the game-winner in game five. Goalie Turk Broda shut out the Wings in game six, and Sweeney Schriner scored two goals in the third period to win the seventh game 3\u20131, completing the reverse-sweep. The Leafs remain the only team to have successfully performed a reverse-sweep in the Stanley Cup Final. Captain Syl Apps won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy that season, not taking one penalty, and finished his 10-season career with an average of 5 minutes, 36 seconds in penalties a season.\nSmythe, who reenlisted in the Canadian Army at the outbreak of World War II, was given leave from military duty to view the final game of the 1942 Cup Final. He arrived at the game in full military regalia. Earlier, at the outbreak of war, Smythe arranged for many of his Maple Leafs players and staff to take army training with the Toronto Scottish Regiment. Most notably, the Leafs announced a large portion of their roster had enlisted, including Apps, and Broda, who did not play on the team for several seasons due to their obligations with the Canadian Forces. During this period, the Leafs turned to lesser-known players such as rookie goaltender Frank McCool and defenceman Babe Pratt.\nThe Maple Leafs beat the Red Wings in the 1945 Final. They won the first three games, with goaltender McCool recording consecutive shutouts. However, in a reversal of the 1942 Final, the Red Wings won the next three games. The Leafs were able to win the series, winning the seventh game by the score of 2\u20131 to prevent a complete reversal of the series played three years ago.\nAfter the end of the war, players who had enlisted were beginning to return to their teams. With Apps and Broda regaining their form, the Maple Leafs beat the first-place Canadiens in the 1947 Final. To bolster their centre depth, the Leafs acquired Cy Thomas and Max Bentley in the following off-season. With these key additions, the Leafs were able to win a second consecutive Stanley Cup, sweeping the Red Wings in the 1948 Final. With their victory in 1948, the Leafs moved ahead of Montreal as the team having won the most Stanley Cups in League history. Apps announced his retirement following the 1948 Final, with Ted Kennedy replacing him as the team's captain. Under a new captaincy, the Leafs managed to make it to the 1949 Final, facing the Red Wings, who had finished the season with the best overall record. However, the Leafs went on to win their third consecutive Cup, sweeping the Red Wings in four games. This brought the total of Detroit's playoff game losses against the Leafs to eleven. The Red Wings were able to end this losing streak in the following postseason, eliminating Toronto in the 1950 NHL playoffs.\nThe Barilko Curse (1950s).\nThe Maple Leafs and Canadiens met again in the 1951 Final, with five consecutive overtime games played in the series. Defenceman Bill Barilko managed to score the series-winning goal in overtime, leaving his defensive position (despite coach Joe Primeau's instructions otherwise) to pick up an errant pass and score. Barilko helped the club secure its fourth Stanley Cup in five years. His glory was short-lived, as he disappeared in a plane crash near Timmins, Ontario, four months later. The crash site was not found until a helicopter pilot discovered the plane's wreckage plane about north of Cochrane, Ontario 11 years later. The Leafs did not win another Cup during the 1950s, with rumours swirling that the team was \"cursed\", and would not win a cup until Barilko's body was found. The \"curse\" came to an end after the Leafs' 1962 Stanley Cup victory, which came six weeks before the discovery of the wreckage of Barilko's plane.\nTheir 1951 victory was followed by lacklustre performances in the following seasons. The team finished third in the 1951\u201352 season and was eventually swept by the Red Wings in the semifinals. With the conclusion of the 1952\u201353 regular season, the Leafs failed to make it to the postseason for the first time since the 1945\u201346 playoffs. The Leafs' poor performance may be attributed partly to a decline in their sponsored junior system (including the Toronto St. Michael's Majors and the Toronto Marlboros). The junior system was managed by Frank J. Selke until his departure to the Canadiens in 1946. In his absence, the quality of players it produced declined. Many who were called up to the Leafs in the early 1950s were found to be seriously lacking in ability. It was only later in the decade that the Leafs' feeder clubs produced prospects that helped them become competitive again.\nAfter a two-year drought from the playoffs, the Maple Leafs clinched a berth after the 1958\u201359 season. Under Punch Imlach, their new general manager and coach, the Leafs made it to the 1959 Final, losing to the Canadiens in five games. Building on a successful playoff run, the Leafs followed up with a second-place finish in the 1959\u201360 regular season. Although they advanced to their second straight Cup Final, the Leafs were again defeated by the Canadiens in four games.\nNew owners and a new dynasty (1961\u20131971).\nBeginning in the 1960s, the Leafs became a stronger team, with Johnny Bower as the goaltender, and Bob Baun, Carl Brewer, Tim Horton and Allan Stanley serving as the Maple Leafs' defencemen. To bolster their forward group during the 1960 off-season, Imlach traded Marc Reaume to the Red Wings for Red Kelly. Originally a defenceman, Kelly was asked to make the transition to the role of centre, where he remained for the rest of his career. Kelly helped reinforce a forward group made up of Frank Mahovlich, and team captain George Armstrong. The beginning of the 1960\u201361 season also saw the debut of rookies Bob Nevin, and Dave Keon. Keon previously played for the St. Michael's Majors (the Maple Leafs junior affiliate), but had impressed Imlach during the Leafs' training camp, and joined the team for the season. Despite these new additions, the Leafs' 1961 playoff run ended in the semifinals against the Red Wings, with Armstrong, Bower, Kelly and others, suffering from injuries.\nIn November 1961, Smythe sold nearly all of his shares in the club's parent company, Maple Leaf Gardens Limited (MLGL), to a partnership composed of his son Stafford Smythe, and his partners, newspaper baron John W. H. Bassett and Toronto Marlboros president Harold Ballard. The sale price was $2.3 million (), a handsome return on Smythe's original investment 34 years earlier. Initially, Conn Smythe claimed that he knew nothing about his son's partners and was furious with the arrangement (though it is highly unlikely he could have believed Stafford could have financed the purchase on his own). However, he did not stop the deal because of it. Conn Smythe was given a retiring salary of $15,000 per year for life, an office, a secretary, a car with a driver, and seats to home games. Smythe sold his remaining shares in the company, and resigned from the board of directors in March 1966, after a Muhammad Ali boxing match was scheduled for the Gardens. Smythe found Ali's refusal to serve in the United States Army offensive, noting that the Gardens was \"no place for those who want to evade conscription in their own country\". He had also said that because the Gardens' owners agreed to host the fight they had \"put cash ahead of class\".\nUnder the new ownership, Toronto won another three straight Stanley Cups. The team won the 1962 Stanley Cup Final beating the defending champion Chicago Black Hawks on a goal from Dick Duff in game 6. During the 1962\u201363 season, the Leafs finished first in the league for the first time since the 1947\u201348 season. In the following playoffs, the team won their second Stanley Cup of the decade. The 1963\u201364 season saw certain members of the team traded. With Imlach seeking to reinvigorate the slumping Leafs, he made a mid-season trade that sent Duff, and Nevin to the Rangers for Andy Bathgate and Don McKenney. The Leafs managed to make the postseason as well as the Cup Final. In game six of the 1964 Cup Final, Baun suffered a fractured ankle and required a stretcher to be taken off the ice. He returned to play with his ankle frozen, and eventually scored the game-winning goal in overtime against the Red Wings. The Leafs won their third consecutive Stanley Cup in a 4\u20130 game 7 victory; Bathgate scored two goals.\nThe two seasons after the Maple Leafs' Stanley Cup victories, the team saw several player departures, including Bathgate, and Brewer, as well as several new additions, including Marcel Pronovost, and Terry Sawchuk. During the 1966\u201367 season, the team had lost 10 games in a row, sending Imlach to the hospital with a stress-related illness. However, from the time King Clancy took over as the head coach, to Imlach's return, the club was on a 10-game undefeated streak, building momentum before the playoffs. The Leafs made their last Cup Final in 1967. Playing against Montreal, the heavy favourite for the year, the Leafs managed to win, with Bob Pulford scoring the double-overtime winner in game three; Jim Pappin scored the series winner in game 6. Keon was named the playoff's most valuable player and was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy.\nFrom 1968 to 1970, the Maple Leafs made it to the playoffs only once. They lost several players to the 1967 NHL expansion draft, and the team was racked with dissension because of Imlach's authoritative manner, and his attempts to prevent the players from joining the newly formed Players' Association. Imlach's management of the team was also brought into question due to some of his decisions. It was apparent that he was too loyal to aging players who had been with him since 1958. In the 1967\u201368 season, Mahovlich was traded to Detroit in a deal that saw the Leafs acquire Paul Henderson and Norm Ullman. The Leafs managed to return to the playoffs after the 1968\u201369 season, only to be swept by the Bruins. Immediately after, Stafford Smythe confronted Imlach and fired him. This act was not without controversy, with some older players, including Horton, declaring that, \"if this team doesn't want Imlach, I guess it doesn't want me\".\nThe Maple Leafs completed the 1969\u201370 season out of the playoffs. With their low finish, the Leafs were able to draft Darryl Sittler at the 1970 NHL amateur draft. The Leafs returned to the playoffs after the 1970\u201371 season with the addition of Sittler, as well as Bernie Parent and Jacques Plante, who were both acquired through trades during the season. They were eliminated in the first round against the Rangers.\nThe Ballard years (1971\u20131990).\nA series of events in 1971 made Harold Ballard the primary owner of the Maple Leafs. After a series of disputes between Bassett, Ballard and Stafford Smythe, Bassett sold his stake in the company to them. Shortly afterwards, Smythe died in October 1971. Under the terms of Stafford's will, of which Ballard was an executor, each partner was allowed to buy the other's shares upon their death. Stafford's brother and son tried to keep the shares in the family, but in February 1972 Ballard bought all of Stafford's shares for $7.5 million, valuing the company at $22 million (). Six months later, Ballard was convicted of charges including fraud, and theft of money and goods, and spent a year at Milhaven Penitentiary.\nBy the end of 1971, the World Hockey Association (WHA) began operations as a direct competitor to the NHL. Believing the WHA would not be able to compete against the NHL, Ballard's attitude caused the Maple Leafs to lose key players, including Parent to the upstart league. Undermanned and demoralized, the Leafs finished with the fourth-worst record for the 1972\u201373 season. They got the fourth overall pick in the 1973 NHL amateur draft, and drafted Lanny McDonald. General Manager Jim Gregory also acquired the 10th overall pick from the Philadelphia Flyers, and the 15th overall pick from the Bruins, using them to acquire Bob Neely and Ian Turnbull. In addition to these first-round picks, the Leafs also acquired Borje Salming during the 1973 off-season.\nDespite acquiring Tiger Williams in the 1974 draft, and Roger Neilson as head coach in the 1977\u201378 season, the Maple Leafs found themselves eliminated in the playoffs by stronger Flyers or Canadiens teams from 1975 to 1979. Although Neilson was a popular coach with fans and his players, he found himself at odds with Ballard, who fired him late in the 1977\u201378 season. Neilson was later reinstated after appeals from the players and the public. He continued as Leafs' head coach until after the 1979 playoffs, when he was fired again, alongside Gregory. Gregory was replaced by Imlach as general manager.\nIn the first year of his second stint as general manager, Imlach became embroiled in a dispute with Leafs' captain Darryl Sittler over his attempt to take part in the Showdown series for \"Hockey Night in Canada\". In a move to undermine Sittler's influence on the team, Imlach traded McDonald, who was Sittler's friend. By the end of the 1979\u201380 season, Imlach had traded away nearly half of the roster he had at the beginning of his tenure as general manager. With the situation between Ballard and Sittler worsening, Sittler asked to be traded. Forcing the Leafs' hand, the club's new general manager, Gerry McNamara, traded Sittler to the Flyers on January 20, 1982. Rick Vaive was named the team's captain shortly after Sittler's departure.\nThe Maple Leafs' management continued in disarray throughout most of the decade, with an inexperienced McNamara named as Imlach's replacement in September 1981. He was followed by Gord Stellick on April 28, 1988, who was replaced by Floyd Smith on August 15, 1989. Coaching was similarly shuffled often after Nielson's departure. Imlach's first choice for coach was his former player Smith, although he did not finish the 1979\u201380 season after being hospitalized by a car accident on March 14, 1980. Joe Crozier was named the new head coach until January 10, 1981, when he was succeeded by Mike Nykoluk. Nykoluk was head coach until April 2, 1984. Dan Maloney returned as head coach from 1984 to 1986, with John Brophy named head coach from 1986 to 1988. Both coaches had little success during their tenure. Doug Carpenter was named the new head coach to begin the 1989\u201390 season when the Leafs posted their first season above .500 in the decade.\nThe team did not have much success during the decade, missing the playoffs entirely in 1982, 1984 and 1985. On at least two occasions, they made the playoffs with the worst winning percentages on record for a playoff team. However, in those days, the top four teams in each division made the playoffs, regardless of record. Since the Norris only had five teams in total, this meant only the last-place team in the division missed the postseason. In 1985\u201386, for instance, they finished with a .356 winning percentage, the fourth worst in the league. However, due to playing in a Norris Division where no team cracked the 90-point mark, the Leafs still made the playoffs because Detroit had the worst record in the league. In 1987\u201388, they entered the final day of the season with the worst record in the league, but were only one point behind the Minnesota North Stars and thus were still in playoff contention. The Red Wings was the only team in the division with a winning record. However, the Leafs upset the Red Wings in their final game while the North Stars lost to the Flames hours later to hand the Leafs the final spot from the Norris.\nThe low finishes allowed the team to draft Wendel Clark first overall at the 1985 NHL entry draft. Clark managed to lead the Leafs to the playoffs from 1986 to 1988, as well as the 1990 playoffs. Ballard died on April 11, 1990.\nResurgence (1990\u20132004).\nDon Crump, Don Giffin, and Steve Stavro were named executors of Ballard's estate. Stavro succeeded Ballard as chairman of Maple Leaf Gardens Ltd. and governor of the Maple Leafs. Cliff Fletcher was hired by Giffin to be the new general manager, although this was opposed by Stavro, who told Fletcher that he wanted to appoint his own general manager.\nNotwithstanding Stavro's initial reluctance with Fletcher's appointment, the Leafs' new ownership would soon earn a reputation for steering clear of exerting undue interference in hockey operations, in stark contrast to Ballard. Fletcher soon set about building a competitive club, hiring Pat Burns as the new coach, and making a series of trades and free-agent acquisitions, such as acquiring Doug Gilmour and Dave Andreychuk, which turned the Leafs into a contender. Assisted by stellar goaltending from minor league call-up Felix Potvin, the team posted a then-franchise-record 99 points.\nDuring the 1993 playoffs, Toronto dispatched the Detroit Red Wings in seven games in the first round, then defeated the St. Louis Blues in another seven games in the division finals. Hoping to meet long-time rival Montreal (who was playing in the Wales Conference finals against the New York Islanders) in the Cup Final, the Leafs faced the Los Angeles Kings in the Campbell Conference finals. They led the series 3\u20132 but dropped game six in Los Angeles. The game was not without controversy, as Wayne Gretzky clipped Gilmour in the face with his stick, but referee Kerry Fraser did not call a penalty, and Gretzky scored the winning goal moments later. The Leafs eventually lost in game seven 5\u20134.\nThe Leafs had another strong season in 1993\u201394, starting the season on a ten-game winning streak, and finishing it with 98 points. The team made it to the conference finals again, only to be eliminated by the Vancouver Canucks in five games. At the 1994 NHL entry draft, the Leafs packaged Wendel Clark in a multi-player trade with the Quebec Nordiques that landed them Mats Sundin. After the Leafs traded Gilmour to the New Jersey Devils in 1997, Sundin was named captain. Missing two consecutive playoffs in 1997 and 1998, the Leafs relieved Fletcher as general manager.\nNew home and a new millennium (1998\u20132004).\nOn February 12, 1998, MLGL purchased the Toronto Raptors, a National Basketball Association franchise, and the arena the Raptors were building, from Allan Slaight and Scotiabank. With the acquisition, MLGL was renamed Maple Leaf Sports &amp; Entertainment (MLSE), acting as the parent company of the two teams. Larry Tanenbaum was a driving force in the acquisition, having bought a 12.5 percent stake in Maple Leaf Gardens Limited (MLGL) in 1996.\nCurtis Joseph was acquired as the team's starting goalie, while Pat Quinn was hired as the head coach before the 1998\u201399 season. Realigning the NHL's conferences in 1998, the Leafs were moved from the Western to the Eastern Conference. On February 13, 1999, the Leafs played their final game at the Gardens before moving to their new home at the then-Air Canada Centre. In the 1999 playoffs, the team advanced to the conference finals but lost in five games to the Buffalo Sabres.\nIn the 1999\u20132000 season, the Leafs hosted the 50th NHL All-Star Game. By the end of the season, they recorded their first 100-point season and won their first division title in 37 years. In both the 2000 and 2001 playoffs, the Leafs defeated the Ottawa Senators in the first round and lost to the New Jersey Devils in the second round. In the 2002 playoffs, the Leafs dispatched the Islanders and the Senators in seven games each during the first two rounds, only to lose to the Cinderella-story Carolina Hurricanes in six games in the conference finals. The 2001\u201302 season was particularly impressive in that injuries sidelined many of the Leafs' better players, but the efforts of depth players, including Alyn McCauley, Gary Roberts and Darcy Tucker, led them to the conference finals.\nAs Joseph opted to become a free agent during the 2002 off-season, the Leafs signed Ed Belfour as the new starting goaltender. Belfour played well during the 2002\u201303 season and was a finalist for the Vezina Trophy. The Leafs lost to Philadelphia in seven games during the first round of the 2003 playoffs. In 2003, an ownership change occurred in MLSE. Stavro sold his controlling interest in MLSE to the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan (OTPP) and resigned his position as chairman in favour of Tanenbaum. Quinn remained as head coach but was replaced as general manager by John Ferguson Jr.\nBefore the 2003\u201304 season, the team held their training camp in Sweden and played in the NHL Challenge against teams from Sweden and Finland. The Leafs went on to enjoy a very successful regular season, leading the NHL at the time of the All-Star Game (with Quinn named head coach of the East's All-Star Team). They finished the season with a then-franchise-record 103 points. They finished with the fourth-best record in the League, and their highest overall finish in 41 years, achieving a .628 win percentage, their best in 43 years, and third-best in franchise history. In the 2004 playoffs, the Leafs defeated the Senators in the first round of the postseason for the fourth time in five years, with Belfour posting three shutouts in seven games, but lost to the Flyers in six games during the second round.\nAfter the lockout (2005\u20132014).\nFollowing the 2004\u201305 NHL lockout, the Maple Leafs experienced their longest playoff drought in the team's history. They struggled in the 2005\u201306 season; despite a late-season surge (9\u20131\u20132 in their final 12 games), led by goaltender Jean-Sebastien Aubin, Toronto was out of playoff contention for the first time since 1998. This marked the first time the team had missed the postseason under Quinn, who was later relieved as head coach. Quinn's dismissal was controversial since many of the young players who were key contributors to the Leafs' late-season run had been drafted by him before Ferguson's arrival, while Ferguson's signings (Jason Allison, Belfour, Alexander Khavanov, and Eric Lindros) had suffered season-ending injuries.\nPaul Maurice, who had previously coached the inaugural season of the Maple Leafs' Toronto Marlies farm team, was named as Quinn's replacement. On June 30, 2006, the Leafs bought out fan-favourite Tie Domi's contract. The team also decided against picking up the option year on goaltender Ed Belfour's contract; he became a free agent. However, despite the coaching change, as well as a shuffle in the roster, the team did not make the playoffs in 2006\u201307. During the 2007\u201308 season, John Ferguson Jr. was fired in January 2008 and replaced by former Leafs' general manager Cliff Fletcher on an interim basis. The team retained Toronto-based sports lawyer Gord Kirke to begin a search for a new team president and general manager, and negotiate a contract. The Leafs did not qualify for the postseason, marking the first time since 1928 the team had failed to make the playoffs for three consecutive seasons. It was also Sundin's last year with the Leafs, as his contract was due to expire at the end of the season. However, he refused Leafs management's request to waive his no-trade clause for the team to rebuild by acquiring prospects or draft picks. On May 7, 2008, after the 2007\u201308 season, the Leafs fired Maurice, as well as assistant coach Randy Ladouceur, naming Ron Wilson as the new head coach, and Tim Hunter and Rob Zettler as assistant coaches.\nOn November 29, 2008, the Maple Leafs hired Brian Burke as their 13th non-interim, and the first American, general manager in team history. The acquisition ended the second Cliff Fletcher era and settled persistent rumours that Burke was coming to Toronto. On June 26, 2009, Burke made his first appearance as the Leafs GM at the 2009 NHL entry draft, selecting London Knights forward Nazem Kadri with the seventh overall pick. On September 18, 2009, Burke traded Toronto's first- and second-round 2010, as well as its 2011 first-round picks, to the Boston Bruins in exchange for forward Phil Kessel. On January 31, 2010, the Leafs made another high-profile trade, this time with the Calgary Flames in a seven-player deal that brought defenceman Dion Phaneuf to Toronto. On June 14, during the off-season, the Leafs named Phaneuf captain after two seasons without one following Sundin's departure. On February 18, 2011, the team traded long-time Maple Leafs defenceman Tomas Kaberle to the Bruins in exchange for prospect Joe Colborne, Boston's first-round pick in 2011, and a conditional second-round draft choice.\nOn March 2, 2012, Burke fired Wilson and named Randy Carlyle the new head coach. However, the termination proved to be controversial as Wilson had received a contract extension just two months before being let go. Changes at the ownership level also occurred in August 2012, when the OTPP completed the sale of their shares in MLSE to BCE Inc. and Rogers Communications. On January 9, 2013, Burke was fired as general manager, and replaced by Dave Nonis. In their first full season under the leadership of Carlyle, Toronto managed to secure a playoff berth in the 2012\u201313 season (which was shortened again due to another lock-out) for the first time in eight years. However, the Leafs lost in seven games to eventual 2013 Stanley Cup finalist Boston in the first round. Despite the season's success, it was not repeated during the 2013\u201314 season, as the Leafs failed to make the playoffs.\nBrendan Shanahan era (2014\u20132025).\nFollowing the 2013\u201314 regular season, Brendan Shanahan was named as the president and an alternate governor of the Maple Leafs. On January 6, 2015, the Leafs fired Randy Carlyle as head coach, and assistant coach Peter Horachek took over on an interim basis immediately. While the Leafs had a winning record before Carlyle's firing, the team eventually collapsed. On February 6, 2015, the Leafs set a new franchise record of 11 consecutive games without a win. At the beginning of February, Shanahan gained the approval of MLSE's board of directors to begin a \"scorched earth\" rebuild of the club. Both Dave Nonis and Horachek were relieved of their duties on April 12, just one day after the season concluded. In addition, the Leafs also fired several assistant coaches, including Steve Spott and Rick St. Croix, as well as individuals from the Leafs' player scouting department.\nOn May 20, 2015, Mike Babcock was named as the new head coach, and on July 23, Lou Lamoriello was named the 16th general manager in team history. On July 1, 2015, the Leafs packaged Kessel in a multi-player deal to the Pittsburgh Penguins in return for three skaters, including Kasperi Kapanen, a conditional first-round pick, and a third-round pick. Toronto also retained $1.2\u00a0million of Kessel's salary for the remaining seven seasons of his contract. During the following season, on February 9, 2016, the Leafs packaged Phaneuf in another multi-player deal, acquiring four players, as well as a 2017 second-round pick from the Ottawa Senators. The team finished last in the NHL for the first time since the 1984\u201385 season. They subsequently won the draft lottery and used the first overall pick to draft Auston Matthews.\nIn their second season under Babcock, Toronto secured the final Eastern Conference wildcard spot for the 2017 playoffs. On April 23, 2017, the Maple Leafs were eliminated from the playoffs by the top-seeded Washington Capitals four games to two in the best-of-seven series.\nToronto finished the 2017\u201318 season with 105 points by beating Montreal 4\u20132 in their final game of the regular season, a franchise-record, beating the previous record of 103 points set in 2004. They faced the Boston Bruins in the first round and lost in seven games. Following the playoffs, Lamoriello was not renewed as general manager. Kyle Dubas was subsequently named the team's 17th general manager in May 2018. During the 2018 off-season, the Maple Leafs signed John Tavares to a seven-year, $77\u00a0million contract. On April 1, the Maple Leafs clinched a division berth for the 2019 Stanley Cup playoffs. The Maple Leafs were eliminated in the first round of the 2019 playoffs on April 23, after losing to the Bruins in a seven-game series.\nOn October 2, 2019, Tavares was named as the team's 25th team captain prior to the Leafs' 2019\u201320 season opening game. After a 9\u201310\u20134 start to the 2019\u201320 season, the club relieved Babcock as head coach on November 20, with Sheldon Keefe named as his replacement. The Maple Leafs were eliminated in the 2020 Stanley Cup Qualifiers on August 9, after losing a five-game series against the Columbus Blue Jackets.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic and travel restrictions at the Canada\u2013United States border, the Leafs were temporarily moved to the North Division for the 2020\u201321 season alongside the NHL's other Canadian teams. During that season, teams only played games against teams in their divisions, in a limited 56-game season. On May 8, 2021, the Leafs clinched the North Division title, giving the Leafs guaranteed home advantage in the first two rounds of the 2021 Stanley Cup playoffs. Matthews also led the league in goals with 41 goals, becoming the first Maple Leaf to win the Maurice \"Rocket\" Richard Trophy. However, the Leafs lost in the first round to their rivals, the Montreal Canadiens, with the Leafs surrendering a 3\u20131 series lead in the process.\nDespite the ending to the previous season, the Leafs were poised to make another run, with much of the core roster intact. Aided by the arrival of defenceman Mark Giordano and centre Colin Blackwell from the Seattle Kraken on March 21, the team cruised throughout the regular season. The Maple Leafs broke their franchise record for points in a season, with 115, and wins in a season, with 50, during a 4\u20132 victory over the New York Islanders on April 17. Despite the achievement, they were unable to match the league-leading Florida Panthers', finishing second in the Atlantic Division During the season, Matthews became the first Leaf in a decade to score 60 goals in a season, and was awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy. The Leafs made the playoffs but lost in the first round to the Tampa Bay Lightning in seven games. With this loss, the Maple Leafs became the first team in the four major North American sports leagues to lose five consecutive winner-take-all games.\nThe 2022 off-season saw the departure of the Leafs' goalie tandem, Jack Campbell and Petr Mrazek, the former signing with Edmonton, the latter being traded to the Blackhawks during the 2022 NHL entry draft. Needing a goaltender tandem for the upcoming season, the Leafs acquired Matt Murray through a trade with the Senators, and signed free agent Ilya Samsonov.\nDuring the 2022\u201323 NHL season, the Leafs again fared well in the regular season, achieving an excellent 50\u201321\u201311 record and 111 points, one point less than the record achieved the season prior. However, the record-setting 2022\u201323 Boston Bruins led the division, finishing with 135 points, and leaving the Leafs in second place in the Atlantic. In the first round of the playoffs, the Leafs defeated the Lightning in a six-game series, marking the first time the Maple Leafs advanced to the second round of the playoff appearance since 2004. During the series with the Lightning, the Leafs became the first NHL team to win three road playoff games in overtime. However, the Leafs lost to the Florida Panthers in the second round in five games. Following the loss, Dubas' contract as general manager was not renewed with the club for the 2023\u201324 season. Dubas was then replaced by Brad Treliving on May 31.\nIn 2023\u201324, the team finished with a 46\u201326\u201310 record, good for 102 points and the third seed in the Atlantic Division. Matthews broke his own career and franchise records for goals in a season, with 69, and was awarded his third Rocket Richard Trophy. However, they were again eliminated in the first round of the playoffs, falling to the Bruins in seven games. After the season, Keefe was dismissed as head coach on May 9, with Craig Berube hired as his successor on May 17. That off-season, Tavares relinquished his role as captain to Matthews on August 14, 2024, with the latter becoming the 26th overall and first American-born captain in franchise history.\nThe team finished the 2024\u201325 season with a 52\u201326\u20134 record, topping the Atlantic Division with 108 points, their first division championship in the Atlantic, setting up a Battle of Ontario matchup with the wild card Ottawa Senators in the first round of the 2025 playoffs. In doing so, Berube broke the record for most wins for a Maple Leafs coach in his first season, previously held by Pat Quinn, who had 45 in the 1998\u201399 season. The Leafs defeated the Senators in a six-game series. As with the 2023 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Leafs faced the Florida Panthers in the second round of the playoffs. The Leafs' goaltender Anthony Stolarz was injured in game one and was replaced with Joseph Woll. Toronto subsequently lost the series to the eventual Stanley Cup victors, the Florida Panthers, in seven games.\nShortly after the end of Toronto's 2025 playoffs, it announced that Shanahan would not return as team president and alternate governor. During the 2025 off-season, the Leafs traded Mitch Marner to the Vegas Golden Knights for Nicolas Roy. \nTeam culture.\nFan base.\nThe price of a Maple Leafs home game ticket is the highest amongst any team in the NHL. Scotiabank Arena holds 18,819 seats for Leafs games, with 15,500 reserved for season ticket holders. Because of the demand for season tickets, their sale is limited to the 10,000 people on the waiting list. As of March 2016, Leafs' season tickets saw a renewal rate of 99.5 percent, a rate that would require more than 250 years to clear the existing waiting list. In a 2014 survey by \"ESPN The Magazine\", the Leafs were ranked last out of the 122 professional teams in the Big Four leagues. Teams were graded by stadium experience, ownership, player quality, ticket affordability, championships won and \"bang for the buck\"; in particular, the Leafs came last in ticket affordability.\nLeafs fans are known for their dedicated support and notable loyalty to the team despite their performance. They are considered to have the largest fan base in the NHL. In a study conducted by sports retailer Fanatics in March 2017, the Leafs and the Minnesota Wild were the only two NHL teams to average arena sellouts despite a below league average winning percentage. Conversely, fans of other teams harbour an equally passionate dislike of the team. In November 2002, the Leafs were named by \"Sports Illustrated\" hockey writer Michael Farber as the \"Most Hated Team in Hockey\".\nDespite their loyalty, there have been several instances where the fanbase voiced their displeasure with the club. During the 2011\u201312 season, fans attending the games chanted for the dismissal of head coach Ron Wilson, and later general manager Brian Burke. Wilson was let go shortly after the fans' outburst, even though he had been given a contract extension months earlier. Burke alluded to the chants noting \"it would be cruel and unusual punishment to let Ron coach another game in the Air Canada Centre\". In the 2014\u201315 season, fans threw Leafs jerseys onto the ice to show their disapproval of the team's poor performances in the past few decades. Similarly, during the later portion of the 2015\u201316 season, which overlaps with the start of Major League Baseball's regular season of play, fans were heard sarcastically chanting \"Let's go Blue Jays!\" and clapping alongside the chant as a sign of their farcical shift in priority from an under-performing team to the more successful playoff-bound 2016 Toronto Blue Jays season. Leafs fans also vandalized Mike Babcock's Wikipedia article amid the poor records of the first few months into the 2019\u201320 season; his article was temporarily semi-protected to minimize further vandalism.\nIn addition to the Greater Toronto Area (GTA), many fans live throughout Ontario, Quebec, including New York state and Michigan. As a result, Leafs' away games at the Bell Centre in Montreal, Canadian Tire Centre in Ottawa, KeyBank Center in Buffalo and at the Little Caesars Arena in Detroit hold more of a shared crowd. This is due in part to the Leafs fans in those areas, and those cities' proximity to the GTA.\nThe Leafs are also a popular team in Atlantic Canada. In November 2016, a survey was conducted that found 20 percent of respondents from Atlantic Canada viewed the Leafs as their favourite team, second only to the Montreal Canadiens at 26 percent. The Leafs were found to be the most favoured team in Prince Edward Island, with 24 percent of respondents favouring the Leafs; and the second favourite team in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and Labrador (19 and 24 percent respectively, both trailing respondents who favoured the Canadiens by one percent).\nRivalries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Montreal\u2013Toronto was the traditional rivalry, Detroit\u2013Toronto was the bitter rivalry.\"\n\u2013 Bob Nevin\nDuring the 25 years of the Original Six era (1942\u201367), teams played each other 14 times during the regular season, and with only four teams continuing into the playoffs, rivalries were intense. The Maple Leafs established several rivalries with other teams that played in this era, including the Boston Bruins, Detroit Red Wings, and the Montreal Canadiens. In addition to the aforementioned teams, the Maple Leafs have also developed a rivalry with the Ottawa Senators, as well as a minor geographic rivalry with the Buffalo Sabres called the after the Queen Elizabeth Way (QEW), the freeway that links Buffalo with Toronto along the western edge of Lake Ontario within the Golden Horseshoe.\nBoston Bruins.\nBoth teams are Original Six teams, with their first game played in Boston's inaugural season on December 3, 1924. In the match-up, the St. Patricks earned a 5\u20133 victory against the Bruins at Mutual Street Arena. The Maple Leafs played their first Stanley Cup playoff series against the Bruins in 1933, winning the series 3\u20132. From 1933 to 2019, the two teams played in 16 postseason series against one another, including one Stanley Cup Final.\nThe rivalry has since been renewed from the 2013 Stanley Cup playoffs which saw the Bruins rally from a 4\u20131 third-period deficit to defeat the Maple Leafs in overtime, 5\u20134, and advance to the second round. In the 2018, 2019, and 2024 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Bruins would again defeat the Maple Leafs in seven games in all three of those years.\nBuffalo Sabres.\nThe rivalry between the Buffalo Sabres and Toronto Maple Leafs is due to the 100-mile (160\u00a0km) distance between their home arenas (KeyBank Center and Scotiabank Arena respectively). The Sabres won 70 of 103 all-time home games against the Maple Leafs from their inception in 1970\u201371 until 2015\u201316 (the last season before Toronto drafted Auston Matthews), despite the always large contingency of Toronto fans at those games. Since the 1998\u201399 season, both teams have played in the Northeast Division, now the Atlantic Division. Buffalo won the 1999 Eastern Conference finals against Toronto in five games, the only playoff series between the two teams. During the 2018\u201319 season, Toronto swept Buffalo in the season series for the first time ever. Buffalo previously swept a season series with Toronto in 1979\u201380, 1987\u201388, and 1991\u201392. Due in part to the number of Leafs fans living near or in Buffalo, and in part to Buffalo's relative proximity to Toronto and the rest of Ontario, as well as the lower prices of Sabres tickets, Maple Leafs\u2013Sabres games at the KeyBank Center in Buffalo typically hold around 80 percent of Leafs fans, making it the largest away crowd in the NHL.\nDetroit Red Wings.\nThe Detroit Red Wings and the Maple Leafs are both Original Six teams, playing their first game together in 1927. From 1929 to 1993, the teams met each other in the 16 playoff series, as well as seven Stanley Cup Final. Meeting one another a combined 23 times in the postseason, they have played each other in more playoff series than any other two teams in NHL history except for the Bruins and Canadiens who have played a total of 34 playoff series against each other. Overlapping fanbases, particularly in markets such as Windsor, Ontario, and the surrounding Essex County, have added to the rivalry.\nThe rivalry between the Detroit Red Wings and the Maple Leafs was at its height during the Original Six era. The Leafs and Red Wings met in the playoffs six times during the 1940s, including four Stanley Cup Final series. The Leafs beat the Red Wings in five of their six meetings. In the 1950s, the Leafs and Red Wings met one another in six Stanley Cup semifinals; the Red Wings beat the Leafs in five of their six meetings. From 1961 to 1967, the two teams met one another in three playoff series, including two Stanley Cup Final. Within those 25 years, the Leafs and Red Wings played a total of 15 playoff series including six Cup Final; the Maple Leafs beat the Red Wings in all six Cup Final.\nThe teams have only met three times in the playoffs since the Original Six era, with their last meeting in 1993. After the Leafs moved to the Eastern Conference in 1998, they faced each other less often, and the rivalry began to stagnate. The rivalry became intradivisional once again in 2013 when Detroit was moved to the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference as part of a realignment. Due in part to the number of Leafs fans living near Detroit and in Michigan, and in part to Detroit's relative proximity to Toronto and the rest of Ontario, Maple Leafs\u2013Red Wings games at the Little Caesars Arena in Detroit typically hold at least 40 percent of Leafs fans.\nMontreal Canadiens.\nThe rivalry between the Montreal Canadiens and the Maple Leafs is the oldest in the NHL, featuring two clubs that were active since the inaugural NHL season in 1917. In the early 20th century, the rivalry was an embodiment of a larger culture war between English Canada and French Canada. The Canadiens have won 24 Stanley Cups, while the Maple Leafs have won 13, ranking them first and second for most Cup wins, respectively.\nThe height of the rivalry was during the 1960s when the Canadiens and Leafs combined to win all but one Cup. The two clubs had 15 playoff meetings. However, the rivalry has waned with the two having not met in the postseason from 1979 to 2021. It also suffered when Montreal and Toronto were placed in opposite conferences in 1981, with the Leafs in the Clarence Campbell/Western Conference and the Canadiens in the Prince of Wales/Eastern Conference. The rivalry became intradivisional once again in 1998 when the Leafs were moved into the Eastern Conference's Northeast Division.\nThe rivalry's cultural imprint may be seen in literature and art. The rivalry from the perspective of the Canadiens fan is captured in the popular Canadian short story \"The Hockey Sweater\" by Roch Carrier. Originally published in French as \"Une abominable feuille d'\u00e9rable sur la glace\" (\"An abominable maple leaf on the ice\"), it referred to the Maple Leafs sweater a mother forced her son to wear. The son is presumably based on Carrier himself when he was young. This rivalry is also evident in Toronto's subway station, which displays murals depicting the two teams, one on each platform (the Leafs mural being on the southbound platform), given that when the murals were installed in 1984, the station was the closest to the Leafs' then-home of Maple Leaf Gardens. Due in part to the number of Leafs fans living near or in Montreal, and in part to Montreal's relative proximity to Toronto and the rest of Ontario, Maple Leafs\u2013Canadiens games at the Bell Centre in Montreal typically hold a significant amount of Leafs fans.\nOttawa Senators.\nThe modern Ottawa Senators entered the NHL in 1992, but the rivalry between the two teams did not begin to emerge until the late 1990s. From 1992 to 1998, Ottawa and Toronto played in different conferences (Prince of Wales / Eastern and Clarence Campbell / Western respectively), which meant they rarely played each other. However, before the 1998\u201399 season, the conferences and divisions were realigned, with Toronto moved to the Eastern Conference's Northeast Division with Ottawa. From 2000 to 2004, the teams played four postseason series; the Leafs won all four playoff series. Due in part to the number of Leafs fans living near or in Ottawa, and in part to Ottawa's relative proximity to Toronto, Maple Leafs\u2013Senators games at the Canadian Tire Centre in Ottawa typically hold more Leafs fans rather than Sens fans.\nTeam operations.\nBranding.\nLogo and uniform.\nThe team is represented through several images and symbols, including the maple leaf logo found on the club's uniform. The Maple Leafs' jersey has a long history and is one of the best-selling NHL jerseys among fans. The club's uniforms have been altered several times. The club's first uniforms were blue and featured the letter T. The first major alteration came in 1919 when the club was renamed the St. Patricks. The uniforms were green with \"Toronto St. Pats\" on the logo, lettered in green either on a white \"pill\" shape or stripes.\nWhen the club was renamed the Maple Leafs in the 1927\u201328 season, the logo was changed, and the team reverted to blue uniforms. The logo was a 48-point maple leaf with the words lettered in white. The home jersey was blue with alternating thin-thick stripes on the arms, legs and shoulders. The road uniform was white with three stripes on the chest and back, waist and legs. For 1933\u201334, the alternating thin-thick stripes were replaced with stripes of equal thickness. This remained the basic design for the next 40 years. In 1937, veins were added to the leaf and \"Toronto\" curved downwards at the ends instead of upwards. In 1942, the 35-point leaf was introduced. In 1946, the logo added trimming to the leaf with a white or blue border, while \"C\" for captain and \"A\" for alternate captain first appeared on the sweaters. In 1947, the \"Toronto Maple Leafs\" lettering was in red for a short time. In 1958, a six-eyelet lace and tie were added to the neck and a blue shoulder yoke was added. In 1961, player numbers were added to the sleeves.\nThe fourth major change came in the 1966\u201367 season when the logo was changed to an 11-point leaf, similar to the leaf on the then-new flag of Canada to commemorate the Canadian Centennial. The simpler leaf logo featured the Futura Display typeface, replacing the previous block letters. The stripes on the sleeves and waistline were also changed, adding a wider stripe in between the two thinner stripes (similar to the stripe patterns on the socks and the early Leafs sweaters). Before the 1970\u201371 season, the Leafs adopted a new 11-point leaf logo, with a Kabel bold-font \"Toronto\" going straight across, running parallel to the other words. Other changes to the sweater included the replacement of the arm strips with an elongated yoke that extended to the ends of the sleeves, a solid single stripe on the waist replacing the three waistline stripes, two stripes on the stockings, and a smaller, textless Leaf crest on the shoulders. In 1973, the jersey's neck was a lace tie-down design, before the V-neck returned in 1976. In 1977, the NHL rules were changed to require names on the backs of the uniforms, but Harold Ballard resisted the change. Under Ballard's direction, the team briefly \"complied\" with the rule by placing blue letters on the blue road jersey for a game on February 26, 1978. With the NHL threatening hefty fines for failing to comply with the spirit of the rule (namely, having the names be legible for the fans and broadcasters in attendance), Ballard reached a compromise with the league, allowing the Leafs to finish the 1977\u201378 season with contrasting white letters on the road sweaters, and coming into full compliance with the new rule in the 1978\u201379 season by adding names in blue to the white home sweaters.\nWith the NHL's 75th anniversary season (1991\u201392 season), the Leafs wore \"Original Six\" style uniforms similar to the designs used in the 1940s. Because of the fan reaction to the previous season's classic uniforms, the first changes to the Maple Leafs uniform in over 20 years were made. The revised uniforms for 1992\u201393 featured two stripes on the sleeves and waistline like the classic uniform, but with the 1970 11-point leaf with Kabel text on the front. A vintage-style veined leaf crest was placed on the shoulders. The uniforms would undergo a few modifications over the years.\nIn 1997, Nike acquired the rights to manufacture Maple Leafs uniforms. Construction changes to the uniform included a wishbone collar and pothole mesh underarms, while the player name and number font were changed to Kabel to match the logo. CCM returned to manufacturing the Leafs uniforms in 1999 when Nike withdrew from the hockey jersey market, and kept most of the changes, although in 2000 the Kabel numbers were replaced with block numbers outlined in silver, and a silver-outlined interlocked TML monogram replaced the vintage leaf on the shoulders. Also during this time, the Leafs began wearing a white 1960s-style throwback third jersey featuring the outlined 35-point leaf, blue shoulders, and lace-up collar.\nWith Reebok taking over the NHL jersey contract following the 2004\u201305 lockout, changes were expected when the Edge uniform system was set to debut in 2007. As part of the Edge overhaul, the TML monograms were removed from the shoulders, and the silver outlines on the numbers were replaced with blue or white outlines (e.g. the blue home jersey featured white numbers with blue and white outlines, rather than blue and silver), and the waistline stripes were removed. In 2010, the two waistline stripes were restored, the vintage leaf returned to the shoulders, and the player names and numbers were changed again, reverting to a simpler single-colour block font. Finally, lace-up collars were brought back to the primary uniforms. The Leafs also brought back the 1967\u20131970 blue uniform, replacing the white 1960s jersey as their third uniform. For the 2014 NHL Winter Classic, the Leafs wore a sweater inspired by their earlier uniforms in the 1930s.\nOn February 2, 2016, the team unveiled a new logo for the 2016\u201317 season in honour of its centennial, dropping the use of the Kabel-style font lettering used from 1970; it returns the logo to a form inspired by the earlier designs, with 31 points to allude to the 1931 opening of Maple Leaf Gardens, and 17 veins a reference to its establishment in 1917. 13 of the veins are positioned along the top part in honour of its 13 Stanley Cup victories. The logo was subsequently accompanied by a new uniform design that was unveiled during the 2016 NHL entry draft on June 24, 2016. In addition to the new logo, the new uniforms feature a custom block typeface for the player names and numbers. Two stripes remain on the sleeves, with a single stripe at the waistline. The updated design carried over to the Adidas Adizero uniforms adopted by the NHL in 2017.\nThe Maple Leafs have worn historical throwback uniforms for select games, with the club wearing Toronto Arenas or St. Pats-inspired throwback designs. Additionally, the Leafs have also used contemporary \"historically inspired\" uniforms as an alternate uniform. For the Centennial Classic, each Leafs player wore a blue sweater with bold white stripes across the chest and arms; the white stripe being a tribute to the St. Pats, while a stylized-\"T\" used by the Arenas featured on their hockey pants. For the 2020\u201321 season, the Maple Leafs wore \"reverse retro\" alternate uniforms, which included silver stripes inspired by the uniforms used from 1970 to 1972, while using the club's logo used from 1967 to 1970. Then for the 2022 Heritage Classic, the Maple Leafs donned a modified version of the team's Arenas throwbacks, with blue-on-blue lettering on the \"Arenas\" wordmark as a nod to the infamous 1978 uniforms. A second \"reverse retro\" alternate uniform, featuring the blue version of the white road uniforms they wore in 1962, was released. This design added a white shoulder yoke which was absent on the original blue uniform.\nOther alternate uniforms worn by the team include a white uniform with two blue stripes across the chest and arms, paired this uniform with white pants worn for the 2018 NHL Stadium Series. The uniforms were largely coloured white as a tribute to the Royal Canadian Navy and also included bolder blue outlines to create uniforms more pronounced for outdoor settings.\nDuring the 2021\u201322 season, the Leafs named TikTok, a video-sharing website, as their helmet entitlement partner. Then in the 2022\u201323 season, the Maple Leafs announced a uniform sponsorship with the Dairy Farmers of Ontario, utilizing the organization's \"Milk\" insignia. For the 2023\u201324 season, Pizza Pizza became the team's helmet entitlement partner; however, they were only featured on the home helmets. In the 2024\u201325 season, Mondelez's Oreo served as the team's helmet entitlement partner, placing them on all of their helmets.\nOn March 22, 2022, the Maple Leafs unveiled a new alternate uniform, but for the first time in team history, black served as a base colour with the traditional blue serving as a trim colour. The \"Next Gen\" uniform features the team crest with a blue and black tie-dye background, along with a subtle black/blue skyline motif serving as sleeve stripes. It also comes with a reversible crest, featuring Canadian singer Justin Bieber's modified drew house insignia inside a yellow Maple Leafs logo and yellow stripes. The black/blue front is normally worn as a game uniform.\nMascot.\nThe Maple Leafs' mascot is Carlton the Bear, an anthropomorphic polar bear whose name and number (#60) come from the location of Maple Leaf Gardens at 60 Carlton Street, where the Leafs played throughout much of their history. Carlton made his first public appearance on July 29, 1995. He later made his regular season appearance on October 10, 1995.\nBroadcasting.\nAs a result of both Bell Canada and Rogers Communications having an ownership stake in MLSE, Maple Leafs broadcasts are split between the two media companies; with regional TV broadcasts split between Rogers' Sportsnet Ontario and Bell's TSN4. Colour commentary for Bell's television broadcasts is performed by Mike Johnson, while play-by-play is provided by Gord Miller. Colour commentary for Rogers' television broadcasts is performed by Craig Simpson, while play-by-play is provided by Chris Cuthbert; both also serve as the lead broadcast team of Hockey Night in Canada and Sportsnet's national TV broadcasts. From 2001 to 2022, MLSE also operated a specialty channel, the Leafs Nation Network.\nLike the Maple Leafs television broadcasts, radio broadcasts are split evenly between Rogers' CJCL (Sportsnet 590, The Fan) and Bell's CHUM (TSN Radio 1050). Both Bell and Rogers' radio broadcasts have their colour commentary provided by Jim Ralph, with play-by-play provided by Joe Bowen.\nRadio broadcasts of games played by the club were started in 1923. The first Leafs hockey game that was televised occurred on November 10, 1952; the broadcast also being the first English-language television broadcast of an NHL game in Canada. Foster Hewitt was the Leafs' first play-by-play broadcaster, providing radio play-by-play from 1927 to 1978. In addition, he provided play-by-play for television from 1952 to 1958, and colour commentary from 1958 to 1961. Originally aired over CFCA, Hewitt's broadcast was picked up by the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (the CRBC) in 1933, moving to CBC Radio (the CRBC's successor) three years later.\nHome arenas and practice facilities.\nThe team's first home was the Arena Gardens, later known as the Mutual Street Arena. From 1912 until 1931, the Arena was ice hockey's premier site in Toronto. The Arena Gardens was the third arena in Canada to feature a mechanically frozen, or artificial, ice surface, and for 11 years was the only such facility in Eastern Canada. The Arena was demolished in 1989, with most of the site converted to residential developments. In 2011, parts of the site were made into a city park, known as Arena Gardens.\nWithin six months in 1931, Conn Smythe built Maple Leaf Gardens on the northwest corner of Carlton Street and Church Street, for C$1.5\u00a0million (C$ million in 2023). The arena soon acquired nicknames including the \"Carlton Street Cashbox\", and the \"Maple Leaf Mint\", since the team's games were constantly sold out. The Maple Leafs won 11 Stanley Cups while playing at the Gardens. The first annual NHL All-Star Game was also held at Maple Leaf Gardens in 1947. The Gardens opened on November 12, 1931, with the Maple Leafs losing 2\u20131 to the Chicago Blackhawks. On February 13, 1999, the Maple Leafs played their last game at the Gardens, also suffering a 6\u20132 loss to the Blackhawks. The building is presently used as a multi-purpose facility, with a Loblaws grocery store occupying retail space on the lower floors, Joe Fresh and LCBO occupying another floor, and an athletics arena for Ryerson University (now Toronto Metropolitan University) occupying the topmost level.\nThe Maple Leafs presently use two facilities in the City of Toronto. The club moved from the Gardens on February 20, 1999, to their current home arena, Air Canada Centre, later renamed Scotiabank Arena, a multi-purpose indoor entertainment arena on Bay Street in the South Core neighbourhood of Downtown Toronto. The arena is owned by the Maple Leafs' parent company MLSE and is shared with the NBA's Toronto Raptors (another MLSE subsidiary), as well as the National Lacrosse League's Toronto Rock. In addition to the main arena, the Maple Leafs also operate a practice facility at the Ford Performance Centre. The facility was opened in 2009 and operated by the Lakeshore Lions Club until September 2011, when the City of Toronto took over ownership of the facility after the Lions Club faced financial difficulties. The facility now operates as a City of Toronto-controlled corporation. The facility was known as the Mastercard Centre for Hockey Excellence until 2019 when it was renamed the Ford Performance Centre. The facility has three NHL rinks and one Olympic-sized rink.\nOn January 1, 2017, the Maple Leafs played the Detroit Red Wings in a home game at BMO Field, an outdoor multipurpose stadium at Exhibition Place, home to Leafs owner MLSE's other teams: the Toronto FC and the Toronto Argonauts. Known as the NHL Centennial Classic, the outdoor game served as a celebration for both the centennial season of the franchise and the NHL.\nMinor league affiliates.\nThe Maple Leafs are affiliated with the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League, the Marlies play from Coca-Cola Coliseum in Toronto. The Maple Leafs' parent company has owned the Marlies franchise since 1978.\nThe first AHL affiliate owned by the Maple Leafs was the Rochester Americans, a team the Leafs initially co-owned with the Montreal Canadiens from 1956 to 1959, before MLGL bought out the Canadiens' share in the team. MLGL held sole ownership of the team until it was sold to an investor group in 1966. However, it continued to serve as their minor league affiliate until 1969. The Leafs did not have an AHL affiliate from 1969 to 1978 and relied on placing their drafted players with other team's affiliates. However, after several poor draft picks and having insufficient control over their prospect's development, MLGL opted to reestablish their own farm system; co-founding the Marlies franchise in 1978, and operating the Cincinnati Tigers of the Central Hockey League from 1981 to 1982. The Marlies were initially established as the New Brunswick Hawks, and were later relocated to St. Catherines, Newmarket, and St. John's, before finally moving to Toronto in 2005.\nThe Newfoundland Growlers were the ECHL affiliate of the Maple Leafs from 2018 until 2024, they played from the Mary Brown's Centre in St. John's, Newfoundland. Unlike the Marlies, the Growlers were not owned by the Leafs' parent company but were instead owned by Deacon Sports and Entertainment. The Growlers folded in 2024. The Cincinnati Cyclones signed an agreement to become the ECHL affiliate of the Maple Leafs in July 2024.\nThe Marlies were named after the Toronto Marlboros, a junior hockey team named after the Duke of Marlborough. Founded in 1903, the Marlboros were sponsored by the Leafs from 1927 to 1989. The Marlboros constituted one of two junior hockey teams the Leafs formerly sponsored, the other being the Toronto St. Michael's Majors. The sponsored junior system served as the Leafs primary farm system for young replacement players from the 1940s to 1950s. Formal NHL sponsorship of junior teams ceased in 1966, making all qualifying prospects not already on NHL-sponsored lists eligible for the draft.\nOwnership.\nThe Maple Leafs is one of six professional sports teams owned by Maple Leaf Sports &amp; Entertainment (MLSE). In 2024, \"Forbes\" estimated the value of the club at US$3.8 billion, making the Maple Leafs the most valuable franchise in the NHL. However, MLSE has refuted past valuations made by \"Forbes\".\nInitially, ownership of the club was held by the Arena Gardens of Toronto, Limited; an ownership group fronted by Henry Pellatt that owned and managed Arena Gardens. The club was named a permanent franchise in the League following its inaugural season, with team manager Charles Querrie, and the Arena Gardens treasurer Hubert Vearncombe as its owners. The Arena Company owned the club until 1919 when litigations from Eddie Livingstone forced the company to declare bankruptcy. Querrie brokered the sale of the Arena Garden's share to the owners of the amateur St. Patricks Hockey Club. Maintaining his shares in the club, Querrie fronted the new ownership group until 1927, when the club was put up for sale. Toronto Varsity Blues coach Conn Smythe put together an ownership group and purchased the franchise for $160,000. In 1929, Smythe decided, amid the Great Depression, that the Maple Leafs needed a new arena. To finance it, Smythe launched Maple Leaf Gardens Limited (MLGL), a publicly traded management company to own both the Maple Leafs and the new arena, which was named Maple Leaf Gardens. Smythe traded his stake in the Leafs for shares in MLGL and sold shares in the holding company to the public to help fund construction for the arena.\nAlthough Smythe was the face of MLGL from its founding, he did not gain a controlling interest in the company until 1947. Smythe remained MLGL's principal owner until 1961 when he sold 90 percent of his shares to an ownership group consisting of Harold Ballard, John W. H. Bassett and Stafford Smythe. Ballard became majority owner in February 1972 shortly following the death of Stafford Smythe. Ballard was the principal owner of MLGL until he died in 1990. The company remained a publicly traded company until 1998, when an ownership group fronted by Steve Stavro privatized the company by acquiring more than the 90 percent of stock necessary to force objecting shareholders out.\nWhile initially primarily a hockey company, with ownership stakes in several junior hockey clubs including the Toronto Marlboros of the Ontario Hockey Association, the company later branched out to own the Hamilton Tiger-Cats of the Canadian Football League from the late 1970s to late 1980s (though the company would later sell off the Tiger-Cats). On February 12, 1998, MLGL purchased the Toronto Raptors of the National Basketball Association, who were constructing the then\u2013Air Canada Centre. After MLGL acquired the Raptors, the company changed its name to MLSE. The company's portfolio has since expanded to include the Toronto FC of Major League Soccer, the Toronto Marlies of the AHL, the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League, and a 37.5 percent stake in Maple Leaf Square.\nIn 2012, the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan (the company's former principal owner) announced the sale of its 75 percent stake in MLSE to a consortium made up of telecommunications rivals Bell Canada and Rogers Communications, in a deal valued at $1.32\u00a0billion. As part of the sale, two numbered companies were created to jointly hold stock. This ownership structure ensures that, at the shareholder level, Rogers and Bell vote their overall 75 percent interest in the company together and thus decisions on the management of the company must be made by consensus between the two. A portion of Bell's share in MLSE is owned by its pension fund, to make Bell's share in MLSE under 30 percent. This was done so that Bell could retain its existing 18 percent interest in the Montreal Canadiens; as NHL's conflict of interest rules prevent any shareholder that owns more than 30 percent of a team from holding an ownership position in another. The remaining 25 percent is owned by Larry Tanenbaum, who is also the chairman of MLSE.\nIn July 2025, Rogers purchased bell's 37.5% share of MLSE for $4.7 billion to become majority owners.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Maple Leafs. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Toronto Maple Leafs seasons\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt; \nTeam captains.\nIn all, 25 individuals have served as captain of the Toronto Maple Leafs. Ken Randall served as the team's first captain for two years beginning with the inaugural 1917\u201318 NHL season. John Ross Roach was the first goaltender to be named captain in the NHL, and the only goaltender to serve as the Leafs' captain. He was one of only six goalies in NHL history to have been officially recognized as the team captain. George Armstrong served as captain from 1958 through 1969 and was the longest-serving captain in the team's history. In 1997, Mats Sundin became the first non-Canadian to captain the Maple Leafs. His tenure as captain holds the distinction as the longest captaincy for a non-North American-born player in NHL history. The most recent player named to the position was Auston Matthews on August 14, 2024.\nThree captains of the Maple Leafs have held the position at multiple points in their careers. Syl Apps' first tenure as the captain began from 1940 to 1943, before he stepped down and left the club to enlist in the Canadian Army. Bob Davidson served as the Maple Leafs captain until Apps' return from the Army in 1945 and resumed his captaincy until 1948. Ted Kennedy's first tenure as captain was from 1948 to 1955. He announced his retirement from the sport at the end of the 1954\u201355 season, with Sid Smith succeeding him as captain. Although Kennedy missed the entire 1955\u201356 season, he came out of retirement to play the second half of the 1956\u201357 season. During that half-season, Kennedy served his second tenure as the Maple Leafs' captain. Darryl Sittler was the third player to have been named the team's captain twice. As a result of a dispute between Sittler and the Maple Leafs' general manager Punch Imlach, Sittler relinquished the captaincy on December 29, 1979. The dispute was resolved in the following off-season after a heart attack hospitalized Imlach. Sittler arranged talks with Ballard to resolve the issue, eventually resuming his captaincy on September 24, 1980. No replacement captain was named during the interim period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHead coaches.\nThe Maple Leafs have had 41 head coaches (including four interim coaches). The franchise's first head coach was Dick Carroll, who coached the team for two seasons. Several coaches have served as the Leafs head coach on multiple occasions. King Clancy was named the head coach on three occasions while Charles Querrie and Punch Imlach served the position on two occasions. Craig Berube is the current head coach. He was named coach on May 17, 2024.\nPunch Imlach coached the most regular season games of any Leafs' head coach with 770 games, and has the most all-time points with the Maple Leafs, with 865. He is followed by Pat Quinn, who coached 574 games, with 678 points all-time with the Maple Leafs. Both Mike Rodden and Dick Duff, have the fewest points with the Maple Leafs, with 0. Both were interim coaches who coached only two games each in 1927 and 1980 respectively, losing both games. Sheldon Keefe earned the most points of any Leafs head coach in a single season, with 115 points during the 2021\u201322 season. Five Maple Leafs' coaches have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame as players, while four others were inducted as builders. Pat Burns is the only Leafs' head coach to win a Jack Adams Award with the team.\nDraft picks.\nIn the 1963 NHL amateur draft, the NHL's inaugural draft, the Maple Leafs selected Walt McKechnie, a centre from the London Nationals with their first pick, sixth overall. Two Maple Leafs captains were obtained through the draft, Darryl Sittler in the 1970 draft; as well as Wendel Clark in the 1985 draft. The Maple Leafs have drafted two players with a first overall draft pick; Clark in the 1985 draft, and Auston Matthews in the 2016 draft. Other notable Maple Leafs draft picks and current players with the team are defenceman Morgan Rielly (fifth overall, 2012), and wingers William Nylander and Mitch Marner (eighth and fourth overall in 2014 and 2015 respectively). The team's most recent first round selection was Easton Cowan, at 28th overall in the 2023 draft.\nAnnouncers.\nThe Toronto Maple Leafs have had four PA announcers in their history. In addition, Harold (Hap) Watson was the Toronto Arenas' announcer in 1929 before the team moved to Maple Leaf Gardens and became the Toronto Maple Leafs.\nTeam and league honours.\nThe Maple Leafs have won 13 Stanley Cups in its history. Toronto's first two Stanley Cups, in 1918 and 1922, took place when the Stanley Cup tournament operated as an interleague competition. Toronto's subsequent 11 Stanley Cups were awarded after 1926 when the Cup was established as the championship trophy of the NHL. The Maple Leafs won their last Stanley Cup in 1967, with the team's 57-season Stanley Cup drought being the longest championship drought in the NHL. The Maple Leafs were also awarded the Prince of Wales Trophy twice, following the 1946\u201347 season, and the 1962\u201363 season. The Prince of Wales Trophy was awarded to the club when it was used as NHL's regular season championship trophy.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Maple Leafs have retired the numbers of 19 players; as some players used the same number, only 13 numbers have been retired. Between October 17, 1992, and October 15, 2016, the Maple Leafs took a unique approach to retired numbers. Whereas players who suffered a career-ending injury had their numbers retired, \"great\" players had their number \"honoured\". Honoured numbers remained in general circulation for players, however, during Brian Burke's tenure as the Maple Leafs' general manager, the use of honoured numbers required his approval.\nDuring this period, only two players met the criteria for retirement, the first being number 6, worn by Ace Bailey and retired on February 14, 1934; and Bill Barilko's number 5, retired on October 17, 1992. The retirement of Bailey's number was the first of its kind in professional sports. It was briefly taken out of retirement after Bailey asked that Ron Ellis be allowed to wear his number. Bailey's number returned to retirement after Ellis's final game on January 14, 1981.\nThe first players to have their numbers honoured were Syl Apps and Ted Kennedy, on October 3, 1993. Mats Sundin was the last player to have his number honoured on February 11, 2012. On October 15, 2016, before the home opening game of the team's centenary season, the Maple Leafs announced they had changed their philosophy on retiring numbers, and that the numbers of those 16 honoured players would now be retired, in addition to the retirement of Dave Keon's number.\nAs well as honouring and retiring the numbers, the club also commissioned statues of former Maple Leafs. The group of statues, known as Legends Row, is a granite hockey bench with statues of former club players. Unveiled in September 2014, it is located outside Gate 5 of Scotiabank Arena, at Maple Leaf Square. As of October 2017, statues have been made of 14 players with retired numbers.\nIn addition to the 13 numbers retired by the Maple Leafs, the number 99 is also retired from use in the organization. At the 2000 NHL All-Star Game hosted in Toronto, the NHL announced the league-wide retirement of Wayne Gretzky's number 99, retiring it from use throughout all its member teams, including the Maple Leafs.\nHall of Fame.\nThe Toronto Maple Leafs acknowledge an affiliation with 78 inductees of the Hockey Hall of Fame, including 64 former players as well as 13 builders of the sport. The Maple Leafs have the greatest number of players inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame of any NHL team. The 13 individuals recognized as builders of the sport include former Maple Leafs broadcasters, executives, head coaches, and other personnel relating to the club's operations. Inducted in 2017, Dave Andreychuk was the latest Maple Leafs player to be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame.\nIn addition to players and builders, five broadcasters for the Maple Leafs were also awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame. In 1984, radio broadcaster Foster Hewitt was awarded the Hall of Fame's inaugural Foster Hewitt Memorial Award, an award named after him. Before the award's creation, Hewitt had already been inducted as a builder into the Hall of Fame. Other Maple Leafs broadcasters that received the award include Wes McKnight in 1986, Bob Cole in 2007, Bill Hewitt in 2007 and Joe Bowen in 2018.\nPlayers\nBuilders\nFranchise career leaders.\nThese are the top franchise leaders in regular season points, goals, assists, points per game, games played, and goaltending wins as of the end of the 2024\u201325 season.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "70157", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70157", "title": "Recycling", "text": "Converting waste materials into new products\nRecycling is the process of converting waste materials into new materials and objects. This concept often includes the recovery of energy from waste materials. The recyclability of a material depends on its ability to reacquire the properties it had in its original state. It is an alternative to \"conventional\" waste disposal that can save material and help lower greenhouse gas emissions. It can also prevent the waste of potentially useful materials and reduce the consumption of fresh raw materials, reducing energy use, air pollution (from incineration) and water pollution (from landfilling).\nRecycling is a key component of modern waste reduction and represents the third step in the \"Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle\" waste hierarchy, contributing to environmental sustainability and resource conservation. It promotes environmental sustainability by removing raw material input and redirecting waste output in the economic system. There are some ISO standards related to recycling, such as ISO 15270:2008 for plastics waste and ISO 14001:2015 for environmental management control of recycling practice.\n\"Recyclable materials\" include many kinds of glass, paper, cardboard, metal, plastic, tires, textiles, batteries, and electronics. The composting and other reuse of biodegradable waste\u2014such as food and garden waste\u2014is also a form of recycling. Materials for recycling are either delivered to a household recycling center or picked up from curbside bins, then sorted, cleaned, and reprocessed into new materials for manufacturing new products.\nIn ideal implementations, recycling a material produces a fresh supply of the same material\u2014for example, used office paper would be converted into new office paper, and used polystyrene foam into new polystyrene. Some types of materials, such as metal cans, can be remanufactured repeatedly without losing their purity. With other materials, this is often difficult or too expensive (compared with producing the same product from raw materials or other sources), so \"recycling\" of many products and materials involves their \"reuse\" in producing different materials (for example, paperboard). Another form of recycling is the salvage of constituent materials from complex products, due to either their intrinsic value (such as lead from car batteries and gold from printed circuit boards), or their hazardous nature (e.g. removal and reuse of mercury from thermometers and thermostats).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nReusing materials has been a common practice for most of human history with recorded advocates as far back as Plato in the fourth century BC. During periods when resources were scarce, archaeological studies of ancient waste dumps show less household waste (such as ash, broken tools, and pottery), implying that more waste was recycled in place of new material. However, archaeological artefacts made from recyclable material, such as glass or metal, may neither be the original object nor resemble it, with the consequence that a successful ancient recycling economy can become invisible when recycling is synonymous with re-melting rather than reuse.\nIn pre-industrial times, there is evidence of scrap bronze and other metals being collected in Europe and melted down for continuous reuse. Paper recycling was first recorded in 1031 when Japanese shops sold repulped paper. In Britain dust and ash from wood and coal fires was collected by \"dustmen\" and downcycled as a base material for brick making. These forms of recycling were driven by the economic advantage of obtaining recycled materials instead of virgin material, and the need for waste removal in ever-more-densely populated areas. In 1813, Benjamin Law developed the process of turning rags into \"shoddy\" and \"mungo\" wool in Batley, Yorkshire, which combined recycled fibers with virgin wool. The West Yorkshire shoddy industry in towns such as Batley and Dewsbury lasted from the early 19th century to at least 1914.\nIndustrialization spurred demand for affordable materials. In addition to rags, ferrous scrap metals were coveted as they were cheaper to acquire than virgin ore. Railroads purchased and sold scrap metal in the 19th century, and the growing steel and automobile industries purchased scrap in the early 20th century. Many secondary goods were collected, processed and sold by peddlers who scoured dumps and city streets for discarded machinery, pots, pans, and other sources of metal. By World War I, thousands of such peddlers roamed the streets of American cities, taking advantage of market forces to recycle post-consumer materials into industrial production.\nManufacturers of beverage bottles, including Schweppes, began offering refundable recycling deposits in Great Britain and Ireland around 1800. An official recycling system with refundable deposits for bottles was established in Sweden in 1884, and for aluminum beverage cans in 1982; it led to recycling rates of 84\u201399%, depending on type (glass bottles can be refilled around 20 times).\nWartime.\nNew chemical industries created in the late 19th century both invented new materials (e.g. Bakelite in 1907) and promised to transform valueless into valuable materials. Proverbially, you could not make a silk purse of a sow's ear\u2014until the US firm Arthur D. Little published in 1921 \"On the Making of Silk Purses from Sows' Ears\", its research proving that when \"chemistry puts on overalls and gets down to business [...] new values appear. New and better paths are opened to reach the goals desired.\"\nRecycling\u2014or \"salvage\", as it was then usually known\u2014was a major issue for governments during World War II, where financial constraints and significant material shortages made it necessary to reuse goods and recycle materials. These resource shortages caused by the world wars, and other such world-changing events, greatly encouraged recycling. It became necessary for most homes to recycle their waste, allowing people to make the most of what was available. Recycling household materials also meant more resources were left available for war efforts. Massive government campaigns, such as the National Salvage Campaign in Britain and the Salvage for Victory campaign in the United States, occurred in every fighting nation, urging citizens to donate metal, paper, rags, and rubber as a patriotic duty.\nPost-World War II.\nA considerable investment in recycling occurred in the 1970s due to rising energy costs. Recycling aluminium uses only 5% of the energy of virgin production. Glass, paper and other metals have less dramatic but significant energy savings when recycled.\nAlthough consumer electronics have been popular since the 1920s, recycling them was almost unheard of until early 1991. The first electronic waste recycling scheme was implemented in Switzerland, beginning with collection of old refrigerators, then expanding to cover all devices. When these programs were created, many countries could not deal with the sheer quantity of e-waste, or its hazardous nature, and began to export the problem to developing countries without enforced environmental legislation. (For example, recycling computer monitors in the United States costs 10 times more than in China.) Demand for electronic waste in Asia began to grow when scrapyards found they could extract valuable substances such as copper, silver, iron, silicon, nickel, and gold during the recycling process. The 2000s saw a boom in both the sales of electronic devices and their growth as a waste stream: In 2002, e-waste grew faster than any other type of waste in the EU. This spurred investment in modern automated facilities to cope with the influx, especially after strict laws were implemented in 2003.\nAs of 2014, the European Union had about 50% of world share of waste and recycling industries, with over companies employing people and a turnover of \u20ac24 billion. EU countries are mandated to reach recycling rates of at least 50%; leading countries are already at around 65%. The overall EU average was 39% in 2013\nand is rising steadily, to 45% in 2015.\nIn 2015, the United Nations General Assembly set 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Goal 12, Responsible Consumption and Production, specifies 11 targets \"to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns\". The fifth target, , is defined as substantially reducing waste generation by 2030, indicated by the National Recycling Rate.\nIn 2018, changes in the recycling industry have sparked a global \"crisis\". On 31 December 2017, China announced its \"National Sword\" policy, setting new standards for imports of recyclable material and banning materials deemed too \"dirty\" or \"hazardous\". The new policy caused drastic disruptions in the global recycling market, and reduced the prices of scrap plastic and low-grade paper. Exports of recyclable materials from G7 countries to China dropped dramatically, with many shifting to countries in southeast Asia. This generated significant concern about the recycling industry's practices and environmental sustainability. The abrupt shift caused countries to accept more materials than they could process, and raised fundamental questions about shipping waste from developed countries to countries with few environmental regulations\u2014a practice that predated the crisis.\nHealth and environmental impact.\nHealth impact.\nE-waste.\nAccording to the WHO (2023), \"Every year millions of electrical and electronic devices are discarded ... a threat to the environment and to human health if they are not treated, disposed of, and recycled appropriately. Common items ... include computers ... e-waste are recycled using environmentally unsound techniques and are likely stored in homes and warehouses, dumped, exported or recycled under inferior conditions. When e-waste is treated using inferior activities, it can release as many as 1000 different chemical substances ... including harmful neurotoxicants such as lead.\" A paper in the journal \"Sustainable Materials &amp; Technologies\" remarks upon the difficulty of managing e-waste, particularly from home automation products, which, due to their becoming obsolete at a high rate, are putting increasing strain on recycling systems, which have not adapted to meet the recycling needs posed by this type of product.\nSlag recycling.\nCopper slag is obtained when copper and nickel ores are recovered from their source ores using a pyrometallurgical process, and these ores usually contain other elements which include iron, cobalt, silica, and alumina. An estimate of 2.2\u20133 tons of copper slag is generated per ton of copper produced, resulting in around 24.6 tons of slag per year, which is regarded as waste.\nEnvironmental impact of slag include copper paralysis, which leads to death due to gastric hemorrhage, if ingested by humans. It may also cause acute dermatitis upon skin exposure. Toxicity may also be uptaken by crops through soil, consequently spreading animals and food sources and increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases, cancer, cognitive impairment, chronic anemia, and damage to kidneys, bones, nervous system, brain and skin.\nSubstituting gravel and grit in quarries has been more cost-effective, due to having its sources with better proximity to consumer markets. Trading between countries and establishment of blast furnaces is helping increase slag utilization, hence reducing wastage and pollution.\nEnvironmental impact.\nEconomist Steven Landsburg, author of a paper entitled \"Why I Am Not an Environmentalist\", claimed that paper recycling actually reduces tree populations. He argues that because paper companies have incentives to replenish their forests, large demands for paper lead to large forests while reduced demand for paper leads to fewer \"farmed\" forests.\nWhen foresting companies cut down trees, more are planted in their place; however, such farmed forests are inferior to natural forests in several ways. Farmed forests are not able to fix the soil as quickly as natural forests. This can cause widespread soil erosion and often requiring large amounts of fertilizer to maintain the soil, while containing little tree and wild-life biodiversity compared to virgin forests. Also, the new trees planted are not as big as the trees that were cut down, and the argument that there would be \"more trees\" is not compelling to forestry advocates when they are counting saplings.\nIn particular, wood from tropical rainforests is rarely harvested for paper because of their heterogeneity. According to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat, the overwhelming direct cause of deforestation is subsistence farming (48% of deforestation) and commercial agriculture (32%), which is linked to food, not paper production.\nOther non-conventional methods of material recycling, like Waste-to-Energy (WTE) systems, have garnered increased attention in the recent past due to the polarizing nature of their emissions. While viewed as a sustainable method of capturing energy from material waste feedstocks by many, others have cited numerous explanations for why the technology has not been scaled globally.\nLegislation.\nSupply.\nFor a recycling program to work, a large, stable supply of recyclable material is crucial. Three legislative options have been used to create such supplies: mandatory recycling collection, container deposit legislation, and refuse bans. Mandatory collection laws set recycling targets for cities, usually in the form that a certain percentage of a material must be diverted from the city's waste stream by a target date. The city is responsible for working to meet this target.\nContainer deposit legislation mandates refunds for the return of certain containers\u2014typically glass, plastic and metal. When a product in such a container is purchased, a small surcharge is added that the consumer can reclaim when the container is returned to a collection point. These programs have succeeded in creating an average 80% recycling rate. Despite such good results, the shift in collection costs from local government to industry and consumers has created strong opposition in some areas\u2014for example, where manufacturers bear the responsibility for recycling their products. In the European Union, the WEEE Directive requires producers of consumer electronics to reimburse the recyclers' costs.\nAn alternative way to increase the supply of recyclates is to ban the disposal of certain materials as waste, often including used oil, old batteries, tires, and garden waste. This can create a viable economy for the proper disposal of the products. Care must be taken that enough recycling services exist to meet the supply, or such bans can create increased illegal dumping.\nGovernment-mandated demand.\nFour forms of legislation have also been used to increase and maintain the demand for recycled materials: minimum recycled content mandates, utilization rates, procurement policies, and recycled product labeling.\nBoth minimum recycled content mandates and utilization rates increase demand by forcing manufacturers to include recycling in their operations. Content mandates specify that a certain percentage of a new product must consist of recycled material. Utilization rates are a more flexible option: Industries can meet their recycling targets at any point of their operations, or even contract out recycling in exchange for tradable credits. Opponents to these methods cite their large increase in reporting requirements, and claim that they rob the industry of flexibility.\nGovernments have used their own purchasing power to increase recycling demand through \"procurement policies\". These policies are either \"set-asides\", which reserve a certain amount of spending for recycled products; or \"price preference\" programs that provide larger budgets when recycled items are purchased. Additional regulations can target specific cases: in the United States, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency mandates the purchase of oil, paper, tires and building insulation from recycled or re-refined sources whenever possible.\nThe final government regulation toward increased demand is recycled product labeling. When producers are required to label their packaging with the amount of recycled material it contains (including the packaging), consumers can make more educated choices. Consumers with sufficient buying power can choose more environmentally conscious options, prompting producers to increase the recycled material in their products and increase demand. Standardized recycling labeling can also have a positive effect on the supply of recyclates when it specifies how and where the product can be recycled.\nRecyclates.\n\"Recyclate\" is a raw material sent to and processed in a waste recycling plant or materials-recovery facility so it can be used in the production of new materials and products. For example, plastic bottles can be made into plastic pellets and synthetic fabrics.\nQuality of recyclate.\nThe quality of recyclates is one of the principal challenges for the success of a long-term vision of a green economy and achieving zero waste. It generally refers to how much of it is composed of target material, versus non-target material and other non-recyclable material. Steel and other metals have intrinsically higher recyclate quality; it is estimated that two-thirds of all new steel comes from recycled steel. Only target material is likely to be recycled, so higher amounts of non-target and non-recyclable materials can reduce the quantity of recycled products. A high proportion of non-target and non-recyclable material can make it more difficult to achieve \"high-quality\" recycling; and if recyclate is of poor quality, it is more likely to end up being down-cycled or, in more extreme cases, sent to other recovery options or landfilled. For example, to facilitate the remanufacturing of clear glass products, there are tight restrictions for colored glass entering the re-melt process. Another example is the downcycling of plastic, where products such as plastic food packaging are often downcycled into lower quality products, and do not get recycled into the same plastic food packaging.\nThe quality of recyclate not only supports high-quality recycling, but it can also deliver significant environmental benefits by reducing, reusing, and keeping products out of landfills. High-quality recycling can support economic growth by maximizing the value of waste material. Higher income levels from the sale of quality recyclates can return value significant to local governments, households and businesses. Pursuing high-quality recycling can also promote consumer and business confidence in the waste and resource management sector, and may encourage investment in it.\nThere are many actions along the recycling supply chain, each of which can affect recyclate quality. Waste producers who place non-target and non-recyclable wastes in recycling collections can affect the quality of final recyclate streams, and require extra efforts to discard those materials at later stages in the recycling process. Different collection systems can induce different levels of contamination. When multiple materials are collected together, extra effort is required to sort them into separate streams and can significantly reduce the quality of the final products. Transportation and the compaction of materials can also make this more difficult. Despite improvements in technology and quality of recyclate, sorting facilities are still not 100% effective in separating materials. When materials are stored outside, where they can become wet, can also cause problems for re-processors. Further sorting steps may be required to satisfactorily reduce the amount of non-target and non-recyclable material.\nRecycling consumer waste.\nCollection.\nA number of systems have been implemented to collect recyclates from the general waste stream, occupying different places on the spectrum of trade-off between public convenience and government ease and expense. The three main categories of collection are drop-off centers, buy-back centers and curbside collection. About two-thirds of the cost of recycling is incurred in the collection phase.\nCurbside collection.\nCurbside collection encompasses many subtly different systems, which differ mostly on where in the process the recyclates are sorted and cleaned. The main categories are mixed waste collection, commingled recyclables, and source separation. A waste collection vehicle generally picks up the waste.\nIn mixed waste collection, recyclates are collected mixed with the rest of the waste, and the desired materials are sorted out and cleaned at a central sorting facility. This results in a large amount of recyclable waste (especially paper) being too soiled to reprocess, but has advantages as well: The city need not pay for the separate collection of recyclates, no public education is needed, and any changes to the recyclability of certain materials are implemented where sorting occurs.\nIn a commingled or single-stream system, recyclables are mixed but kept separate from non-recyclable waste. This greatly reduces the need for post-collection cleaning, but requires public education on what materials are recyclable.\nSource separation.\nSource separation is the other extreme, where each material is cleaned and sorted prior to collection. It requires the least post-collection sorting and produces the purest recyclates. However, it incurs additional operating costs for collecting each material, and requires extensive public education to avoid recyclate contamination. In Oregon, USA, Oregon DEQ surveyed multi-family property managers; about half of them reported problems, including contamination of recyclables due to trespassers such as transients gaining access to collection areas.\nSource separation used to be the preferred method due to the high cost of sorting commingled (mixed waste) collection. However, advances in sorting technology have substantially lowered this overhead, and many areas that had developed source separation programs have switched to what is called \"co-mingled collection\".\nBuy-back centers.\nAt buy-back centers, separated, cleaned recyclates are purchased, providing a clear incentive for use and creating a stable supply. The post-processed material can then be sold. If profitable, this conserves the emission of greenhouse gases; if unprofitable, it increases their emission. Buy-back centres generally need government subsidies to be viable. According to a 1993 report by the U.S. National Waste &amp; Recycling Association, it costs an average $50 to process a ton of material that can be resold for $30.\nDrop-off centers.\nDrop-off centers require the waste producer to carry recyclates to a central location\u2014either an installed or mobile collection station or the reprocessing plant itself. They are the easiest type of collection to establish but suffer from low and unpredictable throughput.\nDistributed recycling.\nFor some waste materials such as plastic, recent technical devices called recyclebots enable a form of distributed recycling called DRAM (distributed recycling additive manufacturing). Preliminary life-cycle analysis (LCA) indicates that such distributed recycling of HDPE to make filament for 3D printers in rural regions consumes less energy than using virgin resin, or using conventional recycling processes with their associated transportation.\nAnother form of distributed recycling mixes waste plastic with sand to make bricks in Africa. Several studies have looked at the properties of recycled waste plastic and sand bricks. The composite pavers can be sold at 100% profit while employing workers at 1.5\u00d7 the minimum wage in the West African region, where distributed recycling has the potential to produce 19 million pavement tiles from 28,000 tons of plastic water sachets annually in Ghana, Nigeria, and Liberia. This has also been done with COVID19 masks.\nSorting.\nOnce commingled recyclates are collected and delivered to a materials recovery facility, the materials must be sorted. This is done in a series of stages, many of which involve automated processes, enabling a truckload of material to be fully sorted in less than an hour. Some plants can now sort materials automatically; this is known as single-stream recycling. Automatic sorting may be aided by robotics and machine learning. In plants, a variety of materials is sorted including paper, different types of plastics, glass, metals, food scraps, and most types of batteries. A 30% increase in recycling rates has been seen in areas with these plants. In the US, there are over 300 materials recovery facilities.\nInitially, commingled recyclates are removed from the collection vehicle and placed on a conveyor belt spread out in a single layer. Large pieces of corrugated fiberboard and plastic bags are removed by hand at this stage, as they can cause later machinery to jam.\nNext, automated machinery such as disk screens and air classifiers separate the recyclates by weight, splitting lighter paper and plastic from heavier glass and metal. Cardboard is removed from mixed paper, and the most common types of plastic\u2014PET (#1) and HDPE (#2)\u2014are collected, so these materials can be diverted into the proper collection channels. This is usually done by hand; but in some sorting centers, spectroscopic scanners are used to differentiate between types of paper and plastic based on their absorbed wavelengths. Plastics tend to be incompatible with each other due to differences in chemical composition; their polymer molecules repel each other, similar to oil and water.\nStrong magnets are used to separate out ferrous metals such as iron, steel and tin cans. Non-ferrous metals are ejected by magnetic eddy currents: A rotating magnetic field induces an electric current around aluminum cans, creating an eddy current inside the cans that is repulsed by a large magnetic field, ejecting the cans from the stream.\nFinally, glass is sorted according to its color: brown, amber, green, or clear. It may be sorted either by hand, or by a machine that uses colored filters to detect colors. Glass fragments smaller than cannot be sorted automatically, and are mixed together as \"glass fines\".\nIn 2003, San Francisco's Department of the Environment set a citywide goal of zero waste by 2020. San Francisco's refuse hauler, Recology, operates an effective recyclables sorting facility that has helped the city reach a record-breaking landfill diversion rate of 80% as of 2021. Other American cities, including Los Angeles, have https://.\nRecycling industrial waste.\nAlthough many government programs concentrate on recycling at home, 64% of waste in the United Kingdom is generated by industry. The focus of many recycling programs in industry is their cost-effectiveness. The ubiquitous nature of cardboard packaging makes cardboard a common waste product recycled by companies that deal heavily in packaged goods, such as retail stores, warehouses, and goods distributors. Other industries deal in niche and specialized products, depending on the waste materials they handle.\nGlass, lumber, wood pulp and paper manufacturers all deal directly in commonly recycled materials; however, independent tire dealers may collect and recycle rubber tires for a profit.\nThe waste produced from burning coal in a Coal-fired power station is often called fuel ash or fly ash in the United States. It is a very useful material and used in concrete construction. It exhibits Pozzolanic activity.\nLevels of metals recycling are generally low. In 2010, the International Resource Panel, hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), published reports on metal stocks and their recycling rates. It reported that the increase in the use of metals during the 20th and into the 21st century has led to a substantial shift in metal stocks from below-ground to use in above-ground applications within society. For example, in the US, in-use copper grew from 73 to 238\u00a0kg per capita between 1932\u20131999.\nThe report's authors observed that, as metals are inherently recyclable, metal stocks in society can serve as huge above-ground mines (the term \"urban mining\" has thus been coined). However, they found that the recycling rates of many metals are low. They warned that the recycling rates of some rare metals used in applications such as mobile phones, battery packs for hybrid cars and fuel cells, are so low that unless future end-of-life recycling rates are dramatically increased, these critical metals will become unavailable for use in modern technology.\nThe military recycles some metals. The U.S. Navy's Ship Disposal Program uses ship breaking to reclaim the steel of old vessels. Ships may also be sunk to create artificial reefs. Uranium is a dense metal that has qualities superior to lead and titanium for many military and industrial uses. Uranium left over from processing it into nuclear weapons and fuel for nuclear reactors is called depleted uranium, and is used by all branches of the U.S. military for the development of such things as armor-piercing shells and shielding.\nThe construction industry may recycle concrete and old road surface pavement, selling these materials for profit.\nSome rapidly growing industries, particularly the renewable energy and solar photovoltaic technology industries, are proactively creating recycling policies even before their waste streams have considerable volume, anticipating future demand.\nRecycling of plastics is more difficult, as most programs are not able to reach the necessary level of quality. Recycling of PVC often results in downcycling of the material, which means only products of lower quality standard can be made with the recycled material.\nE-waste is a growing problem, accounting for 20\u201350 million metric tons of global waste per year according to the EPA. It is also the fastest growing waste stream in the EU. Many recyclers do not recycle e-waste responsibly. After the cargo barge Khian Sea dumped 14,000 metric tons of toxic ash in Haiti, the Basel Convention was formed to stem the flow of hazardous substances into poorer countries. They created the e-Stewards certification to ensure that recyclers are held to the highest standards for environmental responsibility and to help consumers identify responsible recyclers. It operates alongside other prominent legislation, such as the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive of the EU and the United States National Computer Recycling Act, to prevent poisonous chemicals from entering waterways and the atmosphere.\nIn the recycling process, television sets, monitors, cell phones, and computers are typically tested for reuse and repaired. If broken, they may be disassembled for parts still having high value if labor is cheap enough. Other e-waste is shredded to pieces roughly in size and manually checked to separate toxic batteries and capacitors, which contain poisonous metals. The remaining pieces are further shredded to particles and passed under a magnet to remove ferrous metals. An eddy current ejects non-ferrous metals, which are sorted by density either by a centrifuge or vibrating plates. Precious metals can be dissolved in acid, sorted, and smelted into ingots. The remaining glass and plastic fractions are separated by density and sold to re-processors. Television sets and monitors must be manually disassembled to remove lead from CRTs and the mercury backlight from LCDs.\nVehicles, solar panels and wind turbines can also be recycled. They often contain rare-earth elements (REE) and/or other critical raw materials. For electric car production, large amounts of REE's are typically required.\nWhereas many critical raw elements and REE's can be recovered, environmental engineer https:// reports that recycling of indium, gallium, germanium, selenium, and tantalum is still very difficult and their recycling rates are very low.\nPlastic recycling.\nPlastic recycling is the process of recovering scrap or waste plastic and reprocessing the material into useful products, sometimes completely different in form from their original state. For instance, this could mean melting down soft drink bottles and then casting them as plastic chairs and tables. For some types of plastic, the same piece of plastic can only be recycled about 2\u20133 times before its quality decreases to the point where it can no longer be used.\nPhysical recycling.\nSome plastics are remelted to form new plastic objects; for example, PET water bottles can be converted into polyester destined for clothing. A disadvantage of this type of recycling is that the molecular weight of the polymer can change further and the levels of unwanted substances in the plastic can increase with each remelt.\nA commercial-built recycling facility was sent to the International Space Station in late 2019. The facility takes in plastic waste and unneeded plastic parts and physically converts them into spools of feedstock for the space station additive manufacturing facility used for in-space 3D printing.\nChemical recycling.\nFor some polymers, it is possible to convert them back into monomers, for example, PET can be treated with an alcohol and a catalyst to form a dialkyl terephthalate. The terephthalate diester can be used with ethylene glycol to form a new polyester polymer, thus making it possible to use the pure polymer again. In 2019, Eastman Chemical Company announced initiatives of methanolysis and syngas designed to handle a greater variety of used material.\nWaste plastic pyrolysis to fuel oil.\nAnother process involves the conversion of assorted polymers into petroleum by a much less precise thermal depolymerization process. Such a process would be able to accept almost any polymer or mix of polymers, including thermoset materials such as vulcanized rubber tires and the biopolymers in feathers and other agricultural waste. Like natural petroleum, the chemicals produced can be used as fuels or as feedstock. A RESEM Technology plant of this type in Carthage, Missouri, US, uses turkey waste as input material. Gasification is a similar process but is not technically recycling since polymers are not likely to become the result.\nPlastic Pyrolysis can convert petroleum based waste streams such as plastics into quality fuels, carbons. Given below is the list of suitable plastic raw materials for pyrolysis:\nRecycling codes.\nIn order to meet recyclers' needs while providing manufacturers a consistent, uniform system, a coding system was developed. The recycling code for plastics was introduced in 1988 by the plastics industry through the Society of the Plastics Industry. Because municipal recycling programs traditionally have targeted packaging\u2014primarily bottles and containers\u2014the resin coding system offered a means of identifying the resin content of bottles and containers commonly found in the residential waste stream.\nIn the United States, plastic products are printed with numbers 1\u20137 depending on the type of resin. Type 1 (polyethylene terephthalate) is commonly found in soft drink and water bottles. Type 2 (high-density polyethylene) is found in most hard plastics such as milk jugs, laundry detergent bottles, and some dishware. Type 3 (polyvinyl chloride) includes items such as shampoo bottles, shower curtains, hula hoops, credit cards, wire jacketing, medical equipment, siding, and piping. Type 4 (low-density polyethylene) is found in shopping bags, squeezable bottles, tote bags, clothing, furniture, and carpet. Type 5 is polypropylene and makes up syrup bottles, straws, Tupperware, and some automotive parts. Type 6 is polystyrene and makes up meat trays, egg cartons, clamshell containers, and compact disc cases. Type 7 includes all other plastics such as bulletproof materials, 3- and 5-gallon water bottles, cell phone and tablet frames, safety goggles and sunglasses. Having a recycling code or the chasing arrows logo on a material is not an automatic indicator that a material is recyclable but rather an explanation of what the material is. Types 1 and 2 are the most commonly recycled.\nCost\u2013benefit analysis.\nIn addition to environmental impact, there is debate over whether recycling is economically efficient. According to a Natural Resources Defense Council study, waste collection and landfill disposal creates less than one job per 1,000 tons of waste material managed; in contrast, the collection, processing, and manufacturing of recycled materials creates 6\u201313 or more jobs per 1,000 tons. According to the U.S. Recycling Economic Informational Study, there are over 50,000 recycling establishments that have created over a million jobs in the US. The National Waste &amp; Recycling Association (NWRA) reported in May 2015 that recycling and waste made a $6.7 billion economic impact in Ohio, U.S., and employed 14,000 people. Economists would classify this extra labor used as a cost rather than a benefit since these workers could have been employed elsewhere; the cost effectiveness of creating these additional jobs remains unclear.\nSometimes cities have found recycling saves resources compared to other methods of disposal of waste. Two years after New York City declared that implementing recycling programs would be \"a drain on the city\", New York City leaders realized that an efficient recycling system could save the city over $20 million. Municipalities often see fiscal benefits from implementing recycling programs, largely due to the reduced landfill costs. A study conducted by the Technical University of Denmark according to the Economist found that in 83 percent of cases, recycling is the most efficient method to dispose of household waste. However, a 2004 assessment by the Danish Environmental Assessment Institute concluded that incineration was the most effective method for disposing of drink containers, even aluminium ones.\nFiscal efficiency is separate from economic efficiency. Economic analysis of recycling does not include what economists call externalities: unpriced costs and benefits that accrue to individuals outside of private transactions. Examples include less air pollution and greenhouse gases from incineration and less waste leaching from landfills. Without mechanisms such as taxes or subsidies, businesses and consumers following their private benefit would ignore externalities despite the costs imposed on society. If landfills and incinerator pollution is inadequately regulated, these methods of waste disposal appear cheaper than they really are, because part of their cost is the pollution imposed on people nearby. Thus, advocates have pushed for legislation to increase demand for recycled materials. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has concluded in favor of recycling, saying that recycling efforts reduced the country's carbon emissions by a net 49 million metric tonnes in 2005. In the United Kingdom, the Waste and Resources Action Programme stated that Great Britain's recycling efforts reduce CO2 emissions by 10\u201315 million tonnes a year. The question for economic efficiency is whether this reduction is worth the extra cost of recycling and thus makes the artificial demand creates by legislation worthwhile.\nCertain requirements must be met for recycling to be economically feasible and environmentally effective. These include an adequate source of recyclates, a system to extract those recyclates from the waste stream, a nearby factory capable of reprocessing the recyclates, and a potential demand for the recycled products. These last two requirements are often overlooked\u2014without both an industrial market for production using the collected materials and a consumer market for the manufactured goods, recycling is incomplete and in fact only \"collection\".\nFree-market economist Julian Simon remarked \"There are three ways society can organize waste disposal: (a) commanding, (b) guiding by tax and subsidy, and (c) leaving it to the individual and the market\". These principles appear to divide economic thinkers today.\nFrank Ackerman favours a high level of government intervention to provide recycling services. He believes that recycling's benefit cannot be effectively quantified by traditional \"laissez-faire\" economics. Allen Hershkowitz supports intervention, saying that it is a public service equal to education and policing. He argues that manufacturers should shoulder more of the burden of waste disposal.\nPaul Calcott and Margaret Walls advocate the second option. A deposit refund scheme and a small refuse charge would encourage recycling but not at the expense of illegal dumping. Thomas C. Kinnaman concludes that a landfill tax would force consumers, companies and councils to recycle more.\nMost free-market thinkers detest subsidy and intervention, arguing that they waste resources. The general argument is that if cities charge the full cost of garbage collection, private companies can profitably recycle any materials for which the benefit of recycling exceeds the cost (e.g. aluminum) and do not recycle other materials for which the benefit is less than the cost (e.g. glass). Cities, on the other hand, often recycle even when they not only do not receive enough for the paper or plastic to pay for its collection, but must actually pay private recycling companies to take it off of their hands. Terry Anderson and Donald Leal think that all recycling programmes should be privately operated, and therefore would only operate if the money saved by recycling exceeds its costs. Daniel K. Benjamin argues that it wastes people's resources and lowers the wealth of a population. He notes that recycling can cost a city more than twice as much as landfills, that in the United States landfills are so heavily regulated that their pollution effects are negligible, and that the recycling process also generates pollution and uses energy, which may or may not be less than from virgin production.\nTrade in recyclates.\nCertain countries trade in unprocessed recyclates. Some have complained that the ultimate fate of recyclates sold to another country is unknown and they may end up in landfills instead of being reprocessed. According to one report, in America, 50\u201380 percent of computers destined for recycling are actually not recycled. There are reports of illegal-waste imports to China being dismantled and recycled solely for monetary gain, without consideration for workers' health or environmental damage. Although the Chinese government has banned these practices, it has not been able to eradicate them. In 2008, the prices of recyclable waste plummeted before rebounding in 2009. Cardboard averaged about \u00a353/tonne from 2004 to 2008, dropped to \u00a319/tonne, and then went up to \u00a359/tonne in May 2009. PET plastic averaged about \u00a3156/tonne, dropped to \u00a375/tonne and then moved up to \u00a3195/tonne in May 2009.\nCertain regions have difficulty using or exporting as much of a material as they recycle. This problem is most prevalent with glass: both Britain and the U.S. import large quantities of wine bottled in green glass. Though much of this glass is sent to be recycled, outside the American Midwest there is not enough wine production to use all of the reprocessed material. The extra must be downcycled into building materials or re-inserted into the regular waste stream.\nSimilarly, the northwestern United States has difficulty finding markets for recycled newspaper, given the large number of pulp mills in the region as well as the proximity to Asian markets. In other areas of the U.S., however, demand for used newsprint has seen wide fluctuation.\nIn some U.S. states, a program called RecycleBank pays people to recycle, receiving money from local municipalities for the reduction in landfill space that must be purchased. It uses a single stream process in which all material is automatically sorted.\nCriticisms and responses.\nMuch of the difficulty inherent in recycling comes from the fact that most products are not designed with recycling in mind. In the USA around 6 to 7 percent of plastic is recycled. The concept of sustainable design aims to solve this problem, and was laid out in the 2002 book \"\" by architect William McDonough and chemist Michael Braungart. They suggest that every product (and all packaging it requires) should have a complete \"closed-loop\" cycle mapped out for each component\u2014a way in which every component either returns to the natural ecosystem through biodegradation or is recycled indefinitely.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Complete recycling is impossible from a practical standpoint. In summary, substitution and recycling strategies only delay the depletion of non-renewable stocks and therefore may buy time in the transition to true or strong sustainability, which ultimately is only guaranteed in an economy based on renewable resources.\u2014\u200a\nWhile recycling diverts waste from entering directly into landfill sites, current recycling misses the dispersive components. Critics believe that complete recycling is impracticable as highly dispersed wastes become so diluted that the energy needed for their recovery becomes increasingly excessive.\nAs with environmental economics, care must be taken to ensure a complete view of the costs and benefits involved. For example, paperboard packaging for food products is more easily recycled than most plastic, but is heavier to ship and may result in more waste from spoilage. Economic expenses can incentivize fraud.\nNet environmental benefits.\nCritics dispute the net economic and environmental benefits of recycling over its costs, and suggest that proponents of recycling often make matters worse and suffer from confirmation bias. Specifically, critics argue that the costs and energy used in collection and transportation detract from (and outweigh) the costs and energy saved in the production process; also that the jobs produced by the recycling industry can be a poor trade for the jobs lost in logging, mining, and other industries associated with production; and that materials such as paper pulp can only be recycled a few times before material degradation prevents further recycling.\nThe amount of energy saved through recycling depends upon the material being recycled and the type of energy accounting that is used. Correct accounting for this saved energy can be accomplished with life-cycle analysis using real energy values, and in addition, exergy, which is a measure of how much useful energy can be used. In general, it takes far less energy to produce a unit mass of recycled materials than it does to make the same mass of virgin materials.\nSome scholars use emergy (spelled with an m) analysis, for example, budgets for the amount of energy of one kind (exergy) that is required to make or transform things into another kind of product or service. Emergy calculations take into account economics that can alter pure physics-based results. Using emergy life-cycle analysis researchers have concluded that materials with large refining costs have the greatest potential for high recycle benefits. Moreover, the highest emergy efficiency accrues from systems geared toward material recycling, where materials are engineered to recycle back into their original form and purpose, followed by adaptive reuse systems where the materials are recycled into a different kind of product, and then by-product reuse systems where parts of the products are used to make an entirely different product.\nThe Energy Information Administration (EIA) states on its website that \"a paper mill uses 40 percent less energy to make paper from recycled paper than it does to make paper from fresh lumber.\" Some critics argue that it takes more energy to produce recycled products than it does to dispose of them in traditional landfill methods, since the curbside collection of recyclables often requires a second waste truck. However, recycling proponents point out that a second timber or logging truck is eliminated when paper is collected for recycling, so the net energy consumption is the same. An emergy life-cycle analysis on recycling revealed that fly ash, aluminum, recycled concrete aggregate, recycled plastic, and steel yield higher efficiency ratios, whereas the recycling of lumber generates the lowest recycle benefit ratio. Hence, the specific nature of the recycling process, the methods used to analyse the process, and the products involved affect the energy savings budgets.\nIt is difficult to determine the amount of energy consumed or produced in waste disposal processes in broader ecological terms, where causal relations dissipate into complex networks of material and energy flow. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[C]ities do not follow all the strategies of ecosystem development. Biogeochemical paths become fairly straight relative to wild ecosystems, with reduced recycling, resulting in large flows of waste and low total energy efficiencies. By contrast, in wild ecosystems, one population's wastes are another population's resources, and succession results in efficient exploitation of available resources. However, even modernized cities may still be in the earliest stages of a succession that may take centuries or millennia to complete.\nHow much energy is used in recycling also depends on the type of material being recycled and the process used to do so. Aluminium is generally agreed to use far less energy when recycled rather than being produced from scratch. The EPA states that \"recycling aluminum cans, for example, saves 95 percent of the energy required to make the same amount of aluminum from its virgin source, bauxite.\" In 2009, more than half of all aluminium cans produced came from recycled aluminium. Similarly, it has been estimated that new steel produced with recycled cans reduces greenhouse gas emissions by 75%.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every year, millions of tons of materials are being exploited from the earth's crust, and processed into consumer and capital goods. After decades to centuries, most of these materials are \"lost\". With the exception of some pieces of art or religious relics, they are no longer engaged in the consumption process. Where are they? Recycling is only an intermediate solution for such materials, although it does prolong the residence time in the anthroposphere. For thermodynamic reasons, however, recycling cannot prevent the final need for an ultimate sink.\u2014\u200a\nEconomist Steven Landsburg has suggested that the sole benefit of reducing landfill space is trumped by the energy needed and resulting pollution from the recycling process. Others, however, have calculated through life-cycle assessment that producing recycled paper uses less energy and water than harvesting, pulping, processing, and transporting virgin trees. When less recycled paper is used, additional energy is needed to create and maintain farmed forests until these forests are as self-sustainable as virgin forests.\nOther studies have shown that recycling in itself is inefficient to perform the \"decoupling\" of economic development from the depletion of non-renewable raw materials that is necessary for sustainable development. The international transportation or recycle material flows through \"...\u00a0different trade networks of the three countries result in different flows, decay rates, and potential recycling returns\". As global consumption of a natural resources grows, their depletion is inevitable. The best recycling can do is to delay; complete closure of material loops to achieve 100 percent recycling of nonrenewables is impossible as micro-trace materials dissipate into the environment causing severe damage to the planet's ecosystems. Historically, this was identified as the metabolic rift by Karl Marx, who identified the unequal exchange rate between energy and nutrients flowing from rural areas to feed urban cities that create effluent wastes degrading the planet's ecological capital, such as loss in soil nutrient production. Energy conservation also leads to what is known as Jevon's paradox, where improvements in energy efficiency lowers the cost of production and leads to a rebound effect where rates of consumption and economic growth increases.\nEconomic costs.\nJournalist John Tierney notes that it is generally more expensive for municipalities to recycle waste from households than to send it to a landfill and that \"recycling may be the most wasteful activity in modern America.\"\nThe amount of money actually saved through recycling depends on the efficiency of the recycling program used to do it. The Institute for Local Self-Reliance argues that the cost of recycling depends on various factors, such as landfill fees and the amount of disposal that the community recycles. It states that communities begin to save money when they treat recycling as a replacement for their traditional waste system rather than an add-on to it and by \"redesigning their collection schedules and/or trucks\".\nIn some cases, the cost of recyclable materials also exceeds the cost of raw materials. Virgin plastic resin costs 40 percent less than recycled resin. Additionally, a United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) study that tracked the price of clear glass from 15 July to 2 August 1991, found that the average cost per ton ranged from $40 to $60 while a USGS report shows that the cost per ton of raw silica sand from years 1993 to 1997 fell between $17.33 and $18.10.\nComparing the market cost of recyclable material with the cost of new raw materials ignores economic externalities\u2014the costs that are currently not counted by the market. Creating a new piece of plastic, for instance, may cause more pollution and be less sustainable than recycling a similar piece of plastic, but these factors are not counted in market cost. A life cycle assessment can be used to determine the levels of externalities and decide whether the recycling may be worthwhile despite unfavorable market costs. Alternatively, legal means (such as a carbon tax) can be used to bring externalities into the market, so that the market cost of the material becomes close to the true cost.\nWorking conditions and social costs.\nThe recycling of waste electrical and electronic equipment can create a significant amount of pollution. This problem is specifically occurrent in India and China. Informal recycling in an underground economy of these countries has generated an environmental and health disaster. High levels of lead (Pb), polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs), polychlorinated dioxins, and furans, as well as polybrominated dioxins and furans (PCDD/Fs and PBDD/Fs), concentrated in the air, bottom ash, dust, soil, water, and sediments in areas surrounding recycling sites. These materials can make work sites harmful to the workers themselves and the surrounding environment.\nIn some countries, recycling is performed by the entrepreneurial poor such as the karung guni, zabbaleen, the rag-and-bone man, waste picker, and junk man. With the creation of large recycling organizations that may be profitable, either by law or economies of scale, the poor are more likely to be driven out of the recycling and the remanufacturing job market. To compensate for this loss of income, a society may need to create additional forms of societal programs to help support the poor. Like the parable of the broken window, there is a net loss to the poor and possibly the whole of a society to make recycling artificially profitable, e.g. through the law. However, in Brazil and Argentina, waste pickers/informal recyclers work alongside the authorities, in fully or semi-funded cooperatives, allowing informal recycling to be legitimized as a paid public sector job.\nBecause the social support of a country is likely to be less than the loss of income to the poor undertaking recycling, there is a greater chance for the poor to come in conflict with the large recycling organizations. This means fewer people can decide if certain waste is more economically reusable in its current form rather than being reprocessed. Contrasted to the recycling poor, the efficiency of their recycling may actually be higher for some materials because individuals have greater control over what is considered \"waste\".\nOne labor-intensive underused waste is electronic and computer waste. Because this waste may still be functional and wanted mostly by those on lower incomes, who may sell or use it at a greater efficiency than large recyclers.\nSome recycling advocates believe that laissez-faire individual-based recycling does not cover all of society's recycling needs. Thus, it does not negate the need for an organized recycling program. Local government can consider the activities of the recycling poor as contributing to the ruining of property.\nPublic participation rates.\nChanges that have been demonstrated to increase recycling rates include:\nIn a study done by social psychologist Shawn Burn, it was found that personal contact with individuals within a neighborhood is the most effective way to increase recycling within a community. In her study, she had 10 block leaders talk to their neighbors and persuade them to recycle. A comparison group was sent fliers promoting recycling. It was found that the neighbors that were personally contacted by their block leaders recycled much more than the group without personal contact. As a result of this study, Shawn Burn believes that personal contact within a small group of people is an important factor in encouraging recycling. Another study done by Stuart Oskamp examines the effect of neighbors and friends on recycling. It was found in his studies that people who had friends and neighbors that recycled were much more likely to also recycle than those who did not have friends and neighbors that recycled.\nMany schools have created recycling awareness clubs in order to give young students an insight on recycling. These schools believe that the clubs actually encourage students to not only recycle at school but at home as well.\nRecycling of metals varies extremely by type. Titanium and lead have an extremely high recycling rates of over 90%. Copper and cobalt have high rates of recycling around 75%. Only about half of aluminum is recycled. Most of the remaining metals have recycling rates of below 35%, while 34 types of metals have recycling rates of under 1%.\n\"Between 1960 and 2000, the world production of plastic resins increased 25 times its original amount, while recovery of the material remained below 5 percent.\" Many studies have addressed recycling behaviour and strategies to encourage community involvement in recycling programs. It has been argued that recycling behavior is not natural because it requires a focus and appreciation for long-term planning, whereas humans have evolved to be sensitive to short-term survival goals; and that to overcome this innate predisposition, the best solution would be to use social pressure to compel participation in recycling programs. However, recent studies have concluded that social pressure does not work in this context. One reason for this is that social pressure functions well in small group sizes of 50 to 150 individuals (common to nomadic hunter\u2013gatherer peoples) but not in communities numbering in the millions, as we see today. Another reason is that individual recycling does not take place in the public view.\nFollowing the increasing popularity of recycling collection being sent to the same landfills as trash, some people kept on putting recyclables on the recyclables bin.\nRecycling in art.\nArt objects are more and more often made from recycled material.\nEmbracing a circular economy through advanced sorting technologies.\nBy extending the lifespan of goods, parts, and materials, a circular economy seeks to minimize waste and maximize resource utilization. Advanced sorting techniques like optical and robotic sorting may separate and recover valuable materials from waste streams, lowering the requirement for virgin resources and accelerating the shift to a circular economy.\nCommunity engagement, such as education and awareness campaigns, may support the acceptance of recycling and reuse programs and encourage the usage of sustainable practices. One can lessen our influence on the environment, save natural resources, and generate economic possibilities by adopting a circular economy using cutting-edge sorting technology and community engagement. According to Melati et al., to successfully transition to a circular economy, legislative and regulatory frameworks must encourage sustainable practices while addressing possible obstacles and difficulties in putting these ideas into action.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nRelated journals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "70158", "revid": "1315520761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70158", "title": "John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset", "text": "English nobleman and politician (c. 1373\u20131410)\nJohn Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset (c. 1373\u00a0\u2013 16 March 1410), known as the Marquess of Somerset and Marquess of Dorset from 1397\u201399, was an English-French nobleman and politician. Beaufort was the second son of John of Gaunt (1340\u20131399; third surviving son of King Edward III), eldest of the four children by his mistress Katherine Swynford, whom he later married in 1396.\nThe Beaufort children were declared legitimate twice by parliament, first during the reign of King Richard II, in 1397, which was confirmed by Henry IV, as well as by Pope Boniface IX in September 1396.\nEarly life.\nBeaufort's surname (properly \"de Beaufort\", \"from Beaufort\") probably reflects his birthplace at his father's castle and manor of Beaufort (\"beautiful stronghold\") in Champagne, France. The Portcullis heraldic badge of the Beauforts, now the emblem of the House of Commons, is believed to have been based on that of the castle of Beaufort, now demolished.\nBetween May and September 1390, Beaufort saw military service in North Africa in the Barbary Crusade led by Louis II, Duke of Bourbon. In 1394, he was in Lithuania serving with the Teutonic Knights.\nJohn was created Earl of Somerset on 10 February 1397, just a few days after the legitimation of the Beaufort children was recognised by Parliament. The same month, he was also appointed Admiral of the Irish fleet, as well as Constable of Dover Castle and Warden of the Cinque Ports. In May, his admiralty was extended to include the northern fleet. That summer, the new earl became one of the noblemen who helped Richard II free himself from the power of the Lords Appellant. As a reward, he was created Marquess of Somerset and Marquess of Dorset on 29 September, and sometime later that year he was made a Knight of the Garter and appointed Lieutenant of Aquitaine. In addition, two days before his elevation as a Marquess he married the king's niece, Margaret Holland, sister of Thomas Holland, 1st Duke of Surrey, another of the counter-appellants. John remained in the king's favour even after his older half-brother Henry Bolingbroke (later Henry IV) was banished from England in 1398.\nLater career.\nAfter Richard II was deposed by Henry Bolingbroke in 1399, the new king rescinded the titles that had been given to the counter-appellants, and thus John Beaufort became merely Earl of Somerset again. Nevertheless, he proved loyal to his half-brother's reign, serving in various military commands and on some important diplomatic missions. It was Beaufort who was given the confiscated estates of the Welsh rebel leader Owain Glynd\u0175r in 1400, although he would not have been able to take possession of these estates unless he had lived until after 1415. In 1404, he was named Constable of England.\nFamily.\nJohn Beaufort and his wife Margaret Holland, the daughter of Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent and Alice FitzAlan, had six children. His granddaughter Lady Margaret Beaufort married Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond, the son of Dowager Queen Catherine of Valois by Owen Tudor.\nJohn Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset, died in the Hospital of St Katharine's by the Tower. He was buried in St Michael's Chapel in Canterbury Cathedral.\nHis children included the following:\nArms.\nAs a legitimised grandson of King Edward III, Beaufort bore that king's royal arms, differenced by a \"bordure gobony argent and azure\".\nArms of Beaufort, legitimised progeny of John of Gaunt, third surviving son of King Edward III: \"Royal arms of King Edward III within a bordure compony argent and azure\" (see Coat of arms of England). The arms were updated when the kings of England adopted France modern, having been adopted by the King of France in 1376. Charles, an illegitimate son of Henry Beaufort, 3rd Duke of Somerset (1436\u20131464), took the surname \"Somerset\" together with the Beaufort arms and was created Baron Herbert (1461) and Earl of Worcester (1513). In 1682 his descendant Henry Somerset, 3rd Marquess of Worcester (1629\u20131700), was created Duke of Beaufort. These arms are thus used by Beaufort, Duke of Somerset (extinct) and Somerset, Duke of Beaufort (extant).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70159", "revid": "16228717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70159", "title": "Anthony Trollope", "text": "English novelist (1815\u20131882)\nAnthony Trollope ( ; 24 April 1815 \u2013 6 December 1882) was an English novelist and civil servant of the Victorian era. Among the best-known of his 47 novels are two series of six novels each collectively known as the \"Chronicles of Barsetshire\" and the Palliser novels, as well as his longest novel, \"The Way We Live Now\". His novels address political, social, and gender issues and other topical matters.\nTrollope's literary reputation dipped during the last years of his life, but he regained somewhat of a following by the mid-20th century.\nBiography.\nAnthony Trollope was the son of barrister Thomas Anthony Trollope and the novelist and travel writer Frances Milton Trollope. Though a clever and well-educated man and a Fellow of New College, Oxford, Thomas Trollope failed at the Bar due to his bad temper. Ventures into farming proved unprofitable, and his expectations of inheritance were dashed when an elderly, childless uncle remarried and fathered children. Thomas Trollope was the son of the Rev. (Thomas) Anthony Trollope, rector of Cottered, Hertfordshire, himself the sixth son of Sir Thomas Trollope, 4th Baronet. The baronetcy later came to descendants of Anthony Trollope's second son, Frederic. As a son of landed gentry, Thomas Trollope wanted his sons raised as gentlemen who would attend Oxford or Cambridge. Anthony suffered much misery in his boyhood, owing to the disparity between the privileged background of his parents and their comparatively meagre means.\nBorn in Marylebone, Anthony Trollope attended Harrow School as a day pupil for three years, beginning at age seven, without paying fees because his father's farm, acquired for that purpose, lay in the neighbourhood. After a spell at a private school at Sunbury, he followed his father and two older brothers to Winchester College, where he remained for three years. He then returned to Harrow as a day-boy to reduce his education costs. With no money or friends at these two high-ranked elite public schools, Trollope was bullied a great deal, enduring miserable experiences. At the age of 12, he fantasised about suicide. He also sought refuge in daydreams, constructing elaborate imaginary worlds.\nIn 1827, his mother, Frances Trollope, moved to America, to the Nashoba Commune in Tennessee, along with his three younger siblings. After that venture failed, she opened a bazaar in Cincinnati, Ohio, which also failed. Thomas Trollope joined them for a short time before returning to the farm at Harrow, but Anthony stayed in England throughout. \nAnthony Trollope's mother returned in 1831 and rapidly made a name for herself as a writer, soon earning a good income. His father's affairs, however, went from bad to worse. He gave up his legal practice entirely and failed to make enough income from farming to pay rent to his landlord, Lord Northwick. In 1834, he fled to Belgium to avoid arrest for debt. The whole family moved to a house near Bruges, where they lived entirely on Frances's earnings.\nIn Belgium, Anthony Trollope was offered a commission in an Austrian cavalry regiment. To accept it, he needed to learn French and German; he had a year in which to do so. To acquire these languages without expense to himself and his family, he became an usher (assistant master) in a school in Brussels, making him the tutor of 30 boys. After six weeks there, however, he was offered a clerkship in the General Post Office, obtained through a family friend. Accepting this post, he returned to London in the autumn of 1834. Thomas Trollope died the following year.\nAccording to Anthony Trollope, \"the first seven years of my official life were neither creditable to myself nor useful to the public service.\" At the Post Office, he acquired a reputation for unpunctuality and insubordination. A debt of \u00a312 to a tailor fell into the hands of a moneylender and grew to more than \u00a3200; the lender regularly visited Trollope at his workplace to demand payments. Trollope hated his job, but he saw no alternative to it and lived in constant fear of dismissal.\nMove to Ireland.\nIn 1841, an opportunity to escape arose. A postal surveyor clerk in central Ireland, reported as incompetent, needed replacement. The position was not regarded as desirable, but Trollope, in debt and in trouble at work, volunteered for it; and his supervisor, William Maberly, a Whig politician eager to be rid of him, appointed him to the position.\nTrollope's new work consisted largely of inspection tours in Connaught, and he based himself in Banagher in King's County. Although he had arrived with a bad reference from London, his new supervisor resolved to judge him on his merits, and within a year, by Trollope's account, he earned a reputation as a valuable public servant. His salary and travel allowance went much further in Ireland than they had in London, and he found himself enjoying a measure of prosperity. He took up fox hunting, which he would pursue enthusiastically for the next three decades. As a post-office surveyor, he interacted with local Irish people, whose company he found pleasant: \"The Irish people did not murder me, nor did they even break my head. I soon found them to be good-humoured, clever\u2014the working classes very much more intelligent than those of England\u2014economical and hospitable.\"\nAt the watering place of Kingstown, Trollope met Rose Heseltine (1821\u20131917), the daughter of a Rotherham bank manager. They became engaged when he had been in Ireland for just a year, but Trollope's debts and her lack of a fortune prevented them from marrying until 1844. Soon after they wed, Trollope was transferred to another postal district in the south of Ireland, and the family moved to Clonmel. Their first son, Henry Merivale, was born in 1846, and their second, Frederick James Anthony, in 1847.\nEarly works.\nThough Trollope had decided to become a novelist, he had accomplished very little writing during his first three years in Ireland. At the time of his marriage, he had written only the first of three volumes of his first novel, \"The Macdermots of Ballycloran\". Within a year of his marriage, he finished that work.\nTrollope began writing on the numerous long train trips around Ireland he had to take to carry out his postal duties. Setting firm goals about how much he would write each day, he eventually became one of the most prolific writers of all time. He wrote his earliest novels while working as a Post Office inspector, occasionally dipping into the \"lost-letter\" box for ideas.\nSignificantly, many of his earliest novels have Ireland as their setting\u2014natural enough given that he wrote them or thought them up while he was living and working in Ireland, but unlikely to enjoy warm critical reception, given the contemporary English attitude towards Ireland. Critics have pointed out that Trollope's view of Ireland separates him from many of the other Victorian novelists. Other critics claimed that Ireland did not influence Trollope as much as his experience in England, and that the society in Ireland harmed him as a writer, especially since Ireland was experiencing the Great Famine during his time there. However, these critics (who have been accused of bigoted opinions against Ireland) failed or refused to acknowledge both Trollope's true attachment to the country and the country's capacity as a rich literary field.\nTrollope published four novels about Ireland. Two were written during the Great Famine, while the third deals with the famine as a theme (\"The Macdermots of Ballycloran\", \"The Kellys and the O'Kellys\", and \"Castle Richmond\", respectively). \"The Macdermots of Ballycloran\" was written while he was staying in the village of Drumsna, County Leitrim. \"The Kellys and the O'Kellys\" (1848) is a humorous comparison of the romantic pursuits of the landed gentry (Francis O'Kelly, Lord Ballindine) and his Catholic tenant (Martin Kelly). Two short stories deal with Ireland (\"The O'Conors of Castle Conor, County Mayo\" and \"Father Giles of Ballymoy\"). Some critics argue that these works seek to unify an Irish and British identity, instead of viewing the two as distinct. Even as an Englishman in Ireland, Trollope was still able to attain what he saw as essential to being an \"Irish writer\": possessed, obsessed, and \"mauled\" by Ireland.\nThe reception of the Irish works left much to be desired. Henry Colburn wrote to Trollope, \"It is evident that readers do not like novels on Irish subjects as well as on others.\" In particular, magazines such as \"The New Monthly Magazine\", which included reviews that attacked the Irish for their actions during the famine, were representative of the dismissal by English readers of any work written about the Irish.\nSuccess as an author.\nIn 1851, Trollope was sent to England, charged with investigating and reorganising rural mail delivery in southwestern England and south Wales. The two-year mission took him over much of Great Britain, often on horseback. Trollope describes the time as being \"two of the happiest years of my life\".\nIn the course of it, he visited Salisbury Cathedral; and there, according to his autobiography, he conceived the plot of \"The Warden\", which became the first of the six Barsetshire novels. His postal work delayed the beginning of writing for a year; the novel was published in 1855, in an edition of 1,000 copies, with Trollope receiving half of the profits: \u00a39 8s. 8d. in 1855 (about \u00a3 in 2023 consumer pounds), and \u00a310 15s. 1d. in 1856 (about \u00a3 in 2023 consumer pounds). Although the profits were not large, the book received notices in the press and brought Trollope to the attention of the novel-reading public.\nHe immediately began work on \"Barchester Towers\", the second Barsetshire novel; upon its publication in 1857, he received an advance payment of \u00a3100 (about \u00a3 in 2023 consumer pounds) against his share of the profits. Like \"The Warden\", \"Barchester Towers\" did not obtain large sales, but it helped to establish Trollope's reputation. In his autobiography, Trollope writes, \"It achieved no great reputation, but it was one of the novels which novel readers were called upon to read.\" For the following novel, \"The Three Clerks\", he was able to sell the copyright for a lump sum of \u00a3250 (about \u00a3 in 2023 consumer pounds); he preferred this to waiting for a share of future profits.\nReturn to England.\nAlthough Trollope had been happy and comfortable in Ireland, he felt that as an author, he should live within easy reach of London. In 1859, he sought and obtained a position in the Post Office as Surveyor to the Eastern District, comprising Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, and most of Hertfordshire.\nLater that year, he moved to Waltham Cross, about from London in Hertfordshire, where he lived until 1871.\nIn late 1859, Trollope learned of preparations for the release of the \"Cornhill Magazine\", to be published by George Murray Smith and edited by William Makepeace Thackeray. He wrote to the latter, offering to provide short stories for the new magazine. Thackeray and Smith both responded: the former urging Trollope to contribute, the latter offering \u00a31,000 (about \u00a3 in 2023 consumer pounds) for a novel, provided that a substantial part of it could be available to the printer within six weeks. Trollope offered Smith \"Castle Richmond\", which he was then writing; but Smith declined to accept an Irish story, and suggested a novel dealing with English clerical life as had \"Barchester Towers\". Trollope then devised the plot of \"Framley Parsonage\", setting it near Barchester so that he could make use of characters from the Barsetshire novels.\n\"Framley Parsonage\" proved enormously popular, establishing Trollope's reputation with the novel-reading public and amply justifying the high price that Smith had paid for it. The early connection to \"Cornhill\" also brought Trollope into the London circle of artists, writers, and intellectuals, not least among whom were Smith and Thackeray.\nBy the mid-1860s, Trollope had reached a fairly senior position within the Post Office hierarchy, despite ongoing differences with Rowland Hill, who was at that time Chief Secretary to the Postmaster General. Postal history credits Trollope with introducing the pillar box (the ubiquitous mail-box) in the United Kingdom. He was earning a substantial income from his novels. He had overcome the awkwardness of his youth, made good friends in literary circles, and hunted enthusiastically. In 1865, Trollope was among the founders of the liberal Fortnightly Review.\nWhen Hill left the Post Office in 1864, Trollope's brother-in-law, John Tilley, who was then Under-Secretary to the Postmaster General, was appointed to the vacant position. Trollope applied for Tilley's old post but was passed over in favour of a subordinate, Frank Ives Scudamore. In the autumn of 1867, Trollope resigned his position at the Post Office, having by that time saved enough to generate an income equal to the pension he would lose by leaving before the age of 60.\nBeverley campaign.\nTrollope had long dreamt of taking a seat in the House of Commons. As a civil servant, however, he was ineligible for such a position. His resignation from the Post Office\nremoved this disability, and he almost immediately began seeking a seat for which he might stand. In 1868, he agreed to stand as a Liberal candidate in the borough of Beverley, in the East Riding of Yorkshire.\nParty leaders apparently took advantage of Trollope's eagerness to stand and of his willingness to spend money on a campaign. Beverley had a long history of vote-buying and of intimidation by employers and others. Every election since 1857 had been followed by an election petition alleging corruption, and it was estimated that 300 of the 1,100 voters in 1868 would sell their votes. The task of a Liberal candidate was not to win the election but to give the Conservative candidates an opportunity to display overt corruption, which could then be used to disqualify them.\nTrollope described his period of campaigning in Beverley as \"the most wretched fortnight of my manhood\".\nHe spent a total of \u00a3400 on his campaign. The election was held on 17 November 1868; the novelist finished last of four candidates, with the victory going to the two Conservatives. A petition was filed, and a Royal Commission investigated the circumstances of the election; its findings of extensive and widespread corruption drew nationwide attention, and led to the disfranchisement of the borough in 1870. The fictional Percycross election in \"Ralph the Heir\" and the Tankerville election in \"Phineas Redux\" are closely based on the Beverley campaign.\nLater years.\nAfter the defeat at Beverley, Trollope concentrated entirely on his literary career. While continuing to produce novels rapidly, he also edited the \"St Paul's Magazine\", which published several of his novels in serial form.\n\"Between 1859 and 1875, Trollope visited the United States five times. Among American literary men he developed a wide acquaintance, which included Lowell, Holmes, Emerson, Agassiz, Hawthorne, Longfellow, Bret Harte, Artemus Ward, Joaquin Miller, Mark Twain, Henry James, William Dean Howells, James T. Fields, Charles Norton, John Lothrop Motley, and Richard Henry Dana Jr.\"\nTrollope wrote a travel book focusing on his experiences in the US during the American Civil War titled \"North America\" (1862). Aware that his mother had published a very unsympathetic travel book about the U.S. (\"Domestic Manners of the Americans\") and having markedly better feelings about the United States, Trollope resolved to write a work which would \"add to the good feeling which should exist between two nations which ought to love each other.\" During his time in America, Trollope, a committed abolitionist who was opposed to the system of slavery as it existed in the South, remained a steadfast supporter of the Union.\nIn 1871, Trollope made his first trip to Australia, arriving in Melbourne on 28 July 1871 on the SS \"Great Britain\", with his wife and their cook. The trip was made to visit their younger son, Frederick, who was a sheep farmer near Grenfell, New South Wales. He wrote his novel \"Lady Anna\" during the voyage. In Australia, he spent a year and two days \"descending mines, mixing with shearers and rouseabouts, riding his horse into the loneliness of the bush, touring lunatic asylums, and exploring coast and plain by steamer and stagecoach\". He visited the penal colony of Port Arthur and its cemetery, Isle of the Dead. Despite that, the Australian press was uneasy, fearing he would misrepresent Australia in his writings. Their fear was based on rather negative writings about America by his mother, Fanny, and by Charles Dickens. On his return, Trollope published a book, \"Australia and New Zealand\" (1873). It contained both positive and negative comments. On the positive side, it found a comparative absence of class consciousness and praised aspects of Perth, Melbourne, Hobart and Sydney. However, he was negative about Adelaide's river, the towns of Bendigo and Ballarat, and the Aboriginal population. What most angered the Australian papers, though, were his comments \"accusing Australians of being braggarts\".\nTrollope returned to Australia in 1875 to help his son close down his failed farming business. He found that the resentment created by his accusations of bragging remained. Even when he died in 1882, Australian papers still \"smouldered\", referring yet again to these accusations, and refusing to fully praise or recognize his achievements.\nIn the late 1870s, Trollope furthered his travel writing career by visiting southern Africa, including the Cape Colony and the Boer Republics of the Orange Free State and the Transvaal. Admitting that he initially assumed that the Afrikaners had \"retrograded from civilization, and had become savage, barbarous, and unkindly\", Trollope wrote at length on Boer cultural habits, claiming that the \"roughness\u00a0... Spartan simplicity and the dirtiness of the Boer's way of life [merely] resulted from his preference for living in rural isolation, far from any town.\" In the completed work, which Trollope simply titled \"South Africa\" (1877), he described the mining town of Kimberly as being \"one of the most interesting places on the face of the earth.\"\nIn 1880, Trollope moved to the village of South Harting in West Sussex. He spent some time in Ireland in the early 1880s researching his last, unfinished, novel, \"The Landleaguers\". It is said that he was extremely distressed by the violence of the Land War.\nDeath.\nTrollope died in Marylebone, London in 1882 and is buried in Kensal Green Cemetery, near the grave of his contemporary, Wilkie Collins.\nWorks and reputation.\nTrollope's first major success came with \"The Warden\" (1855)\u2014the first of six novels set in the fictional county of \"Barsetshire\" (often collectively referred to as the \"Chronicles of Barsetshire\"), dealing primarily with the clergy and landed gentry. \"Barchester Towers\" (1857) has probably become the best-known of these. Trollope's other major series, the Palliser novels, which overlap with the Barsetshire novels, concerned itself with politics, with the wealthy, industrious Plantagenet Palliser (later Duke of Omnium) and his delightfully spontaneous, even richer wife Lady Glencora featured prominently. However, as with the Barsetshire series, many other well-developed characters populated each novel and in one, \"The Eustace Diamonds\", the Pallisers play only a small role.\nTrollope's popularity and critical success diminished in his later years, but he continued to write prolifically, and some of his later novels have acquired a good reputation. In particular, critics, who concur that the book was not popular when published, generally acknowledge the sweeping satire \"The Way We Live Now\" (1875) as his masterpiece. In all, Trollope wrote 47 novels, 42 short stories, and five travel books, as well as nonfiction books titled \"Thackeray\" (1879) and \"Lord Palmerston\" (1882).\nAfter his death, Trollope's \"An Autobiography\" appeared and was a bestseller in London. Trollope's downfall in the eyes of the critics stemmed largely from this volume. Even during his writing career, reviewers tended increasingly to shake their heads over his prodigious output, but when Trollope revealed that he strictly adhered to a daily writing quota, and admitted that he wrote for money, he confirmed his critics' worst fears. Writers were expected to wait for inspiration, not to follow a schedule.\nJulian Hawthorne, an American writer, critic and friend of Trollope, while praising him as a man, calling him \"a credit to England and to human nature, and ... [deserving] to be numbered among the darlings of mankind\", also said that \"he has done great harm to English fictitious literature by his novels\".\nHenry James expressed mixed opinions of Trollope. The young James wrote some scathing reviews of Trollope's novels (\"The Belton Estate\", for instance, he called \"a stupid book, without a single thought or idea in it ... a sort of mental pabulum\"). He also made it clear that he disliked Trollope's narrative method; Trollope's cheerful interpolations into his novels about how his storylines could take any twist their author wanted did not appeal to James's sense of artistic integrity. However, James thoroughly appreciated Trollope's attention to realistic detail, as he wrote in an essay shortly after the novelist's death:\nHis [Trollope's] great, his inestimable merit was a complete appreciation of the usual. ... [H]e \"felt\" all daily and immediate things as well as saw them; felt them in a simple, direct, salubrious way, with their sadness, their gladness, their charm, their comicality, all their obvious and measurable meanings. ... Trollope will remain one of the most trustworthy, though not one of the most eloquent, of the writers who have helped the heart of man to know itself. ... A race is fortunate when it has a good deal of the sort of imagination\u2014of imaginative feeling\u2014that had fallen to the share of Anthony Trollope; and in this possession our English race is not poor.\nWriters including William Thackeray, George Eliot and Wilkie Collins admired and befriended Trollope, and Eliot noted that she could not have embarked on so ambitious a project as \"Middlemarch\" without the precedent set by Trollope in his own novels of the fictional\u2014yet thoroughly alive\u2014county of Barsetshire. Other contemporaries of Trollope praised his understanding of the quotidian world of institutions, official life, and daily business; he is one of the few novelists who find the office a creative environment. W. H. Auden wrote of Trollope: \"Of all novelists in any country, Trollope best understands the role of money. Compared with him, even Balzac is too romantic.\"\nAs trends in the world of the novel moved increasingly towards subjectivity and artistic experimentation, Trollope's standing with critics suffered. But Lord David Cecil noted in 1934 that \"Trollope is still very much alive ... and among fastidious readers.\" He noted that Trollope was \"conspicuously free from the most characteristic Victorian faults\". In the 1940s, Trollopians made further attempts to resurrect his reputation; he enjoyed a critical renaissance in the 1960s, and again in the 1990s. Some critics today have a particular interest in Trollope's portrayal of women\u2014he caused remarks even in his own day for his deep insight and sensitivity to the inner conflicts caused by the position of women in Victorian society.\nIn the early 1990s, interest in Trollope increased. A Trollope Society flourishes in the United Kingdom, as does its sister society in the United States. In 2011, the University of Kansas's Department of English, in collaboration with the Hall Center for the Humanities and in partnership with \"The Fortnightly Review\", began awarding an annual Trollope Prize. The Prize was established to focus attention on Trollope's work and career.\nNotable fans have included Alec Guinness, who never travelled without a Trollope novel; the former British prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Sir John Major; the first Canadian prime minister, John A. Macdonald; the economist John Kenneth Galbraith; the merchant banker Siegmund Warburg, who said that \"reading Anthony Trollope surpassed a university education\"; the English judge Lord Denning; the American novelists Sue Grafton, Dominick Dunne, and Timothy Hallinan; the poet Edward Fitzgerald; the artist Edward Gorey, who kept a complete set of his books; the American author Robert Caro; the playwright David Mamet; the soap opera writer Harding Lemay; the screenwriter and novelist Julian Fellowes; liberal political philosopher Anthony de Jasay and theologian Stanley Hauerwas.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nLiterary allusions in Trollope's novels have been identified and traced by Professor James A. Means, in two articles which appeared in \"The Victorian Newsletter\" (vols. 78 and 82) in 1990 and 1992, respectively."}
{"id": "70161", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70161", "title": "Wiradjuri", "text": "Aboriginal Australian people\nThe Wiradjuri people (; ) are a group of Aboriginal Australian people from central New South Wales, united by common descent through kinship and shared traditions. They survived as skilled hunter-fisher-gatherers, in family groups or clans, and many still use knowledge of hunting and gathering techniques as part of their customary life.\nIn the 21st century, major Wiradjuri groups live in Condobolin, Peak Hill, Narrandera and Griffith. There are significant populations at Wagga Wagga and Leeton and smaller groups at West Wyalong, Parkes, Dubbo, Forbes, Cootamundra, Darlington Point, Cowra and Young.\nName.\nThe Wiradjuri autonym is derived from , meaning \"no\" or \"not\", with the comitative suffix or meaning \"having\". That the Wiradjuri said , as opposed to some other word for \"no\", was seen as a distinctive feature of their speech, and several other tribes in New South Wales, to the west of the Great Dividing Range, are similarly named after their own words for \"no\". A similar distinction was made between Romance languages in medieval France, with the \"langues d'oc\" and the \"langues d'o\u00efl\" distinguished by their word for \"yes\".\nIn his book \"Aboriginal Tribes of Australia\" (1974), Norman Tindale wrote that \"Wiradjuri\" was one of several terms coined later, after the 1890s had seen a \"rash of such terms\", following the publication of a work by ethnologist John Fraser. In 1892, Fraser had published a revised and expanded edition of Lancelot Threlkeld's 1834 work on the Awabakal language, \"An Australian Grammar\", in which he created his own names for groupings, such as Yunggai, Wachigari and Yakkajari.\nTindale says that some of the later terms had entered the literature, although not based on fieldwork and lacking Aboriginal support, as artificial, collective names for his \"Great Tribes\" of New South Wales. He writes that there was such a \"literary need for major groupings that [Fraser] set out to provide them for New South Wales, coining entirely artificial terms for his 'Great tribes'. These were not based on field research and lacked aboriginal support. His names such as Yunggai, Wachigari and Yakkajari can be ignored as artifacts...During the 1890s the idea spread and soon there was a rash of such terms...Some of these have entered, unfortunately, into popular literature, despite their dubious origins.\"\nHe lists Wiradjuri (NSW) as one of these artificial names, along with Bangarang (Pangerang) (Vic.); Booandik (Vic. &amp; SA); Barkunjee (Barkindji) (NSW), Kurnai (Vic.), Thurrawal (Dharawal) (NSW), and Malegoondeet (?) (Vic.). He also mentions R. H. Mathews, A. W. Howitt and John Mathew as promulgators of the \"nations\" concept. However, Tindale refers to Wiradjuri in his own work (p.\u00a0200): \"Wiradjuri 'Wiradjuri (Wi'raduri)\".\nWiradjuri language.\nWiradjuri is a Pama\u2013Nyungan family and classified as a member of the small Wiradhuric branch of Australian languages of Central New South Wales.\nThe Wiradjuri language is effectively extinct, but attempts are underway to revive it, with a reconstructed grammar, based on earlier ethnographic materials and wordlists and the memories of Wiradjuri families, which is now used to teach the language in schools. This reclamation work was originally propelled by elder Stan Grant and John Rudder who had previously studied Australian Aboriginal languages in Arnhem Land.\nCountry.\nThe Wiradjuri are the largest Aboriginal group in New South Wales. They once occupied a vast area in central New South Wales, on the plains running north and south to the west of the Blue Mountains. The area was known as \"the land of the three rivers\", the \"Wambuul\" (Macquarie), the \"Kalare\" later known as the Lachlan and the Murrumbidgee, or \"Murrumbidjeri\".\nNorman Tindale estimated the territorial range of the Wiradjuri tribal lands at . Their eastern borders ran from north to south from above Mudgee, down to the foothills of the Blue Mountains east of Lithgow and Oberon, and east of Cowra, Young and Tumut and south to the upper Murray at Albury and east to about Tumbarumba. The southern border ran to Howlong. Its western reaches went along Billabong Creek to beyond Mossgiel. They extended southwest to the vicinity of Hay and Narrandera. Condobolin southwards to Booligal, Carrathool, Wagga Wagga, Cootamundra, Parkes, Trundle; Gundagai, Boorowa, and Rylstone, Wellington, and Carcoar all lay within Wiradjuri territory.\nThe Murray River forms the Wiradjuri's southern boundary and the change from woodland to open grassland marks their eastern boundary.\nSocial organisation.\nThe Wiradjuri were organised into bands. Norman Tindale quotes Alfred William Howitt as mentioning several of these local groups of the tribe:\nBurial rite.\nThe Wiradjuri, together with the Gamilaraay (who however used them in bora ceremonies), were particularly known for their use of carved trees which functioned as taphoglyphs, marking the burial site of a notable medicine-man, ceremonial leader, warrior or orator of a tribe. On the death of a distinguished Wiradjuri, initiated men would strip the bark off a tree to allow them to incise symbols on the side of the trunk which faced the burial mound. The craftsmanship on remaining examples of this funeral artwork displays notable artistic power. Four still stand near Molong at the Grave of Yuranigh.\nThey are generally to be found near rivers where the softer earth allowed easier burial. Alfred William Howitt remarked that these trees incised with taphoglyphs served both as transit points to allow mythological cultural heroes to ascend to, and descend from, the firmament as well as a means for the deceased to return to the sky.\nLifestyle.\nThe Wiradjuri diet included yabbies and fish such as Murray cod from the rivers. In dry seasons, they ate kangaroos, emus and food gathered from the land, including fruit, nuts, yam daisies (\"Microseris lanceolata\"), wattle seeds, and orchid tubers. The Wiradjuri travelled into Alpine areas in the summer to feast on Bogong moths.\nThe Wiradjuri were also known for their handsome possum-skin cloaks stitched together from several possum furs. Governor Macquarie was presented with one of these cloaks by a Wiradjuri man when he visited Bathurst in 1815.\nBritish penetration.\nWiradjuri territory was first penetrated by British colonists in 1813. In 1822 George Suttor took up an extensive lot of land, later known as Brucedale Station, after Wiradjuri guides showed him an area with ample water sources. Suttor learnt their language, and befriended Windradyne, nicknamed \"Saturday\", and attributed conflict to the harshness of his own people's behaviour, since the Wiradjuri were in his view, fond of white people, as they would call them. Clashes between the British settlers and the Wiradjuri, however, multiplied as the influx of colonists increased, and became known as the Bathurst Wars. The occupation of their lands and their cultivation caused famine among the Wiradjuri, who had a different notion of what constituted property. In the 1850s there were still corroborees around Mudgee, but there were fewer clashes.\nWiradjuri culture in fiction.\nThe short story \"Death in the Dawntime\", originally published in \"The Mammoth Book of Historical Detectives\" (Mike Ashley, editor; 1995), is a murder mystery that takes place entirely among the Wiradjuri people before the arrival of Europeans in Australia.\nIn Bryce Courtenay's novel \"Jessica\", the plot is centred in Wiradjuri region. Jessica's best friend (Mary Simpson) was from Wiradjuri.\nNoel Beddoe's novel \"The Yalda Crossing\" also explores Wiradjuri history from an early settler perspective, bringing to life a little-known massacre that occurred in the 1830s. \nAndy Kissane's poem, \"The Station Owner's Daughter, Narrandera\" tells a story about the aftermath of that same massacre, and was the inspiration for Alex Ryan's short film, \"Ngurrumbang\".\nAnita Heiss's historical novel, \"Bila Yarrudhanggalangdhuray\", set in 1852 around the time of the devastating Gundagai flood, follows the life of a young Wiradjuri woman named Wagadhaany.\nAlternative names.\nThe variety of spellings for the name Wiradjuri is extensive, with over 60 ways of transcribing the word registered.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70162", "revid": "12782318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70162", "title": "Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter", "text": "English military commander\nThomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter (c. January 1377\u00a0\u2013 31 December 1426) was an English military commander during the Hundred Years' War, and briefly Chancellor of England. He was the third of the four children born to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and his mistress Katherine Swynford. To overcome their problematic parentage, his parents were married in 1396, and he and his siblings were legitimated in 1390 and again in 1397. He married the daughter of Sir Thomas Neville (died 1387) of Hornby, Margaret Neville (born c. 1384). She bore him one son, Henry Beaufort, who died young.\nUnder Henry IV.\nAfter the accession of his half-brother Henry IV, Beaufort was made a Knight of the Garter. In the following years he held various military posts: constable of Ludlow (1402), appointed Admiral of the North (1403), appointed captain of Calais (1407), and Admiral of the North and West (1408\u20131413) he retained the title for life. His most notable action during this decade was commanding the forces against the northern rebellion of 1405.\nHe became Chancellor of England on 31 January 1410, an office he held until 5 January 1412 during a time when King Henry was having trouble with the clergy, and then returned to military matters. Later in 1412 he was created Earl of Dorset.\nUnder Henry V.\nOn the accession of Henry V, Beaufort was appointed Lieutenant of Aquitaine in 1413 and then captain of Harfleur in 1415. He spent the next few years in Normandy, serving as lieutenant of that duchy from 1416. He was created Duke of Exeter for life that same year.\nBeaufort returned to England in 1417 while the king was still in Normandy in order to deal with problems in Scotland. In 1418, he went back to Normandy with a large force, taking part in the sieges of \u00c9vreux, Ivry, and Rouen. After the fall of Rouen in 1419, he was made captain of the city and conquered several more of the smaller Norman cities. Finally, in 1419, he took the great fortress of Ch\u00e2teau Gaillard, midway between Rouen and Paris, after a six-month siege.\nDuring this time, Henry V began a policy of creating Norman titles for his aristocrats, with Beaufort being made Count of Harcourt in 1418.\nIn 1420, Beaufort helped negotiate the treaty of Troyes. The next year he was captured at the Battle of Baug\u00e9, where his nephew, Thomas of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Clarence, was killed.\nBeaufort was one of the executors of Henry V's will, and so returned to England in 1422 after the latter's death. He served on the governing council for the infant King Henry VI, though it is likely he spent some time in France as well.\nThe character of Exeter in Shakespeare's play \"Henry V\" is based on Beaufort, although Beaufort was not actually created duke of Exeter until after the Battle of Agincourt; in 1415 he was still earl of Dorset. He also appears in \"Henry VI, Part 1\".\nHe is reported to have died on 31 December 1426, although 27 December 1426 or 1 January 1427 have been suggested as alternative dates. All of his titles (Duke of Exeter, Earl of Dorset and Count of Harcourt) became extinct. The Duchy of Exeter was restored to the Holland family; the Earldom of Dorset was recreated for Edmund, Count of Mortain, his nephew.\nArms.\nAs a legitimated grandson of the sovereign, Beaufort bore the arms of the kingdom, differenced by a \"bordure gobony azure and ermine\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70167", "revid": "744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70167", "title": "Woradjera", "text": ""}
{"id": "70172", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70172", "title": "Drones Club", "text": "Fictional club in stories by P. G. Wodehouse\nThe Drones Club is a recurring fictional location in the stories of British humorist P. G. Wodehouse. It is a gentlemen's club in London. Many of Wodehouse's Jeeves and Blandings Castle stories feature the club or its members.\nVarious members of the club appear in stories included in the \"Drones Club series\", which contains stories not already included in other series. Most of the Drones Club stories star either Freddie Widgeon or Bingo Little. The club is initially introduced as a minor element in Wodehouse's 1920 novel \"Jill the Reckless\"; it subsequently appears with more prominence across many Wodehouse stories and novels. The Drones Club makes its final appearance as a setting in 1972's \"Pearls, Girls and Monty Bodkin\".\nThe name \"Drones\" has been used by several real-life clubs and restaurants.\nOverview.\nThe Drones Club is in Mayfair, London, located in Dover Street, off Piccadilly. A drone being a male bee that does no work of its own and lives off the labour of others, it aptly describes the late 1920s to early 1930s stereotype of rich, idle young men, though some of the club members have jobs and even careers.\nAs decided by a vote of the club's members, the Drones Club tie is a striking \"rich purple\". A Drones Club scarf is also mentioned.\nWodehouse based the Drones Club on a combination of three real London clubs: the Bachelors' Club (which existed around the turn of the century), Buck's Club (established 1919), and a dash of the Bath Club for its swimming pool's ropes and rings. The fictional Drones barman, McGarry, has the same surname as the Buck's first bartender, a Mr McGarry (Buck's barman from 1919 to 1941, credited with creating the Buck's Fizz and Sidecar cocktails). However Evelyn Waugh declared that the Drones did not resemble any real club in 1920s London.\nA real club has been based at 40 Dover Street since 1893, The Arts Club. Other gentlemen's clubs which have existed on Dover Street but are now dissolved include the Bath Club, the Junior Naval and Military Club, and the Scottish Club, as well as two mixed-sex clubs, the Albemarle Club and the Empress Club. None of these were considered among London's 'premier' clubs of the kind found on St James's Street and Pall Mall, and so their ambience often had something of the raucous informality of the fictional Drones Club.\nAbout a dozen club members are major or secondary recurring characters in the Wodehouse stories. In addition to Bertie Wooster (Jeeves stories), Pongo Twistleton (Uncle Fred stories), Rupert Psmith (Psmith stories), and Freddie Threepwood (Blandings stories), prominent recurring drones include Bingo Little and Freddie Widgeon, plus Monty Bodkin, Barmy Fotheringay-Phipps, Tuppy Glossop, Catsmeat Potter-Pirbright, Archibald Mulliner, and the club millionaire Oofy Prosser.\nStories.\nAmong the Wodehouse works, what was later dubbed the \"Drones Club series\" is a loose set of separate stories told by various narrators about members of the Drones Club. Many of the stories are told at the club or have some events happening at the club.\nThe main canon consists of 21 short stories (nine Bingo Little, eight Freddie Widgeon, and four other Drones, including the one introducing Pongo Twistleton and his Uncle Fred), as eventually collected in the omnibus:\nThe same set of short stories is also available in their original collections:\nSix novels about the adventures of Drones Club Members as main protagonist:\nRelated are all stories about those Drones Club members already part of another series (Jeeves and Bertie, Blandings's Freddie Threepwood, Uncle Fred and Pongo, Psmith, Mr Mulliner's nephew Archibald Mulliner), but more especially:\nRelatable is one story, which features the club and a Drone as a secondary character, and marks the first mention of the Drones Club:\nMany more stories simply include a Drones member in some scenes, or have mentions of club members.\nNot included are all identical stories published under other titles (in magazines or U.S. versions), or \"recycled\" stories, especially:\nEggs, Beans, and Crumpets.\nMost of the Drones short stories are also \"Eggs, Beans, and Crumpets stories\". These stories feature unnamed club members, each referred to as an \"Egg\", \"Bean\", or \"Crumpet\". This is allegedly based on the habit they have of addressing each other as \"old egg\", \"old bean\", or \"my dear old crumpet\", though characters in the stories almost never address other characters by these nicknames. A few later stories introduce a fourth subset of Drones Club members known as \"Piefaces\".\nMany of the Drones Club stories begin with these nondescript members talking about the latest exploits of Freddie Widgeon, Pongo Twistleton, Bingo Little, or another of their number. The story then transitions into a particularly well-informed Crumpet narrating the story as he tells it to an uninformed Egg or Bean:\n \"Beau Widgeon?\" said the Egg, impressed. \"What ho!\" A Crumpet shook his head. \"You won't catch Freddie joining any Foreign Legion, once he gets on to the fact that it means missing his morning cup of tea. [...]\" (in \"Noblesse Oblige\")\n \"[...] I allude, of course, to the Bella Mae Jobson affair.\" The Bean asked what the Bella Mae Jobson affair was, and the Crumpet, expressing surprise that he had not heard of it, said that it was the affair of Bella Mae Jobson. (in \"The Editor Regrets\")\n \"He can't do that here,\" said an Egg, [...] \"Hoy!\" he went on, addressing the Crumpet, who had entered as he spoke. (in \"The Word in Season\")\nWodehouse had already used this technique in the stories told by his Mr Mulliner, who refers to his anonymous interlocutors by the name of their drink.\nMembers.\nThe total number of members is not established. At the Drones Club weekend in Le Touquet, France, were \"about 87 members\", and not all of them crossed the Channel (such as Pongo Twistleton and Horace Pendlebury-Davenport).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReal Drones Clubs.\nSome real \"Drones\" clubs or restaurants exist or have existed, including:\nReferences, notes and sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70173", "revid": "40753954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70173", "title": "Ethical", "text": ""}
{"id": "70174", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70174", "title": "Moral", "text": "Message that is conveyed or lesson to be learned from a story or event\nA moral (from Latin \"mor\u0101lis\") is a message that is conveyed or a lesson to be learned from a story or event. The moral may be left to the hearer, reader, or viewer to determine for themselves, or may be explicitly encapsulated in a maxim. A moral is a lesson in a story or real life.\nFinding morals.\nAs an example of an explicit maxim, at the end of Aesop's fable of the Tortoise and the Hare, in which the plodding and determined tortoise won a race against the much-faster yet extremely arrogant hare, the stated moral is \"slow and steady wins the race\". However, other morals can often be taken from the story itself; for instance, that arrogance or overconfidence in one's abilities may lead to failure or the loss of an event, race, or contest.\nThe use of stock characters is a means of conveying the moral of the story by eliminating the complexity of personality and depicting the issues arising in the interplay between the characters, enabling the writer to generate a clear message. With more rounded characters, such as those typically found in Shakespeare's plays, the moral may be more nuanced but no less present, and the writer may point it out in other ways (see, for example, the Prologue to \"Romeo and Juliet\").\nArts.\nThroughout the history of recorded literature, most fictional writing has served not only to entertain but also to instruct, inform, or improve their audiences or readership. In classical drama, for example, the role of the chorus was to comment on the proceedings and draw out a message for the audience to take away with them. At the same time, the novels of Charles Dickens are a vehicle for morals regarding the social and economic system of Victorian Britain.\nMorals have typically been more obvious in children's literature, sometimes even being introduced with the phrase: \"https:// \u2026\". Such explicit techniques have grown increasingly out of fashion in modern storytelling, and are now usually only included for ironic purposes.\nSome examples are: \"Better to be safe than sorry\" (precautionary principle), \"The evil deserves no aid\", \"Be friends with whom you don't like\", \"Don't judge people by the way they look\", \"Slow and steady wins the race\", \"Once started down the dark path, forever will it hold your destiny\", and \"Your overconfidence is your weakness\". Aesop's Fables is one of the most famous collections of stories with strong moral conclusions.\nMoral tales.\nMoral tales were one of the main purposes of literature during 1780\u20131830, especially in children's literature. Part of the reason for this was the writings of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the 18th century, which brought attention to children as an audience for literature. Following in their line of thought, Thomas Day (1748\u20131789) wrote \"Sandford and Merton\", elevating the outstanding morals of one young boy above the rapscallion nature of another. Maria Edgeworth (1776\u20131849) was another prominent author of moral tales, writing about how a wise adult can educate a child; one of her more famous stories is \"The Purple Jar\". During this time, the theme of \"a young heroine or hero gaining wisdom and maturity\" was taken up by many other writers.\nThe ability of children to derive moral lessons from stories and visual media develops around the age of 9 or 10 years.\nResearch in developmental psychology has shown that children\u2019s ability to understand and apply moral lessons from stories typically begins to develop between the ages of 9 and 10, as they become more capable of abstract thinking.\nIn more recent children's literature, moral lessons continue to be conveyed through fantasy and adventure stories. For example, in J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter series, themes of friendship, courage, and standing up for what is right are central moral messages that resonate with young readers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"moral\" at Wiktionary"}
{"id": "70175", "revid": "50954424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70175", "title": "Wilhelm Marr", "text": "German journalist who popularized the term antisemitism (1819\u20131904)\nFriedrich Wilhelm Adolph Marr (November 16, 1819 \u2013 July 17, 1904) was a German journalist and politician, who popularized the term \"antisemitism\" (1881).\nLife.\nMarr was born in Magdeburg as the only son of an actor and stage director. He went to a primary school in Hanover, then to a high school in Braunschweig. In Hamburg and Bremen, he was an apprentice in commerce, then he joined his father in Vienna, who had been engaged by the Burgtheater. There he worked as an employee in two Jewish firms. Later, Marr stated that he had unjustly lost his job.\nIn 1841, he went to Z\u00fcrich, where he became acquainted with political \u00e9migr\u00e9s (like Georg Herwegh, Julius Fr\u00f6bel, and August Follen), most of whom were members of the democratic or liberal leftist movements of the early 19th century.\nIn 1843, Marr was expelled from Z\u00fcrich under the accusation that he had furthered communist activities. He turned to Lausanne, where he joined Hermann D\u00f6leke and Julius Standau, the founders of the secret L\u00e9man-Bund, which belonged to the \"Junges Deutschland\" (Young German Movement). Marr eventually became the head of the secret society and began to lean towards anarchism and atheism, founded another secret society, the \"Schweizerischer Arbeiterbund\" (Swiss Worker's Union) and edited the \"Bl\u00e4tter der Gegenwart f\u00fcr soziales Leben\" (Present-Day Papers for Social Life, 1844/45). In 1845 he was expelled from Lausanne, too, and went to Hamburg. There he became a political journalist and published the satirical magazine \"Mephistopheles\" (1847/48\u20131852). He belonged to the leftists of the radical-democratic \"party\" and was a delegate to the National Assembly in Frankfurt after the March-Revolution of 1848. After the ultimate failure of the revolution he became, like so many other former revolutionaries, a proponent of the idea of German unification under Prussian leadership.\nIn 1852, Marr went abroad, to Costa Rica, where he tried to make a living as a businessman. Lacking success, he returned to Hamburg, worked again as a journalist, and in 1854 he married Georgine Johanna Bertha Callenbach, daughter of a Jewish businessman who had renounced his faith.\nIn 1859, Marr was elected member of the Hamburg Parliament. In an article, in the \"Courier an der Weser\" on 13 June 1862, he attacked the elected liberal speaker of the house, the Jewish lawyer Isaac Wolffson, accusing him and other Jews of betraying the democratic movement and abusing their emancipation in order to enter the city's merchant class. After extensive public protests, Marr was not reelected in 1862.\nMarr and his first wife were divorced in 1873. In 1874, Marr married a Jewish woman, Helene Sophia Emma Maria Behrend, who died within the same year. Marr's first marriage was an unhappy one, and despite being financially stable, Marr was in emotional distress. Marr's second marriage was a happy one, but then his wife and child died within days of each other, which left Marr in great distress and bitter towards the world. In 1875, there was a third marriage, to Jenny Therese Kornick (whose parents lived in a Christian-Jewish mixed marriage), who bore him a son. In 1877, this marriage was ended in divorce too; Marr's last wife was Clara Maria Kelch, daughter of a Hamburg working man.\nAntisemitism.\nMarr's speeches and articles showed first indications of antisemitism in 1848. He was influenced by the \"Burschenschaft\" movement of the early nineteenth century, which developed out of frustration among German students with the failure of the Congress of Vienna to create a unified state out of all the territories inhabited by the German people. The Burschenschaft rejected the participation of Jewish and other non-German minorities as members, \"unless they prove that they are anxious to develop within themselves a Christian-German spirit\" (a decision of the \"\"Burschenschaft\" Congress of 1818\"). While they were opposed to the participation of Jews in their movement, similarly to Heinrich von Treitschke later, they did allow the possibility of the Jewish (and other) minorities to participate in the German state if they were to abandon all signs of ethnic and religious distinctiveness and assimilate into the German \"Volk\".\nLeague of antisemites.\nMarr rejected the premise of assimilation as a means for Jews to become Germans. In his pamphlet \"Der Sieg des Judenthums \u00fcber das Germanenthum\" (The Victory of Judaism over Germandom, 1879) he introduced the idea that Germans and Jews were locked in a longstanding conflict, the origins of which he attributed to race\u2014and that the Jews were winning. He argued that Jewish emancipation resulting from German liberalism had allowed the Jews to control German finance and industry. Furthermore, since this conflict was based on the different qualities of the Jewish and German races, it could not be resolved even by the total assimilation of the Jewish population. \nAccording to Marr, the struggle between Jews and Germans would only be resolved by the victory of one and the ultimate death of the other. A Jewish victory, he concluded, would result in \"finis Germaniae\" (the end of the German people). To prevent this from happening, in 1879 Marr founded the League of Antisemites (Antisemiten-Liga), the first German organization committed specifically to combating the alleged threat to Germany posed by the Jews and advocating their forced removal from the country.\nThe Pan-German League, founded in 1891, originally allowed for the membership of Jews, provided they were fully assimilated into German culture. It was only in 1912, eight years after Marr's death, that the League declared racism as an underlying principle. Nevertheless, Marr was a major link in the evolving chain of German racism that erupted into genocide during the Nazi era.\nAccording to Moshe Zimmermann in \"Wilhelm Marr: The Patriarch of Anti-Semitism\", a book written 100 years after the fact, toward the end of his life Marr came to renounce antisemitism, arguing that social upheaval in Germany had been the result of the Industrial Revolution and conflict between political movements. This book was never published by Marr, only as text cited by Zimmermann.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70176", "revid": "3497737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70176", "title": "Frank Harris", "text": "Irish-American writer (1855\u20131931)\nFrank Harris (14 February 1856 \u2013 26 August 1931) was an Irish-American editor, novelist, short story writer, journalist and publisher, who was friendly with many well-known figures of his day.\nBorn in Ireland, he emigrated to the United States early in life, working in a variety of unskilled jobs before attending the University of Kansas to study law. After graduation, he quickly tired of his legal career and returned to Europe sometime prior to 1882. He traveled in continental Europe before settling in London to pursue a career in journalism. In 1921, in his sixties, he became a US citizen. Though he attracted much attention during his life for his irascible, aggressive personality, editorship of famous periodicals, and friendship with the talented and famous, he is remembered mainly for his multiple-volume memoir \"My Life and Loves\", which was banned in countries around the world for its sexual explicitness.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nHarris was born James Thomas Harris in 1855, in Galway, Ireland, to Welsh parents. His father, Thomas Vernon Harris, was a naval officer from Fishguard, Pembrokeshire, Wales. While living with his older brother he was, for a year or more, a pupil at The Royal School, Armagh. At the age of 12 he was sent to Wales to continue his education as a boarder at the Ruabon Grammar School in Denbighshire, a time he was to remember later in \"My Life and Loves\". Harris was unhappy at the school and ran away within a year.\nHe emigrated to the United States in late 1869, arriving in New York City virtually penniless. The 14-year-old took a series of odd jobs to support himself, working first as a boot black, a porter, a general laborer, and a construction worker on the erection of the Brooklyn Bridge. Harris would later turn these early occupational experiences into art, incorporating tales from them into his book \"The Bomb.\"\nFrom New York Harris moved to the American Midwest, settling in the country's second largest city, Chicago, where he took a job as a hotel clerk and eventually a manager. Owing to Chicago's central place in the meat packing industry, Harris made the acquaintance of various cattlemen, who inspired him to leave the big city to take up work as a cowboy. Eventually growing tired of life in the cattle industry, he enrolled at the University of Kansas, where he studied law and earned a degree, gaining admission to the Kansas state bar association.\nIn 1878, in Brighton, England, he married Florence Ruth Adams, who died the following year.\nReturn to Europe.\nHarris was not cut out to be a lawyer and soon decided to turn his attention to literature. He moved to England in 1882, later traveling to various cities in Germany, Austria, France, and Greece on his literary quest. He worked briefly as an American newspaper correspondent before settling down in England to seriously pursue the vocation of journalism.\nHarris first came to general notice as the editor of a series of London publications, including the \"Evening News\", the \"Fortnightly Review\" and the \"Saturday Review\", the last-named being the high point of his journalistic career, with H. G. Wells and George Bernard Shaw as regular contributors.\nFrom 1908 to 1914 Harris concentrated on working as a novelist, authoring a series of popular books such as \"The Bomb,\" \"The Man Shakespeare,\" and \"The Yellow Ticket and Other Stories\". With the advent of World War I in the summer of 1914, Harris decided to return to the United States.\nFrom 1916 to 1922 he edited the U.S. edition of \"Pearson's Magazine,\" a popular monthly which combined short story fiction with socialist-tinted features on contemporary news topics. One issue of the publication was banned from the mails by Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson during the period of American participation in the Great War. Despite this Harris managed to navigate the delicate situation which faced the left-wing press and to keep \"Pearson's Magazine\" functioning and solvent during the war years.\nHarris became an American citizen in April 1921. In 1922 he travelled to Berlin to publish his best-known work, his autobiography \"My Life and Loves\" (published in four volumes, 1922\u20131927). It is notorious for its graphic descriptions of Harris' purported sexual encounters and for its exaggeration of the scope of his adventures and his role in history. Years later, \"Time\" magazine reflected in its 21 March 1960 issue \"Had he not been a thundering liar, Frank Harris would have been a great autobiographer\u00a0... he had the crippling disqualification that he told the truth, as Max Beerbohm remarked, only 'when his invention flagged'.\" Among the many aspects of Harris' life not treated in the autobiography is his first marriage (to Adams). A fifth volume, supposedly taken from his notes but of doubtful provenance, was published in 1954, long after his death.\nHarris also wrote short stories and novels, two books on Shakespeare, a series of biographical sketches in five volumes under the title \"Contemporary Portraits\" and biographies of his friends Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw. His attempts at playwriting were less successful: only \"Mr. and Mrs. Daventry\" (1900) (which may have been based on an idea by Oscar Wilde) was produced on the stage.\nDeath and legacy.\nMarried three times, Harris died at 9 Rue de la Buffa in Nice aged 75 on 26 August 1931, of a heart attack. He was subsequently buried at Cimeti\u00e8re Sainte-Marguerite, adjacent to the Cimeti\u00e8re Caucade, in the same city.\nJust after his death a biography written by Hugh Kingsmill (pseudonym of Hugh Kingsmill Lunn) was published.\nCultural references.\nIn 1920, French writer and diplomat Paul Morand met an aged Frank Harris in Nice and borrowed much of his personality to create the character of O'Patah, a larger-than-life writer, publisher and Irish patriot, \"the last of the Irish bards,\" in his short story \"La nuit de Portofino Kulm,\" collected in Morand's \"Ferm\u00e9 la nuit\" (1923).\nIn 1922, Whittaker Chambers published a \"blasphemous\" and \"sacrilegious\" playlet called \"A Play for Puppets\" in \"The Morningside\", a Columbia University student magazine, based on Frank Harris' 1919 play \"Miracle of the Stigmata\", for which Chambers quit school to avoid expulsion. (\"The greater part of it is so plainly sacrilegious that it cannot be reproduced.\")\nIn 1929, Cole Porter's song \"After All, I'm Only a Schoolgirl\" references Harris and \"My Life and Loves\", in a tale about a girl who is learning about adult relationships from a private tutor.\nThe 1934 movie \"The Spectacle Maker\" is an adaptation of Harris's short story \"The Magic Glasses,\" collected in \"Unpath'd Waters\" (1915).\nIn 1936, Harris appeared as a character in the play \"Oscar Wilde\", by Leslie &amp; Sewell Stokes, first produced at London's Gate Theatre Studio (1936) and later at the Fulton Theatre, New York, in 1938, in both cases starring Robert Morley in the title role.\nThe 1958 feature film \"Cowboy\" is an adaptation of the semi-autobiographical novel \"My Reminiscences as a Cowboy\". Harris is played by Jack Lemmon.\nIn 1960, he is seen as a minor character in \"The Trials of Oscar Wilde\" played by Paul Rogers. Harris had specifically warned Wilde against prosecuting Queensberry for criminal libel, which led to his downfall.\nIn a 1972 episode of \"The Edwardians\", he was played by John Bennett.\nSherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson meet Harris in Nicholas Meyer's 1976 novel \"The West End Horror\". Watson comments on Harris' habit of always speaking very loudly.\nA volume by Frank Harris held up the couch in \"Six Big Boobies\" (1985) episode of \"'Allo 'Allo!\".\nOn television, Harris was played by Leonard Rossiter in a 1978 BBC Play of the Week: \"Fearless Frank, or, Tidbits From The Life Of An Adventurer\".\nIn 1980, a musical stage adaptation of \"Fearless Frank\" briefly ran on Broadway at the Princess Theatre, with Niall Toibin in the starring role. It had book and lyrics by Andrew Davies, music by Dave Brown, and was directed by Robert Gillespie. The production ran for 13 previews and 12 performances.\nHarris appears as a vampire in Kim Newman's 1992 novel \"Anno Dracula\", as the mentor and vampire sire of one of the novel's main characters.\nHe is a character in the 1997 Tom Stoppard play \"The Invention of Love\", which deals with the life of A. E. Housman and the Oscar Wilde trials.\nHe appears as a close friend of Oscar Wilde in the award-winning play by Mois\u00e9s Kaufman: \"\".\nHe appears in the first episode of the 2001 miniseries \"The Infinite Worlds of H. G. Wells\", rejecting a story from Wells for being too long and too preposterous.\nIn the ITV series \"Mr Selfridge\" (2013), Samuel West plays a newspaper editor and publisher called Frank Edwards, a character based on Frank Harris.\nIn the crime comedy Pulp, Michael Caine plays a novelist who someone compares to Frank Harris, in which Caine glibly replies, \"Frank was a novice.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70177", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70177", "title": "Jewelweed", "text": ""}
{"id": "70178", "revid": "8319723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70178", "title": "Henri Barbusse", "text": "French author (1873\u20131935)\nHenri Barbusse (; 17 May 1873 \u2013 30 August 1935) was a French novelist, short story writer, journalist, poet and political activist. He began his literary career in the 1890s as a Symbolist poet and continued as a neo-Naturalist novelist; in 1916, he published \"Under Fire\", a novel about World War I based on his experience which is described as one of the earliest works of the Lost Generation movement or as the work which started it; the novel had a major impact on the later writers of the movement, namely on Ernest Hemingway and Erich Maria Remarque. Barbusse is considered one of the important French writers of 1910\u20131939 who mingled the war memories with moral and political meditations.\nBefore World War I, Barbusse was a pacifist, but in 1914, he volunteered for wartime service and was awarded the \"Croix de guerre\"; during the war, he was influenced by the Communists and came to the belief that a Revolution against the imperialist governments would be the only quick way to end the war and to deal with militarism and reaction. In years following the war, his work acquired a definite political orientation; he became a member of the French Communist Party and an Anti-Fascist and an anti-war activist. In the 1930s, he supported the Stalinist regime despite having a friendly relationship with Leon Trotsky in the middle of the 1920s and contributed to Joseph Stalin's personality cult by writing his biography which became a 'canonical' text for the French Stalinists but wasn't in line with the glorification of Stalin in the USSR. He died in 1935 and didn't see the events that followed, like the Moscow trials and the Nazi-Soviet pact.\nHe was a lifelong friend of Albert Einstein.\nLife.\nEarly life and career.\nThe son of a French father and an English mother, Barbusse was born in Asni\u00e8res-sur-Seine, France in 1873. Although he grew up in a small town, he left for Paris in 1889, at age 16. In 1895, he published a poetry collection \"Mourners\" (\"Pleureuses\"), which is sometimes identified as \"neo-Symbolist\".\nIn 1908, Barbusse wrote a novel \"Hell\" (\"L'Enfer\"), in which he described the life of a young Parisian who lives in a boarding house and spies through a hole in his wall on the other boarders and sees birth, death, adultery and lesbianism. The novel produced controversy because of breaking taboos and crossing conventional moral boundaries of the time; this work is identified as 'neo-Naturalist'.\nFirst World War.\nIn 1914, at age 41, he enlisted in the French Army and served on the Western front during World War I. Invalided out of the army three times, Barbusse served in the war for 17\u00a0months, until November 1915, when he was permanently moved into a clerical position due to pulmonary damage, exhaustion, and dysentery. On 8 June 1915, he was awarded the Croix de guerre with citation. In 1916, he participated in the battle of Verdun. He was reformed on 1 June 1917.\nBarbusse first came to fame with the publication of his novel \"Le Feu\" (translated by William Fitzwater Wray as \"Under Fire\") in 1916, which was based on his experiences during World War I. By this time, Barbusse had become a pacifist, and his writing demonstrated his growing hatred of militarism. \"Le Feu\" drew criticism at the time for its harsh naturalism, but won the Prix Goncourt in December 1916.\nPolitical and cultural activities.\nIn January 1918, he left France and moved to Moscow, where he married a Russian woman and joined the Bolshevik Party. His novel, \"Clart\u00e9\", is about an office worker who, while serving in the army, begins to realize that the imperialist war is a crime. Vladimir Lenin commented that this novel was censored in France.\nThe Russian Revolution had a significant influence on Barbusse's life and work. He joined the French Communist Party in 1923 and later travelled back to the Soviet Union. His later works, \"Manifeste aux Intellectuels\" (\"Elevations\") (1930) and others, show a more revolutionary standpoint. Of these, the 1921 \"Le Couteau entre les dents\" (\"The Knife Between My Teeth\") marks Barbusse's siding with Bolshevism and the October Revolution. Barbusse characterized the birth of Soviet Russia as \"the greatest and most beautiful phenomenon in world history\". The book \"Light from the Abyss\" (1919) and the collection of articles \"Words of a Fighting Man\" (1920) contain calls for the overthrow of capitalism. In 1925, Barbusse published \"Chains\", showing history as the unbroken chain of suffering of people and their struggle for freedom and justice. In the publicistic book \"The Butchers\", he exposes the White Terror in the Balkan countries.\nIn 1927, Barbusse participated in the Congress of Friends of the Soviet Union in Moscow. He led the World Congress Against Imperialist War (Amsterdam, 1932) and headed the World Committee Against War and Fascism, founded in 1933. He also took part in the work of the International Youth Congress (Paris, 1933) and the International Congress of Writers in Defense of Culture. Additionally, in the 1920s and 1930s, he edited the periodicals \"Monde\" (1928\u20131935) and \"Progr\u00e8s Civique\", which published some of George Orwell's first writings. He was also literary editor for the daily newspaper \"l'Humanit\u00e9\" from 1926 to 1929.\nIn 1934, Barbusse sent Egon Kisch to Australia to represent the International Movement Against War and Fascism as part of his work for the Comintern. The resulting unsuccessful exclusion of Egon Kisch from Australia by the conservative Australian government succeeded in energizing Communism in Australia and resulted in Kisch's staying longer than Barbusse had intended.\nAn associate of Romain Rolland's and editor of \"Clart\u00e9\", he attempted to define a \"proletarian literature\", akin to \"Proletkult\" and Socialist realism.\nBarbusse was an Esperantist, and was honorary president of the first congress of the Sennacieca Asocio Tutmonda. In 1921, he wrote an article titled \"Esperantista Laboristo\" (\"Esperantist worker\") for \"Esperanto\" journal.\nSupport for Stalin.\nIn his 1928 book \"Voici ce qu'on a fait de la G\u00e9orgie\", Barbusse praised post-sovietization political, social, and economic conditions in Georgia and completely glossed over the brutal methods employed by Stalin which disturbed the dying Lenin, triggering a critical response from the Georgian \u00e9migr\u00e9 Dathico Charachidze who published in 1929 \"Barbusse, les Soviets et la G\u00e9orgie\", with a sympathetic preface by Karl Kautsky.\nIn 1930, he published a book \"Russie\", an account of year-long living in the Soviet Union which contained flattering references to Stalin.\nIn 1932, Barbusse agreed to write a biography of Stalin. Originally, Stalin wanted Maxim Gorky to write it, but he didn't, and the task was handed to Barbusse; the key condition was that it would be checked and subject to editorial changes in the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, and Barbusse assured that he would break with the \"Trostkyist elements\" in the editorial of his journal \"Monde\". It appeared in 1935 as \"Staline: Un monde nouveau vu \u00e0 travers un homme\" (\"Stalin: A New World Seen Through the Man\"). Barbusse praised Stalin, whom he called in his personal notes as \"great comrade\", as a man with \"the head of a scholar, with the figure of a worker, and with the dress of a simple soldier\" and as the only true heir of Lenin; one of the phrases of the book, \"Stalin is the Lenin of today\", became one of the most celebrated slogans of the Stalin cult; according to Isaak Mints, the slogan was written by Stalin himself. Although Barbusse had a friendly relationship with Leon Trotsky in the middle of the 1920s, in the book he was condemned as an intriguer and a deviationist, a Menshevik at heart. Nevertheless, Aleksei Stetskii, one of the chief ideologues of the Stalin cult, was concerned by Barbusse's description of Stalin not as \"the greatest theoretician of Marxism after Lenin\", as he was described in the Soviet Union, but as a \"man of action\" and practice, while Trotsky still seemed as a \"different type of leader\": the opposition between Trotsky and Stalin seemed as an opposition between Trotsky's intellectualism and Stalin's anti-intellectualism. The book was published in Russian in the same year.\nVictor Serge, a writer and a member of the Left Opposition, met Barbusse in the 1920s and tried to make him aware of the political repression in the USSR:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter this conversation, Barbusse made Serge one of the cosponsors of \"Monde\", but removed him from the masthead after his imprisonment.\nTrotsky criticised Barbusse as representative of a \"pretentious ... humanitarian, lyric and pacifistical 'communism'\".\nDeath.\nWhile writing a second biography of Stalin in Moscow, Barbusse fell ill with pneumonia and died on 30August 1935. His funeral drew 500,000 people and he is buried at the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.\nLegacy.\nIn the Spanish Civil War in December 1936 the Henri Barbusse Battalion was formed as part of the XIV International Brigade, named in honour of Henri Barbusse.\nIn the foreword to \"I Saw It Happen\", a 1942 collection of eyewitness accounts of the war, the book critic Lewis Stiles Gannett wrote: \"We shall be hearing and reading of this war for decades to come. No one of us can yet guess who will be its Tolstoys, its Barbusses, its Remarques and its Hemingways.\"\nThe \"parc Henri Barbusse\" was the site of the Ch\u00e2teau d'Issy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70179", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70179", "title": "Lucy Webb Hayes", "text": "First Lady of the United States from 1877 to 1881\nLucy Ware Hayes (n\u00e9e Webb; August 28, 1831 \u2013 June 25, 1889) was the wife of President Rutherford B. Hayes and served as the 19th first lady of the United States from 1877 to 1881. Opposed to alcohol, she never served it in the White House, a move that was highly controversial. She died of a stroke aged 57 after her husband's presidency. She was also, while her husband was governor, First Lady of Ohio. She served in this position two non-consecutive times, from 1868 to 1872, and again from 1876 until 1877, when her husband was elected as President of the United States. He resigned the governorship effective March 2, 1877, and was sworn in in the next day.\nHayes was the first First Lady to have a college degree. She was also a more egalitarian hostess than previous First Ladies. An advocate for African Americans both before and after the American Civil War, she invited the first African-American professional musician to appear at the White House. She was a Past Grand of Lincoln Rebekah Lodge of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, together with her husband.\nHistorians have christened her \"Lemonade Lucy\" due to her staunch support of the temperance movement. However, contrary to popular belief, she was never referred to by that nickname while living. It was her husband who banned alcohol from the White House.\nEarly life.\nLucy Webb was born on August 28, 1831, in Chillicothe, Ohio. Her parents were Dr. James Webb and Maria Cook. She had two older brothers who both became medical doctors. Her earliest ancestor in America was Giles Webb, who emigrated to the Americas from England in the early-mid 1600s.\nIn 1833, Lucy's father went to his family's home in Lexington, Kentucky, to free 15-20 slaves he had inherited from his aunt. There was a cholera epidemic happening at the time and James cared for the sick. Soon James became infected with cholera and died. Friends of Lucy's mother advised the family to sell the slaves rather than free them. Maria responded that she would take in washing to earn money before she would sell a slave.\nMaria's father, Isaac Cook, was a temperance advocate and he encouraged young Lucy to sign a pledge to abstain from alcohol.\nThe Webbs were Methodists.\nEducation.\nIn 1844, the Webb family moved to Delaware, Ohio. Lucy's brothers enrolled at Ohio Wesleyan University. Although women were not allowed to study at Wesleyan, Lucy was permitted to enroll in the college prep program at the university. A term report signed by the vice-president of Ohio Wesleyan in 1845 noted that her conduct was \"unexceptionable\" (beyond reproach).\nSeveral months later Lucy transferred to Cincinnati Wesleyan Female College and she graduated from there in 1850. Lucy was unusually well educated for a young lady of her day.\nWhile in college, Lucy wrote essays on social and religious issues. One essay was entitled \"Is Traveling on the Sabbath Consistent with Christian Principles?\" At her commencement, she read an original essay, \"The Influence of Christianity on National Prosperity.\" Lucy appears to have been influenced by the women's suffrage movement, writing in one essay, \"It is acknowledged by most persons that her (woman's) mind is as strong as a man's. ... Instead of being considered the slave of man, she is considered his equal in all things, and his superior in some.\"\nMarriage.\nLucy first met Rutherford B. Hayes at Ohio Wesleyan University. At the time, Lucy was fourteen years old and Rutherford was twenty-three. Rutherford's mother was hopeful that the two would find a connection, but at this point Rutherford considered Lucy \"not quite old enough to fall in love with.\"\nIn 1850, Rutherford's older sister Fanny Platt encouraged him to visit with Lucy again. That summer Lucy was 19, and she and Rutherford were members of the same wedding party. Rutherford was so taken with Lucy that he gave her the prize (a gold ring) that he had found in the wedding cake.\nIn 1851, Rutherford wrote in his diary, \"I guess I am a great deal in love with L(ucy). ... Her low sweet voice ... her soft rich eyes.\" Rutherford also praised her intelligence and character, \"She sees at a glance what others study upon, but will not, perhaps study what she is unable to see at a flash. She is a genuine woman, right from instinct and impulse rather than judgment and reflection.\"\nAfter the couple became engaged, Lucy returned the wedding cake ring to Rutherford. He wore that ring for the rest of his life.\nLucy and Rutherford were married at her mother's house in Cincinnati in a simple ceremony on December 30, 1852.\nThey spent their honeymoon at Fanny's house in Columbus, Ohio, before returning to Cincinnati. In Columbus, Rutherford argued a case before the Ohio Supreme Court while Fanny and Lucy developed a close friendship. The two women attended lectures and concerts together. Lucy and Fanny once went to a lecture by noted suffragette Lucy Stone. Lucy Hayes agreed with Stone that a reform in the wage scale for women was long overdue, and that \"violent\" methods sometimes served the purpose of calling attention to the need for reforms. Lucy noted that Stone took the position that \"whatever is proper for a man to do is equally right for a woman provided she has the power.\" According to Emily Apt Geer of the Rutherford B. Hayes Presidential Center, \"if the influence of the bright and aggressive Fanny Platt had extended over a normal lifetime, Lucy Hayes might have become active in the woman's rights movement.\" Fanny Platt died in childbirth during the winter of 1856. Lucy named her sixth child and only daughter Fanny in memory of her sister-in-law and friend.\nThe couple had eight children: Birchard Austin (1853\u20131926), Webb Cook (1856\u20131934), Rutherford Platt (1858\u20131927), Joseph Thompson (1861\u20131863), George Crook (1864\u20131866), Fanny (1867\u20131950), Scott Russell (1871\u20131923), and Manning Force (1873\u20131874).\nRutherford had previously thought the abolition of slavery was too radical an action. However, Lucy's anti-slavery sentiments influenced him, and soon after their marriage Rutherford began defending runaway slaves in court who had crossed into Ohio from Kentucky.\nAfter Lincoln's election in 1860, Lucy and Rutherford joined the presidential train from Indianapolis to Cincinnati.\nCivil War.\nWhen the first news of the firing on Fort Sumter reached Cincinnati, Lucy was in favor of the war. She felt that if she had been at Fort Sumter with a garrison of women, there might not have been a surrender. Her enthusiasm encouraged Rutherford to enlist as a major in the Twenty-third Ohio Volunteer Infantry. As often as she could, Lucy \u2013 sometimes with her mother and children \u2013 visited Rutherford in the field. She often assisted her brother, Dr. Joe Webb, in caring for the sick.\nIn September 1862, Rutherford was injured in battle in Middleton, Maryland. Thinking he was hospitalized in Washington due to a paperwork error, Lucy rushed to the nation's capital. She eventually found Hayes in Maryland and after two weeks of convalescence, the Hayeses returned to Ohio, traveling by train with other wounded troops.\nAfter Rutherford returned to his regiment, Lucy became a regular visitor in Rutherford's Army camp. She ministered to the wounded, cheered the homesick, and comforted the dying. She also secured supplies from Northern civilians to better equip the Union soldiers. Lucy was often joined by her mother at camp and her brother Joe was the regiment's surgeon. The men of the 23rd Ohio Volunteer Infantry affectionately nicknamed her \"Mother Lucy\" for her service. At one point, twenty-year-old William McKinley spent hours tending a campfire because Lucy sat nearby.\nThe couple's infant son, Joe, died while the family was at an Army camp.\nCongress.\nWhile Rutherford served in Congress, Lucy joined him in Washington for its winter social season. Lucy regularly sat in the gallery of the House to listen to congressional debates. She often wore a checkered shawl so her husband could spot her.\nIn 1866, the Hayeses and other congressional couples visited the scene of race riots in Memphis and New Orleans to see the damage that had been done.\nLucy also worked for the welfare of children and veterans. The couple's nearly two-year-old son George died during this period.\nFirst Lady of Ohio.\nWhile Rutherford was Governor of Ohio, Lucy often accompanied her husband on visits to prisons, correctional institutions for boys and girls, hospitals for the mentally ill, and facilities for the deaf and mute.\nIn 1870, Lucy and her friends established a soldiers' orphans home in Xenia, Ohio.\nRutherford initially chose not to run for a third term as governor and in 1873, the family moved to Spiegel Grove. Rutherford's uncle, Sardis Birchard, had built the house years earlier with them in mind. This house would later become the first presidential library.\nIn 1875, Rutherford ran for and won a third term as governor. The hard fought victory brought Rutherford to national prominence. In June 1876, he was nominated for president by the Republican party.\nLucy played an active role in her husband's administration and lobbied the state legislature to provide more funding to schools, orphanages, and insane asylums.\nTheir youngest child, named for General Manning F. Force, was born in 1873 and died in 1874, while the Hayes family lived at Spiegel Grove.\nFirst Lady of the United States.\nThe presidential election of 1876 was one of the most controversial in the country's history. Hayes was not declared the winner until March 1, 1877, five months after Election Day. The declaration was so delayed that the Hayes family boarded a train to Washington without being sure if Rutherford was the president elect. The next morning, March 2, they were awakened near Harrisburg to receive the news that Congress had finally declared Hayes President of the United States.\nIn the early days of Rutherford's administration, the North's military occupation of the South and the Reconstruction era came to an end.\nRestoration funds for the White House were unavailable when they first moved in, so Lucy retrieved old furniture from the attic and rearranged things to hide the holes in the carpets and drapes. According to executive assistant William Cook, \"any really good things owed their preservation to this energetic lady.\"\nBy the time of Rutherford's inauguration, the position of First Lady was an increasingly prominent one. There were growing numbers of female journalists in the late nineteenth century. Female reporters devoted much of their time and energy to covering the most visible woman in America: the First Lady. The attention began after Rutherford's inauguration, with the \"New York Herald\" writing \"Mrs. Hayes is a most attractive and lovable woman. She is the life and soul of every party ... For the mother of so many children she looks ... youthful.\"\nLucy Hayes was the first wife of a President to be widely referred to as the First Lady by the press, when Mary C. Ames referred to the \"First Lady\" in a newspaper column about the inauguration. Advances in printing technology meant that a wide audience saw sketches of the new First Lady from the 1877 inauguration.\nAt this time it was not the custom for a president's wife to have a staff of social assistants and, unlike some previous First Ladies, Lucy had no adult daughters to help shoulder the workload. Lucy depended on nieces, cousins, and daughters of friends to help with social events, and these young ladies also helped enliven the Hayes White House.\nLucy was fond of animals. A cat, a bird, two dogs, and a goat joined the Hayes family in residence at the White House.\nIn 1879, \"The Washington Post\" described Lucy's dress at the White House New Year's Reception, \"The dress of Mrs. Hayes was at once simple and elegant ... With accustomed good taste she wore no jewelry, and the white plume in her black hair fell gracefully in drooping folds.\"\nAt the first official state dinner on April 19, 1877, to honor Russian Grand Duke Alexis and Grand Duke Constantine, a \"full quota\" of wine was served. But soon after this, President Hayes made it known that there would be no more alcoholic beverages served at future White House functions. The six wine glasses laid out at each place setting had angered temperance advocates and Rutherford believed the Republican Party needed the temperance vote. The decision was Rutherford's, although Lucy may have influenced him. Although the Hayes family were generally teetotal, they had previously served alcoholic beverages to guests at their home in Ohio. But because Lucy was a known teetotaler (Hayes sometimes had a \"schoppen\" of beer when he visited Cincinnati) she was blamed for the dry White House. Regardless of her teetotaler status however, along with her husband they privately opposed Prohibition. They believed controlling alcohol consumption through education and example rather than force was more effective. Yet Hayes understood the political power becoming a teetotaler gave him by ensuring dry Republicans stayed within the party. He believed this stance on alcohol would only effect them at the White House and could still enjoy in private. This political move earned them more attention than they had originally thought. As a mother herself, Lucy stood as a key figure in the temperance movement as setting an example for how women could set moral examples for their families. She understood the power her role possessed and announced to the public that, \"I have young sons who have never tasted liquor, they shall not receive from my hand, or with the sanction that its use in the family would give, the first taste of what might prove their ruin. What I wish for my own sons I must do for the sons of other mothers.\"\nLater, when President Garfield brought alcohol back to the White House, the Hayeses predicted it would cause a split within the Republican Party. \nIn general, Lucy had a more casual style that was reflected in the receptions she held during Washington's winter social season. During the holidays, she invited staff members and their families to Thanksgiving dinner and opened presents with them on Christmas morning. The White House telegraph operator and secretaries were included in the Thanksgiving group. The group was so large it took three turkeys and a roast pig to feed them all. Lucy was generally kind towards the White House staff, she also allowed White House servants to take time off to attend school.\nOn December 31, 1877, Rutherford and Lucy celebrated their silver wedding anniversary in the White House.\nThe most significant change made to the White House during the Hayes Administration were the installation of bathrooms with running water and the addition of a crude wall telephone. Lucy was the first First Lady to use a typewriter, a telephone, and a phonograph while in office, and was also the first to enjoy a permanent system of running water in the White House.\nLucy preferred to enlarge the greenhouse conservatories rather than to undertake extensive redecoration of the White House. The billiard-room, which connected the house with the conservatories, was converted into an attractive greenhouse and the billiard table consigned to the basement. Shuttered windows in the State Dining Room could be opened for dinner guests to look into the conservatories. Some Americans considered the billiard table as either a gambling device or a rich man's toy, and the Hayes were glad to get it out of sight.\nEvery day, flowers were brought in from the greenhouses to decorate the White House. Additional bouquets were sent to friends and Washington hospitals. Greenhouse upkeep made up one fourth of the White House's household expenditures under Hayes.\nLooking to celebrate American flora and fauna, Lucy commissioned Theodore R. Davis to design new china for the White House. After using the pieces, Washington hostess Clover Adams complained that it was hard to eat soup calmly with a coyote springing from behind a pine tree in the bowl.\nMusic was important to Lucy and she held informal \"sings\" upstairs in the family quarters. Lucy sang and played the guitar, and was assisted by the talents of friends and family. At times, Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz played the piano while Vice President William A. Wheeler, Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman, and his brother, Gen. William T. Sherman, joined in singing gospel songs.\nLucy frequently accompanied her husband on trips around the country. Rutherford travelled so much that the \"Chicago Tribune\" nicknamed him \"Rutherford the Rover.\" In 1877, The couple undertook a tour of the South in hopes of improving national unity. The \"Richmond Dispatch\" reported that Lucy \"won the admiration of people where she has been.\"\nIn 1878, Lucy toured Philadelphia without her husband. She visited the Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia School of Design for Women, and the Woman's Medical College, as well as several schools and orphanages. This was the first documented instance of a First Lady following a public schedule independent of the President.\nIn 1880, Lucy was the first presidential spouse to visit the West Coast while her husband was President. While on their Western tour, Lucy and Rutherford met with Sarah Winnemucca. Lucy was moved to tears by Winnemucca's impassioned speech for Native American lands.\nLucy's compassion and sincerity endeared her to Washingtonians. She regularly visited the National Deaf Mute College (today Gallaudet University) and the Hampton Institute, where she sponsored a scholarship for a student. She continued to show concern for the poor by contributing generously to Washington charities. In January 1880 alone, Lucy and Rutherford gave $990 (~$ in 2024) to help the poor in Washington.\nHowever, Lucy rejected pleas from groups requesting her public support, committing herself instead to serving as a moral example to the nation. Rutherford once commented, \"I don't know how much influence Mrs. Hayes has with Congress, but she has great influence with me.\"\nAs First Lady, Lucy advocated for the completion of the Washington Monument.\nWhen the children of Washington were banned from rolling their Easter eggs on the Capitol grounds, they were invited to use the White House lawn on the Monday following Easter.\nLucy was a friend to other First Ladies. During her tenure as First Lady, Lucy visited with Sarah Polk and journeyed to Martha Washington's Mount Vernon and Dolley Madison's Montpelier. She asked Julia Tyler to help officiate at a White House reception and was friendly with former First Lady Julia Grant. She was also friendly with future First Ladies including Lucretia Garfield, Ida McKinley, and Helen Herron Taft.\nWhen portraits of past presidents were commissioned for the White House, Lucy insisted that paintings of both Martha Washington and Dolley Madison also grace the walls of the presidential mansion. Lucy's own official portrait by Daniel Huntington was commissioned by the Woman's Christian Temperance Union.\nOn his 48th birthday, Rutherford wrote to Lucy, \"My life with you has been so happy--so successful--so beyond reasonable anticipations, that I think of you with a loving gratitude that I do not know how to express.\"\nRutherford kept his promise to serve only one term, the Hayes family returned to their Fremont, Ohio, home, Spiegel Grove, in 1881.\nViews on race.\nLucy Hayes was an advocate for African Americans both before and after the Civil War. She remained in contact with her family's former slaves, and employed some. Winnie Monroe, a former slave freed by Lucy's mother Maria, eventually moved to the White House with the Hayes family as a cook and nurse. Later, Lucy would encourage Winnie's daughter Mary Monroe to attend Oberlin.\nThe Hayes were so known for their sympathy towards African Americans that a month after they returned to Cincinnati from Columbus, a black baby was left on their doorstep.\nIn 1861, Lucy wrote to her husband, \"if a contraband [runaway slave] is in Camp--- don't let the 23rd Regiment be disgraced by returning [him or her].\"\nAs First Lady, Lucy invited African-American performers to the White House. In 1878, Marie Selika Williams (1849\u20131937), also known as Madame Selika, appeared at the White House. Introduced by Frederick Douglass, Madame Selika was the first African-American professional musician to appear at the White House.\nViews on temperance.\nKnown as a teetotaler, Lucy had signed a pledge to abstain from alcohol at a young age.\nThe White House had a ban on alcoholic beverages during Rutherford's term, but historians generally credit Rutherford with the final decision to ban alcohol. Lucy actually opposed prohibition. She preferred to persuade rather than prevent and did not condemn those who used alcohol in moderation.\nLucy was not a member of any temperance groups. She resisted attempts by the Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) to enlist her as a leader out of fear of creating political fallout for her husband by association with the controversial cause.\nThe WCTU paid for a portrait of Lucy by Daniel Huntington before she left the White House.\nThe first written references to \"Lemonade Lucy\" don't turn up until the 20th century, which didn't begin until 11 years after Lucy's death in 1889, according to Tom Culbertson of the Hayes Center. Hundreds of articles, cartoons, and poems chronicled and parodied her opposition to drinking. Historian Carl Anthony \"suggests a reason the legend of Lemonade Lucy might have become so popular with historians of the early 20th century, when there was greater moral stigma associated with alcohol consumption\".\nViews on suffrage.\nAs a young woman, Lucy expressed opinions that suggested she was pro-suffrage, but she did not join any of the prominent suffrage groups of the day. Two of Lucy's aunts were involved in the suffrage movement.\nMany historians believe that had her sister-in-law Fanny Platt lived longer, Lucy would have become a committed advocate for women's suffrage.\nLater life.\nBack in Ohio after leaving the White House, Lucy joined the Woman's Relief Corps (founded 1883), taught a Sunday School class, attended reunions of the 23rd Ohio Volunteer Infantry, and entertained distinguished visitors to Spiegel Grove. Lucy also became national president of the newly formed Woman's Home Missionary Society of the Methodist Church. As president, she called attention to the plight of the urban poor and disenfranchised African-Americans in the South. She also spoke out against Mormon polygamy. However, when asked by Susan B. Anthony to send delegates from the Home Missionary Society to a meeting of the International Council of Women, Lucy declined.\nHayes spent her last eight years at Spiegel Grove. A few days after suffering a stroke, she died, at age 57, on June 25, 1889. Flags across the country were flown at half-mast in her honor.\nRutherford died three and a half years later and was buried beside his wife. In 1915, their remains were moved to Spiegel Grove. Below them their dog Gryme and two horses named Old Whitey and Old Ned are buried also.\nLegacy.\nLucy Hayes served as First Lady during an important transitional era in nineteenth-century American history. Major economic trends of the 1870s included the rise of national businesses, shifts in centers of agriculture, and the development of a favorable balance of trade for the United States. The accelerated movement of people from rural to urban areas also brought about great alterations in social life.\nEmily Apt Geer explained,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpiegel Grove is operated by the Ohio History Connection and is open to the public.\nHayes is honored with a life-size bronze sculpture inside the Cuyahoga County Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument in Cleveland, Ohio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70180", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70180", "title": "Oology", "text": "Branch of ornithology studying bird eggs, nests and breeding behavior\nOology (; also o\u00f6logy) is a branch of ornithology studying bird eggs, nests and breeding behaviour. The word is derived from the Greek \"oion\", meaning egg. Oology can also refer to the hobby of collecting wild birds' eggs, sometimes called egg collecting, birdnesting or egging, which is now illegal in many jurisdictions.\nHistory.\nAs a science.\nOology became increasingly popular in Britain and the United States during the 1800s. Observing birds from afar was difficult because high-quality binoculars were not readily available. Thus it was often more practical to shoot the birds or collect their eggs. While the collection of the eggs of wild birds by amateurs was considered a respectable scientific pursuit in the 19th century and early 20th century, from the mid 20th century onwards it was increasingly regarded as being a hobby rather than a scientific discipline.\nIn the 1960s, the naturalist Derek Ratcliffe compared peregrine falcon eggs from historical collections with more recent egg-shell samples, and was able to demonstrate a decline in shell thickness. This was found to cause the link between the use by farmers of pesticides such as DDT and dieldrin, and the decline of British populations of birds of prey.\nAs a hobby.\nEgg collecting was still popular in the early 20th century, even as its scientific value became less prominent. Egg collectors built large collections and traded with one another. Frequently, collectors would go to extreme lengths to obtain eggs of rare birds. For example, Charles Bendire was willing to have his teeth broken to remove a rare egg that became stuck in his mouth. He had placed the egg in his mouth while climbing down a tree.\nIn 1922, the British Oological Association was founded by Baron Rothschild, a prominent naturalist, and the Reverend Francis Jourdain; the group was renamed the Jourdain Society after Jourdain's death in 1940. Rothschild and Jourdain founded it as a breakaway group after egg collecting by members of the British Ornithologists' Union was denounced by Earl Buxton at a meeting of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.\nPoaching laws.\nIn the UK.\nLegislation, such as the Protection of Birds Act 1954 and Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 in the United Kingdom, has made it impossible to collect wild birds' eggs legally. In the United Kingdom, it is only legal to possess a wild-bird's egg if it was taken before 1954, or with a permit for scientific research; selling wild birds' eggs, regardless of their age, is illegal.\nHowever, the practice of egg collecting, or egging, continues as an underground or illegal activity in the UK and elsewhere. In the 1980s and 1990s, the fines allowed by the law were only a moderate deterrent to some egg collectors. However, the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 allowed for six months' imprisonment for the possession of the eggs of wild birds and, since it came into force, a number of individuals have been imprisoned, both for possessing and for attempting to buy egg collections. The Jourdain Society continued to meet although membership dwindled after 1994, when a dinner of the society was raided by police, assisted by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). This resulted in six members being convicted and fined.\nDespite this, some of those who engage in egg collecting show considerable recidivism in their activity. One, Colin Watson, was convicted six times before he fell to his death in 2006, while attempting to climb to a nest high up in a tree. While the threat of imprisonment after 2000 encouraged some to give up egg collecting, others were not deterred. One individual has been convicted ten times and imprisoned twice. As recently as 2018, a man was imprisoned for amassing a collection of 5000 eggs, after previously being imprisoned in 2005. Another man was convicted of possessing 200 eggs in 2021.\nThe Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has been particularly active in fighting illegal egg collection and maintains an investigative unit that collects intelligence on egg collectors and assists police in mounting prosecutions on them, in addition to investigating other wildlife crimes. At one point, RSPB staff were being trained by soldiers from the Brigade of Gurkhas in camouflage skills and in surveillance, map and radio techniques, to better enable them to guard nests of rare birds.\nIn the United Kingdom, to avoid the possibility of prosecution, owners of old egg collections must retain sufficient proof to show, on the balance of probabilities, that the eggs pre-date 1981. However owners of genuinely old collections are unlikely to face prosecution as experienced investigators and prosecutors are able to distinguish them from recently collected eggs. It is illegal to sell a collection, regardless of the eggs' age, so old collections may only be disposed of by giving the eggs away or by destroying them. Museums are reluctant to accept donations of collections without reliable collection data (i.e. date and place that they were collected) that gives them scientific value. Also, museums no longer put egg collections on public display.\nIn the US.\nIn the United States, the collection and possession of wild bird eggs is also restricted, and in some cases is a criminal act. Depending on the species, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the Lacey Act, the Endangered Species Act, or other laws may apply.\nCollecting.\nMethods.\nWhen collecting eggs, normally the whole clutch of eggs is taken. Because eggs will rot if the contents are left inside, they must be \"blown\" to remove the contents. Although collectors will take eggs at all stages of incubation, freshly laid eggs are much easier to blow, usually through a small, inconspicuous hole drilled with a specialized drill through the side of the eggshell. Egg blowing is also done with domestic bird's eggs for the hobby of egg decorating.\nOology related publications.\nNumerous books, and at one point a journal, have been published on egg collecting and identification:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70181", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70181", "title": "Battle of Worcester", "text": "1651 final battle of the English Civil War\nThe Battle of Worcester took place on 3 September 1651 in and around the city of Worcester, England and was the last major battle of the 1642 to 1651 Wars of the Three Kingdoms. A Parliamentarian army of around 28,000 under Oliver Cromwell defeated a largely Scottish Royalist force of 16,000 led by Charles II of England and Scotland.\nThe Royalists took up defensive positions in and around the city of Worcester. The area of the battle was bisected by the River Severn, with the River Teme forming an additional obstacle to the south-west of Worcester. Cromwell divided his army into two main sections, divided by the Severn, in order to attack from both the east and south-west. There was fierce fighting at river crossing points and two dangerous sorties by the Royalists against the eastern Parliamentary force were beaten back. Following the storming of a major redoubt to the east of the city, the Parliamentarians entered Worcester and organised Royalist resistance collapsed. Charles II was able to escape capture.\nBackground.\nInvasion of England.\nThe King was aided by Scottish allies and was attempting to regain the throne that had been lost when his father Charles I was executed. The commander of the Scots, David Leslie, supported the plan of fighting in Scotland, where royal support was strongest. Charles, however, insisted on making war in England. He calculated that Cromwell's campaign north of the River Forth would allow the main Scottish Royalist army which was south of the Forth to steal the march on the Roundhead New Model Army in a race to London. He hoped to rally not merely the old faithful Royalists, but also the overwhelming numerical strength of the English Presbyterians to his standard. He calculated that his alliance with the Scottish Presbyterian Covenanters and his signing of the Solemn League and Covenant would encourage English Presbyterians to support him against the English Independent faction which had grown in power over the last few years. The Royalist army was kept well in hand, no excesses were allowed, and in a week the Royalists covered 150 miles in marked contrast to the Duke of Hamilton's ill-fated expedition of 1648. On 8 August the troops were given a well-earned rest between Penrith and Kendal. The exact location is marked by a stone monument at Black Dub on Crosby Ravensworth Fell near Shap, Cumbria (OS Grid Ref : NY 604108). An inscription on the monument reads \"Here at Black Dub; the source of the Livennet, King Charles II regaled his army and drank of the water on his march from Scotland. August 8th 1651\"\nHowever the Royalists were mistaken in supposing that the enemy was unaware. Everything had been foreseen both by Cromwell and by the Council of State in Westminster. The latter had called out the greater part of the militia on 7 August. Lieutenant-General Charles Fleetwood began to draw together the midland contingents at Banbury. The London trained-bands turned out for field service no fewer than 14,000 strong. Every suspected Royalist was closely watched, and the magazines of arms in the country-houses of the gentry were for the most part removed into the strong places. On his part Cromwell had quietly made his preparations. Perth passed into his hands on 2 August and he brought back his army to Leith by 5 August. Thence he dispatched Lieutenant-General John Lambert with a cavalry corps to harass the invaders. Major-General Thomas Harrison was already at Newcastle picking the best of the county mounted-troops to add to his own regulars. On 9 August, Charles was at Kendal, Lambert hovering in his rear, and Harrison marching swiftly to bar his way at the Mersey. Thomas Fairfax emerged for a moment from his retirement to organize the Yorkshire levies, and the best of these as well as of the Lancashire, Cheshire and Staffordshire militias were directed upon Warrington, which Harrison reached on 15 August, a few hours in front of Charles's advanced guard. Lambert too, slipping round the left flank of the enemy, joined Harrison, and the English fell back (16 August), slowly and without letting themselves be drawn into a fight, along the London road.\nWorcester campaign.\nCromwell meanwhile, leaving George Monck with the least efficient regiments to carry on the war in Scotland, had reached the river Tyne in seven days, and thence, marching a day in extreme heat with the country people carrying their arms and equipment, the regulars entered Ferrybridge on 19 August, at which date Lambert, Harrison and the north-western militia were about Congleton. It seemed probable that a great battle would take place between Lichfield and Coventry on or just after 25 August and that Cromwell, Harrison, Lambert and Fleetwood would all take part in it but the scene and the date of the denouement were changed by the Royalists' movements. Shortly after leaving Warrington the young king had resolved to abandon the direct march on London and to make for the Severn valley, where his father had found the most constant and the most numerous adherents in the first war, and which had been the centre of gravity of the English Royalist movement of 1648.\nSir Edward Massey, formerly the Parliamentary governor of Gloucester, was now with Charles, and it was hoped that he would induce his fellow Presbyterians to take arms. The military quality of the Welsh border Royalists was well proved, that of the Gloucestershire Presbyterians not less so, and, in basing himself on Gloucester and Worcester as his father had done on Oxford, Charles II hoped, naturally, to deal with the Independent faction minority of the English people more effectually than Charles I had earlier dealt with the majority of the people of England who had supported the Parliamentary cause. However the pure Royalism which now ruled in the invading army could not alter the fact that it was a foreign, Scottish, army, and it was not merely an Independent faction but all England that united against it.\nCharles arrived at Worcester on 22 August and spent five days in resting the troops, preparing for further operations, and gathering and arming the few recruits who came in. The delay was to prove fatal; it was a necessity of the case foreseen and accepted when the march to Worcester had been decided upon, and had the other course, that of marching on London via Lichfield, been taken the battle would have been fought three days earlier with the same result. Worcester itself had no particular claim to being loyal to the King. Throughout the First Civil War it had taken the pragmatic position of declaring loyalty to whichever side had been in occupation. The epithet 'Faithful City' arose out of a cynical (and unsuccessful) claim at the Restoration for compensation from the new king.\nCromwell, the lord general, had during his march south thrown out successively two flying columns under Colonel Robert Lilburne to deal with the Lancashire Royalists under the Earl of Derby. Lilburne entirely routed a Lancashire detachment of the enemy on their way to join the main Royalist army at the Battle of Wigan Lane on 25 August and as affairs turned out Cromwell merely shifted the area of his concentration two marches to the south-west, to Evesham. Early on 28 August, Lambert's brigade made a surprise crossing of the Severn at Upton, below Worcester. In the action which followed Massey was severely wounded and he and his men were forced to retreat northwards along the west bank of the Severn towards the river Teme and Worcester. Fleetwood followed Lambert with reinforcements and orders to advance north towards the Teme. This western envelopment severed the Royalists' lines of communications to Wales and the western counties of England. The Royalists were now only 16,000 strong with no hope of significant reinforcements and disheartened by the apathy with which they had been received in districts formerly all their own. Cromwell, for the only time in his military career, had a two-to-one numerical superiority.\nOn 30 August Cromwell delayed the start of the battle to give time for two pontoon bridges to be constructed, one over the Severn and the other over the Teme, close to their confluence. The delay allowed Cromwell to launch his attack on 3 September, one year to the day since his victory at the Battle of Dunbar.\nBattle.\nCromwell took his measures deliberately. Lilburne from Lancashire and Major Mercer with the Worcestershire horse were to secure Bewdley Bridge, north of Worcester and on the enemy's line of retreat. Fleetwood was to force his way across the Teme and attack St John's, the western suburb of Worcester. While Lambert commanded the eastern flank of the army which would advance and encircle the eastern walls of Worcester, Cromwell would lead the attack on the southern ramparts of the city.\nThe assault started on the morning of 3 September and initially the initiative lay with the Parliamentarians. Fleetwood forced the passage of the Teme over the pontoon bridges against Royalists under the command of Major General Montgomery. Colonel Richard Deane's initial attempts to cross the Powick Bridge (where Prince Rupert of the Rhine had won the Battle of Powick Bridge, his first victory, in 1642) failed against stubborn resistance by the Royalists (many of whom were Scottish Highlanders) commanded by Colonel Keith. By force of arms and numbers, the Royalist army was pushed backward by the New Model Army with Cromwell on the eastern bank of the Severn and Fleetwood on the western sweeping in a semicircle long up toward Worcester.\nThe Royalists contested every hedgerow around Powick meadows. This stubborn resistance on the west bank of the Severn north of the Teme was becoming a serious problem for the Parliamentarians, so Cromwell led Parliamentary reinforcements from the eastern side of the town over the Severn pontoon bridge to aid Fleetwood. Charles II, from his vantage point on top of Worcester Cathedral's tower, realised that an opportunity existed to attack the now-exposed eastern flank of the Parliamentary army. As the defenders on the Western side of the city retreated in good order into the city (although during this manoeuvre Keith was captured and Montgomery was badly wounded), Charles ordered two sorties to attack the Parliamentary forces east of the city. The north-eastern sortie through St Martin's Gate was commanded by the Duke of Hamilton and attacked the Parliamentary lines at Perry Wood. The south-eastern one through Sidbury Gate was led by Charles II and attacked Red Hill. The Royalist cavalry under the command of David Leslie that was gathered on Pitchcroft meadow on the northern side of the city did not receive orders to aid the sorties and Leslie chose not to do so under his own initiative. Cromwell seeing the difficulty that his east flank was under attack rushed back over the Severn pontoon bridge with three brigades of troops to reinforce the flank.\nAlthough they were pushed back, the Parliamentarians under Lambert were too numerous and experienced to be defeated by such a move. For an hour, the Parliamentarians retreated before the unexpected attack. However, following their reinforcement by Cromwell's three brigades, they reversed the situation and drove the Royalists back toward the city. The Royalist retreat turned into a rout in which Parliamentarian and Royalist forces intermingled and skirmished up to and into the city. The Royalist position became untenable when the Essex militia stormed and captured Fort Royal, (a redoubt on a small hill to the south-east of Worcester overlooking the Sidbury gate), turning the Royalist guns to fire on Worcester.\nOnce in the city, Charles II removed his armour and found a fresh mount; he attempted to rally his troops but it was to no avail. A desperate Royalist cavalry charge down Sidbury Street and High Street, led by the Earl of Cleveland and Major Careless amongst others, allowed King Charles to escape the city by St Martin's Gate. This cavalry force was composed of the few Midland English Royalists who had rallied to Charles II, and largely consisted of Lord Talbot's troop of horse.\nThe defences of the city were stormed from three different directions as darkness came on, regulars and militia fighting with equal gallantry. Most of the few thousands of the Royalists who escaped during the night were easily captured by Lilburne and Mercer, or by the militia which watched every road in Yorkshire and Lancashire. Even the country people brought in scores of prisoners, for the Royalist officers and men alike, stunned by the suddenness of the disaster, offered no resistance.\nAftermath.\nAbout 3,000 men were killed during the battle and a further 10,000 were taken prisoner at Worcester or soon afterwards. The Earl of Derby was executed, while the other English prisoners were conscripted into the New Model Army and sent to Ireland. Around 8,000 Scottish prisoners were deported to New England, Bermuda, and the West Indies to work for landowners as indentured labourers, or else to work on fen drainage. Around 1,200 \"Scotch prisoners\" were taken to London; many died from disease and starvation at Tothill Fields and other makeshift prison camps. Parliamentary casualties numbered in the low hundreds.\nThe escape of Charles II included various incidents, including one of his hiding from a Parliamentarian patrol in an oak tree in the grounds of Boscobel House. He reached the south coast of England, and at Shoreham found transport to take him to safety in France. In announcing the Worcester victory of the day earlier, Cromwell's 4 September despatch to William Lenthall, the Speaker of the House of Commons, has become famous: \"The dimensions of this mercy are above my thoughts. It is, for aught I know, a crowning mercy\". Hence, Cromwell thought the victory was the greatest of all the favours, or mercies, given to him by God. The expression \"crowning mercy\" is frequently linked to the battle as it heralded the end of the English Civil War by completely destroying the last major Royalist army.\nThe Parliamentary militia were sent home within a week. Cromwell, who had ridiculed \"such stuff\" six months ago, knew them better now. \"Your new raised forces\", he wrote to the Rump Parliament, \"did perform singular good service, for which they deserve a very high estimation and acknowledgement\". The New England preacher Hugh Peters gave the militia a rousing farewell sermon \"when their wives and children should ask them where they had been and what news, they should say they had been at Worcester, where England's sorrows began, and where they were happily ended\", referring to the first clash of the Royalist and Parliamentarian Armies at the Battle of Powick Bridge on 23 September 1642, almost exactly nine years before. Prior to the battle King Charles II contracted the Worcester Clothiers Company to outfit his army with uniforms but was unable to pay the \u00a3453.3s bill. In June 2008 Charles, Prince of Wales paid off the 357-year-old debt (less the interest, which would have amounted to around \u00a347,500.)\nBattle analysis.\nCromwell's plan of battle divided his army into three parts, each part having a specific target: Colonel Robert Lilburne from Lancashire and Major Mercer with the Worcestershire horse were to secure Bewdley Bridge on the enemy's line of retreat. Lambert and Fleetwood were to force their way across the Teme and attack St John's, the western suburb of Worcester. Cromwell himself and the main army were to attack the town itself.\nThis plan was executed, and was the prototype of the Battle of Sedan. Worcester resembled Sedan in much more than outward form. Both were fought by \"nations in arms\", by citizen soldiers who had their hearts in the struggle, and could be trusted not only to fight their hardest but to march their best. Only with such troops would a general dare to place a deep river between the two halves of his army or to send away detachments beforehand to reap the fruits of victory, in certain anticipation of winning the victory with the remainder. The result was, in brief, one of those rare victories in which a pursuit is superfluous.\nLegacy.\n134 years later, in early April 1786, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson visited Fort Royal Hill at the battlefield at Worcester. John Adams wrote that he was \"deeply moved\" but disappointed at the locals' lack of knowledge of the battle, and gave the townspeople an \"impromptu lecture\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The people in the neighborhood appeared so ignorant and careless at Worcester that I was provoked and asked \"And do Englishmen so soon forget the ground where liberty was fought for? Tell your neighbors and your children that this is holy ground, much holier than that on which your churches stand. All England should come in pilgrimage to this hill, once a year\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70182", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70182", "title": "United States Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "70184", "revid": "5851537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70184", "title": "Duodenum", "text": "First section of the small intestine\nThe duodenum is the first section of the small intestine in most vertebrates, including mammals, reptiles, and birds. In mammals, it may be the principal site for iron absorption.\nThe duodenum precedes the jejunum and ileum and is the shortest part of the small intestine.\nIn humans, the duodenum is a hollow jointed tube about long connecting the stomach to the jejunum, the middle part of the small intestine. It begins with the duodenal bulb, and ends at the duodenojejunal flexure marked by the suspensory muscle of duodenum. The duodenum can be divided into four parts: the first (superior), the second (descending), the third (transverse) and the fourth (ascending) parts.\nOverview.\nThe duodenum is the first section of the small intestine in most higher vertebrates, including mammals, reptiles, and birds. In fish, the divisions of the small intestine are not as clear, and the terms \"anterior intestine\" or \"proximal intestine\" may be used instead of duodenum. In mammals the duodenum may be the principal site for iron absorption.\nIn humans, the duodenum is a C-shaped hollow jointed tube, in length, lying adjacent to the stomach (and connecting it to the small intestine). It is divided anatomically into four sections. The first part lies within the peritoneum but its other parts are retroperitoneal.\nParts.\nThe \"first\" or \"superior part\" of the duodenum is a continuation from the pylorus to the transpyloric plane. It is superior (above) to the rest of the segments, at the vertebral level of L1. The duodenal bulb, about long, is the first part of the duodenum and is slightly dilated. The duodenal bulb is a remnant of the mesoduodenum, a mesentery that suspends the organ from the posterior abdominal wall in fetal life. The first part of the duodenum is mobile, and connected to the liver by the hepatoduodenal ligament of the lesser omentum. The first part of the duodenum ends at the corner, the \"superior duodenal flexure\".\nRelations:\nThe \"second\" or \"descending part\" of the duodenum begins at the superior duodenal flexure. It goes inferior to the lower border of vertebral body L3, before making a sharp turn medially into the \"inferior duodenal flexure\", the end of the descending part.\nThe pancreatic duct and common bile duct enter the descending duodenum, through the major duodenal papilla. The second part of the duodenum also contains the minor duodenal papilla, the entrance for the accessory pancreatic duct. The junction between the embryological foregut and midgut lies just below the major duodenal papilla.\nThe \"third\", \"horizontal\" or \"inferior part\" of the duodenum is 10~12\u00a0cm in length. It begins at the \"inferior duodenal flexure\" and passes transversely to the left, passing in front of the inferior vena cava, abdominal aorta and the vertebral column. The superior mesenteric artery and vein are anterior to the third part of the duodenum. This part may be compressed between the aorta and SMA causing superior mesenteric artery syndrome.\nThe \"fourth\" or \"ascending part\" of the duodenum passes upward, joining with the jejunum at the duodenojejunal flexure. The fourth part of the duodenum is at the vertebral level L3, and may pass directly on top, or slightly to the left, of the aorta.\nBlood supply.\nThe first (superior) part of the duodenum, right after the pylorus of the stomach, is not supplied by the arcades. Instead, it is supplied by the supraduodenal artery and posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, along with some branches of the right gastroepiploic artery and the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. In many people part of the first centimeter of the duodenum is also supplied by branches of the right gastric artery.\nThe remaining three parts (descending, horizontal, and ascending) of the duodenum are supplied by two arcades (rings) of arteries, one anterior (in front) of the duodenum and pancreas and one posterior to (behind) them. Each arcade is made of two anastomosed (connected) arteries. The superior artery of each arcade comes from the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, which arises from the celiac artery via the gastroduodenal artery. The inferior artery of each arcade comes from the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, a branch of the superior mesenteric artery. The anterior arcade is formed by the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and the anterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery; the posterior arcade is formed by the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and the posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery.\nVessels from the arcades supply the muscularis externa (muscular layer) before forming a plexus (network of blood vessels) in the submucosa (a layer of connective tissue) called the submucosal plexus. Vessels continue from the submucosal plexus through the muscularis mucosae (another thin muscular layer) before forming another plexus under the epithelium of the villi, the layer where nutrients are absorbed. These vessels entering the duodenum from the arcades are sometimes called vasae rectae or arteriae rectae.\nThe venous drainage of the duodenum mainly follows the arteries, ultimately draining into the portal system. The venous arcades are usually superficial to the arterial arcades. The anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal vein drains into the right gastroepiploic vein, as do the veins of the lower first part of the duodenum and the pylorus (subpyloric veins). The upper first part of the duodenum is drained by suprapyloric veins, which can drain into the portal vein or the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal vein, which drains into the portal vein. The inferior veins of the arcades drain into the superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric, splenic, or first jejunal vein.\nEmbryologically, the duodenum arises from both the foregut and midgut, constituting the boundary between the two. However, the \"midgut\" is defined surgically as the parts of the intestine supplied by the superior mesenteric artery. Since the duodenum is supplied both by the celiac artery and the superior mesenteric artery, these two definitions are similar but not exactly the same.\nLymphatic drainage.\nThe lymphatic vessels follow the arteries in a retrograde fashion. The anterior lymphatic vessels drain into the pancreatoduodenal lymph nodes located along the superior and inferior pancreatoduodenal arteries and then into the pyloric lymph nodes (along the gastroduodenal artery). The posterior lymphatic vessels pass posterior to the head of the pancreas and drain into the superior mesenteric lymph nodes. Efferent lymphatic vessels from the duodenal lymph nodes ultimately pass into the celiac lymph nodes.\nHistology.\nUnder microscopy, the duodenum has a villous mucosa. This is distinct from the mucosa of the pylorus, which directly joins the duodenum. Like other structures of the gastrointestinal tract, the duodenum has a mucosa, submucosa, muscularis externa, and adventitia. Glands line the duodenum, known as Brunner's glands, which secrete mucus and bicarbonate in order to neutralise stomach acids. These are distinct glands not found in the ileum or jejunum, the other parts of the small intestine.\nVariation.\nThe duodenum's close anatomical association with the pancreas creates differences in function based on the position and orientation of the organs. The congenital abnormality, annular pancreas, causes a portion of the pancreas to encircle the duodenum. In an extramural annular pancreas, the pancreatic duct encircles the duodenum which results in gastrointestinal obstruction. An intramural annular pancreas is characterized by pancreatic tissue that is fused with the duodenal wall, causing duodenal ulceration.\nGene and protein expression.\nAbout 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and 70% of these genes are expressed in the normal duodenum. Some 300 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the duodenum with very few genes expressed only in the duodenum. The corresponding specific proteins are expressed in the duodenal mucosa, and many of these are also expressed in the small intestine, such as alanine aminopeptidase, a digestive enzyme, angiotensin-converting enzyme, involved in controlling blood pressure, and RBP2, a protein involved in the uptake of vitamin A.\nFunction.\nThe duodenum is largely responsible for the breakdown of food in the small intestine, using enzymes. The duodenum also regulates the rate of emptying of the stomach via hormonal pathways. Secretin and cholecystokinin are released from cells in the duodenal epithelium in response to acidic and fatty stimuli present there when the pylorus opens and emits gastric chyme into the duodenum for further digestion. These cause the liver and gallbladder to release bile, and the pancreas to release bicarbonate and digestive enzymes such as trypsin, lipase and amylase into the duodenum as they are needed.\nThe duodenum is a critical contributor to the regulation of food intake and glycemic control. As the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum is the initial site of nutrient absorption in the gastrointestinal tract. The duodenum senses nutrient intake and composition, and signals to the liver, pancreas, adipose tissue and brain through the direct and indirect release of several key hormones and signaling molecules, including the incretin peptides Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), as well as Cholecystokinin (CCK) and Secretin.\u00a0 The duodenum also signals to the brain directly via vagal afferents enabling neural control over food intake and glycemia.\u00a0 Intestinal secretion of GIP and GLP-1 stimulates glucose-dependent insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells, known as the incretin effect. Incretin peptides, principally GLP-1 and GIP, regulate islet hormone secretion, glucose concentrations, lipid metabolism, gut motility, appetite and body weight, and immune function.\nThe villi of the duodenum have a leafy-looking appearance, which is a histologically identifiable structure. Brunner's glands, which secrete mucus, are only found in the duodenum. The duodenum wall consists of a very thin layer of cells that form the muscularis mucosae.\nClinical significance.\nUlceration.\nUlcers of the duodenum commonly occur because of infection by the bacteria \"Helicobacter pylori\". These bacteria, through a number of mechanisms, erode the protective mucosa of the duodenum, predisposing it to damage from gastric acids. The first part of the duodenum is the most common location of ulcers since it is where the acidic chyme meets the duodenal mucosa before mixing with the alkaline secretions of the duodenum. Duodenal ulcers may cause recurrent abdominal pain and dyspepsia, and are often investigated using a urea breath test to test for the bacteria, and endoscopy to confirm ulceration and take a biopsy. If managed, these are often managed through antibiotics that aim to eradicate the bacteria, and proton-pump inhibitors and antacids to reduce the gastric acidity.\nCeliac disease.\nThe British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines specify that a duodenal biopsy is required for the diagnosis of adult celiac disease. The biopsy is ideally performed at a moment when the patient is on a gluten-containing diet.\nCancer.\nDuodenal cancer is a cancer in the first section of the small intestine. Cancer of the duodenum is relatively rare compared to stomach cancer and colorectal cancer; malignant tumors in the duodenum constitute only around 0.3% of all the gastrointestinal tract tumors but around half of cancerous tissues that develop in the small intestine. Its histology is often observed to be adenocarcinoma, meaning that the cancerous tissue arises from glandular cells in the epithelial tissue lining the duodenum.\nObesity and diabetes.\nA western diet induces duodenal mucosal hyperplasia and dysfunction that underlie insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes and obesity. Diet-induced duodenal mucosal hyperplasia consists of increased mucosal mass, increased villus length, decreased crypt density, proliferation of enteroendocrine cells, increased enterocyte mass, and an accumulation of lipid droplets in the mucosa. Diet induced duodenal dysfunction includes increased duodenal nutrient absorption, altered duodenal hormone secretion, and altered intestinal vagal afferent neuronal function.\nInflammation.\nInflammation of the duodenum is referred to as duodenitis. There are multiple known causes. Celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease are two of the known causes.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"duodenum\" is Medieval Latin, short for \"intest\u012bnum duod\u0113num digit\u014drum\", meaning \"intestine of twelve finger-widths (in length)\", genitive of \"duod\u0113n\u012b\", \"twelve each\", (related to \"duodecim\" \"twelve\"). Coined by Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187) in his Latin translation of \"Canon Avicennae\", \"\u0627\u062b\u0646\u0627 \u0639\u0634\u0631\" itself a loan-translation of Greek dodekadaktylon (\u03b4\u03c9\u03b4\u03b5\u03ba\u03ac\u03b4\u03ac\u03ba\u03c4\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf\u03bd), literally \"twelve fingers long\". The intestine part was so called by the Greek physician Herophilus (c. 335\u2013280 BCE) for its length, about equal to the breadth of 12 fingers.\nMany languages use calques for this word. For example, German , Dutch , Turkish , and Mandarin Chinese \"sh\u00ed'\u00e8r zh\u01d0 ch\u00e1ng\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70188", "revid": "28427534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70188", "title": "Highgate Cemetery", "text": "Place of burial in North London, England\nHighgate Cemetery is a place of burial in North London, England, designed by architect Stephen Geary. There are approximately 170,000 people buried in around 53,000 graves across the West and East sides. Highgate Cemetery is notable both for some of the people buried there either in coffins or urns as well as for its \"de facto\" status as a nature reserve. The Cemetery is designated Grade I on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens.\nLocation.\nThe cemetery is in Highgate N6, next to Waterlow Park, in the London Borough of Camden. It comprises two sides, on either side of Swain's Lane. The main gate is on Swain's Lane, just north of Oakshott Avenue. There is another, disused, gate on Chester Road. The nearest public transport (Transport for London) is the C11 bus, Brookfield Park stop, and Archway tube station.\nHistory and setting.\nThe cemetery in its original form\u00a0\u2013 the northwestern wooded area\u00a0\u2013 opened in 1839, as part of a plan to provide seven large, modern cemeteries, now known as the \"Magnificent Seven\", around the outside of central London. The inner-city cemeteries, mostly the graveyards attached to individual churches, had long been unable to cope with the number of burials and were seen as a hazard to health and an undignified way to treat the dead. The initial design was by architect and entrepreneur Stephen Geary.\nOn 20 May 1839, Highgate (West) Cemetery was dedicated to St James by the Right Reverend Charles James Blomfield, Lord Bishop of London. were consecrated for the use of the Church of England, and two acres were set aside for dissenters. Rights of burial were sold either for a limited period or in perpetuity. The first burial was Elizabeth Jackson of Little Windmill Street, Soho, on 26 May.\nHighgate, like the others of the Magnificent Seven, soon became a fashionable place for burials and was much admired and visited. The Victorian attitude to death and its presentation led to the creation of a wealth of Gothic tombs and buildings. It occupies a spectacular south-facing hillside site slightly downhill from the top of Highgate hill, next to Waterlow Park. In 1854 a further 19 acres (8 ha) to the south east of the original area, across Swain's Lane, were bought to form the eastern extension; this opened in 1860. Both sides of the cemetery are still used today for burials.\nThe cemetery's grounds are full of trees, shrubbery and wildflowers, most of which have been planted and grown without human influence. The grounds are a haven for birds and small mammals, such as foxes. The cemetery is now owned and maintained by a charitable trust, the Friends of Highgate Cemetery Trust, which was set up in 1975 and acquired the freehold of both East and West sides by 1981. In 1984 it published \"Highgate Cemetery: Victorian Valhalla\" by John Gay.\nGraves.\nWest Side.\nThe Egyptian Avenue and the Circle of Lebanon (previously surmounted by a huge, 280-year-old Cedar of Lebanon, which had to be cut down and replaced in August 2019) are both Grade I listed buildings. The west side of the Cemetery is characterised by elaborate feature tombs, vaults and winding paths dug into hillsides. At the highest point, the Terrace Catacombs and the Tomb of Julius Beer are both Grade II* listed. In 1967 the Dissenter's Catacombs were declared unsafe and demolished. Three houses were subsequently built on the site. The Grey House, built in 2008, is visible from the West Side of the cemetery on Faraday Path. \nEast Side.\nMany famous or prominent people are buried on this side of Highgate cemetery; the most famous of which is perhaps that of Karl Marx, whose tomb was the site of attempted bombings on 2 September 1965 and in 1970. The tomb of Karl Marx is also a Grade I listed building for reasons of historical importance. Fireman's corner is a monument erected in the East side by widows and orphans of members of the London Fire Brigade in 1934. There are 97 firemen buried here. The monument is cared for by the Brigade's Welfare Section.\nWar graves.\nThe cemetery contains the graves of 318 Commonwealth service personnel maintained and registered by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, in both the East and West sides, 259 from the First World War and 59 from the Second. Those whose graves could not be marked by headstones are listed on a Screen Wall memorial erected near the Cross of Sacrifice in the west side.\nIn popular culture.\nHighgate Cemetery was featured in the popular media from the 1960s to the late 1980s for its so-called occult past, particularly as being the alleged site of the \"Highgate Vampire\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "70193", "revid": "36623386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70193", "title": "List of cities and towns in Poland", "text": "This is a list of cities and towns in Poland, consisting of four sections: the full list of all 107 cities in Poland by size, followed by a description of the principal metropolitan areas of the country, the table of the most populated cities and towns in Poland, and finally, the full alphabetical list of all 107 Polish cities and 861 towns combined. \nAs of 30 April 2022, there are altogether 2471 municipalities (gmina) in Poland:\nIn some cases, a city with powiat rights may also be a seat of both an eponymous rural gmina and an eponymous regular powiat, despite belonging to neither, e.g. Siedlce, Skierniewice, S\u0142upsk. No city in Poland constitutes a separate voivodeship in its own right, though 5 cities held such status in the past.\nGeneral principles.\nAll municipalities in Poland are governed regardless of their type under the mandatory mayor\u2013council government system. Executive power in a rural gmina is exercised by a \"w\u00f3jt\", while the homologue in municipalities containing cities or towns is called accordingly either a city mayor (\"prezydent miasta\") or a town mayor (\"burmistrz\"), all of them elected by a two-round direct election, while the town/city council is the legislative, budget-making and oversight body. Any local laws considered non-compliant with the national ones may be invalidated by the respective voivode, whose rulings may be appealed to an administrative court. Decisions in individual cases may in turn be appealed to quasi-judicial bodies named local government boards of appeal, their ruling subject to appeal to an administrative court. A town or city mayor may be scrutinized or denied funding for his/her projects by the council, but is not politically responsible to it and does not require its confidence to remain in office; therefore, cohabitation is not uncommon. A recall referendum may however be triggered either in respect to the w\u00f3jt/town mayor/city mayor or to the municipal council through a petition supported by at least 1/10 of eligible voters, but the turnout in the recall referendum must be at least 3/5 of the number of people voting in the original election in order for the referendum to be valid and binding. In addition, elected bodies of any municipality may be suspended by the Prime Minister of Poland in case of persisting law transgressions or negligence, resulting in such case in the municipality being placed under receivership. In a city with powiat rights, the city mayor additionally has the powers and duties of a powiat executive board and a starosta, while the city council has the powers and duties of a powiat (county) council; both nevertheless being elected under the municipal election rules rather than those applicable to county elections.\nCities.\nIn spite of no linguistic distinction between a city and a town in the Polish language (both translated ), a city may be recognized among other Polish urban municipalities through being managed by a city mayor (, literally translated city president) instead of a town mayor () as the head of the city executive, thus being informally called \"miasto prezydenckie\", with such privilege automatically awarded to municipalities either inhabited by more than 100,000 residents (currently 34) or those enjoying the status of a city with powiat rights (currently 66). As of 2022, all of the former group fit into the latter, though it was not always the case in the past. There is, however, a number of exemptions due to historic or political reasons, when a municipality meets neither of these two conditions but nevertheless has the city status, including the only 3 capitals of the former voivodeships of Poland (1975\u20131998) not meeting the abovementioned criteria, as well as 38 other municipalities which do not fit into any of the mentioned categories but have nevertheless been allowed to keep the earlier awarded status due to unspecified historical reasons. Among the 34 cities over 100,000, 18 are seats of voivode or voivodeship sejmik, thus carrying the informal designation of a voivodeship city. 11 of them are seats of an appeal court and other supra-voivodeship institutions.\nThe 107 Polish cities these are cities with a president ( ) belong to the following size ranges in terms of the number of inhabitants (cities with powiat rights are indicated with \"italics\"; the seats of either a voivode or a voivodeship legislature are marked in bold, the seats of an appeal court are marked with an asterisk*):\nPrincipal metropolitan areas.\nOnly a single officially incorporated multi-purpose metropolitan union exists in Poland, the \"sui generis\" Metropolis GZM, established by a dedicated act of Parliament of Poland within the Silesian Voivodeship, currently composed of 41 contiguous municipalities, with some of them containing also rural areas. Its total population is 2,279,560. The metropolis largely coincides with the metropolitan area of the Katowice urban area, which is a part of the wider polycentric transnational Katowice-Ostrava metropolitan area.\nA \"de facto\" metropolitan area is, however, also formed in some aspects by Warsaw metropolitan area, consisting of the capital city of Warsaw, a city with powiat rights, and the 9 neighbouring counties: Warsaw West County, Nowy Dw\u00f3r County, Legionowo County, Wo\u0142omin County, Mi\u0144sk County, Otwock County, Piaseczno County, Pruszk\u00f3w County and Grodzisk Mazowiecki County. Warsaw forms together with these counties a NUTS 2 area separate as an exception from the remainder of its home region, the Mazovian Voivodeship. In addition, identical area is policed by the Capital City Police Headquarters separate from the Mazovian Voivodeship Police Headquarters, with a status equal to that of voivodeship police headquarters. Attempts to establish a formally incorporated metropolitan union have been fiercely resisted by the citizens and the city mayor of Warsaw who have considered them a form of concealed gerrymandering, potentially leading to a political takeover of the city government through aiming to counterbalance the profoundly liberal city population with the conservative population of the neighbouring areas. \nA third widely known metropolitan area is the metropolitan area of Tricity in Pomeranian Voivodeship, urban area of which consists of the eponymous cities of Gda\u0144sk, Sopot and Gdynia. The designation has been used informally or semi-formally only. A strategic cooperation declaration, the Tricity Charter (Polish: \"Karta Tr\u00f3jmiasta\"), was signed by the three city mayors on 28 March 2007. The only incorporated common management authority in the Tricity metro is the Gda\u0144sk Bay Public Transport Metropolitan Union () which is, despite the name, an inter-municipal union and not a metropolitan one.\nLargest cities and towns by population.\nBelow is the table of the most populated cities and towns in Poland. The table ranks cities by population based on data from the Central Statistical Office of Poland.\nCities alphabetically.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70194", "revid": "41209184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70194", "title": "Lady Margaret Beaufort", "text": "English noblewoman and politician (1443\u20131509)\nLady Margaret Beaufort ( or ; 31 May 1443 \u2013 29 June 1509) was a major figure in the Wars of the Roses of the late 15th century, and mother of Henry VII of England, the first Tudor monarch. She was also a second cousin of Henry VI, Edward IV and Richard III of England.\nA descendant of King Edward III, Lady Margaret passed a disputed claim to the English throne to her son, Henry Tudor. Capitalising on the political upheaval of the period, she actively manoeuvred to secure the crown for her son. Margaret's efforts ultimately culminated in Henry's decisive victory over King Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field. She was thus instrumental in orchestrating the rise to power of the Tudor dynasty. With her son crowned Henry VII, Margaret wielded a considerable degree of political influence and personal autonomy. She was also a major patron and cultural benefactor during her son's reign, initiating an era of extensive Tudor patronage.\nMargaret is credited with the establishment of two prominent Cambridge colleges, founding Christ's College in 1505 and beginning the development of St John's College, which was completed posthumously by her executors in 1511. Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, a 19th-century foundation named after her, was the first Oxford college to admit women.\nOrigins.\nLady Margaret Beaufort was the daughter and sole heiress of John Beaufort, Duke of Somerset (1404\u20131444), (a legitimised grandson of John of Gaunt and Gaunt's mistress Katherine Swynford), and John Beaufort's wife Margaret Beauchamp. Lady Margaret was born at Bletsoe Castle, Bedfordshire, either on 31 May 1441 or, more likely, on 31 May 1443. The day and month are not disputed, since she required Westminster Abbey to celebrate her birthday on 31 May.\nThe year of her birth is less certain. William Dugdale, the 17th-century antiquary, suggested that she had been born in 1441, based on evidence of inquisitions \"post mortem\" taken after the death of her father. Dugdale has been followed by a number of Lady Margaret's biographers; however, it is more likely that she was born in 1443, as in May 1443 her father had negotiated with the king concerning the wardship of his unborn child should he die on campaign.\nEarly years.\nAt the moment of her birth, Margaret's father was preparing to go to France and lead an important military expedition for King Henry VI. Somerset negotiated with the king to ensure that if he were to die, the rights to Margaret's wardship and marriage would be granted only to his wife.\nAs Somerset was a tenant-in-chief of the crown, the wardship of his heir fell to the crown under the feudal system. Somerset fell out with the king after coming back from France and was banished from the royal court pending a charge of treason against him. He died shortly afterwards. According to Thomas Basin, Somerset died of illness, but the \"Crowland Chronicle\" reported that his death was a suicide. As his only surviving child, Margaret was heiress to his considerable fortune and inheritor of his contested claim to the throne. Both effectively rendered Margaret, as her biographers Jones and Underwood write, \"a pawn in the unstable political atmosphere of the Lancastrian court\".\nUpon her first birthday, the king broke the arrangement with Margaret's father and granted the wardship of her extensive lands to William de la Pole, 1st Duke of Suffolk, although Margaret herself remained in the custody of her mother. Margaret's mother was pregnant at the time of Somerset's death, but the child did not survive and Margaret remained the sole heir. Although she was her father's only legitimate child, Margaret had two maternal half-brothers and three maternal half-sisters from her mother's first marriage whom she supported after her son's accession to the throne.\nMargaret was married to Suffolk's son, John de la Pole. The wedding may have been held between 28 January and 7 February 1444, when she was perhaps a year old but certainly no more than three. However, there is more evidence to suggest they were married in January 1450, after Suffolk had been arrested and was looking to secure his son's future by betrothing him to a conveniently wealthy ward whose children could be potential claimants to the throne. Papal dispensation was granted on 18 August 1450, necessary because the spouses were closely related (Lady Margaret and de la Pole being the great-grandchildren of two sisters, Katherine Swynford and Philippa Chaucer, respectively), and this concurs with the later date of marriage. Three years later, her marriage to de la Pole was dissolved, and King Henry VI granted Margaret's wardship to his own half-brothers, Jasper and Edmund Tudor.\nMargaret never recognised the marriage to de la Pole. In her will, made in 1472, Margaret refers to Edmund Tudor as her first husband. Under canon law, Margaret was not bound by her first marriage contract as she was entered into the marriage before reaching the age of 12.\nEven before the annulment of her first marriage, Henry VI chose Margaret as a bride for his half-brother, Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond. This was likely to strengthen Edmund's claim to the throne should Henry be forced to designate Edmund his heir; the king was then without child or legitimate siblings. Edmund was the eldest son of the king's mother, Catherine of Valois, by Owen Tudor.\nAt nine years of age, Margaret was required to assent formally to the marriage. Later, she claimed she was divinely guided to do so.\nAt the age of 12, Margaret married Edmund Tudor, who was 12 years her senior, on 1 November 1455. The Wars of the Roses had just broken out. Edmund, a Lancastrian, was taken prisoner by Yorkist forces less than a year later. He died of the plague in captivity at Carmarthen on 3 November 1456, leaving a 13-year-old widow who was pregnant with their child.\nThe Countess always respected the name and memory of Edmund as the father of her only child. In 1472, 16 years after his death, Margaret specified in her will that she wanted to be buried alongside Edmund, even though she had enjoyed a long, stable and close marriage with her third husband, who had died in 1471.\nMotherhood.\nWhile in the care of her brother-in-law Jasper Tudor, Earl of Pembroke, on 28 January 1457, the 13-year-old Margaret gave birth to a son, Henry Tudor, at Pembroke Castle. As she was not yet physically mature, the birth was extremely difficult. In a sermon delivered after her death, Margaret's confessor, John Fisher, deemed it a miracle that a baby could be born \"of so little a personage\". Her son's birth may have done permanent physical injury to Margaret; despite two later marriages, she never had another child. Years later, she enumerated a set of proper procedures concerning the delivery of potential heirs, perhaps informed by the difficulty of her own experience.\nShortly after her re-entry into society after the birth, Jasper helped arrange another marriage for her to ensure her son's security. She married Sir Henry Stafford (c.\u20091425\u20131471), the second son of Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham, on 3 January 1458, at the age of 14. A dispensation for the marriage was necessary because Margaret and Stafford were second cousins; it was granted on 6 April 1457. They enjoyed a fairly long and harmonious marital relationship and were given Woking Palace, to which Margaret sometimes retreated and which she restored. Margaret and her husband were given 400 marks' worth of land by Buckingham, but her own estates were still their main source of income. For a time the Staffords were able to visit Margaret's son, who had been entrusted to Jasper Tudor's care at Pembroke Castle in Wales. \nInvolvement in the Wars of the Roses.\nReign of Edward IV.\nYears of Yorkist forces fighting Lancastrian for power culminated in the Battle of Towton in 1461, where the Yorkists were victorious. Edward IV was King of England. The fighting had taken the life of Margaret's father-in-law and forced Jasper Tudor to flee to Scotland and France to muster support for the Lancastrian cause. Edward IV gave the lands belonging to Margaret's son to his own brother, the Duke of Clarence. Henry became the ward of Sir William Herbert. Again, Beaufort was allowed some visits to her son.\nIn 1469 the discontented Duke of Clarence and Earl of Warwick incited a rebellion against Edward IV, capturing him after a defeat of his forces. Beaufort used this opportunity to attempt to negotiate with Clarence, hoping to regain custody of her son and his holdings. Soon, however, Edward was back in power.\nWarwick's continued insurrection resulted in the brief reinstallation of the Lancastrian Henry VI in 1470\u201371, which was effectively ended with the Yorkist victory at the Battle of Barnet. Faced with York rule once again, Margaret allegedly begged Jasper Tudor, forced to flee abroad once more, to take 13-year-old Henry with him. It would be 14 years before Beaufort saw her son again.\nIn 1471, Margaret's husband, Lord Stafford, died of wounds suffered at the Battle of Barnet, fighting for the Yorkists. At 28 years old, Margaret became a widow again.\nIn June 1472, Margaret married Thomas Stanley, the Lord High Constable and King of Mann. Jones and Underwood have suggested that Margaret never considered herself a member of the Stanley family. Their marriage was primarily one of convenience; marrying Stanley enabled Margaret to return to the court of Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville. Indeed, Gristwood speculates Beaufort organised the marriage with the sole aim of rehabilitating her image and securing herself a prime position from which to advocate for her son. Evidently her efforts were successful; Margaret was chosen by Queen Elizabeth to be godmother to one of her daughters.\nHolinshed, a Tudor chronicler, claims King Edward IV later proposed a marriage between Beaufort's son and his own daughter, Elizabeth of York, intending to force Henry Tudor out of his safe haven on the continent. Poet Bernard Andre seems to corroborate this, writing of Tudor's miraculous escape from the clutches of Edward's envoys, allegedly warned of the deception by none other than his mother.\nReigns of Edward V and Richard III.\nFollowing Edward IV's death in April 1483 and the seizure of the throne in June by Richard III from Edward V, Margaret was soon back at court serving the new queen, Anne Neville. Margaret carried Anne's train at the coronation. Seeking her son's return to England, Margaret appears to have negotiated with Richard.\nDespite what these negotiations may suggest, Lady Margaret is known to have conspired with Elizabeth Woodville, mother of the two York princes whom Richard confined to the Tower of London, after rumours spread of the boys' murder. It was at this point, according to Polydore Vergil, that Beaufort \"began to hope well of her son's fortune\".\nBeaufort is believed to have initiated discussions with Woodville, via mutual physician, Lewis Caerleon, who conveyed secret correspondences between the two women. Together they conspired to supplant King Richard and by joint force replace him with Margaret's son, Henry Tudor. Their solidified alliance further secured the subsequent dynasty by the agreed betrothal of Henry to Elizabeth of York. They hoped this proposal would attract both Yorkist and Lancastrian support.\nAs to the fate of the princes, it is widely held that Richard III ordered the death of his two nephews to secure his own reign. Gristwood, however, suggests that another was responsible; Henry Tudor's path to the throne was certainly expedited by their disappearance, perhaps motive enough for his mother \u2013 his \"highly able and totally committed representative\" \u2013 to give the order.\nDespite this suggestion, no contemporary sources corroborate the implication, whilst most contemporary accounts outline \"her outstanding qualities, her courage, presence of mind, family loyalty, and a deeply felt awareness of the spiritual responsibilities of high office,\" as clarified by Jones and Underwood. Before Jones and Underwood, there was no consensus within the scholarly community regarding Margaret's role or character: historiographical opinions ranged from celebrating her to demonising her.\nIt was not until the 17th century that religious retrospective speculations began to criticise Lady Margaret, but even then only as a \"politic and contriving woman,\" and never anything beyond shrewd or calculating. All things considered, the words of her own contemporaries, such as Tudor historian Polydore Vergil, continue to extol Lady Margaret's noble virtues as \"the most pious woman,\" further removing her from accusations of wickedness.\nErasmus, in writing about his friend the Bishop, Saint John Fisher, praised Margaret's support of religious institutions and the Bishop, further attesting the simultaneously pragmatic and charitable nature testified in the funerary sermon dedicated by the Bishop himself, as laid out in a following section.\nIn 1483 Margaret was certainly involved in \u2013 if not the mastermind behind \u2013 Buckingham's rebellion. Indeed, in his biography of Richard III, historian Paul Murray Kendall describes Beaufort as the \"Athena of the rebellion\". Perhaps with duplicitous motives (as he may have been desirous of the crown for himself), Buckingham conspired with Beaufort and Woodville to dethrone Richard. Margaret's son was to sail from Brittany to join forces with him, but he arrived too late.\nIn October, Beaufort's scheme proved unsuccessful; the Duke was executed and Tudor was forced back across the English Channel. Beaufort appears to have played a large role in financing the insurrection. In response to her betrayal, Richard passed an act of Parliament stripping Margaret of all her titles and estates, declaring her guilty of the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Forasmoch as Margaret Countesse of Richmond, Mother to the Kyngs greate Rebell and Traytour, Herry Erle of Richemond, hath of late conspired, consedered, and comitted high Treason ayenst oure Soveraigne Lorde the King Richard the Third, in dyvers and sundry wyses, and in especiall in sendyng messages, writyngs and tokens to the said Henry... Also the said Countesse made chevisancez of greate somes of Money... and also the said Countesse conspired, consedered, and imagyned the destruction of oure said Soveraign Lorde...\nRichard did, however, stop short of a full attainder by transferring Margaret's property to her husband, Lord Stanley. He also effectively imprisoned Margaret in her husband's home with the hope of preventing any further correspondence with her son. However, her husband failed to stop Margaret's continued communication with her son. When the time came for Henry to press his claim, he relied heavily on his mother to raise support for him in England.\nMargaret's husband Stanley, despite having fought for Richard III during the Buckingham rebellion, did not respond when summoned to fight at the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485, remaining aloof from the battle, even though his eldest son, George Stanley (styled Lord Strange), was held hostage by Richard. After the battle, it was Stanley who placed the crown on the head of his stepson (Henry VII), who later made him Earl of Derby. Margaret was then styled \"Countess of Richmond and Derby\". She was invested as a Lady of the Order of the Garter (LG) in 1488.\nMargaret Beaufort in power.\nAfter her son's victory at the Battle of Bosworth Field, the Countess was referred to in court as \"My Lady the King's Mother\". Her son's first Parliament reversed the attainder against her and declared her a \"feme sole\". This status granted Beaufort considerable legal and social independence from men. She was allowed to own property separately from her husband (as though she were unmarried) and sue in court \u2013 two rights denied to contemporary married women.\nAs arranged by their mothers, Henry married Elizabeth of York. The Countess was reluctant to accept a lower status than the dowager queen Elizabeth or even her daughter-in-law, the queen consort. She wore robes of the same quality as the queen consort and walked only half a pace behind her. Elizabeth's biographer, Amy Licence, states that this \"would have been the correct courtly protocol\", adding that \"only one person knew how Elizabeth really felt about Margaret and she did not commit it to paper.\"\nMargaret had written her signature as \"M. Richmond\" for years, since the 1460s. In 1499, she changed her signature to \"Margaret R.\", perhaps to signify her royal authority (\"R\" standing either for \"regina\" \u2013 queen in Latin as customarily employed by female monarchs \u2013 or for Richmond). Furthermore, she included the Tudor crown and the caption \"et mater Henrici septimi regis Angli\u00e6 et Hiberni\u00e6\" (\"and mother of Henry VII, king of England and Ireland\").\nMany historians believe the departure from court of dowager queen Elizabeth Woodville in 1487 was partly at the behest of Henry's influential mother, though this is uncertain.\nBeaufort exerted considerable political influence within the Tudor court. The power she exercised was evidently obvious; a report from Spanish envoy Pedro de Ayala dating to 1498 claimed Henry was \"much influenced by his mother and his followers in affairs or personal interest and in others.\" In the earlier years of her son's reign, records indicate Margaret usually accompanied the royal couple when they traveled.\nWhile Margaret's position in the royal court was, to some extent, an expression of gratitude by her son, she was likely far less the passive recipient of Henry's favor one might expect. As Gristwood suggests in the following, Beaufort instead actively contrived to further her standing:\n\"A place had to be created for the sort of 'king's mother' Margaret was determined to be. Perhaps if Margaret had become a queen, a role that she clearly felt Fortune had denied her, she would not have felt the need to press for her rights quite so stridently.\"\nHowever, Lady Margaret's immediate petitions were not for queenly powers of rule over others, but were two succinct demands for independence and liberty of self, which were products of expert legal advice, as opposed to a desperate desire to rule.\nThe first act reversed the legislation that had robbed Margaret of her properties under the reign of Richard III, deeming it \"entirely void, annulled and of no force or effect\". The second act of November 1485 stated that she would enjoy all her properties and titles, and could pursue any legal action as any \"single unmarried person might or may do at any time\", despite still being married.\nMoreover, as with many decisions made to secure the new dynasty, these Acts of Parliament passed appear to be a collaborative effort, mutually beneficial to both mother and son, as by granting Margaret the status of a femme sole, Henry and his Parliament made it possible to empower the King's Mother without giving further\nleverage to the Stanleys, since Margaret could use any wealth granted to her for her own purposes, thereby circumventing the prevailing idea of coverture.\nIn his chronicle, Polydore Vergil assessed the partnership between the Tudor king and his mother, noting that Henry gave her a share of most of his public and private resources, contrary to any assertion that Margaret desired greater power. Or, as King Henry Tudor states in a letter to his mother: \"...not only in this but in all other things that I may know should be to your honour and pleasure, and will of your self, I shall be as glad to please you as your heart can desire.\"\nLady Margaret's wardship of brothers, Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham, and Henry Stafford, 1st Earl of Wiltshire, is one of many examples of how her unique position allowed her in varying aspects to operate beyond the scope of any queen, a position which, instead of hindering or irritating her at all, proved advantageous to the state of the Crown and delineated her as a helpful and happy agent of its course, as she refused monetary recompense for her stewardship in this arena and successfully secured the allegiance of the Duke of Buckingham to King Henry Tudor, a loyalty that would fade away from the Crown once she and her son were gone.\nLater in her marriage, the Countess preferred living alone. In 1499, with her husband's permission, she took a vow of chastity in the presence of Richard FitzJames, Bishop of London. Taking a vow of chastity while being married was unusual but not unprecedented. The Countess moved away from her husband and lived alone at Collyweston, Northamptonshire (near Stamford). She was regularly visited by her husband, who had rooms reserved for him. Margaret renewed her vows in 1504. From her principal residence at Collyweston, she was given a special commission to administer justice over the Midlands and the North.\nBeaufort was also actively involved in the domestic life of the royal family. She created a proper protocol regarding the birth and upbringing of royal heirs. Though their relationship is often portrayed as antagonistic, Beaufort and her daughter-in-law Elizabeth worked together when planning the marriages of the royal children. They wrote jointly of the necessary instruction for Catherine of Aragon, who was to marry Elizabeth's son Prince Arthur. Both women also conspired to prevent Elizabeth and Henry's daughter Margaret from being married to the Scottish king at too young an age; in this matter, Gristwood writes, Beaufort was undoubtedly resolved that her granddaughter \"should not share her fate\".\nAfter Elizabeth's death in 1503, Margaret became the principal female presence at court. When Arthur died, Margaret played a part in ensuring her grandson Henry, the new heir apparent, was raised appropriately by selecting some members of his new household.\nThe Countess was known for her education and her piety. Biographers Jones and Underwood claim the entirety of Beaufort's life can be understood in the context of her \"deeply-felt love and loyalty to her son\". Henry is said to have been likewise devoted. A surviving letter written by Henry to his mother reveals his sense of gratitude and appreciation:\n\"All which thyngs according to your desire and plesure I have with all my herte and goode wille giffen and graunted unto you... I shall be as glad to plese you as youre herte can desire hit, and I knowe welle that I am as much bounden so to doe as any creture lyvyng, for the grete and singular moderly love and affection that hit hath plesed you at all tymes to ber towards me\".\nHenry VII died on 21 April 1509, having designated his mother chief executrix of his will. For two days after the death of her son, Margaret scrambled to secure the smooth succession of her grandson, Henry VIII. She arranged her son's funeral and her grandson's coronation. At her son's funeral she was given precedence over all the other women of the royal family.\nBefore her death, Beaufort also left her mark on the early reign of Henry VIII; when her 18-year-old grandson chose members of his privy council, it was Margaret's suggestions he took.\nDeath.\nMargaret had been ill for several days, as legend has it, after eating a cygnet (a young swan) for dinner. The Countess died in the Deanery of Westminster Abbey on 29 June 1509. This was the day after her grandson Henry VIII's 18th birthday, 5 days after his coronation and just over two months after the death of her son.\nShe had made her will and a schedule of bequests in February 1509, making arrangements for her funeral and donations to religious foundations. She made bequests of her jewellery and gold cups to Catherine of Aragon, Margaret Tudor, and Mary Tudor, and a chalice to the parish church at Collyweston.\nMargaret is buried in the Henry VII Chapel of the Abbey. Her tomb is now situated between the later graves of William III and Mary II and the tomb of her great-great-granddaughter Mary, Queen of Scots.\nHer tomb was created by Pietro Torrigiano, who probably arrived in England in 1509 and received the commission in the following year. The gilded bronze sculpture on the tomb depicts Margaret with her head resting on pillows and her hands raised in prayer, wearing garments characteristic of widowhood; the face was probably sculpted from a death mask. The black marble tomb is embellished with heraldic bronze insignia, including a yale, her heraldic badge, at her feet.\nErasmus wrote the Latin inscription on her tomb. In English it reads: \"Margaret, Countess of Richmond, mother of Henry VII, grandmother of Henry VIII, who donated funds for three monks of this abbey, a grammar school in Wimborne, a preacher in the whole of England, two lecturers in Scripture, one at Oxford, the other at Cambridge, where she also founded two colleges, one dedicated to Christ, and the other to St John, the Evangelist.\"\nIn 1539 iron railings, elaborately painted with coats of arms and other ornaments, were erected around the tomb. The ironwork was sold off by the Abbey in 1823 but recovered and restored a century later.\nLegacy.\nLady Margaret Beaufort was a lifelong artistic patron and supporter of academia. Margaret commissioned the first English parody mass from Robert Fayrfax based on his earlier motet, \"O bone Jesu\".\nWhile married to Lord Stanley Margaret endowed the building of chapels in Wales. Like Edward IV and his court, she was also involved with the advances in printing of William Caxton and his successor Wynkyn de Worde, not only as a patroness but for her own acquisition. The first book she commissioned from Caxton in 1483 was the 13th-century French romance \"Blanchardin et Eglantine\", which mirrored fairly closely the match she was forging in secret between her son Henry and Elizabeth of York, with the aid of Elizabeth Woodville, then in sanctuary from Richard III in Westminster Abbey. Six years later, after Richard's defeat by Henry at Bosworth, she commissioned an English translation of the romance from Caxton: it heralded the beginning of a period of Tudor patronage. Apart from encouraging book production and building her own library, Margaret also achieved considerable success as a translator, becoming the first English translator of the \"Imitation of Christ\" known by name, as well as translating the 15th-century Netherlandish treatise \"The Mirror of Gold for the Sinful Soul\" from a French intermediary.\nIn 1497 she announced her intention to build a free school for the general public of Wimborne. Following her death in 1509, Wimborne Grammar School came into existence, to become Queen Elizabeth's School, Wimborne Minster.\nIn 1502 she established the Lady Margaret's Professorship of Divinity at the University of Cambridge. In 1505 she refounded and enlarged God's House, Cambridge as Christ's College, Cambridge with a royal charter from the king. She has been honoured ever since as the Foundress of the college. A copy of her signature can be found carved on one of the buildings (4 staircase, 1994) within the college. In 1511, St. John's College, Cambridge was founded by her estate, either at her direct behest or at the suggestion of her chaplain, John Fisher. Land that she owned around Great Bradley in Suffolk was bequeathed to St. John's upon its foundation. Her portraits hang in the Great Halls and other college rooms of both Christ's and St. John's, accompanied by portraits of John Fisher. Unusually, both colleges have the same coats of arms, using her crest and motto. Furthermore, various societies, including the Lady Margaret Society as well as the Beaufort Club at Christ's, and the Lady Margaret Boat Club at John's, were named after her.\nIn 1540, funds she had bequeathed endowed a lectureship in divinity at the University of Oxford, first held by John Roper; it became the Lady Margaret Professorship of Divinity, held concurrently with a canonship at Christ Church, Oxford. Lady Margaret Hall, the first women's college at the University of Oxford (founded in 1878), was named in her honour.\nA practical woman, when faced with problems of flooding in parts of the Fens that threatened some of her properties, she was able to initiate an ambitious drainage scheme, involving foreign engineers, that saw the construction of a large sluice at Boston. She funded the restoration of Church of All Saints, Martock in Somerset, and the construction of the church tower.\nIn 1993, the Margaret Beaufort Institute of Theology on Grange Road, Cambridge, was founded and named in her honour. It is now a coeducational interdenominational theological college, having originally begun as a centre for training Catholic laywomen in religion and theology.\nPortraits.\nThere is no surviving portrait of Margaret Beaufort dating from her lifetime. All known portraits, however, are in essentially the same format, depicting her in her later years, wearing a long, peaked, white headdress and in a pose of religious contemplation. Most of these were made in the reign of Henry VIII and Elizabeth I as symbols of loyalty to the Tudor regime. They may be based on a lost original, or be derived from the sculpture on her tomb in Westminster Abbey, in which she wears the same headdress.\nOne portrait by Meynnart Wewyck in 1510 shows her at prayer in her richly furnished private closet behind her chamber. The plain desk at which she kneels is draped with a richly patterned textile that is so densely encrusted with embroidery that its corners stand away stiffly. Her lavishly illuminated Book of Hours is open before her, with its protective cloth wrapper (called a \"chemise\" binding), spread out around it. The walls are patterned with oak leaf designs, perhaps in lozenges, perhaps of stamped and part-gilded leather. Against the wall hangs the dosser of her canopy of estate, with the tester above her head (the Tudor rose at its centre) supported on cords from the ceiling. The coats-of-arms woven into the tapestry are of England (parted as usual with France) and the portcullis badge of the Beauforts, which the early Tudor kings later used in their arms. Small stained-glass roundels in the leaded glass of her lancet windows also display elements of the arms of both England (cropped away here) and Beaufort. The painting, which measures 180\u00a0cm by 122\u00a0cm, is notable as the first large-scale portrait of an Englishwoman.\nIn 2023, restoration work on the Wewyck portrait revealed that it had been overpainted several times throughout its history, with Margaret's original facial expression made more sombre and pious.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
