{"id": "69755", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69755", "title": "Avro Canada CF-105 Arrow", "text": "Canadian interceptor aircraft family\nThe Avro Canada CF-105 Arrow was a delta-winged interceptor aircraft designed and built by Avro Canada. The CF-105 held the promise of Mach\u00a02 speeds at altitudes exceeding and was intended to serve as the Royal Canadian Air Force's (RCAF) primary interceptor into the 1960s and beyond.\nThe Arrow was the culmination of a series of design studies begun in 1953 that examined improved versions of the Avro Canada CF-100 Canuck. After considerable study, the RCAF selected a dramatically more powerful design, and serious development began in March 1955. The aircraft was intended to be built directly from the production line, skipping the traditional hand-built prototype phase. The first Arrow Mk. 1, RL-201, was rolled out to the public on 4 October 1957, the same day as the launch of Sputnik I.\nFlight testing began with RL-201 on 25 March 1958, and the design quickly demonstrated excellent handling and overall performance, reaching Mach\u00a01.9 in level flight. Powered by the Pratt &amp; Whitney J75, another four Mk. 1s were completed, RL-202, RL-203, RL-204 and RL-205. The lighter and more powerful Orenda Iroquois engine was soon ready for testing, and the first Mk 2 with the Iroquois, RL-206, was ready for taxi testing in preparation for flight and acceptance tests by RCAF pilots by early 1959.\nCanada tried to sell the Arrow to the US and Britain, but no agreements were concluded.\nOn 20 February 1959, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker abruptly halted the development of both the Arrow and its Iroquois engines before the scheduled project review to evaluate the program could be held. Two months later the assembly line, tooling, plans, existing airframes, and engines were ordered to be destroyed. The cancellation was the topic of considerable political controversy at the time, and the subsequent destruction of the aircraft in production remains a topic for debate among historians and industry pundits. \"This action effectively put Avro out of business and its highly skilled engineering and production personnel scattered\".\nDesign and development.\nBackground.\nIn the post-Second World War period, the Soviet Union began developing a capable fleet of long-range bombers with the ability to deliver nuclear weapons across North America and Europe. The main threat was principally from high-speed, high-altitude bombing runs launched from the Soviet Union travelling over the Arctic against military bases and built-up industrial centres in Canada and the United States. To counter this threat, Western countries developed interceptors that could engage and destroy these bombers before they reached their targets.\nA.\u00a0V. Roe Canada Limited had been set up as a subsidiary of the Hawker Siddeley Group in 1945, initially handling repair and maintenance work for aircraft at the Malton, Ontario, Airport, today known as Toronto Pearson International Airport. The next year the company began the design of Canada's first jet fighter for the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF), the Avro CF-100 Canuck all-weather interceptor. The Canuck underwent a lengthy and troubled prototype stage before entering service seven years later in 1953. Nevertheless, it went on to become one of the most enduring aircraft of its class, serving in a variety of roles until 1981.\nRecognizing that the delays that affected the development and deployment of the CF-100 could also affect its successor, and that the Soviets were working on newer jet-powered bombers that would render the CF-100 ineffective, the RCAF began looking for a supersonic, missile-armed successor for the Canuck even before it had entered service. In March 1952, the RCAF's \"Final Report of the All-Weather Interceptor Requirements Team\" was submitted to Avro Canada.\nHigher speeds.\nAvro engineering had been considering supersonic issues already at this point. Supersonic flight works in a very different fashion and presents a number of new problems. One of the most critical, and surprising, was the sudden onset of a new form of drag, known as wave drag. The effects of wave drag were so strong that engines of the era could not provide enough power to overcome it, leading to the concept of a \"sound barrier\".\nGerman research during the Second World War had shown the onset of wave drag was greatly reduced by using airfoils that varied in curvature as gradually as possible. This suggested the use of thinner airfoils with much longer chord than designers would have used on subsonic aircraft. These designs were impractical because they left little internal room in the wing for armament or fuel.\nThe Germans also discovered it was possible to \"trick\" the airflow into the same behaviour if a conventional thicker airfoil was used swept rearward at a sharp angle, creating a swept wing. This provided many of the advantages of a thinner airfoil while also retaining the internal space needed for strength and fuel storage. Another advantage was that the wings were clear of the supersonic shock wave generated by the nose of the aircraft.\nAlmost every fighter project in the postwar era immediately applied the concept, which started appearing on production fighters in the late 1940s. Avro engineers explored swept-wing and tail modifications to the CF-100 known as the CF-103, which had proceeded to wooden mock-up stage. The CF-103 offered improved transonic performance with supersonic abilities in a dive. The basic CF-100 continued to improve through this period, and the advantages were continually eroded. When a CF-100 broke the sound barrier on 18 December 1952, interest in the CF-103 waned.\nDelta wings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt the time we laid down the design of the CF-105, there was a somewhat emotional controversy going on in the United States on the relative merits of the delta plan form versus the straight wing for supersonic aircraft\u00a0... our choice of a tailless delta was based mainly on the compromise of attempting to achieve structural and aero elastic efficiency, with a very thin wing, and yet, at the same time, achieving the large internal fuel capacity required for the specified range.\n \u2014Designer James C. Floyd\nAnother solution to the high-speed problem is the delta wing. The delta wing had many of the same advantages of the swept wing in terms of transonic and supersonic performance, but offered much more internal room and overall surface area. This provided more room for fuel, an important consideration given the inefficient early jet engines of the era, and the large wing area provided ample lift at high altitudes. The delta wing also enabled slower landings than swept wings in certain conditions.\nThe disadvantages of the design were increased drag at lower speeds and altitudes, and especially higher drag while maneuvering. For the interceptor role these were minor concerns, as the aircraft would be spending most of its time flying in straight lines at high altitudes and speeds, mitigating these disadvantages.\nFurther proposals based on the delta wing resulted in two versions of the design known as C104: the single engine C104/4 and twin-engined C104/2. The designs were otherwise similar, using a low-mounted delta-wing and sharply raked vertical stabilizer. The primary advantages of the C104/2 were its twin-engine reliability and a larger overall size, which offered a much larger internal weapons bay. The proposals were submitted to the RCAF in June 1952.\nAIR 7-3 and C105.\nIntensive discussions between Avro and the RCAF examined a wide range of alternative sizes and configurations for a supersonic interceptor, culminating in RCAF Specification AIR 7-3 in April 1953. AIR 7-3 called specifically for a two crew, twin engine, aircraft with a range of 300 nautical miles (556 km) for a normal low-speed mission, and 200 nmi (370 km) for a high-speed interception mission. It also specified operation from a 6,000 ft (1,830 m) runway; a Mach\u00a01.5 cruising speed at an altitude of 70,000 ft (21,000 m); and manoeuvrability for 2\u00a0\"g\" turns with no loss of speed or altitude at Mach\u00a01.5 and 50,000 ft. The specification required five minutes from starting the aircraft's engines to reaching 50,000 ft altitude and Mach\u00a01.5. It was also to have turn-around time on the ground of less than 10 minutes. An RCAF team led by Ray Foottit visited US aircraft producers and surveyed British and French manufacturers, concluding that no existing or planned aircraft satisfied these requirements.\nIn 1955 Avro estimated the performance of the Arrow Mk 2 (with Iroquois) as follows, from the January 1955 British evaluation titled Evaluation of the CF.105 as an All Weather Fighter for the RAF: \"Max speed Mach\u00a01.9 at 50,000\u00a0ft, Combat speed of Mach\u00a01.5 at 50,000\u00a0feet and 1.84\u00a0g without bleeding energy, time to 50,000\u00a0ft of 4.1\u00a0minutes, 500-foot per minute climb ceiling of 62,000\u00a0feet, 400\u00a0nmi radius on a high-speeds mission, 630\u00a0nmi radius on a low-speed mission, Ferry range is not given, but estimated at 1,500\u00a0nmi.\"\nAvro submitted their modified C105 design in May 1953, essentially a two-man version of the C104/2. A change to a \"shoulder-mounted\" wing allowed rapid access to the aircraft's internals, weapons bay, and engines. The new design also allowed the wing to be built as a single structure sitting on the upper fuselage, simplifying construction and improving strength. The wing design and positioning required a long main landing gear that still had to fit within the thin delta wing, presenting an engineering challenge. Five different wing sizes were outlined in the report, ranging between 1,000 ft2 and 1,400 ft2 (93 m2 to 130 m2); the 1,200 ft2 (111 m2) sized version was eventually selected.\nThe primary engine selection was the Rolls-Royce RB.106, an advanced two-spool design offering around . Backup designs were the Bristol Olympus OL-3, the US-built Curtiss-Wright J67 version of the OL-3, or the Orenda TR.9 engines.\nArmament was stored in a large internal bay located in a \"belly\" position, taking up over one third of the fuselage. A wide variety of weapons could be deployed from this bay, such as the Hughes Falcon guided missile, the CARDE Velvet Glove air-to-air missile, or four general-purpose 1,000\u00a0lb bombs. The Velvet Glove radar-guided missile had been under development with the RCAF for some time, but was believed unsuitable for supersonic speeds and lacked development potential. Consequently, further work on that project was cancelled in 1956.\nIn July 1953, the proposal was accepted and Avro was given the go-ahead to start a full design study under the project name \"CF-105\". In December, CA$27 million was provided to start flight modelling. At first, the project was limited in scope, but the introduction of the Soviet Myasishchev M-4 \"Bison\" jet bomber and the Soviet Union's testing of a hydrogen bomb the next month dramatically changed Cold War priorities. In March 1955, the contract was upgraded to CA$260\u00a0million for five Arrow Mk.1 flight-test aircraft, to be followed by 35 Arrow Mk. 2s with production engines and fire-control systems.\nProduction.\nTo meet the timetable set by the RCAF, Avro decided that the Arrow program would adopt the Cook-Craigie plan. Normally a small number of prototypes of an aircraft were hand-built and flown to find problems, and when solutions were found these changes would be worked into the design. When satisfied with the results, the production line would be set up. In a Cook-Craigie system, the production line was set up first and a small number of aircraft were built as production models. Any changes would be incorporated into the jigs while testing continued, with full production starting when the test program was complete. As Jim Floyd noted at the time, this was a risky approach: \"it was decided to take the technical risks involved to save time on the programme\u00a0... I will not pretend that this philosophy of production type build from the outset did not cause us a lot of problems in Engineering. However, it did achieve its objective.\"\nTo mitigate risks, a massive testing program was started. By mid-1954, the first production drawings were issued and wind tunnel work began, along with extensive computer simulation studies carried out both in Canada and the United States using sophisticated computer programs. In a related program, nine instrumented free-flight models were mounted on solid fuel Nike rocket boosters and launched from Point Petre over Lake Ontario while two additional models were launched from the NASA facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, over the Atlantic Ocean. These models were for aerodynamic drag and stability testing, flown to a maximum speed of Mach\u00a01.7+ before intentionally crashing into the water.\nExperiments showed the need for only a small number of design changes, mainly involving the wing profile and positioning. To improve high-alpha performance, the leading edge of the wing was drooped, especially on outer sections, a dog-tooth was introduced at about half-span to control spanwise flow, and the entire wing given a slight negative camber which helped control trim drag and pitch-up. The area rule principle, made public in 1952, was also applied to the design. This resulted in several changes including the addition of a tailcone, sharpening the radar nose profile, thinning the intake lips, and reducing the cross-sectional area of the fuselage below the canopy.\nThe construction of the airframe was fairly conventional, with a semi-monocoque frame and multi-spar wing. The aircraft used a measure of magnesium and titanium in the fuselage, the latter limited largely to the area around the engines and to fasteners. Titanium was still expensive and not widely used because it was difficult to machine.\nThe Arrow's thin wing required aviation's first hydraulic system to supply enough force to the control surfaces, while using small actuators and piping. A rudimentary fly-by-wire system was employed, in which the pilot's input was detected by a series of pressure-sensitive transducers in the stick, their signal sent to an electronic control servo operating valves in the hydraulic system to move the flight controls. This resulted in a lack of control feel; because the control stick input was not mechanically connected to the hydraulic system, the variations in back-pressure from the flight control surfaces that would normally be felt by the pilot could no longer be transmitted back into the stick. To re-create a sense of feel, the same electronic control box rapidly responded to the hydraulic back-pressure fluctuations and triggered actuators in the stick, making it move slightly; this system, called \"artificial feel\", was also a first.\nIn 1954, the RB.106 program was cancelled, necessitating the use of the backup Wright J67 engine instead. In 1955, this engine was also cancelled, leaving the design with no engine. At this point, the Pratt &amp; Whitney J75 was selected for the initial test-flight models, while the new TR 13 engine was developed at Orenda for the production Mk. 2s.\nAfter evaluating the engineering mock-ups and the full-scale wooden mock-up in February 1956, the RCAF demanded additional changes, selecting the advanced RCA-Victor \"Astra\" fire-control system firing the equally advanced United States Navy Sparrow II in place of the MX-1179 and Falcon combination. Avro vocally objected on the grounds that neither of these were even in testing, whereas both the MX-1179 and Falcon were almost production-ready and would have been nearly as effective for \"a very large saving in cost\". The Astra proved problematic as the system ran into a lengthy period of delays, and when the USN cancelled the Sparrow II in 1956, Canadair was quickly brought in to continue the Sparrow program in Canada, although they expressed grave concerns about the project as well and the move added yet more expense.\nRollout and flight testing.\nGo-ahead on the production was given in 1955. The rollout of the first CF-105, marked as RL-201, took place on 4 October 1957. The company had planned to capitalize on the event, inviting more than 13,000 guests to the occasion. Unfortunately for Avro, the media and public attention for the Arrow rollout was dwarfed by the launch of Sputnik the same day.\nThe J75 engine was slightly heavier than the PS-13, and therefore required ballast to be placed in the nose to return the centre of gravity to the correct position. In addition, the Astra fire-control system was not ready, and it too, was replaced by ballast. The otherwise unused weapons bay was loaded with test equipment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe aircraft, at supersonic speeds, was pleasant and easy to fly. During approach and landing, the handling characteristics were considered good\u00a0... On my second flight\u00a0... the general handling characteristics of the Arrow Mark 1 were much improved\u00a0... On my sixth and last flight\u00a0... the erratic control in the rolling plane, encountered on the last flight, [was] no longer there\u00a0... Excellent progress was being made in the development\u00a0... from where I sat the Arrow was performing as predicted and was meeting all guarantees.\n\u2014Jack Woodman, the only RCAF pilot to fly the Arrow\nRL-201 first flew on 25 March 1958 with Chief Development Test Pilot S/L Janusz \u017burakowski at the controls. Four more J75-powered Mk 1s were delivered in the next 18 months. The test flights, limited to \"proof-of-concept\" and assessing flight characteristics, revealed no serious design faults. The CF-105 demonstrated excellent handling throughout the flight envelope, in large part due to the natural qualities of the delta-wing, but responsibility can also be attributed to the Arrow's Stability Augmentation System. The aircraft went supersonic on its third flight and, on the seventh, broke 1,000 mph (1,600 km/h) at 50,000 ft (15,000 m) while climbing. A top speed of Mach\u00a01.98 was achieved, and this was not at the limits of its performance. An Avro report made public in 2015 clarifies that during the highest speed flight, the Arrow reached Mach\u00a01.90 in steady level flight, and an indicated Mach number of 1.95 was recorded in a dive. Estimates up to Mach\u00a01.98 likely originated from an attempt to compensate for lag error, which was expected in diving flight.\nAlthough no major problems were encountered during the initial testing phase, some minor issues with the landing gear and flight control system had to be rectified. The first was partly due to the tandem main landing gear being very narrow, in order to fit into the wings; the leg shortened in length and rotated as it was stowed. During one landing incident on 11 June 1958, the chain mechanism (used to shorten the gear) in the Mark 1 gear jammed, resulting in the Arrow 201 experiencing a runway excursion and gear collapse. In a second incident with Arrow 202 on 11 November 1958, the flight control system commanded elevons full down at landing; the resulting reduction in weight on the gears reduced the effective tire friction, ultimately resulting in brake lockup and subsequent gear collapse. A photograph taken of the incident proved that inadvertent flight control activation had caused the accident. The only occasion when a test flight was diverted occurred on 2 February 1959, when a Trans-Canada Airlines Vickers Viscount crash-landed in Toronto, necessitating a landing at RCAF Trenton.\nThe stability augmentation system also required much fine-tuning. Although other aircraft had used such systems before, the CF-105 was among the first of its kind, and was problematic. By February 1959, the five aircraft had completed the majority of the company test program and were progressing to the RCAF acceptance trials.\nPolitical issues.\nFrom 1953, some senior Canadian military officials at the chiefs of staffs began to question the program. The chiefs of staff of the army and navy were both strongly opposed to the Arrow, since \"substantial funds were being diverted to the air force\", while Air Marshal Hugh Campbell, RCAF Chief of Staff, backed it right up until its cancellation. In June 1957, when the governing Liberals lost the federal election and a Progressive Conservative government under John Diefenbaker took power, the aircraft's prospects began to noticeably change. Diefenbaker had campaigned on a platform of reining in what the Conservatives described as \"rampant Liberal spending\". Nonetheless, by 1958, the parent company had become Canada's third largest business enterprise and had primary interests in rolling stock, steel and coal, electronics, and aviation with 39 different companies under the A.\u00a0V. Roe Canada banner.\nIn September 1957, the Diefenbaker government signed the NORAD (North American Air Defense) Agreement with the United States, making Canada a partner with American command and control. The USAF was in the process of completely automating their air defence system with the SAGE project, and offered Canada the opportunity to share this sensitive information for the air defence of North America. One aspect of the SAGE system was the Bomarc nuclear-tipped anti-aircraft missile. This led to studies on basing Bomarcs in Canada in order to push the defensive line further north, even though the deployment was found to be extremely costly. Deploying the missiles alone was expected to cost C$164\u00a0million, while SAGE would absorb another C$107\u00a0million, not counting the cost of improvements to radar. Minister of national defence George Pearkes projected these initiatives would raise Canada's defence spending by \"as much as 25 to 30%\".\nDefence against ballistic missiles was increasingly prioritized. The existence of \"Sputnik\" raised the possibility of attacks from space, and, as the year progressed, word of a \"missile gap\" spread. An American brief of the meeting with Pearkes records his concern that Canada could not afford defensive systems against both ballistic missiles and manned bombers. It is also stated Canada could afford the Arrow or Bomarc/SAGE, but not both.\nBy 11 August 1958, Pearkes requested cancellation of the Arrow, but the Cabinet Defence Committee (CDC) refused. Pearkes tabled it again in September and recommended installation of the Bomarc missile system. The latter was accepted, but again the CDC refused to cancel the entire Arrow program. The CDC wanted to wait until a major review on 31 March 1959. They cancelled the Sparrow/Astra system in September 1958. Efforts to continue the program through cost-sharing with other countries were then explored. In 1959, Pearkes would say the ballistic missile was the greater threat, and Canada purchased Bomarc \"in lieu of more airplanes\".\nOperational history.\nSpying during development.\nThere was Soviet interest in the Avro Arrow, and significant spying and infiltration of the program. A Soviet defector and former spy codenamed \"Brik\" (alias David Soboloff) confessed to the RCMP that he ran a spy ring within Avro Canada. Another spy, codenamed \"Lind,\" was involved in stealing and passing on top-secret documents, including airframe and engine drawings, photographs, and test data, to the KGB.\nHistorical understanding of the issue of spying, let alone the basis and truth of reasoning (competition, unfeasibility, cost, compromise, obsolescence or otherwise) behind the end of the program has been fraught, as Canada does not have a policy of timed systematic release of historical documentation in intelligence or in public administration, except in access-to-information processes.\nForeign interest.\nCanada unsuccessfully tried to sell the Arrow to the US and Britain. The aircraft industry in both countries was considered a national interest and the purchase of foreign designs was rare.\nNevertheless, from 1955 on the UK had shown considerable interest in the Arrow. Desiring a high-performance interceptor like the Arrow, the RAF began the F.155 program in 1955, projecting a service entry date of 1962. As the program continued, it was clear the aircraft would not be ready in time. It was apparent that new versions of the Soviet M-4 bomber would be available in 1959 that could outperform the Gloster Javelin, implying the RAF would have no effective anti-bomber force for several years. To prevent this, the UK considered interim designs which could be in service by the late 1950s. At first, consideration was given to the thin-wing Javelin that would provide moderate supersonic performance, along with the extremely high performance but short range Saunders-Roe SR.177.\nA new round of development produced an improved Mach\u00a01.6 version of the thin-wing Javelin, and the Arrow was set aside. It was soon clear that the new Javelin would not enter service until at least 1961, too late to stop the new M-4s and with the F.155 designs coming on only two years later. In April 1956, the Air Council recommended a purchase of 144 Arrows to fill the role of the thin-wing Javelin. These would be powered by UK engines; the Bristol Olympus 7R \u2013 thrust dry, with reheat, the Rolls-Royce Conway Stage 4 \u2013 thrust dry, with reheat, or de Havilland Gyron \u2013 thrust dry, with reheat.\nProcurement of the Arrow from Canada, and setting up a production line in the UK, was explored. The unit price per aircraft built in the UK was estimated at \u00a3220,000 each for a production run of 100 aircraft, as opposed to the estimate of \u00a3150,000 for each upgraded Javelin. The CF-105 would serve as a stopgap until the F.155 project came to fruition, but with the F.155 due in 1963 and the Arrow unlikely to reach the RAF before 1962, there was little point in proceeding.\nThe infamous 1957 Defence White Paper, described as \"the biggest change in military policy ever made in normal times\", led to the cancellation of almost all British manned fighter aircraft in development and eliminated the possibility of an Arrow purchase. Instead, the UK offered to sell Canada the English Electric Lightning interceptor.\nThe French government expressed an interest in the Iroquois engine for an enlarged version of the Dassault Mirage IV bomber, the Mirage IVB. This was one of several engines under consideration, including the Olympus, with an order for 300 Iroquois considered. Acting on media speculation that the Iroquois engine program was also at risk of cancellation, the French government ended negotiations in October 1958 and opted for an upgraded version of the indigenous Snecma Atar, instead. The French government never explained its decision, even after Avro offered the Iroquois as a private venture.\nIn the US, the 1954 interceptor program was well underway, and would ultimately introduce the Convair F-106 Delta Dart, an aircraft with many similarities to the Arrow. More advanced designs were also being considered, notably the Mach\u00a03 Republic XF-103, and by the time the Arrow was flying, the much more advanced North American XF-108. Both of these programs were cancelled during the mock-up stage, as very high-performance manned interceptors were seen as unneeded in light of the Soviet shift towards ICBMs rather than strategic bombers. This argument added weight to the justification for cancelling the Arrow. In 1958, Avro Aircraft Limited president and general manager Fred Smye elicited a promise from the USAF to \"supply, free, the fire control system and missiles and if they would allow the free use of their flight test centre at\u00a0... Edwards AFB.\"\nCancellation.\nThe Arrow's cancellation was announced on 20 February 1959, becoming known as \"Black Friday\" in the Canadian aviation industry. Diefenbaker claimed the decision was based on \"a thorough examination\" of threats and defensive measures, and the cost of defensive systems. More specifically, the cost would have needed to be amortized over hundreds of manufactured models. At the time the trend was \"away from conventional bombers\" that the Avro Arrow could intercept and \"towards atmospheric weapons like intercontinental ballistic missiles\", according to Global News. As a result, foreign demand for the Arrow had declined substantially. Canada's alternative to the Arrow was to purchase American McDonnell F-101 Voodoo interceptors and Bomarc B missiles.\nThe decision immediately put 14,528 Avro employees, as well as nearly 15,000 employees in the Avro supply chain, out of work. Declassified records show Avro management was caught unprepared by Diefenbaker's announcement; executives knew the program was in jeopardy but expected it to continue until the March review. It was widely believed during this lead-up to the review, the first Arrow Mk. 2, RL-206, would be prepared for an attempt at both world speed and altitude records.\nAn attempt was made to provide the completed Arrows to the National Research Council of Canada as high-speed test aircraft. The NRC refused, noting that without sufficient spare parts and maintenance, as well as qualified pilots, the NRC could make no use of them. A similar project initiated by the Royal Aircraft Establishment (Boscombe Down) had resulted in Avro vice president of engineering Jim Floyd preparing a transatlantic ferry operation. This proposal, like others from the United States, was never realized.\nAftermath.\nWithin two months of the cancellation, all aircraft, engines, production tooling and technical data were ordered scrapped. Officially, the reason given for the destruction order from cabinet and the chiefs of staff was to destroy classified and \"secret\" materials used in the Arrow and Iroquois programs. The action has been attributed to Royal Canadian Mounted Police fears that a Soviet \"mole\" had infiltrated Avro, which were later confirmed to some degree in the Mitrokhin Archives. \nRumours circulated that air marshal W.\u00a0A. Curtis, a World War I ace who headed Avro, had defied Diefenbaker and hidden one of the Arrows away to be saved for posterity. These rumours were given life in a 1968 interview, where Curtis refused to confirm or deny the allegation. He proceeded to question the wisdom of printing the story of a missing Arrow, and wondered whether it would be safe to reveal the existence of a surviving airframe only nine years later. \"If it is in existence it may have to wait another 10 years. Politically it may cause a lot of trouble.\" The legend endures that one of the prototypes remains intact somewhere.\nFollowing the cancellation of the Avro Arrow project, CF-105 chief aerodynamicist Jim Chamberlin led a team of 25 engineers to NASA's Space Task Group to become lead engineers, program managers, and heads of engineering in NASA's manned space programs\u2014projects Mercury, Gemini and Apollo. The Space Task Group team eventually grew to 32 Avro engineers and technicians, becoming emblematic of what many Canadians viewed as \"brain drain\" to the United States. Among the former Arrow engineers to go south were Tecwyn Roberts (NASA's first flight dynamics officer on Project Mercury and later director of networks at the Goddard Space Flight Center), John Hodge (flight director and manager on the cancelled Space Station Freedom project), Dennis Fielder (director of the Space Station Task Force, later the Space Station), Owen Maynard (chief of the LM engineering office in the Apollo Program Office), Bruce Aikenhead, and Rod Rose (technical assistant for the Space Shuttle program). Many other engineers, including Jim Floyd, found work in either the UK or the United States. Work undertaken by both Avro Canada and Floyd benefited supersonic research at Hawker Siddeley, Avro Aircraft's UK parent, and contributed to programs such as the HSA.1000 supersonic transport design studies, influential in the design of the Concorde.\nIn 1961, the RCAF obtained 66 McDonnell CF-101 Voodoo aircraft, one of the American designs the RCAF originally rejected, to serve in the role originally intended for the Avro Arrow. The controversy surrounding this acquisition, and Canada's acquiring nuclear weapons for the Voodoos and Bomarcs, contributed to the collapse of the Diefenbaker government in 1963.\nAlthough nearly everything connected to the CF-105 and Orenda Iroquois programs was destroyed, some were saved and are on display at the Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Ottawa: the cockpit and nose gear of RL-206, the first Mk\u00a02 Arrow, and two outer panels of RL-203's wings, alongside an Iroquois engine.\nAt the time of its cancellation, with specifications comparable to then-current offerings from American and Soviet design bureaus, the Arrow was considered by one aviation industry observer to be one of the most advanced aircraft in the world. According to Bill Gunston:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Arrow's cancellation eventually led to the end of Avro Aircraft Limited (Canada), and its president and general manager, Crawford Gordon Jr., was fired shortly afterward. In 1962, the Hawker Siddeley Group formally dissolved A.\u00a0V. Roe Canada and transferred all its assets to Hawker Siddeley's newly formed subsidiary, Hawker Siddeley Canada.\nThe nose cone section of Avro Arrow RL-206, currently on display at the Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Ottawa, was smuggled out of the Avro Aircraft plant in Malton by members of the RCAF Flying Personnel Medical Establishment, a detachment of RCAF Station Downsview on Avenue Road in Toronto, where it resided for many years and was employed in high-altitude work. The commanding officer of the Flying Personnel Medical Establishment, wing commander Roy Stubbs, provided this prologue:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One day after a change of government, the new RCAF Chief of the Air Staff came to inspect our facilities and programs and after lunch, I asked if he would like to see something special. I showed him a piece of the Arrow; cockpit section and engine nacelles and a few other bits. I asked him what we should do with it and he said to keep it hidden until the climate in Ottawa was right, and then he would arrange to have it placed in the National Aeronautical Museum in Ottawa. Eventually this was done and at least a bit of history was saved.\nAround 2011, a new version of the Avro Arrow was privately proposed as an alternative to a Canadian purchase of F-35 aircraft. The proposal, promoted by former Canadian Forces infantry officer Lewis MacKenzie, was rejected by Ottawa in 2012 for being too risky, costly and time-consuming, as it would require re-engineering a 1950s-era aircraft to incorporate modern communication, targeting and stealth features. Member of Parliament and former Canadian Forces fighter pilot Laurie Hawn described the CF-105 as having been advanced 50 years prior, but \"hopelessly behind its time\" in 2012.\nVariants.\nMark 1.\nThe Arrow Mark 1 was the initial version powered by two Pratt\u00a0&amp; Whitney J75 turbojet engines that produced of thrust each. The Mk\u00a01 was used for development and flight testing. Five were completed.\nMark 2.\nThe Mk\u00a02 version was to be fitted with the Orenda PS-13 Iroquois engines and would be evaluated by RCAF acceptance pilots as well as Avro test pilots. The new PS-13S engines were designed to produce each. The Astra/Sparrow fire control system had been terminated by the government in September 1958 with all aircraft to employ the Hughes/Falcon combination. At the time of cancellation of the entire program, the first Arrow Mk 2, RL-206, was ready for taxi trials. Though Avro expected it to break the world speed record, it would never fly.\nThough speed would have been limited by atmospheric frictional heating, according to project engineer James Floyd, \"[t]he aluminum alloy structure which we favoured was good for speeds greater than a Mach number of 2.\"\nOther designs.\nAvro Canada had a wide range of advanced Arrow variants under development at the time of project cancellation. Frequent mention is made of an Arrow that could have been capable of Mach\u00a03, similar to the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25. This was not the production version, but one of the design studies, and would have been a greatly modified version of the Arrow Mk\u00a02, featuring revised engine inlets and extensive use of carbon steel and titanium to withstand airframe heating. The Mark 2A and Mark 3 were also to have updated engines, capable of producing each, increasing the maximum takeoff weight by and flight ceiling to 70,000\u00a0ft.\nReplicas.\nA replica Arrow built by Allan Jackson was used in \"The Arrow\", a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) miniseries. He began building a full-scale replica of the Arrow in 1989, and was approached by the producers of the miniseries in 1996, when the replica was about 70% complete. They offered to complete the model's construction if Jackson permitted the CBC to use it in \"The Arrow.\" The replica appeared in the miniseries and several public air shows before being Jackson donated it to the Reynolds-Alberta Museum in his home town of Wetaskiwin, Alberta. While in a temporary outdoor collection, it was damaged in a wind storm in 2009. It has since been repaired, but is no longer on display.\nThe Avro Museum, based out of Calgary/Springbank Airport west of Calgary, Alberta, is building a 2/3rd scale, manned, high performance flying replica of the Avro Arrow (officially known as ARROW II) to Canadian Aviation Experimental Aircraft Regulations in order to become an airshow demonstration aircraft. Construction began in October 2007, and by 2012 the fuselage was completed and passed its first MDRA inspection, and now has a serial number. Powered by a pair of Pratt &amp; Whitney JT-15D-4s, the ARROW II is to have a top speed of approximately 926 km/h (Mach 0.75) and a range of 2900 kms. Current projections show a final cost of the project at approximately one million dollars ($1.4 million as of 2025) and it was hoped that ground tests would start in about 2016 with the first flight to follow. The 2018 annual report from the museum updates the previous predictions, and states\nWe look forward to more exciting progress in the coming year as we work towards the goal of having the Arrow II on its landing gear and able to be presented as a work in progress static display at the 2019 Springbank Airshow.\nThe Canadian Air and Space Museum (CASM), previously located at the Toronto/Downsview Airport, featured a full-size replica Arrow built by volunteers with materials supplied by local aerospace firms. With a metal structure, the replica features many authentic-looking components including a landing gear constructed by Messier-Dowty, the original Arrow primary landing gear subcontractor. Painted by Bombardier Inc. at their Downview plant in the colours of Arrow 25203, the Arrow replica was rolled out for a media event on 28 September 2006 and publicly displayed on 8\u20139 October 2006 to commemorate the 49th anniversary of the original aircraft's rollout in 1957. CASM was closed in 2011 when the hangar was rebuilt for use by a college.\nThis replica was placed in storage at Toronto Pearson Intl Airport after being displayed at the Toronto International Centre (across the road from where the actual aircraft were built) for a technology trade show that ran from 30 September to 4 October 2013. In late 2019, Milan Kroupa brought the replica to Edenvale Airport, south of Georgian Bay in Southern Ontario. It is currently on display in a hangar, with weekly showings to the public.\nScale models.\nBetween 1954 and 1957, nine Avro Arrow models, scaled at one-eighth size or about long, are believed to have been launched using rockets over Lake Ontario from Point Petre in Prince Edward County, Ontario as part of the process for testing the hull design. They travelled at supersonic speeds as onboard sensors sent data back to shore. Two others were launched in Virginia. After many attempts to find the models, a new search began in late July 2017. The Raise the Arrow project, operated by OEX Recovery Group Incorporated, was a joint venture by several companies, the Canadian Coast Guard and the Royal Canadian Military Institute. A Thunderfish autonomous submarine, equipped with an AquaPix interferometric synthetic aperture sonar, was used to survey the relevant area of the lake bottom. Any scale models found will be restored and displayed at the Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Ottawa and the National Air Force Museum of Canada in Trenton, Ontario.\nIn September 2017, the Raise the Arrow Project confirmed the discovery of one of the 1/8 scale Delta Test Vehicle (DTV) models at the bottom of Lake Ontario. It was recovered in August 2018. The model was restored and has been on display at the Canadian Aviation and Space Museum since 2019. The search for one of the more advanced Arrow test models, in cooperation with the Royal Canadian Air Force, continued. In September 2020, OEX announced that a piece of another test model had been discovered; the Project was working on a method to recover that piece and find other fragments of the same wreck.\n\"Destroyed\" plans re-discovered.\nOn January 6, 2020, \"CBC News\" announced that the Arrow's plans, long thought to have been destroyed, were kept. Ken Barnes, a senior draftsman on the project in 1959, was ordered to destroy all documents related to the Avro Arrow project. Instead, he quietly took the blueprints home, storing them in his basement for decades. The blueprints were on display in the \"Touch the Sky: The Story of Avro Canada\" exhibit at the Diefenbaker Canada Centre at the University of Saskatchewan until April 2020.\nIn 2021, the National Research Council of Canada digitized and released 595 Avro Arrow reports stored in their rare book room and the NRC Archives, both located in Ottawa.\nLegacy.\nThe \"Avro Arrow Private\" street name commemorates the aircraft at Ottawa Macdonald\u2013Cartier International Airport. Also, OC Transpo route 105, scheduled to serve Ottawa Macdonald\u2013Cartier International Airport beginning in late-August 2025, is named after the CF-105.\nSpecifications (Arrow Mk 1).\n\"Data from\" \"The Great Book of Fighters\", \"The Canadian Approach to All-Weather Interceptor Development\", \"Avro Arrow: The Story of the Avro Arrow from its Evolution to its Extinction\"General characteristics* Crew: 2* Aspect ratio: * Airfoil: root: NACA 0003.5 (modified); tip: NACA 0003.8 (modified)\nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach 1.98* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: * Maximum glide ratio: * Thrust/weight: 0.825 at loaded weight\nArmament\n\"or\"\nAvionics\nNotable appearances in media.\nIn 1997, the CBC broadcast their two-part miniseries, \"The Arrow\". The production used a combination of archival film, remote-control flying models and computer animation for the static, ground and flying sequences. Although highly acclaimed, receiving praise from film historian and former Avro employee Elwy Yost and winner of numerous awards including the Gemini that year, the miniseries was criticized for its \"docu-drama\" style and departing from a strict factual account. The continued rebroadcasts and accompanying DVD releases have re-animated the controversy over the Arrow's cancellation and introduced the story to a new generation.\nSee also.\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69756", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69756", "title": "Perryville", "text": "Perryville may refer to a location in the United States:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69757", "revid": "40820929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69757", "title": "Somers", "text": "Somers may refer to:\nPlaces.\nIn Australia\nIn the United States\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69758", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69758", "title": "Ridgefield", "text": "Ridgefield may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69759", "revid": "45868963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69759", "title": "DAF Trucks", "text": "Dutch truck manufacturing company\nDAF Trucks is a Dutch truck manufacturing company and a division of Paccar. DAF originally stood for \"van Doorne's Aanhangwagen Fabriek\". Its headquarters and main plant are in Eindhoven. Cabs and axle assemblies are produced at its Westerlo plant in Belgium. Some of the truck models sold with the DAF brand are designed and built by Leyland Trucks at its Leyland plant in the United Kingdom.\nHistory.\nIn 1928, Hubert \"Hub\" van Doorne founded the company \"Commanditaire Vennootschap Hub van Doorne's Machinefabriek\". His co-founder and investor was A. H. Huenges, managing director of a brewery. Van Doorne had repaired Huenges' car several times, and Huenges, pleased with his work, offered to finance him in business. Hub started to work in a small workshop on the grounds of the brewery.\nIn 1932, the company, by then run by Hub and his brother, Wim van Doorne, changed its name to \"Van Doorne's Aanhangwagen Fabriek\" (Van Doorne's Trailer Factory), abbreviated to \"DAF\". Huenges left the company in 1936 and the DAF company was then completely in the hands of the van Doorne brothers.\nDAF developed the Trado conversions to convert 4\u00d72 Ford trucks to an off-road 6\u00d74 drive. One of DAF's few armoured vehicles, the \"M39 Pantserwagen\", used developments of this Trado drivetrain. M39 production came too late for World War II \u2013 in the invasion of the Netherlands (1940) only three saw combat.\nAfter World War II, luxury cars and trucks were very scarce. This meant a big opportunity for DAF. In 1949, the company started making trucks, trailers and buses, changing its name to \"Van Doorne's Automobiel Fabriek\" (Van Doorne's Automobile Factory). The first lorry model was the DAF A30.\nThrough the 1950s, DAF was a major supplier to the re-equipping of the Dutch Army's softskin vehicles, with models such as the DAF YA-126 and DAF YA-328 \"Dikke Daf\". These used the all-wheel drive H-drive developed from the Trado conversions.\nIn late 1954, Hub van Doorne had the idea to use belt driven continuously variable transmissions (CVT), like so many belt-driven machines in factories, to drive road vehicles. In 1955, DAF produced its first draft of a car belt drive system. Over the next few years, the design was developed and refined. In February 1958, DAF demonstrated a small belt-driven four-seater car at the Dutch car show (the AutoRAI).\nThe public reaction was very positive and 4,000 cars were ordered. In 1959, DAF started selling the world's first car with a CVT, the small four seater DAF 600. This was the first of a series of models to be released in subsequent years, including the DAF 33, DAF 44, DAF 55 and DAF 66, all using the innovative Variomatic transmission system.\nIn 1967, DAF opened a new plant in Born for car production. The 44 was the first model to be produced there.\nIn 1972, International Harvester of Chicago bought a 33% stake in DAF (with the Dutch government holding 25% and the Van Doorne family holding the remaining 42%), forming a joint venture. This agreement lasted until 1981. DAF sold its passenger car division, along with what is now the Nedcar factory in Born, in 1975 to the Swedish company Volvo Cars, leaving DAF to concentrate on its successful line of trucks.\nIn 1987, DAF merged with the Leyland Trucks division of Rover Group (which included Freight Rover), and in June 1989 was floated on the Dutch and London Stock Exchanges as DAF NV. The new company traded as Leyland DAF in the United Kingdom, and as DAF elsewhere.\nDAF Bus was split off in 1990 to become a part of United Bus. Following difficulties in the British market, DAF NV was placed under administration in February 1993. The Dutch operations were sold in a management buyout, with the business branded DAF Trucks.\nIn October 1996 Paccar acquired DAF Trucks. DAF Trucks and Leyland Trucks were rejoined in June 1998, when Paccar also acquired Leyland Trucks. On 9 January 2012, Paccar installed the cornerstone of the new plant in the city of Ponta Grossa, in the state of Paran\u00e1, Brazil.\nDAF now has a net worth of 1.7 billion dollars.\nCar business.\nThe first passenger car, the DAF 600, was presented to the public in February 1958. It featured unitary steel construction, with a front mounted, air cooled two cylinder boxer engine driving the rear wheels through a centrifugal clutch and the Variomatic CVT transmission. The way this was constructed eliminated the need for a differential, with the drivebelts taking up the difference of speed in turns.\nThis acted as a limited-slip differential. The car had independent suspension all around, with MacPherson struts and a transverse leaf spring at the front, and a coil sprung semi trailing arm design at the rear. The first 600s rolled off the production line in the following year. The next model was the 750, featuring a larger twin.\nLater, DAF produced a more luxurious type called the Daffodil, divided into three models assigned the numbers DAF 30, DAF 31 and DAF 32. The designation 32 was changed to 33 upon the 1966 release of the 44, a larger middle class vehicle designed by Giovanni Michelotti.\nThe 44 featured a completely new design aesthetically as well as mechanically, but was of the same layout as the \"A types\" (the 600, 750, 30, 31, 32 and 33), with the main difference being its two cylinder engine, and its full swing axle rear axle design as opposed to the A type semi trailing arms.\nThe 1968 DAF 55 carried a bigger water cooled OHV four cylinder engine derived from the Renault 8 Cleon engine. Its body design was altered from the 44 by a new front which accommodated the longer engine and radiator, bigger taillights, and a more plush interior. The front suspension was changed from a transverse leaf spring to MacPherson struts with torsion springs and an antiroll bar.\nThe DAF 66 was introduced as a successor to the 55. It featured new, boxy styling of the front, and a new rear axle design. The two drive belts now powered a differential, and the axle was changed from a swing axle design to a leaf sprung de Dion axle. It was a major improvement over the (tricky) handling of the swing axles of the earlier 33, 44 and 55 models.\nVolvo purchased a 33 percent stake in DAF in December 1972, with the intent of taking a larger interest. They increased their holdings to 75% on 1 January 1975, taking over the company and the Nedcar plant. Volvo dropped the 33 and 44 models, and later rebadged the DAF 66 as the Volvo 66, with bigger bumpers and a safety steering wheel.\nThe DAF 46 was developed with Volvo's assistance, and was basically a 44 with the rear axle of a 66 and a single belt Variomatic (half the 66's transmission). A big weakness of this system is that a failed drive belt would cripple the car. The last DAF design, codenamed P900, initially intended to be the DAF 77, was developed during the transition to Volvo ownership and was ultimately launched as the Volvo 300 series in 1976, firstly as the Volvo 343 three door hatchback with the Variomatic transmission.\nAfter initial slow sales, the range was expanded into the 340/360, with a five-door variant and the availability of manual transmission, and the 340/360 range became a sales success, eventually surpassing 1.3\u00a0million units by the time production ceased in 1991. The subsequent Volvo 440/460/480 and the first generation S40/V40 models were also made at the Nedcar plant, until Volvo sold its interest to Mitsubishi Motors in 2001, marking the end of Volvo's involvement with the former DAF plant after almost thirty years. Today, the plant is now owned by VDL Nedcar, and contract manufactures certain Mini models for BMW.\nPrototypes and special cars.\nFor a small company, DAF made a huge number of prototypes. Also, famous coachbuilders like Giovanni Michelotti and OSI made cars based on DAF mechanicals. For instance, the OSI City Car, which turned into a miniature. There was also Michelotti's \"Shellette\" beach car, which was later modified to use Fiat 850 underpinnings. The Dutch Royal Family used one of these at their Porto Ercole summer residence.\nTruck business.\nDAF produced its first truck, the A30, in 1949. This truck was upgraded in the following years. Their first attempt into the international market was a failure, the 2000DO. Their next truck was the 1964 2600, which became a big seller with its well equipped but practical cabin. They also produced a so-called torpedo front tractor.\nIn the 1970s, a new modular tilting cab called the F218 was introduced on the F1600/F2000 range of vehicles. Three years later, the wider F241, which featured DAF's characteristic three wiper windscreen, was introduced as the DAF 2800. This design lasted until the introduction of the 95 style cab in 1987. There was also a lighter, narrower version called the 'F198 which was introduced in 1972 on the F1200 and F1400, but this short lived model was replaced after only three years. In 1984, DAF truck production was 13,645; this increased to 14,382 in calendar year 1985.\nDAF was also one of the first to introduce an intercooled turbocharged diesel engine into their trucks, which in these years became very evident with their 3600. Their largest six cylinder turbodiesel was based on the old Leyland O.680 motor. It was to be DAF's standard large engine long into the nineties.\nDAF's 95 series was launched in 1987, and quickly gained the coveted 'Truck of The Year' award. The 95 featured an all new cab developed jointly with ENASA of Spain called Cabtec, a revised version of the 11.6-litre ATI engine, rated at 310, 350, or 380 hp (metric), and 16-speed ZF Friedrichshafen gearbox. On the Continent, Eaton's Twinsplitter gearbox was an option. A full range of axle configurations were offered, to suit every operating requirement.\nMuch attention was paid to soundproofing; the gear linkage for example was telescopic, whilst in-cab noise levels on the 95 put many luxury saloons to shame. An update in 1991 saw new power ratings of 329, 364, and 401 hp; \u2013 a 430 hp variant, along with low deck tractor unit models and revised interior trim, were introduced in the spring of 1992.\nTwo years later, after an intensive study of the ultra long haul market sector, DAF unveiled the 95.500 Super Spacecab at the 1994 RAI show. The 95 series cabin had gained height and length, and sat atop Cummins' 14-litre N14, rated at 507 bhp. ZF's new Aluminium cased 16S221 gearbox was fitted, with optional Intarder. An innovation was the hydraulic gearshift developed with Konsberg of Norway.\nWithin an overall height of 3.85m, the Super boasted an interior height of 2.25m, a luxury bunk with generous stowage space underneath, and a full range of options included microwave, fridge, and a television/video system. The 95.500 was available as a 4x2 tractor or drawbar rigid, with LHD only, though the Super Spacecab was available on 11.6-litre engined models. The 95.500 is now a very rare truck, which is surprising given the original list price of \u00a387,650.\nThe basic cab design remains in production to this day, latterly as the 95XF and now the XF105, although both these developments of the original 95 are totally different machines under the skin. Other vehicles in the DAF range have included the inherited from Leyland Trucks Roadrunner (Badged DAF 600, 800, 1000 on the Continent) which evolved into the 45 Series, the cab of which was used on the 18 ton gross 55, also as a military spec 4\u00d74.\nAn all new medium to heavyweight line up debuted in the end of 1992, the 65, 75 and 85 utilising the same wedge shaped cab. Powered by DAF's , and engines, some novel styling details featured, while the 85 Series' cab sat higher on the chassis to clear the WS engine.\nA short lived model was the 1990 to 1993 80 Series, using the T45 Roadtrain cab acquired from the Leyland Trucks takeover, fitted with the ATI driveline. Also offered for a short period was the 3200, basically a remodelled 2800 with the corporate style, three bar grille.\nThere is a DAF LF45 hybrid version, which was presented by DAF at the IAA 2010 in Hannover.\nTatra.\nIn August 2011, DAF announced it had built up a 19% stake in Tatra, which will use DAF cabs and Paccar engines. DAF dealers will sell Tatra off-road trucks.\nMotorsport.\nCars.\nDAF cars had the image of being slow. The company tried to change this image with entries in rallies and races, such as their entry in the London\u2013Sydney Marathon.\nThey were pioneers with continuously variable automatic transmission called Variomatic.\nA DAF car was used in Albie Mangle's \"World Safari\" movie of 1977.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69760", "revid": "50661574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69760", "title": "Crossword", "text": "Grid-based word puzzle\nA crossword (or crossword puzzle) is a word game consisting of a grid of black and white squares, into which solvers enter words or phrases (\"entries\") crossing each other horizontally (\"across\") and vertically (\"down\") according to a set of clues. Each white square is typically filled with one letter, while the black squares are used to separate entries. The first white square in each entry is typically numbered to correspond to its clue. \nCrosswords commonly appear in newspapers and magazines. The earliest crosswords that resemble their modern form were popularized by the \"New York World\" in the 1910s. Many variants of crosswords are popular around the world, including cryptic crosswords and many language-specific variants.\nCrossword construction in modern times usually involves the use of software. Constructors choose a theme (except for themeless puzzles), place the theme answers in a grid which is usually symmetric, fill in the rest of the grid, and then write clues.\nA person who constructs or solves crosswords is called a \"cruciverbalist\". The word \"cruciverbalist\" appears to have been coined in the 1970s from the Latin roots \"crucis\", meaning 'cross', and \"verbum\", meaning 'word'.\nAmerican-style crosswords.\nCrossword grids such as those appearing in most North American newspapers and magazines consist mainly of solid regions of uninterrupted white squares, separated more sparsely by shaded squares. Every letter is \"checked\" (i.e., is part of both an \"across\" word and a \"down\" word) and usually each answer must contain at least three letters. In such puzzles shaded squares are typically limited to about one-sixth of the total. Crossword grids elsewhere, such as in Britain, South Africa, India and Australia, have a lattice-like structure, with a higher percentage of shaded squares (around 25%), leaving about half the letters in an answer unchecked. For example, if the top row has an answer running all the way across, there will often be no across answers in the second row.\nAnother tradition in puzzle design (in North America, India, and Britain particularly) is that the grid should have 180-degree rotational symmetry, so that its pattern appears the same if the paper is turned upside down. Most puzzle designs also require that all white cells be orthogonally contiguous (that is, connected in one mass through shared sides, to form a single polyomino).\nSubstantial variants from the usual forms exist. Two of the common ones are barred crosswords, which use bold lines between squares (instead of shaded squares) to separate answers, and circular designs, with answers entered either radially or in concentric circles. \"Free form\" crosswords (\"criss-cross\" puzzles), which have simple, asymmetric designs, are often seen on school worksheets, children's menus, and other entertainment for children. Grids forming shapes other than squares are also occasionally used.\nPuzzles are often one of several standard sizes. For example, many weekday newspaper puzzles (such as the American \"New York Times\" crossword puzzle) are 15\u00d715 squares, while weekend puzzles may be 21\u00d721, 23\u00d723, or 25\u00d725. The \"New York Times\" puzzles also set a common pattern for American crosswords by increasing in difficulty throughout the week: their Monday puzzles are the easiest and the puzzles get harder each day until Saturday. Their larger Sunday puzzle is about the same level of difficulty as a weekday-size Thursday puzzle. This has led U.S. solvers to use the day of the week as a shorthand when describing how hard a puzzle is: e.g. an easy puzzle may be referred to as a \"Monday\" or a \"Tuesday\", a medium-difficulty puzzle as a \"Wednesday\", and a truly difficult puzzle as a \"Saturday\".\nTypically clues appear outside the grid, divided into an across list and a down list; the first cell of each entry contains a number referenced by the clue lists. For example, the answer to a clue labeled \"17 Down\" is entered with the first letter in the cell numbered \"17\", proceeding down from there. Numbers are almost never repeated; numbered cells are numbered consecutively, usually from left to right across each row, starting with the top row and proceeding downward. Some Japanese crosswords are numbered from top to bottom down each column, starting with the leftmost column and proceeding right.\nClues: conventions and types.\nAmerican-style crossword clues, called \"straight\" or \"quick clues\" by those more familiar with cryptic puzzles, are often simple definitions of the answers. Often, a straight clue is not in itself sufficient to distinguish between several possible answers, either because multiple synonymous answers may fit or because the clue itself is a homonym (e.g., \"Lead\" as in to be ahead in a contest or \"Lead\" as in the element), so the solver must make use of \"checks\" to establish the correct answer with certainty. For example, the answer to the clue \"PC key\" for a three-letter answer could be \"ESC\", \"ALT\", \"TAB\", \"DEL\", or \"INS\", so until a \"check\" is filled in, giving at least one of the letters, the correct answer cannot be determined.\nIn most American-style crosswords, the majority of the clues in the puzzle are straight clues, with the remainder being one of the other types described below.\nCrossword clues are generally consistent with the solutions. For instance, clues and their solutions should always agree in tense, number, and degree. If a clue is in the past tense, so is the answer: thus \"Traveled on horseback\" would be a valid clue for the solution \"RODE\", but not for \"RIDE\". Similarly, \"Family members\" would be a valid clue for \"AUNTS\" but not \"UNCLE\", while \"More joyful\" could clue \"HAPPIER\" but not \"HAPPIEST\".\nCapitalization.\nCapitalization of answer letters is conventionally ignored; crossword puzzles are typically filled in, and their answer sheets published, in all caps. This ensures a proper name can have its initial capital letter checked with a non-capitalizable letter in the intersecting clue.\nSome clue examples:\nAbbreviations.\nThe constraints of the American-style grid (in which every letter is checked) often require a fair number of answers not to be dictionary words. As a result, the following ways to clue abbreviations and other non-words, although they can be found in \"straight\" British crosswords, are much more common in American ones:\nThemes.\nMany American crossword puzzles feature a \"theme\" consisting of a number of long entries (generally three to five in a standard 15\u00d715-square \"weekday-size\" puzzle) that share some relationship, type of pun, or other element in common. As an example, the \"New York Times\" crossword of April 26, 2005 by Sarah Keller, edited by Will Shortz, featured five themed entries ending in the different parts of a tree: \"SQUARE ROOT\", \"TABLE LEAF\", \"WARDROBE TRUNK\", \"BRAIN STEM\", and \"BANK BRANCH\".\nThe above is an example of a category theme, where the theme elements are all members of the same set. Other types of themes include:\nThe themed crossword puzzle was invented in 1958 by Harold T. Bers, an advertising executive and frequent contributor to \"The New York Times\" crossword.\nThe Simon &amp; Schuster Crossword Puzzle Series has published many unusually themed crosswords. \"Rosetta Stone\", by Sam Bellotto Jr., incorporates a Caesar cipher cryptogram as the theme; the key to breaking the cipher is the answer to 1Across. Another unusual theme requires the solver to use the answer to a clue as another clue. The answer to \"that\" clue is the real solution.\nIndirect clues.\nMany puzzles feature clues involving wordplay which are to be taken metaphorically or in some sense other than their literal meaning, requiring some form of lateral thinking. Depending on the puzzle creator or the editor, this might be represented either with a question mark at the end of the clue or with a modifier such as \"maybe\" or \"perhaps\". In more difficult puzzles, the indicator may be omitted, increasing ambiguity between a literal meaning and a wordplay meaning. Examples:\nOther clue variations.\nAny type of puzzle may contain \"cross-references\", where the answer to one clue forms part of another clue, in which it is referred to by number and direction. E.g., a puzzle might have 1-across clued as \"Central character in The Lord of the Rings\" = \"FRODO\", with 17-down clued as \"Precious object for 1-Across\" = \"RING\".\nWhen an answer is composed of multiple or hyphenated words, some crosswords (especially in Britain) indicate the structure of the answer. For example, \"(3,5)\" after a clue indicates that the answer is composed of a three-letter word followed by a five-letter word. Most American-style crosswords do not provide this information.\nMetapuzzles.\nSome crossword designers have started including a metapuzzle, or \"meta\" for short, a second puzzle within the completed puzzle. After the player has correctly solved the crossword puzzle in the usual fashion, the solution forms the basis of a second puzzle. The designer usually includes a hint to the metapuzzle. For instance, the puzzle \"Eight Isn't Enough\" by Matt Gaffney gives the clue \"This week's contest answer is a three-word phrase whose second word is 'or'.\" The crossword solution includes the entries \"BROUGHT TO NAUGHT\", \"MIGHT MAKES RIGHT\", \"CAUGHT A STRAIGHT\", and \"HEIGHT AND WEIGHT\", which are all three-word phrases with two words ending in -ght. The solution to the meta is a similar phrase in which the middle word is \"or\": \"FIGHT OR FLIGHT\".\nSince September 2015, the Wall Street Journal Friday crossword has featured a crossword contest metapuzzle, with the prize of a WSJ mug going to a reader randomly chosen from among those submitting the correct answer.\nSchr\u00f6dinger or quantum puzzles.\nSome puzzle grids contain more than one correct answer for the same set of clues. These are called Schr\u00f6dinger or quantum puzzles, alluding to the Schr\u00f6dinger's Cat thought experiment in quantum physics. Schr\u00f6dinger puzzles have frequently been published in venues including \"Fireball Crosswords\" and \"The American Values Club Crosswords\", and at least ten have appeared in \"The New York Times\" since the late 1980s. The daily \"New York Times\" puzzle for November 5, 1996, by Jeremiah Farrell, had a clue for 39 across that read \"Lead story in tomorrow's newspaper, with 43 Across (!).\" The answer for 43 across was ELECTED; depending on the outcome of that day's Presidential Election, the answer for 39 across would have been correct with either CLINTON or BOBDOLE, as would each of the corresponding down answers. On September 1, 2016, the daily \"New York Times\" puzzle by Ben Tausig had four squares which led to correct answers reading both across and down if solvers entered either \"M\" or \"F\". The puzzle's theme, GENDERFLUID, was revealed at 37 across in the center of the puzzle: \"Having a variable identity, as suggested by four squares in this puzzle.\"\nCryptic crosswords.\nIn cryptic crosswords, the clues are puzzles in themselves. A typical clue contains both a definition at the beginning or end of the clue and wordplay, which provides a way to manufacture the word indicated by the definition, and which may not parse logically. Cryptics usually give the length of their answers in parentheses after the clue, which is especially useful with multi-word answers. Certain signs indicate different forms of wordplay. Solving cryptics is harder to learn than standard crosswords, as learning to interpret the different types of cryptic clues can take some practice. In Great Britain and throughout much of the Commonwealth, cryptics of varying degrees of difficulty are featured in many newspapers.\nThe first crosswords with strictly cryptic clues appeared in the 1920s, pioneered by Edward Powys Mathers. He established the principle of cryptic crossword clues. Cryptic crossword clues typically consist of a definition and some type of word play. Cryptic crossword clues need to be viewed two ways. One is a surface reading and one a hidden meaning. The surface reading is the basic reading of the clue to look for key words and how those words are constructed in the clue. The second way is the hidden meaning. This can be a double definition, an anagram, a homophone, or words backwards. There are eight main types of clues in cryptic crosswords.\nTypes of cryptic clues.\nThere are several types of wordplay used in cryptics. One is straightforward definition substitution using parts of a word. For example, in one puzzle by Mel Taub, the answer \"IMPORTANT\" is given the clue \"To bring worker into the country may prove significant\". The explanation is that to \"import\" means \"to bring into the country\", the \"worker\" is a worker \"ant\", and \"significant\" means \"important\". Here, \"significant\" is the straight definition (appearing here at the end of the clue), \"to bring worker into the country\" is the wordplay definition, and \"may prove\" serves to link the two. Note that in a cryptic clue, there is almost always only one answer that fits both the definition and the wordplay, so that when one sees the answer, one knows that it is the right answer\u2014although it can sometimes be a challenge to figure out \"why\" it is the right answer. A good cryptic clue should provide a fair and exact definition of the answer, while at the same time being deliberately misleading.\nAnother type of wordplay used in cryptics is the use of homophones. For example, the clue \"A few, we hear, add up (3)\" is the clue for \"SUM\". The straight definition is \"add up\", meaning \"totalize\". The solver must guess that \"we hear\" indicates a homophone, and so a homophone of a synonym of \"A few\" (\"some\") is the answer. Other words relating to sound or hearing can be used to signal the presence of a homophone clue (e.g., \"aloud\", \"audibly\", \"in conversation\", etc.).\nThe double meaning is commonly used as another form of wordplay. For example, \"Cat's tongue (7)\" is solved by \"PERSIAN\", since this is a type of cat, as well as a tongue, or language. This is the only type of cryptic clue without wordplay\u2014both parts of the clue are a straight definition.\nCryptics often include anagrams, as well. For example, in \"Slipped a disc \u2013 it's cruel (8)\" an anagram is indicated by \"slipped\", with the definition to aim for being \"cruel\". Ignoring all punctuation, \"a disc \u2013 it's\" produces \"SADISTIC\". Colin Dexter advised that \"Usually the indicator will be an adjective (drunk, fancy, unusual, and so on); an adverb (badly, excitedly, unexpectedly); a past participle (altered, broken, jumbled) or indeed any phrase giving a similar meaning.\"\nEmbedded words are another common trick in cryptics. The clue \"Bigotry aside, I'd take him (9)\" is solved by \"APARTHEID\". The straight definition is \"bigotry\", and the wordplay explains itself, indicated by the word \"take\" (since one word \"takes\" another): \"aside\" means APART and I'd is simply ID, so APART and ID \"take\" HE (which is, in cryptic crossword usage, a perfectly good synonym for \"him\"). The answer could be elucidated as APART(HE)ID.\nAnother common clue type is the \"hidden clue\" or \"container\", where the answer is hidden in the text of the clue itself. For example, \"Made a dug-out, buried, and passed away (4)\" is solved by \"DEAD\". The answer is written in the clue: \"maDE A Dug-out\". \"Buried\" indicates that the answer is embedded within the clue.\nThere are numerous other forms of wordplay found in cryptic clues. Backwards words can be indicated by words like \"climbing\", \"retreating\", or \"ascending\" (depending on whether it is an across clue or a down clue) or by directional indicators such as \"going North\" (meaning upwards) or \"West\" (right-to-left); letters can be replaced or removed with indicators such as \"nothing rather than excellence\" (meaning replace E in a word with O); the letter \"I\" can be indicated by \"me\" or \"one;\" the letter \"O\" can be indicated by \"nought\", \"nothing\", \"zero\", or \"a ring\" (since it visually resembles one); the letter \"X\" might be clued as \"a cross\", or \"ten\" (as in the Roman numeral), or \"an illiterate's signature\", or \"sounds like your old flame\" (homophone for \"ex\"). \"Senselessness\" is solved by \"e\", because \"e\" is what remains after removing (less) \"ness\" from \"sense\".\nWith the different types of wordplay and definition possibilities, the composer of a cryptic puzzle is presented with many different possible ways to clue a given answer. Most desirable are clues that are clean but deceptive, with a smooth \"surface reading\" (that is, the resulting clue looks as natural a phrase as possible). The Usenet newsgroup \"rec.puzzles.crosswords\" has a number of clueing competitions where contestants all submit clues for the same word and a judge picks the best one.\nIn principle, each cryptic clue is usually sufficient to define its answer uniquely, so it should be possible to answer each clue without use of the grid. In practice, the use of checks is an important aid to the solver.\nOther variants.\nThese are common crossword variants that vary more from a regular crossword than just an unusual grid shape or unusual clues; these crossword variants may be based on different solving principles and require a different solving skill set.\nCipher crosswords.\nCipher crosswords were invented in Germany in the 19th century. Published under various trade names (including Code Breakers, Code Crackers, and Kaidoku), and not to be confused with cryptic crosswords (ciphertext puzzles are commonly known as cryptograms), a cipher crossword replaces the clues for each entry with clues for each white cell of the grid\u2014an integer from 1 to 26 inclusive is printed in the corner of each. The objective, as any other crossword, is to determine the proper letter for each cell; in a cipher crossword, the 26 numbers serve as a cipher for those letters: cells that share matching numbers are filled with matching letters, and no two numbers stand for the same letter. All resultant entries must be valid words. Usually, at least one number's letter is given at the outset. English-language cipher crosswords are nearly always pangrammatic (all letters of the alphabet appear in the solution). As these puzzles are closer to codes than quizzes, they require a different skillset; many basic cryptographic techniques, such as determining likely vowels, are key to solving these. Given their pangrammaticity, a frequent start point is locating where 'Q' and 'U' must appear.\nDiagramless crosswords.\nIn a diagramless crossword, often called a diagramless for short or, in the UK, a skeleton crossword or carte blanche, the grid offers overall dimensions, but the locations of most of the clue numbers and shaded squares are unspecified. A solver must deduce not only the answers to individual clues, but how to fit together partially built-up clumps of answers into larger clumps with properly set shaded squares. Some of these puzzles follow the traditional symmetry rule, others have left-right mirror symmetry, and others have greater levels of symmetry or outlines suggesting other shapes. If the symmetry of the grid is given, the solver can use it to his/her advantage.\nFill-in crosswords.\nA fill-in crossword (also known as crusadex or cruzadex) features a grid and the full list of words to be enteref&gt;red in that grid, but does not give explicit clues for where each word goes. The challenge is figuring out how to integrate the list of words together within the grid so that all intersections of words are valid. Fill-in crosswords may often have longer word length than regular crosswords to make the crossword easier to solve, and symmetry is often disregarded. Fitting together several long words is easier than fitting together several short words because there are fewer possibilities for how the long words intersect together. These types of crosswords are also used to demonstrate artificial intelligence abilities, such as finding solutions to the puzzle based on a set of determined constraints.\nCross-figures.\nA cross-figure or crossnumber is the numerical analogy of a crossword, in which the solutions to the clues are numbers instead of words. Clues are usually arithmetical expressions, but can also be general knowledge clues to which the answer is a number or year. There are also numerical fill-in crosswords.\nAcrostic puzzles.\nAn acrostic is a type of word puzzle, in eponymous acrostic form, that typically consists of two parts. The first is a set of lettered clues, each of which has numbered blanks representing the letters of the answer. The second part is a long series of numbered blanks and spaces, representing a quotation or other text, into which the answers for the clues fit. In most forms of the puzzle, the first letters of each correct clue answer, read in order from clue A on down the list, will spell out the author of the quote and the title of the work it is taken from; this can be used as an additional solving aid.\nArroword.\nThe arroword is a variant of a crossword that does not have as many black squares as a true crossword, but has arrows inside the grid, with clues preceding the arrows. It has been called the most popular word puzzle in many European countries, and is often called the Scandinavian crossword, as it is believed to have originated in Sweden.\nHistory.\nThe phrase \"cross word puzzle\" was first written in 1862 by \"Our Young Folks\" in the United States. Crossword-like puzzles, for example Double Diamond Puzzles, appeared in the magazine \"St. Nicholas\", published since 1873. Another crossword puzzle appeared on September 14, 1890, in the Italian magazine \"Il Secolo Illustrato della Domenica\". It was designed by Giuseppe Airoldi and titled \"Per passare il tempo\" (\"To pass the time\"). Airoldi's puzzle was a four-by-four grid with no shaded squares; it included horizontal and vertical clues.\nCrosswords in England during the 19th century were of an elementary kind, apparently derived from the word square, a group of words arranged so the letters read alike vertically and horizontally, and printed in children's puzzle books and various periodicals.\nOn December 21, 1913, Arthur Wynne, a journalist born in Liverpool, England, published a \"word-cross\" puzzle in the \"New York World\" that embodied most of the features of the modern genre. This puzzle is frequently cited as the first crossword puzzle, and Wynne as the inventor. An illustrator later reversed the \"word-cross\" name to \"cross-word\".\nCrossword puzzles became a regular weekly feature in the \"New York World\", and spread to other newspapers; the \"Pittsburgh Press\", for example, was publishing them at least as early as 1916 and \"The Boston Globe\" by 1917.\nBy the 1920s, the crossword phenomenon was starting to attract notice. In October 1922, newspapers published a comic strip by Clare Briggs entitled \"Movie of a Man Doing the Cross-Word Puzzle\", with an enthusiast muttering \"87 across 'Northern Sea Bird'!!??!?!!? Hm-m-m starts with an 'M', second letter is 'U'\u00a0... I'll look up all the words starting with an 'M-U\u00a0...' mus-musi-mur-murd\u2014Hot Dog! Here 'tis! Murre!\" In 1923 a humorous squib in \"The Boston Globe\" has a wife ordering her husband to run out and \"rescue the papers\u00a0... the part I want is blowing down the street.\" \"What is it you're so keen about?\" \"The Cross-Word Puzzle. Hurry, please, that's a good boy.\" In \"The New Yorker\"'s inaugural issue, from 1925, the \"Jottings About Town\" section observed, \"Judging from the number of solvers in the subway and 'L' trains, the crossword puzzle bids fair to become a fad with New Yorkers.\" In 1922, the New York Public Library reported that \"The latest craze to strike libraries is the crossword puzzle\", and complained that when \"the puzzle 'fans' swarm to the dictionaries and encyclopedias so as to drive away readers and students who need these books in their daily work, can there be any doubt of the Library's duty to protect its legitimate readers?\"\nThe first book of crossword puzzles was published by Simon &amp; Schuster in 1924, after a suggestion from co-founder Richard Simon's aunt. The publisher was initially skeptical that the book would succeed, and only printed a small run at first. The book was promoted with an included pencil, and \"This odd-looking book with a pencil attached to it\" was an instant hit, leading crossword puzzles to become a craze of 1924. To help promote its books, Simon &amp; Schuster also founded the Amateur Cross Word Puzzle League of America, which began the process of developing standards for puzzle design.\nNot all of the attention drawn to the crossword puzzle fad was positive: A 1924 editorial in \"The New York Times\" complained of the \"sinful waste in the utterly futile finding of words the letters of which will fit into a prearranged pattern, more or less complex. This is not a game at all, and it hardly can be called a sport\u00a0... [solvers] get nothing out of it except a primitive form of mental exercise, and success or failure in any given attempt is equally irrelevant to mental development.\" A clergyman called the working of crossword puzzles \"the mark of a childish mentality\" and said, \"There is no use for persons to pretend that working one of the puzzles carries any intellectual value with it.\" However, another wrote a complete \"Bible Cross-Word Puzzle Book\". Also in 1925, \"Time\" magazine noted that nine Manhattan dailies and fourteen other big newspapers were carrying crosswords, and quoted opposing views as to whether \"This crossword craze will positively end by June!\" or \"The crossword puzzle is here to stay!\" In 1925, \"The New York Times\" noted, with approval, a scathing critique of crosswords by \"The New Republic\"; but concluded that \"Fortunately, the question of whether the puzzles are beneficial or harmful is in no urgent need of an answer. The craze evidently is dying out fast and in a few months it will be forgotten.\" and in 1929 declared, \"The cross-word puzzle, it seems, has gone the way of all fads.\" In 1930, a correspondent noted that \"Together with \"The Times\" of London, yours is the only journal of prominence that has never succumbed to the lure of the cross-word puzzle\" and said that \"The craze\u2014the fad\u2014stage has passed, but there are still people numbering it to the millions who look for their daily cross-word puzzle as regularly as for the weather predictions.\"\nThe term \"crossword\" first appeared in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" in 1933.\n\"The New York Times\" finally began to publish a crossword puzzle on 15 February 1942, spurred on by the idea that the puzzle could be a welcome distraction from the harsh news of World War II. \"The New York Times\"'s first puzzle editor was Margaret Petherbridge Farrar, who was editor from 1942 to 1969. She was succeeded by Will Weng, who was succeeded by Eugene T. Maleska. Since 1993, they have been edited by Will Shortz, the \"Times\"' fourth crossword editor.\nSimon &amp; Schuster continues to publish the \"Crossword Puzzle Book Series\" books that it began in 1924, currently under the editorship of John M. Samson. The original series ended in 2007 after 258 volumes. Since 2008, these books are now in the Mega series, appearing three times per year and each featuring 300 puzzles.\nThe cryptic crossword variation originated in Britain in the mid-1920s. Edward Powys Mathers set the first crossword to use entirely cryptic clues, originally just for the enjoyment of his friends, one of whom, without permission, submitted it to the Saturday \"Westminster Gazette\". The editors approached Mathers for more puzzles, and published eleven more of these novel cryptic crosswords. Upon the demise of the Saturday \"Westminster\", Mathers began setting puzzles for \"The Observer\", beginning a series of 670 cryptic crosswords, which ended only with Mathers' death in 1939. Mathers set his puzzles under the pen name of Torquemada, after the first Grand Inquisitor of the Spanish Inquisition. His successors as \"The Observer\" cryptic crossword setter followed his example. Derrick Somerset Macnutt, who took over at Mather's death, chose the pen name \"Ximenes,\" an Anglicization of the surname of Francisco Jim\u00e9nez de Cisneros, a Grand Inquisitor in Castile. The current \"Observer\" cryptic compiler, Jonathan Crowther sets under the name \"Azed,\" a reversal of Deza, another Grand Inquisitor. Cryptic crosswords are popular in Britain, some British Commonwealth nations, and in a few other countries. Many British newspapers publish both standard and cryptic crosswords.\nThe cryptic crossword was imported to the US in 1968 by composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim in the \"New York\" magazine, but never became widespread. From 1977 to 2006, \"The Atlantic\" regularly featured a cryptic crossword \"Puzzler\" by the husband and wife team of Emily Cox and Henry Rathvon. From 2006 to 2009, \"The Atlantic\" puzzler appeared only online. In 2010, Cox and Rathvon's efforts began to appear monthly in \"The Wall Street Journal\". The pair retired at the end of 2023, but the WSJ continues to offer a cryptic crossword each month.\nIn the United Kingdom, the \"Sunday Express\" was the first newspaper to publish a crossword on November 2, 1924, a Wynne puzzle adapted for the UK. The first crossword in Britain, according to Tony Augarde in his \"Oxford Guide to Word Games\" (1984), was in \"Pearson's Magazine\" for February 1922.\nThe 2006 documentary \"Wordplay\", about enthusiasts of \"The New York Times\"'s puzzle, increased public interest in crosswords. It highlighted attendees of Will Shortz's American Crossword Puzzle Tournament and other notable crossword enthusiasts, including former US president Bill Clinton and comedian Jon Stewart. Other crossword tournaments in the United States include Lollapuzzoola in New York City and Boswords in Boston.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1944, Allied security officers were disturbed by the appearance, in a series of crosswords in \"The Daily Telegraph\", of words that were secret code names for military operations planned as part of Operation Overlord.\nSome cryptologists for Bletchley Park were selected after doing well in a crossword-solving competition.\nRecords.\nAccording to \"Guinness World Records\", May 15, 2007, the most prolific crossword compiler is Roger Squires of Ironbridge, Shropshire, UK. On May 14, 2007, he published his 66,666th crossword, equivalent to 2 million clues. He is one of only four setters to have provided cryptic puzzles to \"The Times\", \"The Daily Telegraph\", \"The Guardian\", the \"Financial Times\" and \"The Independent\". He also holds the record for the longest word ever used in a published crossword\u2014the 58-letter Welsh town Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch clued as an anagram.\nEnthusiasts have compiled a number of record-setting achievements in \"New York Times\" and other venues.\nFemale crossword constructors.\nWomen editors such as Margaret Farrar were influential in the first few decades of puzzle-making, and women constructors such as Bernice Gordon and Elizabeth Gorski have each contributed hundreds of puzzles to \"The New York Times\". However, in recent years the number of women constructors has declined. During the years that Will Weng and Eugene Maleska edited the New York Times crossword (1969\u20131993), women constructors accounted for 35% of puzzles, while during the editorship of Will Shortz (1993\u2013present), this percentage has gone down, with women constructors (including collaborations) accounting for only 15% of puzzles in both 2014 and 2015, 17% of puzzles published in 2016, 13%\u2014the lowest in the \"Shortz Era\"\u2014in 2017, and 16% in 2018. Several reasons have been given for the decline in women constructors. One explanation is that the gender imbalance in crossword construction is similar to that in related fields, such as journalism, and that more freelance male constructors than females submit puzzles on spec to \"The New York Times\" and other outlets. Another explanation is that computer-assisted construction and the increased influence of computational approaches in generating word lists may be making crossword construction more like STEM fields in which women are underrepresented for a number of factors. However, it has also been argued that this explanation risks propagating myths about gender and technology. Some have argued that the relative absence of women constructors and editors has had an influence on the content of the puzzles themselves, and that clues and entries can be insensitive regarding language related to gender and race. Margaret Irvine suggested that lack of confidence was a barrier. Several approaches have been suggested to develop more women in the field, including mentoring novice women constructors and encouraging women constructors to publish their puzzles independently.\nCrossword venues other than \"New York Times\" have recently published higher percentages of women than that puzzle. In the spring of 2018, Patti Varol and Amy Reynaldo organized and edited a pack of 18 puzzles constructed by women called \"Women of Letters\". Inspired by this, Laura Braunstein and Tracy Bennett launched \"The Inkubator\", a \"twice-monthly subscription service that will publish crosswords constructed by cis women, trans women, and woman-aligned constructors.\" \"The Inkubator\" raised over $30,000 in its initial Kickstarter campaign, and began publishing puzzles on January 17, 2019. A book of 100 puzzles, \"Inkubator Crosswords: 100 Audacious Puzzles by Women and Nonbinary Creators,\" was published in 2022. On February 8, 2023, they announced to subscribers that 2023 would be their final year as a subscription service.\nNon-English languages.\nOwing to the large number of words ending with a vowel, Italian crossword-makers have perhaps the most difficult task. The right margin and the bottom can be particularly difficult to put together. From such a perspective, Swedish crossword-makers have a far easier task. Especially in the large picture crosswords, both conjugation of verbs and declension of adjectives and nouns are allowed. A Swedish clue like \"\"kan s\u00e4ttas i munnen\" = \"sked\"\" (\"can be put in the mouth\" = \"spoon\") can be grammatically changed; \"\"den kan s\u00e4ttas i munnen\" = \"skeden\"\" (\"it can be put in the mouth\" = \"the spoon\"), as the definite form of a noun includes declension.\nOrthography.\nFrom their origin in New York, crosswords have spread to many countries and languages. In languages other than English, the status of diacritics varies according to the orthography of the particular language, thus:\nGrid design, clues, and conventions.\nFrench-language crosswords are smaller than English-language ones, and not necessarily square: there are usually 8\u201313 rows and columns, totaling 81\u2013130 squares. They need not be symmetric and two-letter words are allowed, unlike in most English-language puzzles. Compilers strive to minimize use of shaded squares. A black-square usage of 10% is typical; Georges Perec compiled many 9\u00d79 grids for Le Point with four or even three black squares. Rather than numbering the individual clues, the rows and columns are numbref&gt;ered as on a chessboard. All clues for a given row or column are listed, against its number, as separate sentences.\nIn Italy, crosswords are usually oblong and larger than French ones, 13\u00d721 being a common size. As in France, they usually are not symmetrical; two-letter words are allowed; and the number of shaded squares is minimized. Nouns (including surnames) and the infinitive or past participle of verbs are allowed, as are abbreviations; in larger crosswords, it is customary to put at the center of the grid phrases made of two to four words, or forenames and surnames. A variant of Italian crosswords does not use shaded squares: words are delimited by thickening the grid. Another variant starts with a blank grid: the solver must insert both the answers and the shaded squares, and across and down clues are either ordered by row and column or not ordered at all.\nModern Hebrew is normally written with only the consonants; vowels are either understood, or entered as diacritical marks. This can lead to ambiguities in the entry of some words, and compilers generally specify that answers are to be entered in ktiv male (with some vowels) or ktiv haser (without vowels). Further, since Hebrew is written from right to left, but Roman numerals are used and written from left to right, there can be an ambiguity in the description of lengths of entries, particularly for multi-word phrases. Different compilers and publications use differing conventions for both of these issues.\nIn the Japanese language crossword; because of the writing system, one syllable (typically katakana) is entered into each white cell of the grid rather than one letter, resulting in the typical solving grid seeming small in comparison to those of other languages. Any second Y\u014don character is treated as a full syllable and is rarely written with a smaller character. Even cipher crosswords have a Japanese equivalent, although pangrammaticity does not apply. Crosswords with kanji to fill in are also produced, but in far smaller number as it takes far more effort to construct one. Despite Japanese having three writing forms - hiragana, katakana, and kanji - they are rarely mixed in a single crossword puzzle. The design of Japanese crossword grids often follows two additional rules: that shaded cells may not share a side (i.e. they may not be orthogonally contiguous) and that the corner squares must be white.\nA. N. Prahlada Rao, based in Bangalore, has composed/ constructed some 35,000 crossword puzzles in the language Kannada, including 7,500 crosswords based on films made in Kannada, with a total of 10,00,000 (ten lakhs, or one million) clues. His name was recorded in the Limca Book Of Records in 2015 for creating the highest number of crosswords in any Indian Regional Language. He continued to hold this title through 2016 and 2017. In 2008, a five volume set of his puzzles was released, followed by 7 more volumes in 2017. Bengali is also well known for its crossword puzzles. Crosswords are published regularly in most Bengali dailies and periodicals. The grid system is similar to the British style and two-letter words are usually not allowed.\nIn Poland, crosswords typically use British-style grids, but some do not have shaded cells. Shaded cells are often replaced by boxes with clues\u2014such crosswords are called Swedish puzzles or Swedish-style crosswords. In a vast majority of Polish crosswords, nouns are the only allowed words.\nSwedish crosswords are mainly in the illustrated (photos or drawings), in-line clue style typical of the \"Swedish-style grid\". The \"Swedish-style\" grid (picture crosswords) uses no clue numbers. Instead, clues are contained in the cells which do not contain answers, with arrows indicating where and in what direction to fill in answers. Arrows can be omitted from clue cells, in which case the convention is for the answer to go horizontally to the right of the clue cell, or \u2013 if the clue cell is split vertically and contains two clues \u2013 for the answer to go horizontally to the right for the top clue and vertically below for the bottom clue. This style of grid is also used in several countries other than Sweden, often in magazines, but also in daily newspapers. The grid often has one or more photos replacing a block of squares as a clue to one or several answers; for example, the name of a pop star, or some kind of rhyme or phrase that can be associated with the photo. These puzzles usually have no symmetry in the grid but instead often have a common theme (literature, music, nature, geography, events of a special year, etc.) This tradition prospered already in the mid-1900s, in family magazines and sections of newspapers. Then the specialised magazines took off. Around the turn of the millennium, approximately half a dozen Swedish magazine publishers produced specialised crossword magazines, totaling more than twenty titles, often published on a monthly basis. The oldest extant crossword magazine published in Swedish is \"Krysset\" (from Bonnier), founded in 1957. Additionally, nearly all newspapers publish crosswords of some kind, and at weekends often devote specialised sections in the paper to crosswords and similar type of pastime material. Both major evening dailies (\"Aftonbladet\" and \"Expressen\") publish a weekly crossword supplement, named \"Kryss &amp; Quiz\" and \"Korsord\" respectively. Both are available as paid supplements on Mondays and Tuesdays, as part of the ongoing competition between the two newspapers.\nConstruction.\nAmerican-style crosswords.\nIn typical themed American-style crosswords, the theme is created first, as a set of symmetric long across answers will be needed around which the grid can be created. Since the grid will typically have 180-degree rotational symmetry, the answers will need to be also: thus a typical 15\u00d715 square American puzzle might have two 15-letter entries and two 13-letter entries that could be arranged appropriately in the grid (e.g., one 15-letter entry in the third row, and the other symmetrically in the 13th row; one 13-letter entry starting in the first square of the 6th row and the other ending in the last square of the 10th row). The theme must not only be funny or interesting, but also internally consistent. In the April 26, 2005 by Sarah Keller mentioned above, the five themed entries contained in the different parts of a tree: SQUAREROOT, TABLELEAF, WARDROBETRUNK, BRAINSTEM, and BANKBRANCH. In this puzzle, CHARTER OAK would \"not\" be an appropriate entry, as all the other entries contain different parts of a tree, not the name of a kind of tree. Similarly, FAMILY TREE would not be appropriate unless it were used as a \"revealer\" for the theme (frequently clued with a phrase along the lines \"...\u00a0and a hint to\u00a0...\"). Given the existing entries, SEED MONEY would also be unacceptable, as all the other theme entries \"end\" in the part of a tree as opposed to beginning with it, though the puzzle could certainly be changed to have a mix of words in different positions.\nOnce a consistent, appropriate theme has been chosen, a grid is designed around that theme, following a set of basic principles:\nCrossword puzzle payments for standard 15\u00d715 puzzles from the major outlets range from $50 (\"Games\") to $500 (\"The New York Times\") while payments for 21\u00d721 puzzles range from $250 (\"Newsday\") to $1,500 (\"The New York Times\").\nThe compensation structure of crosswords generally entails authors selling all rights to their puzzles upon publication, and as a result receiving no royalties from republication of their work in books or other forms.\nSoftware.\nSoftware that aids in \"creating\" crossword puzzles has been written since at least 1976; one popular example was Crossword Magic for the Apple II in the 1980s. The earliest software relied on people to input a list of fill words and clues, and automatically maps the answers onto a suitable grid. This is a search problem in computer science because there are many possible arrangements to be checked against the rules of construction. Any given set of answers might have zero, one, or multiple legal arrangements. Modern open source libraries exist that attempt to efficiently generate legal arrangements from a given set of answers.\nIn the late 1990s, the transition began from mostly hand-created arrangements to computer-assisted, which creators generally say has allowed authors to produce more interesting and creative puzzles, reducing crosswordese.\nModern software includes large databases of clues and answers, allowing the computer to randomly select words for the puzzle, potentially with guidance from the user as to the theme or a specific set of words to pick with greater probability. Many serious users add words to the database as an expression of personal creativity or for use in a desired theme. Software can also be used to assist the user in finding words for a specific spot in an arrangement by quickly searching through the dictionary for all words that fit.\nIn 1998 in Jakarta, publisher Elex Media Komputindo (Gramedia Group) published a crossword software entitled \"Teka-Teki Silang Komputer\" (Computerized Crossword Puzzle [Eng]) in diskette form. It is the first Crossword Puzzle software published in Indonesia. Created by Sukmono Bayu Adhi, the software is archived in the National Library of the Republic of Indonesia (Salemba Library, Jakarta).\nNotation.\nOriginally Petherbridge called the two dimensions of the crossword puzzle \"Horizontal\" and \"Vertical\". Among various numbering schemes, the standard became that in which only the start squares of each word were numbered, from left to right and top to bottom. \"1 Horizontal\" and \"1 Vertical\" and the like were names for the clues, the cross words, or the grid locations, interchangeably.\nLater in the \"Times\" these terms commonly became \"across\" and \"down\" and notations for clues could either use the words or the letters \"A\" and \"D\", with or without hyphens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "69761", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69761", "title": "Herbert Bayer", "text": "Austrian-American artist, architect, and designer\nHerbert Bayer (April 5, 1900 \u2013 September 30, 1985) was an Austrian and American graphic designer, painter, photographer, sculptor, art director, environmental and interior designer, and architect. He was instrumental in the development of the Atlantic Richfield Company's corporate art collection until his death in 1985.\nBiography.\nTraining and Bauhaus years.\nBayer apprenticed under the artist Georg Schmidthammer in Linz. Leaving the workshop to study at the Darmstadt Artists' Colony, he became interested in Walter Gropius's Bauhaus manifesto. After Bayer had studied for four years at the Bauhaus under such teachers as Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee and L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy, Gropius appointed Bayer director of printing and advertising.\nIn the spirit of reductive minimalism, Bayer developed a crisp visual style and adopted use of all-lowercase, sans serif typefaces for most Bauhaus publications. Bayer is one of several typographers of the period including Kurt Schwitters and Jan Tschichold who experimented with the creation of a simplified more phonetic-based alphabet. From 1925 to 1930, Bayer designed a geometric sans-serif titled \"Proposal for a Universal Typeface\" (Herbert Bayer, universal) that existed only as a design and was never actually cast into real type. These designs are now issued in digital form as Bayer Universal (P22 Type Foundry Bauhaus Set). The design also inspired ITC Bauhaus and Architype Bayer, which bears comparison with the stylistically related typeface Architype Schwitters.\nIn 1923 Bayer met the photographer Irene Bayer-Hecht at the first large Bauhaus exhibit in Weimar. They married in 1925, separated in 1928, had a daughter, Julia Alexandra, in 1929, and divorced in 1944.\nPost-Bauhaus years in Germany.\nIn 1928, Bayer left the Bauhaus to become art director of Vogue magazine's Berlin office. He remained in Germany far later than most other progressives. In 1936 he designed a brochure for the \"Deutschland Ausstellung\", an exhibition for tourists in Berlin during the 1936 Olympic Games\u00a0\u2013 the brochure celebrated life in Nazi Germany, and the authority of Hitler. However, in 1937, works of Bayer's were included in the Nazi propaganda exhibition \"Degenerate Art\", upon which he left Germany. Upon fleeing Germany, he traveled in Italy.\nTime in the United States.\nIn 1938, Bayer came to The United States where he remained until his death in 1985. In 1944 he married Joella Synara Haweis, the daughter of poet and Dada artist Mina Loy. The same year, he became a U.S. citizen.\nIn 1946 the Bayers relocated. Hired by industrialist and visionary Walter Paepcke, Bayer moved to Aspen, Colorado as Paepcke promoted skiing as a popular sport. Bayer's architectural work in the town included co-designing the Aspen Institute and restoring the Wheeler Opera House, but his production of promotional posters identified skiing with wit, excitement, and glamour.\nIn 1959, he designed his \"fonetik alfabet\", a phonetic alphabet, for English. It was sans-serif and without capital letters. He had special symbols for the endings \"-ed\", \"-ory\", \"-ing\", and \"-ion\", as well as the digraphs \"ch\", \"sh\", and \"ng\". An underline indicated the doubling of a consonant in traditional orthography.\nWhile living in Aspen, Bayer had a chance meeting with the eccentric oilman, outdoorsman and visionary ecologist, Robert O. Anderson. When Anderson saw the ultra-modern, Bauhaus-inspired home that Bayer had designed and built in Aspen, he walked up to the front door and introduced himself. It was the beginning of a lifelong friendship between the two men and instigated Anderson's insatiable passion for enthusiastically collecting contemporary art.\nWith Anderson's eventual formation of the Atlantic Richfield Company, and as his personal art collection quickly overflowed out of his New Mexico ranch and other homes, ARCO soon held the unique distinction of possessing the world's largest corporate art collection, under the critical eye and sharp direction of Bayer as ARCO's Art and Design Consultant.\nOverseeing acquisitions for ARCO Plaza, the newly built (1972) twin 51-story office towers in Los Angeles that served as the new company's corporate headquarters, Bayer was also responsible for the ARCO logo and designing all corporate branding related to the company. Prior to the completion of ARCO Plaza, Anderson commissioned Bayer to design a monumental sculpture-fountain to be installed between the dark green granite towers. Originally titled \"Stairway to Nowhere\" Anderson laughed, but felt the Shareholders wouldn't see the irony; thus he suggested it be named \"Double Ascension\" and it still stands between the twin skyscrapers today.\nUnder Bayer's direction, ARCO's art collection grew to nearly 30,000 works nationwide, managed by Atlantic Richfield Company Art Collection staff. ARCO's collection was eclectic, and consisted of an extremely wide range of media and styles; ranging from contemporary and earlier paintings, sculpture, works on paper (including drawings, watercolors and signed original lithographs, etchings and serigraphs) and signed photographs to tribal and ethnic art from many cultures, as well as historic prints and artifacts, all displayed throughout ARCO's buildings in Los Angeles and several other cities. Three years after ARCO was taken over by BP in 2000, that company's then-chairman, Lord Brown, personally ordered ARCO's art collection liquidated. It was sold through Christie's and LA Modern Auctions. Bayer made provisions to donate, after his death, a collection of his works which had been housed in ARCO's conference center in Santa Barbara to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. The works have been loaned previously to the Denver Art Museum. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1979.\nLegacy and influence.\nBayer's works appear in prominent public and private collections including the MIT List Visual Arts Center. Bayer designed the Mill Creek Canyon Earthworks, an environmental sculpture located in Kent, Washington.\nIn 2019, the philanthropists and entrepreneurs Lynda and Stewart Resnick donated $10 million to the nonprofit Aspen Institute for a center dedicated to Bayer that is located on the Institute's Aspen Meadows campus, in Aspen, Colorado, which Bayer designed. The Resnick Center for Herbert Bayer Studiesis an exhibition space and center for the study of art and culture that preserves the art and legacy of Herbert Bayer. The Bayer Center promotes a fuller understanding of Bayer\u2014one of the leading figures to translate the Bauhaus movement into an American context\u2014and his contributions to art, design, and architecture. It anchors the Aspen Institute\u2019s campus-wide visual arts program, which includes over 7,000 square feet of gallery space and multiple site-specific outdoor art installations. The vision is intended to honor Bayer\u2019s interdisciplinary perspective by promoting an understanding of art and design through exhibitions, public programming, and educational initiatives. The Bayer Center is free and open to the public.\nHerbert Bayer was the architect for the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, in Fort Worth, Texas. The institution moved to its new location designed by architect Tadao Ando in 2002. The building, owned by the City of Fort Worth was, until 2024, home to the Fort Worth Community Arts Center, which featured seven galleries highlighting regional and national artists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "69762", "revid": "17217293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69762", "title": "Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft", "text": "German electropunk/Neue Deutsche Welle band\nDeutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft (; \"German-American Friendship\"), or D.A.F., was a German electropunk/Neue Deutsche Welle band from D\u00fcsseldorf, formed in 1978 featuring Gabriel \"Gabi\" Delgado-L\u00f3pez (vocals), Robert G\u00f6rl (drums, percussion, electronic instruments), Kurt \"Pyrolator\" Dahlke (electronic instruments), Michael Kemner (bass-guitar) and Wolfgang Spelmans (guitar). Kurt Dahlke was replaced by Chrislo Haas (electronic instruments, bass guitar, saxophone) in 1979. Since 1981, the band has consisted of Delgado-L\u00f3pez and G\u00f6rl. Gabi Delgado-Lopez died on 22 March 2020 aged 61.\nIn interviews they claimed not to target anything or anyone specific while writing lyrics to be taken as a parody of words and phrases floating around in the public media. \"Sato-Sato\" and \"Der Mussolini\" are both examples of songs written around Delgado-L\u00f3pez's fascination with the sound of a particular word. A few months before the 2003 invasion of Iraq, D.A.F. released \"The Sheriff (An Anti-American Song)\".\nThe album \"Alles ist gut\" (all is good) received the German \"Schallplattenpreis\" award by the \"Deutsche Phono-Akademie\" (The German Phono-Academy), an association of the German recording industry.\nHistory.\nFormation and early albums.\nG\u00f6rl came to D\u00fcsseldorf in August 1978 and met Delgado as both were regulars at punk club Ratinger Hof. G\u00f6rl noted, \"The earliest line up of DAF was Gabi and me in the basement of the Ratinger Hof. We created our basic ideas and we had a very strong will as a duo. Gabi Delgado played the stylophone and I played the drums.\" Several early Neue Deutsche Welle bands formed from this social group, and G\u00f6rl and Delgado played with multiple other bands. The first two D.A.F. albums featured the original four-piece line-up and a range of styles. Their first album, \"Ein Produkt der Deutsch-Amerikanischen Freundschaft\", was released in 1979 on Dahlke's Ata Tak label (then called Warning). The album was 22 improvised untitled instrumentals, Delgado having temporarily left the band at the time.\nThe band then moved to London. As Delgado later noted, \"at that time if you wanted to do new music you\u2019d go to London because that was the center, not D\u00fcsseldorf.\" Daniel Miller signed DAF to Mute Records because \"they weren\u2019t relying on past rock traditions at all, which is the criterion of what goes on Mute.\" DAF recorded \"Die Kleinen und die B\u00f6sen\" (The Small Ones and the Evil Ones) for Mute, one side studio and most of the other side live. According to the Trouser Press, \"Ein Produkt...\" featured \"shrieking, colliding overdubbed synths and guitars\" while \"Die Kleinen...\" presented a more polished sound \"with anarchic synthesizer work slowly integrating a solid, defined beat.\"\nVirgin trilogy.\nDAF then shrank to just Delgado and G\u00f6rl, who signed to Virgin Records and released \"Alles ist gut\", their breakthrough album. The band became pop stars in Germany and gained great critical acclaim in the UK.\nG\u00f6rl played drums \u2014 usually fairly simple and relatively unsyncopated patterns, but with simple variations that prevented them sounding robotic \u2014 while Delgado sang. The only other instruments used were Korg MS-20 and ARP Odyssey analogue synthesizers usually driven by a Korg SQ-10 analog sequencer. Typically only a single sequencer-driven line would be used for a song, the sequence functioning both as melodic accompaniment and as a bassline. The song \"Der Mussolini\" is a perfect example of this. On other songs, such as the title track, certain notes of the sequence were set slightly out of tune. Over all, the songs entail a complex tension between the predominantly visceral (the voice), the relentlessly robotic (the 16-step sequences), and the drums, which lie somewhere in between. One song, \"Der R\u00e4uber und der Prinz\" (\"The Robber and the Prince\"), also features a Glockenspiel-like sound as a sinister reminder of childhood.\n\"Alles ist gut\" sold hundreds of thousands in Germany, and DAF became the fifth-biggest German-speaking group in Germany.\nThe next two albums, \"Gold und Liebe\" (Gold and Love) and \"F\u00fcr Immer\" (Forever), continued in the same vein, until, as one British music journalist of the time put it, D.A.F. had exhausted all the possibilities of the 16-step sequencer. These possibilities ranged from something resembling rhythm and blues \u2014 you could just about play Der Mussolini as R'n'B if you wanted \u2014 to the microtonality of \"Im Dschungel der Liebe\" (In the Jungle of Love) (on \"F\u00fcr immer\") or \"Knochen auf Knochen\" (the B-side of the single \"Sex unter Wasser\"). These three albums (from \"Alles ist gut\" to \"F\u00fcr immer\") were all produced by Konrad \"Conny\" Plank, who was renowned for his pioneering work both with minimalist-influenced Krautrock bands and other experimenters in the 1970s, and with electropop artists in the 1980s. The band added an Oberheim OB-Xa for \"F\u00fcr immer\".\nThe band split during the recording of \"F\u00fcr immer\".\nPost-split.\nEach member released solo albums: Delgado \"Mistress\" (on Virgin), and G\u00f6rl \"Night Full Of Tension\" (on Mute).\nDelgado and G\u00f6rl reunited in 1985 to record \"1st Step to Heaven\", their only album in English, which achieved one week in the Swedish album chart at no. 46. Delgado later noted: \"So we wanted to break our own rules and said: OK, so now we sing in English, now we don\u2019t wear black. \"(laughing)\" With purpose. Because we wanted to break our own rules.\"\nDuring this extensive period their historical importance began to become clearer. Legendary radio DJ John Peel went as far as to call them the \"Grandfathers of Techno\". Both Robert and Gabi had solo musical careers, with Robert becoming a respected techno artist in his own right. Gabi Delgado also recorded two albums as DAF/DOS ('Dos' here referring to the Spanish word for 'two') together with Wotan Wilke.\nWhen DAF reformed for the 2003 album \"F\u00fcnfzehn neue D.A.F.-Lieder\" (15 New D.A.F Songs) their style had shifted to a fusion of the classic Plank-produced D.A.F. sound with elements taken from Robert's techno work. The drums were replaced with crisper electronic beats, but the ARP Avatar and, of course, Gabi's vocals remained in place. According to Deutsche Welle, the album \"takes specific aim at American cultural imperialism and political dominance\" as evidenced by the first single, \"Der Sheriff\", a song about the George W. Bush administration. \"Der Sheriff\" peaked at number 2 on the German Alternative Charts (DAC) and ranked number 15 on the DAC Top 100 Singles of 2003.\nThe band prepared more music, but split before they could make another album. G\u00f6rl played in 2007 as DAF.Partei with Thoralf Dietrich (from J\u00e4ger 90) as lead singer.\nDelgado-Lopez and G\u00f6rl have played occasional reunion shows since their thirtieth anniversary tour in 2008. In 2010, the band returned with a new single \"Du bist DAF\", limited to 2010 copies. The sound snippet is available via SoundCloud.\nThe band declared its split again in January 2015, with another farewell tour to start in May.\nAn authorised biography of the band, \"Das ist DAF\", written by Miriam Spies and Rudi Esch, was published in 2017. There is no English translation of the text available at present. According to the publisher's page, \"This richly illustrated book tells the unique DAF story from the perspective of Gabi Delgado and Robert G\u00f6rl\", both of whom as DAF are \"regarded as a forerunner of the techno and EBM scene.\"\nDelgado died in 2020. G\u00f6rl released one last album as DAF, \"Nur Noch Einer\" in 2021, based on old DAF tapes and with new lyrics by G\u00f6rl.\nLegacy.\nThe D.A.F. track \"Alle Gegen Alle\" was remade by Laibach in 1994. \"Der Mussolini\" was remade by Atrocity in 1997 and by KMFDM in 2006. Patrik Sampler's 2017 novel \"The Ocean Container\" makes reference to \"Greif Nach Den Sternen\".\nStyle.\nG\u00f6rl described their sound on \"Alles ist gut\" in \"Melody Maker\" in 1981:\nMost bands get a synthesizer and their first idea is to tune it! They want a clean normal sound. They don\u2019t work with the \"power\" you get from a synthesizer ... We want to bring together this high technique with body power so you have the past time mixed with the future.\nDelgado described his new vocal style in the same interview:\nThe singing isn\u2019t like rock \u2019n\u2019 roll or pop singing. It\u2019s sometimes like in a Hitler speech, not a Nazi thing, but it\u2019s in the German character, that \"crack! crack! crack!\" way of speaking.\nThe band determined early on that they would not sing in English. As Delgado later said:\nIt\u2019s not only a part of image. It\u2019s a serious matter because DAF from the very first beginning didn\u2019t want to imitate any American pop, rock or whatever. In fact we think there is a very strong American influence in culture, television, music, everywhere. So in the very first beginning one of our main content was to refuse to imitate rock \u2018n\u2019 roll, to refuse to sing in English. We don\u2019t do that. We have our own identity. Our identity is not American identity.\nAs a lyricist, Delgado's concerns throughout D.A.F.'s recording career have ranged from sardonic reflections on ideology and political violence, to journeys into a very physical, even brutal, sexuality, sometimes related from a child's point of view. Having grown up as the child of working class Spanish immigrants in Wuppertal, and coming of age in the politically polarized era of the German Autumn (his response to the left-wing extremism of that time being thematized in the 2003 song \"Kinderzimmer (Heldenlied)\" [\"Childhood Bedroom (Hero Song)\"], he was blunt and unromantically detached about social reality in West Germany, and unapologetic about the provocative potential of his songs.\nAs performers and media personalities D.A.F. were, much like New York's Suicide, forerunners of later 1980s synthpop duos, such as the Pet Shop Boys and Soft Cell, in that the singer (in this case Delgado) appears relatively extroverted while the one who plays with the electronics (G\u00f6rl) appears quiet and reserved. Visually, at least from \"Alles ist gut\" until \"1st Step to Heaven\", they cultivated an image of black leather, muscles, hairy chests, and sweat.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69763", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69763", "title": "Cuba/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "69766", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69766", "title": "Duesseldorf", "text": ""}
{"id": "69768", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69768", "title": "Burundi/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "69769", "revid": "29566584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69769", "title": "Bedfordshire", "text": "County of England\nBedfordshire (; abbreviated \"Beds\") is a ceremonial county in the East of England. It is bordered by Northamptonshire to the north, Cambridgeshire to the north-east, Hertfordshire to the south-east and south, and Buckinghamshire to the west. The largest settlement is Luton.\nThe county has an area of and an estimated population of 749,943 in 2024. Luton is located in the south, and Dunstable neighbours it to the west. Leighton Buzzard in the south-west, and Bedford in the centre-north; much of the county is rural. For local government purposes Bedfordshire comprises three unitary authority areas: Bedford, Central Bedfordshire, and Luton. \nThe centre of Bedfordshire is a gently undulating clay plateau, out of which rises a ridge of greensand that runs south-west to north-east and which has a distinct north-facing escarpment. The south of the county, around Luton, contains part of the chalk Chiltern Hills, and the north of the county part of a limestone ridge that runs between Milton Keynes and Northampton. The county's highest point is at on the Dunstable Downs, which are part of the Chilterns. The River Great Ouse flows through Bedfordshire, entering upstream of Harrold in the north-east and flowing in a circuitous but broadly southerly route to Bedford before turning north-east to exit the county upstream of St Neots in Cambridgeshire.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded use of the name in 1011 was \"Bedanfordscir\", meaning the shire or county of Bedford, which itself means \"Beda's ford\" (river crossing).\nBedfordshire was historically divided into nine hundreds: Barford, Biggleswade, Clifton, Flitt, Manshead, Redbornestoke, Stodden, Willey, Wixamtree, along with the liberty and the ancient borough of Bedford.\nThere have been several changes to the county boundary; for example, in 1897 Kensworth and part of Caddington were transferred from Hertfordshire to Bedfordshire. \nGeography.\nThe southern end of the county is on the chalk ridge known as the Chiltern Hills. The remainder forms part of the broad drainage basin of the River Great Ouse and its tributaries. Most of Bedfordshire's rocks are clays and sandstones from the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, with some limestone. Local clay has been used for brick-making of Fletton-style bricks in the Marston Vale. Glacial erosion of chalk has left hard flint nodules deposited as gravel\u2014these have been commercially extracted in the past at pits which are now lakes: at Priory Country Park, Wyboston and Felmersham. The Greensand Ridge is an escarpment across the county from near Leighton Buzzard to near Gamlingay in Cambridgeshire.\nClimate.\nBedfordshire, being situated in the east of England, has a relatively dry climate for the UK with regular but generally moderate rainfall. Average annual rainfall is at Bedford. October is the wettest month, with , and March the driest, with .\nAlthough temperatures are usually moderate, the county has one of the largest absolute temperature ranges in the UK \u2013 of more than 60\u00a0\u00b0C (108\u00a0\u00b0F). Average temperatures in Bedford range from a low of overnight in February to a high of during the day in July. The highest official temperature recorded in Bedfordshire was in 2022. The lowest official temperature recorded in Bedfordshire was in 1947.\nPolitics.\nPolice and Crime Commissioner.\nThe Bedfordshire Police and Crime Commissioner is John Tizard, a member of the Labour Party.\nLocal government.\nFor local government purposes, Bedfordshire is divided into three unitary authorities: the boroughs of Bedford and Luton, and the district of Central Bedfordshire. Healthcare in the county is dealt with by a single Clinical Commission Group (CCG), which serves all three local authorities in the county, alongside the City of Milton Keynes in Buckinghamshire.\nEmergency services.\nPolicing and fire and rescue services continue to be provided on a county-wide basis, with Bedfordshire Police governed by the Bedfordshire Police and Crime Commissioner and Bedfordshire Fire and Rescue Service governed by a Fire Authority comprising members of the three councils. Ambulance Services are provided by the East of England Ambulance Service NHS Trust.\nParliamentary constituencies.\nFor elections to the House of Commons, Bedfordshire is divided into seven constituencies, each returning a single Member of Parliament (MP):\nThe present constituencies date from 1997. The boundaries were slightly modified for the 2010 general election.\nEconomy.\nThis is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Bedfordshire at current basic prices https:// (pp.\u00a0240\u2013253) by \"Office for National Statistics\" with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.\nBedfordshire is the location of a number of notable UK and international companies who have either headquarters or major bases in the county. Autoglass, Boxclever and Charles Wells Pubs are all based in Bedford, while the Kier Group and Kingspan Timber Solutions are based in Sandy, and Jordans Cereals are based in Biggleswade. EasyJet, Impellam, TUI Airways and Vauxhall Motors are all based in Luton, Whitbread is based in Houghton Regis and Costa Coffee is now based in Dunstable. UltraVision is based in Leighton Buzzard, while Moto Hospitality is based at Toddington service station.\nCulture.\nFood.\nThe \"Bedfordshire clanger\" is a local dish consisting of a suet crust pastry filled with meat in one end and a fruit preserve in the other. It was traditionally a farm labourers' meal, designed so as to produce no waste as well as two separate meals.\nChocolate Toothpaste is another local delicacy. A chocolate tart, Chocolate Toothpaste consists of a gritty chocolate filling (said to resemble the texture of toothpaste) within a pastry tart, commonly finished with a swirl of whipped cream on top.\nFlag.\nThe flag of Bedfordshire is based on the banner of arms of the former Bedfordshire County Council.\nTransport.\nBedfordshire lies on many of the main transport routes which link London to the Midlands, Northern England and the rest of the UK.\nRoads.\nTwo of England's six main trunk roads pass through Bedfordshire. The A1 London to Edinburgh road (the Great North Road) runs close by Biggleswade and Sandy, and Watling Street, the Roman road between London and Chester, passes through Dunstable. Until it was diverted in 2017, this was also the route of the A5 road between London and Holyhead. The Bedfordshire section of the A5 now runs from junction 11a of the M1 to rejoin Watling Street between Dunstable and Hockliffe, then continues on to cross the Buckinghamshire border at the City of Milton Keynes.\nTo these was added in 1959 the M1 motorway, running from London to Leeds. Running from junctions 10 to 13 in Bedfordshire, there are two junctions serving Luton (at the southern end), with another one serving Bedford and Milton Keynes (at the northern end). Between these lie two other junctions in the county; one connecting to the A5 and serving Dunstable, and the other serving the town of Flitwick. There is one motorway service station in the county: Toddington Services.\nFormer trunk roads, now local roads managed by the local highway authorities, include the A428 (Cambridge-Coventry) running east\u2013west through Bedford Borough, and the A6 from Luton to Carlisle.\nRailways.\nThree of England's main lines pass through Bedfordshire.\nThe West Coast Main Line has but a short section where it passes through the far west of the county, with one station at Leighton Buzzard served by West Midlands Trains to London Euston and Northampton.\nThe East Coast Main Line has stations at Arlesey, Biggleswade and Sandy, served by Great Northern services to King's Cross and Peterborough.\nThe Midland Main Line serves Luton, Luton Airport (via Luton DART link from the station at Luton Airport Parkway) and Bedford, with trains to many destinations operated by East Midlands Railway and Thameslink. Intermediate stations at Flitwick, Harlington and Leagrave are served by Thameslink.\nThere are London North Western rural services also running between Bedford and Bletchley along the Marston Vale Line.\nWaterways.\nThe River Great Ouse links Bedfordshire to the Fenland waterways. As of 2004 there are plans by the Bedford &amp; Milton Keynes Waterway Trust to construct a canal linking the Great Ouse at Bedford to the Grand Union Canal at Milton Keynes, 14 miles (23\u00a0km) distant.\nAir.\nLuton Airport (the fifth busiest in the United Kingdom) has flights to many UK, European, Middle Eastern and North African destinations, operated largely (but not exclusively) by low-cost airlines.\nMedia.\nLocal news is provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia from Cambridge, the southern part of the county such as Luton can also receive BBC London &amp; ITV London meaning the area can get news and television programmes from Cambridge and London.\nLocal radio stations are BBC Three Counties Radio (broadcast from Dunstable), Heart East, Greatest Hits Radio Bucks, Beds and Herts (formerly Mix 96), BigglesFM (covering Biggleswade, Potton and Sandy), In2beats (Bedford) and Radio LaB (Luton).\nEducation.\nThe state education system for all of Bedfordshire used to be organised by Bedfordshire County Council. Unlike most of the United Kingdom, Bedfordshire County Council operated a three-tier education system arranged into lower, middle and upper schools, as recommended in the Plowden Report of 1967, although Luton continued to operate a two-tier system. The three-tier arrangement continued in the rest of the county, though in 2006 a vote was held with a view to moving to the two-tier model, but this was rejected.\nAfter the 2009 structural changes to local government in England, Bedfordshire County Council was abolished, and its responsibilities for education were passed to Bedford Borough Council and Central Bedfordshire Council.\nBedford Borough.\nBedford Borough Council voted in November 2009 to change to the two-tier model in its area. The change was due to be introduced over a five-year period and be completed in 2015. However, with the cancellation of the Building Schools for the Future programme in 2010, the borough changed its proposals, and the switch proceeded on school by school basis where council funds allowed. However as of 2020 all of Bedford Borough has a two-tier education structure apart from in the Marston Vale area (one upper school remains).\nMost of the secondary schools in the area offer sixth form courses (such as A Levels), though Bedford College and The Bedford Sixth Form also offer a range of further education courses. Additionally, Stella Mann College is a private college which offers a range of further education courses relating to the performing arts.\nThere are a number of independent schools, many of which have links to the Harpur Trust. These include Bedford School, Bedford Modern School and Bedford Girls' School.\nCentral Bedfordshire.\nIn Central Bedfordshire, the school systems in Dunstable and Sandy have been re-organised into the two-tier model in response to parent and school demand, but elsewhere in the authority the three-tier model continues. Plans for the construction of new settlements in Marston Vale have included lower, middle and upper schools.\nAs well as sixth form departments in schools, the main further education providers in the district are Central Bedfordshire College and Shuttleworth College\nLuton.\nLuton also operates a three-tier education system, though its organisation of infant, junior and high schools mirrors the traditional transfer age into secondary education of 11 years. However, most of Luton's high schools do not offer sixth-form education. Instead, this is handled by Luton Sixth Form College, though Barnfield College and Cardinal Newman Catholic School, Stockwood Park Academy and The Chalk Hills Academy also offer a range of further education courses.\nHigher education.\nThere are two universities based in the county \u2013 the University of Bedfordshire and Cranfield University. These institutions attract students from all over the UK and abroad, as well as from Bedfordshire.\nLandmarks.\nCardington airship sheds.\nThe enormous Cardington airship sheds are situated to the south of Bedford, near the villages of Cardington and Shortstown. They were originally built for the construction of large airships during World War I. Since falling out of their intended use, one has been used for many purposes including housing film sets for 'Charlie and the Chocolate Factory' and 'Batman Begins' and as a rehearsal space for Take That, with the other having been extensively refurbished and now accommodating Hybrid Air Vehicles, a British modern airship design and manufacturing company.\nSt Paul's Church Bedford.\nSt Paul's Church, Bedford is a Church of England parish church and the Civic Church of the Borough of Bedford and the County of Bedfordshire. Located on St Paul's Square, it is a large medieval and later church of cathedral proportions and spire. St Paul's was the church of the BBC during the Second World War.\nMillbrook Proving Ground.\nThe Millbrook Proving Ground, near Junction 13 of the M1, has of varied vehicle test tracks.\nSport and leisure.\nBedfordshire is home to League One team Luton Town F.C. and the Ampthill RUFC and Bedford Blues rugby teams, amongst other various sporting teams.\nBedfordshire boasts a 40-mile (64\u00a0 km) walk traversing the county from Leighton Buzzard at the southern endpoint and Sandy, Bedfordshire/Gamlingay in southern Cambridgeshire to the east; this is called the Greensand Ridge Walk. For cyclists, there is a parallel route called the Greensand Cycle Way that follows minor country roads.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69770", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69770", "title": "Netpbm format", "text": ""}
{"id": "69771", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69771", "title": "Laos/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "69772", "revid": "48915008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69772", "title": "Bedford", "text": "Town in Bedfordshire, England\nBedford is a market town in Bedfordshire, England. At the 2011 Census, the population was 106,940. Bedford is the county town of Bedfordshire and seat of the Borough of Bedford local government district.\nBedford was founded at a ford on the River Great Ouse and is thought to have been the burial place of King Offa of Mercia, who is remembered for building Offa's Dyke on the Welsh border. Bedford Castle was built by Henry I, although it was destroyed in 1224. Bedford was granted borough status in 1166 and has been represented in Parliament since 1265. It is known for its large population of Italian descent.\nHistory.\nThe name of the town is believed to derive from the name of a Saxon chief called Beda, and a ford crossing the River Great Ouse. Bedford was a market town for the surrounding agricultural region from the early Middle Ages. The Anglo-Saxon King Offa of Mercia was buried in the town in 796; this is believed to be in his new minster, now the Church of St Paul, or on the banks of the Great Ouse where his tomb was soon lost to the river. In 886 it became a boundary town separating Wessex and Danelaw. It was the seat of the Barony of Bedford. In 919 Edward the Elder built the town's first known fortress, on the south side of the River Great Ouse and there received the area's submission. This fortress was destroyed by the Danes. William II gave the barony of Bedford to Paine de Beauchamp, who built a new, strong castle.\nBedford traces its borough charter in 1166 by Henry II and elected two members to the unreformed House of Commons. The new Bedford Castle was razed in 1224 and today only a mound remains. From the 16th century Bedford and much of Bedfordshire became one of the main centres of England's lace industry, and lace continued to be an important industry in Bedford until the early 20th century. In 1660 John Bunyan was imprisoned for 12 years in Bedford Gaol. It was here that he wrote \"The Pilgrim's Progress\". The River Great Ouse became navigable as far as Bedford in 1689. Wool declined in importance with brewing becoming a major industry in the town. The 19th century saw Bedford transform into an important engineering hub. The northern part of the town was badly damaged in the Great Fire of Bedford in 1802, which destroyed 72 properties in the St Loyes area. 21 years later, the Great Flood of Bedford swamped most of the town when the River Great Ouse burst its banks. The former Phoenix public house in St Johns Street has a stone marker in its wall almost two metres above ground level, representing the maximum height of the floodwater in 1823. In 1832 gas lighting was introduced, and the railway reached Bedford in 1846. The first corn exchange was built 1849, and the first drains and sewers were dug in 1864.\nBedford's first woman town councillor was Mary Milligan who, in 1919, was also the secretary of the local Women's Citizens League.\nGovernance.\nThe contiguous Bedford built-up area forms the largest settlement in the wider Borough of Bedford. The borough council is led by a directly elected mayor who holds the title 'Mayor of Bedford', an office which was first held by Frank Branston, until his death in 2009. The current mayor of Bedford is Tom Wootton from the Conservative Party.\nThe Bedford built-up area is divided into 10 wards for elections to the Borough Council: Brickhill, Castle, Cauldwell, De Parys, Goldington, Harpur, Kingsbrook, Newnham, Putnoe, Queens Park, Kempston East and Kempston West. Within the Bedford urban area, only Brickhill, Biddenham and Kempston elect their own parish councils, while the rest (and majority) of the built-up area is unparished. Kempston is the only civil parish in both the built-up area and Borough of Bedford which has a town council.\nBedford is served by Bedfordshire Police The Chief Constable since January 2023 is Trevor Rodenhurst. The elected Bedfordshire Police and Crime Commissioner of that force is John Tizard.\nBedford forms part of the Bedford constituency, represented in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom Parliament. The current Member of Parliament (MP) for Bedford is Mohammad Yasin, who is a member of the Labour Party.\nGeography.\nBedford is miles north-northwest of London, southeast of Birmingham, west of Cambridge and east-southeast of Northampton.\nThe town of Kempston is part of Bedford's built-up area, as is the village of Biddenham. Other villages adjacent to, but outside of, the built-up area include Bromham, Elstow, Renhold and Ravensden. Wixams is a new town which is being developed to the south of Bedford. Villages in the Borough of Bedford, outside of the built-up area, with populations of more than 2,000 (as of 2005) include Clapham, Elstow, Oakley, Sharnbrook, Shortstown, Wilstead, and Wootton. There are also many smaller villages in the borough.\nClimate.\nAs with the rest of the United Kingdom, Bedford has a maritime climate, with a limited range of temperatures, and generally even rainfall throughout the year. The nearest Met Office weather station to Bedford is Bedford (Thurleigh) airport, about north of Bedford town centre at an elevation of . Temperature extremes at the site have ranged from in July 2022, down to in January 1982. However, such extremes would likely be superseded if longer-term records were available \u2013 Historically, the nearest weather station to Bedford was Cardington about south south east of the town centre with an elevation of . This location recorded a minimum of during January 1963.\nRainfall averages around a year, with an excess of falling on 115 days.\nSunshine at around 1,550 hours a year is typical of inland areas of southern-central England.\nDemographics.\nBedford is home to one of the largest concentrations of Italian immigrants in the United Kingdom. According to the 2001 census, almost 30% of Bedford's population were of at least partial Italian descent. This is mainly as a result of labour recruitment in the early 1950s by the London Brick Company from Southern Italy. From 1954 to 2008 Bedford had its own Italian vice-consulate.\nIn addition to Italian immigrants, Bedford has also been the recipient of significant immigration from India (8.1% of Bedford's population; Indians began arriving from the late 1950s onwards from the Punjab area, many of whom worked at the London Brick Company), Eastern Europe (particularly in the 2000s) and Scandinavia, Ireland, Northern Ireland, Greece, Cyprus, Northern Cyprus, Malta, Spain, France, Switzerland, Germany, Poland, Portugal, Albania, Turkey, The Middle East, East Asia, South East Asia, Africa (3% of Bedford's population is of Sub-Saharan descent), the Caribbean, and South America, making it one of the most ethnically, racially, and linguistically diverse towns in the United Kingdom outside of London in proportion to its size.\nAt the 2011 Census, the ethnic mix of the Bedford urban area was 74.4% white, 4% mixed, 15% Asian or Asian-British, 5% Black or Black-British, and 1% \"other ethnic group\". In terms of national identity, just over 50% identified as English only, 24% as British only and 15% only as a non-UK identity; just over 8% had a \"British and other\" identity.\nIn 2001, Bedford was 69% Christian, 24% Irreligious, 3% Muslim, and 2% Sikh. By 2021, Bedford was 48% Christian, 40% Irreligious, 7% Muslim, and 2% Sikh.\nLandmarks.\nBedford Park is the town's largest urban park and is located directly to the north of the town centre. The park retains many original features from its Victorian design and construction, including a cricket pavilion and bandstand which are both still in use. Priory Country Park is a large country park located on the northern bank of the River Great Ouse in eastern Bedford. Both parks have been awarded Green Flag status.\nBedford's principal church is St Paul's, in the square of the same name at the historic centre of the town. It is the Civic Church of the Borough of Bedford and County of Bedfordshire and has a tall, iconic spire which is one of the dominant features of the town. There was an early Minster church on the site by 1066 and work on the present structure began in the early 13th century, but little remains from that period. John Bunyan and John Wesley both preached in the church. In 1865\u20131868 the tower and spire were completely rebuilt and the two transepts added and lesser alterations have been made since. From 1941 to the end of the Second World War the BBC's daily service was broadcast from St Paul's. Another notable local church is St Peter's, on St Peter's Street, which contains some of the oldest architectural remains in Bedford, the most ancient being the two monoliths. St Paul's Church also hosts the town's Visitor Information Centre.\nJust outside the town lie the Cardington airship hangars. The hangars have been used to shoot scenes for movies such as \"Star Wars\", \"Batman Begins\", \"The Dark Knight\", and \"Inception\". The hangars can be seen from the Bedford Bypass.\nDespite being far upriver from the sea, seals have occasionally been reported as swimming as far inland as Bedford.\nThe Old Town Hall dates back to 1550 and the building was originally constructed as a school.\nRiver Great Ouse.\nThe River Great Ouse passes through the town centre and is lined with gardens known as the Embankment. Within these gardens, opposite Rothsay Road, stands a war memorial to the men of the town killed in the First World War. The memorial was designed in 1921 by the sculptor Charles Sargeant Jagger and depicts the Anglo Saxon Lady Athelflaed, who ruled Mercia, killing a dragon. The inscription reads\nBedford Castle.\nBedford Castle Mound is the remnant of Bedford's medieval castle, located close to the centre of the modern town, less than a hundred yards from Bedford Bridge and the High Street. In around 2000, Bedford Borough Council built a sloping retaining wall on the south side, facing the river. Although almost completely modern, the wall does incorporate a few pieces of historic masonry. A paved path leads round the side of the mound up to the top, which is a flat circular grassy area. A small wooden structure of the same date at the top of the wall, much like a bus shelter, protects tourists from the rain while they view the river embankment.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nThere are two stations in Bedford. The main Bedford railway station is on the Midland Main Line, providing inter-city services to London St Pancras and the East Midlands, operated by East Midlands Railway. Stopping services, operated by Thameslink, run through London to Gatwick Airport and Brighton. Bedford's other lesser used station is Bedford St John's which in on the Marston Vale Line. Services are operated by London North Western Railway and run between Bletchley and Bedford's main station.\nRoad.\nRoad access to and from the town is provided by the A6 and A421 roads; the former connects the town with Kettering to the north-west, and Luton to the south, whilst the latter connects the town with Milton Keynes and the M1 (at Junction 13) to the west, and the A1 to the east (near St Neots) via a bypass, with both being around away. Other roads that serve or skirt the town include the A422, which runs westwards into Milton Keynes (also connecting to the M1 at Junction 14 via the A509), and the A428, which runs between Coventry and Cambridge.\nThe new Greyfriars surface car park and the refurbished Allhallows multi-storey car park both implement a pay on foot system. Greyfriars occupies 142 parking spaces, including 7 designated disabled spaces, although there is a 2-hour per day parking limit.\nBuses.\nBedford bus station serves the town and was reopened on 29 March 2015, after undergoing \u00a38.8million regeneration which began in 2013. \nThe main operators in and around the town are Stagecoach East and Stagecoach Midlands.\nEducation.\nBedford Borough previously operated a three-tier education system, which was arranged into lower, middle and upper schools, as recommended in the Plowden Report of 1967. The arrangement was put to the vote in 2006 with a view to moving to the two-tier model, but was rejected. On 17 November 2009, borough councillors voted 19 to 17 in favour of a two tier system, which would then be phased in. However, following the defeat of the Labour Government in 2010, the new coalition government announced that the funding necessary for the switch to a two-tier system would no longer be available. As a result, the switch proceeded on a school by school basis as national funding was due to cover most of the cost. However, in July 2015, the council announced the intention to support the transition to a system of two tier education across the whole borough in a coordinated way. At the time, only the Wootton cluster of schools chose not to transition. As of September 2018, all of the borough's schools have converted to two-tier. The secondary schools currently operating in the borough are Bedford Academy, Bedford Free School, Biddenham International School, Castle Newnham School, Goldington Academy, Mark Rutherford School and St Thomas More Catholic School.\nBedford is home to four private schools run by the Harpur Trust charity, endowed by Bedfordian Sir William Harpur in the 16th century. These are:\nSmaller private institutions include Bedford Greenacre Independent School (boys and girls aged 3\u201318), and Polam School (boys and girls aged 12 months to 9 years), neither of which are part of the Harpur Trust.\nBedford hosts a campus of the University of Bedfordshire, which prior to a merger with the University of Luton in 2006 had been a campus of De Montfort University (itself now solely based in Leicester). For further education, the town is served by Bedford College and The Bedford Sixth Form. Additionally, Stella Mann College is a private college, which offers a range of further education courses relating to the performing arts.\nReligious sites.\nThe town has a high number of places of worship, including the Civic and County Church of St Paul's and the Church of St Peter's. There are three from the Newfrontiers network, as well as Polish, Arab, Portuguese, Spanish and Italian Roman Catholic churches, LDS (Mormon) meeting houses, Greek, Russian and other Orthodox churches, Presbyterian churches, Lutheran churches, Baptist churches, Evangelical churches, Methodist churches, Protestant churches, Anglican churches and various independent churches and other places of worship that cater to the different ethnic, racial, and language groups. There are four Islamic mosques in the town. There are also Buddhist and Hindu temples in the town.\nBedford has the largest Sikh gurdwara in the United Kingdom outside London, alongside two other Sikh gurdwaras; one of which is in Kempston. Bedford has Guru Ravidass and Valmiki temples.\nThere are Quaker, Jehovah's Witness and Wiccan communities who meet and have their own places of worship in the town. There is no longer a synagogue in Bedford, but Bedfordshire Progressive Synagogue, based in Luton, meets in Bedford once a month for the town's Jewish community. The nearest Orthodox synagogue is the Luton United Synagogue, a Lubavitch synagogue in Luton. Bedford is the former headquarters of the Panacea Society, founded in 1919, who believed that the town would have an important role in the Second Coming of Jesus Christ, and that Bedford was the original location of the Garden of Eden.\nCulture.\nThe Higgins Art Gallery &amp; Museum, Bedford is housed in the recreated Victorian home of the Higgins family of Victorian brewers and in a modern extension. The museum has local history collections, while the galleries have notable collections of watercolours, prints and drawings, ceramics, glass and lace.\nBedford contains several works of public art, most notably the Statue of John Bunyan, the Statue of John Howard, and Reflections of Bedford, a statue by British sculptor Rick Kirby.\nThe Panacea Museum tells the story of the Panacea Society, a religious community formed in the early twentieth century.\nThe Bedford Corn Exchange is the largest entertainment venue in the town and plays host to a variety of performances, meetings, conferences, concerts and private functions. The venue has been host to many great entertainers such as Glenn Miller and Bob Hope.\nThe University of Bedfordshire Theatre is the largest theatre in Bedford and hosts many larger productions as well as projects from the university. There is an active amdram (community theatre) scene, with groups such as the Swan Theatre Company, Bedford Drama Company (formerly Bedford Dramatic Club), Bedford Marianettes and ShowCo Bedford producing plays and musicals in venues like the Place Theatre and the Corn Exchange. The Bedford Pantomime Company produces a traditional pantomime at the Bedford Corn Exchange each Christmas. Esquires (one of the town's premier live music venues) regularly plays host to many notable bands and acts from all over the United Kingdom as well as showcasing local live music.\nEvery two years, an event called the \"Bedford River Festival\" is held near the river in Bedford during early July. The event lasts for two days and regularly attracts about 250,000 visitors. The event includes sports, funfairs and live music. It is the second-largest regular outdoor event in the United Kingdom, beaten in numbers only by the Notting Hill Carnival. The Bedford Regatta each May is Britain's largest one-day river rowing regatta.\nOther annual events include \"Bedford by the Sea\" (when large quantities of sand are deposited in the town centre), the \"Bedford International Kite Festival\" and \"Bedford Festival of Motoring\" in June. \"Proms in the Park\", held in early August, is a popular musical event.\nBedford's special brand of the ordinary has resulted in regular small TV and radio appearances, for instance the upbeat episode of \"Mark Steel's in Town\", contrasting with the less enthusiastic treatment in \"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\". The \"Bedford of Bedfordshire's Community Calendar\" segment of this US show featured Bedford-bred John Oliver.\nTourism.\nIn December 2023, Universal Destinations &amp; Experiences announced that it had purchased 480 acres (later expanded to around 700 acres) of land on a former brickworks site near Stewartby, on the outskirts of Bedford, with the company exploring the possibility of building a theme park and resort in the area, citing Bedford's proximity to London and Luton Airport.\nIn 2024, Universal United Kingdom was announced to be in the planning and approval phases, with construction potentially beginning as early as January 2025, and the park itself slated for completion around 2030.\nNew technologies.\nFollowing successful rollouts of autonomous delivery robots in nearby Milton Keynes, Northampton and Cambridgeshire by Starship Technologies, in July 2022, the company announced a partnership with Bedford Borough Council and The Co-operative Group to rollout the autonomous robots in the Bedford built-up area, delivering from three Co-op stores in Goldington, Queens Drive and Kempston, an area spanning 45,000 residents and 20,000 households.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nLocal news and televisions programmes are provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia from the Sandy Heath TV transmitter.\nRadio.\nLocal radio stations are BBC Three Counties Radio on 95.5 FM, Heart East on 96.9 FM, Greatest Hits Radio Bucks, Beds and Herts on 96.2 FM, In2beats on 106.5 FM and Bedford Radio which is the local radio station.\nNewspaper.\nThe town has two local newspapers, the Times &amp; Citizen and the Bedford Independent, with both being distributed freely across the Borough of Bedford and neighboring settlements within Central Bedfordshire.\nSport.\nThere is a long-standing sporting heritage in the Bedford borough with long-established rugby and football clubs. The town has four rugby union teams called Bedford Blues, Bedford Queens, Bedford Swifts and Bedford Athletic. Since 2004, Bedford also has a rugby league team, Bedford Tigers, who compete one tier below the National Conference.\nTaking into account the size of its overall urban area, Bedford is one of the largest towns in England without a fully professional football team. Bedford Town F.C. currently plays at the seventh level of the English football league system and Real Bedford F.C. play at the eighth level.\nRowing is also a major part of the sports scene with a number of regatta events hosted throughout the year from February to October; the most significant of these being Bedford Regatta which, in terms of numbers of crews participating, is the second largest in the country. It was on Bedford's River Great Ouse that Olympic rower, Tim Foster, honed his skills as a student of Bedford Modern and member of star club; indeed the borough has produced many other champions of sport past and present including Stephanie Cook, Gail Emms, Liz Yelling and Paula Radcliffe who is Life Vice-President of Bedford &amp; County Athletic Club\nViking Kayak Club organise the Bedford Kayak Marathon with canoe racing held along the Embankment on Bedford's riverside and organise national ranking canoe slalom events at the Cardington Artificial Slalom Course (CASC), which was the first artificial whitewater course in the United Kingdom. CASC is also the venue each year for the United Kingdom's National Inter Clubs Slalom Finals, the largest canoe slalom event by participation in the United Kingdom. Etienne Stott \u2013 2012 Olympic Gold Medallist's Club.\nBedford Borough was a major host of national teams preparing for the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics. The Maldives National Olympic Committee based its competing athletes in the borough, while Paralympic athletes from Angola, the Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Gambia, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Lesotho, Morocco, Niger, Pakistan, Senegal, Tunisia and Uganda were also based in the area. With the exception of Weymouth (which hosted various sailing events), Bedford Borough accommodated more Olympic teams in 2012 than any other local authority area in the United Kingdom.\nPublic services.\nBedford Hospital is a district general hospital that operates from two sites in the town, providing a wide range of services, although patients requiring advanced health services are referred to specialist units elsewhere, particularly Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge, which has a partnership with Bedford Hospital. Bedford Hospital's catchment area is based on the Borough of Bedford and parts of Central Bedfordshire.\nBedfordshire Police is responsible for policing in Bedford, and operates a main police station in the town centre. Fire and rescue services in Bedford are coordinated by the Bedfordshire Fire and Rescue Service. Bedford's fire station is in the Newnham area of the town and is staffed 24 hours a day.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttps://www.bedford.gov.uk/"}
{"id": "69773", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69773", "title": "Word of Life (Sweden)", "text": "Word of Faith congregation in Sweden\nWord of Life () is a megachurch in Uppsala and an international association of churches, within the Swedish Word of Faith movement. Livets Ord is the foremost example of the Neo-charismatic movement in Sweden, closely related to Word of Faith, and it may be viewed as a Swedish expression of similar Pentecostal elements in American Christianity.\nHistory.\nThe congregation was founded in Uppsala by Ulf Ekman on 24 May 1983. In 1987, it dedicated its new building in Uppsala. In 2012, it founded Word of Life International, an association of churches it helped establish around the world. Ekman passed on the local pastorship in Uppsala to Joakim Lundqvist in 2013. On 9 March 2014, Ekman announced that he and his wife was leaving the organisation, with the intent of joining the Catholic Church. In April 2022, Jan Blom was installed as the senior pastor. In August 2022, Jan Blom was injured in a serious motorcycle accident and is currently on sick leave. In the fall of 2023, Livets Ord implemented an interim leadership team of Simon Ahlstrand, Sebastian Asklund and Christian \u00c5kerhielm. In the fall 2025, David Ekerbring will begin his tenure as senior pastor. \nAside from church, the movement also runs academic schools for all ages and Bible schools. It sends missionaries to Russia, Ukraine, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Israel and India. In 2023, Word of Life International would have helped establish 1,000 churches.\nLivets Ord Theological Seminary.\nThe congregation had its own institution of tertiary education, \"Livets Ord Theological Seminary\", between 1994 and 2014. It was affiliated with an American institution, Oral Roberts University in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the largest charismatic Christian university in the world, accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools. Livets Ord Theological Seminary offered American Bachelor's and master's degrees in New Testament studies, history, education, and other fields under the auspices of Oral Roberts University, but it was never accredited by the Swedish National Agency for Higher Education to award Swedish academic degrees.\nThe seminary was announced to be closing in February 2014 due to having been operating under a loss.\nCriticism.\nWhen it was founded, the movement met with criticism from mass media and other churches, due to what was perceived as an inhumane perspective against people who suffer from physical disabilities and financial poverty, coupled with its authoritarian leadership. Since then, the movement has consolidated, and its views have emerged as somewhat more acceptable to Swedish free churches. \nSome of its critics consider it a cult because of its connection with, and usage of theology from within, the Word of Faith movement, though its teachings now are broadened with other, more classical theology. \nIn November 2015, the church was criticized in a television episode of Uppdrag granskning, notably by the demand of Ulf Ekman to be paid in cash during his interventions in churches, his culture of silence refusing any criticism and its insistence on multiple offerings, in addition to the tithe. Pastor Joakim Lundqvist confirmed that the weak culture of dialogue and the insistence on multiple offerings had indeed been problems, but that the church had implemented new policies over the years and that these problems were therefore no longer relevant.\nPopular culture.\nA parody of the congregation exists in novel \"Berts bekymmer\", where Klimpen returns to \u00d6reskoga, now as a member of the congregation \"Lennarts ord\". The congregation runs a bible school in Motala, and is led by a person named Lennart.\nIn Stieg Larsson's novel, The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo, journalist Mikael Blomkvist's daughter, Pernilla, is a member of the church. Her recognition of the Old Testament verses corresponding to a series of numbers in Harriet Vanger's datebook (which Blomkvist initially took to be telephone numbers) helps her father to make the connection between Harriet's disappearance in 1966 and a serial killer who used parodies of the punishments laid out in the Book of Leviticus as a \"signature\" for his murders of various women all over Sweden.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69776", "revid": "5886041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69776", "title": "Word of Life", "text": "Word of Life can refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69778", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69778", "title": "Semiconservative replication", "text": "Mechanism of DNA replication\nSemiconservative replication describes the mechanism of DNA replication in all known cells. DNA replication occurs on multiple origins of replication along the DNA template strands. As the DNA double helix is unwound by helicase, replication occurs separately on each template strand in antiparallel directions. This process is known as semi-conservative replication because two copies of the original DNA molecule are produced, each copy conserving (replicating) the information from one half of the original DNA molecule. Each copy contains one original strand and one newly synthesized strand. (Both copies should be identical, but this is not entirely assured.) The structure of DNA (as deciphered by James D. Watson and Francis Crick in 1953) suggested that each strand of the double helix would serve as a template for synthesis of a new strand. It was not known how newly synthesized strands combined with template strands to form two double helical DNA molecules.\nDiscovery.\nMultiple experiments were conducted to determine how DNA replicates. The semiconservative model was anticipated by Nikolai Koltsov and later supported by the Meselson\u2013Stahl experiment, which confirmed that DNA replicated semi-conservatively by conducting an experiment using two isotopes: nitrogen-15 (N) and nitrogen-14 (N). When N was added to the heavy N-N DNA, a hybrid of N-N was seen in the first generation. After the second generation, the hybrid remained, but light DNA (N-N) was seen as well. This indicated that DNA replicated semi-conservatively. This mode of DNA replication allowed for each daughter strand to remain associated with its template strand.\nNature of DNA replication.\nSemiconservative replication derives its name from the fact that this mechanism of transcription was one of three models originally proposedfor DNA replication:\nSeparation and recombination of double-stranded DNA.\nFor semiconservative replication to occur, the DNA double-helix needs to be separated so the new template strand can be bound to the complementary base pairs. Topoisomerase is the enzyme that aids in the unzipping and recombination of the double-helix. Specifically, topoisomerase prevents the double-helix from supercoiling, or becoming too tightly wound. Three topoisomerase enzymes are involved in this process: Type IA Topoisomerase, Type IB Topoisomerase, and Type II Topoisomerase. Type I Topoisomerase unwinds double stranded DNA while Type II Topoisomerase breaks the hydrogen bonds linking the complementary base pairs of DNA.\nRate and accuracy.\nThe rate of semiconservative DNA replication in a living cell was first measured as the rate of the T4 phage DNA strand elongation in phage-infected \"E. coli\". During the period of exponential DNA increase at 37\u00a0\u00b0C, the rate of strand elongation was 749 nucleotides per second. The mutation rate per base pair per round of replication during phage T4 DNA synthesis is . Thus, semiconservative DNA replication is both rapid and accurate.\nApplications.\nSemiconservative replication provides many advantages for DNA. It is fast, accurate, and allows for easy repair of DNA. It is also responsible for phenotypic diversity in a few prokaryotic species. The process of creating a newly synthesized strand from the template strand allows for the old strand to be methylated at a separate time from the new strand. This allows repair enzymes to proofread the new strand and correct any mutations or errors.\nDNA could have the ability to activate or deactivate certain areas on the newly synthesized strand that allows the phenotype of the cell to be changed. This could be advantageous for the cell because DNA could activate a more favorable phenotype to aid in survival. Due to natural selection, the more favorable phenotype would persist throughout the species. This gives rise to the idea of inheritance, or why certain phenotypes are inherited over another.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69779", "revid": "665998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69779", "title": "F.C.C.", "text": ""}
{"id": "69782", "revid": "31", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69782", "title": "2002 stock market downturn", "text": ""}
{"id": "69783", "revid": "48854498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69783", "title": "Abarth", "text": "Italian car manufacturer\nAbarth &amp; C. S.p.A. () is an Italian racing- and road-car maker and performance division founded by Italo-Austrian Carlo Abarth in 1949. Abarth &amp; C. S.p.A. is owned by Stellantis through its Italian subsidiary. Abarth's logo is a shield with a stylized scorpion on a yellow and red background, a short, wide Italian flag in the middle, and \"Abarth\" text on a black background.\nHistory.\n1949: Abarth &amp; C..\nCarlo Abarth was sporting director of the Cisitalia racing team starting in 1947. The following year, the manufacturer folded, and founder Piero Dusio flew to Argentina.\nAbarth, funded by Armando Scagliarini, took over Cisitalia's assets and on 31 March 1949, Abarth &amp; C. was founded in Bologna. Carlo's astrological sign, Scorpio, was chosen as the company logo.\nFrom the Cisitalia liquidation, Abarth obtained five 204 sports cars (two complete Spiders and three unfinished), a D46 single-seater, and various spares. The Cisitalia 204s were immediately rechristened Abarth Cisitalia 204A. Abarth proceeded to build and race a series of sports cars developed from these last Cisitalia cars. In addition to Guido Scagliarini, the \"Squadra Abarth\" racing team lined up celebrated drivers, including Tazio Nuvolari, Franco Cortese, and Piero Taruffi. Notably, Tazio Nuvolari made his last appearance in racing at the wheel of an Abarth 204A, winning its class in the Palermo\u2013Monte Pellegrino hillclimb on 10 April 1950. Alongside racing, the company's main activity was producing and selling accessories and performance parts for Fiat, Lancia, Cisitalia, and Simca cars, like inlet manifolds and silencers.\nOn 9 April 1951, the company's headquarters were moved to Turin; Abarth began his well-known association with Fiat in 1952, when the company built the Abarth 1500 Biposto on Fiat mechanicals.\nIn 1957, Abarth entered a deal with Fiat whereby they were paid direct fees for successful competition finishes. Abarth accordingly went on to enter their cars in countless hillclimbing and sports-car racing events across the world, mainly in classes from 850 to 2000 cc, competing with Porsche 904 and Ferrari Dino in the higher echelons. Since they were paid based on the number of results, Abarth entered their cars in every conceivable class and in countries across the entire world. Hans Herrmann was a factory driver from 1962 until 1965, winning the 500 km N\u00fcrburgring in 1963 with Teddy Pilette.\nAbarth promised Johann Abt that he could race a factory car for free if he won all the races he entered. Abt almost succeeded; of the 30 races he entered, Abt won 29 and finished second once. Abt later founded Abt Sportsline.\nAbarth produced high-performance exhaust pipes, diversifying into tuning kits for road vehicles, mainly for Fiat. A racing exhaust was produced for the 1950s Lambretta models \"D\" and \"LD\". Original Abarth LD exhausts are now valuable collector's items. Reproductions are available, which carry the Abarth name; how Fiat feels about this is not known. Lambretta even held several 125 cc motorcycle land speed records during the 1950s due partly to the exhaust that Abarth developed for them.\nIn 1958, Abarth developed the Abarth Alfa Romeo 1000 in collaboration with the Milanese manufacturer. They sent an engineer, Mario Colucci, to oversee the process. Abarth was impressed with his skill, and while the car remained a one-off, Colucci was given the position of Abarth's Technical Director in 1960. Colucci's first design was a mid-engined, tubular framed roadster using the 750 engine called the Abarth Spider Sport. This car had an unfortunate gestation period and never attained much success in competition, while Abarth himself favored the rear-engine layout and kept offering both types. The Spider Sport series was also built with 700 and 1000\u00a0cc displacements, while a few late examples were fitted with 1300\u00a0cc engines of Simca origins. Colucci's next design, the Group 4 1000\u00a0SP, was much more successful and spawned a range of mid-engined, tubular-framed, fibreglass-bodied sports prototypes.\nAbarth also helped build sports or racing cars with Porsche and Simca.\n1971: Fiat takeover.\nCarlo sold Abarth to Fiat on 31 July 1971. The acquisition was not made public until 15 October. As Fiat was not interested in the Reparto Corse racing operations, these were taken over by Enzo Osella. Osella obtained cars, spares, technicians, and drivers (amongst them Arturo Merzario), and continued the racing activity, founding the Osella racing team. Thus ended for Abarth the days of sport prototype and hillclimb racing.\nUnder Fiat ownership, Abarth became the Fiat Group's racing department, managed by engine designer Aurelio Lampredi. Abarth prepared Fiat's rally cars, including the Fiat 124 Abarth Rally and 131 Abarth.\nIn December 1977, in advance of the 1978 racing season, the beforehand competing Abarth and Squadra Corse Lancia factory racing operations were merged by Fiat into a single entity named EASA (\"Ente per l'Attivit\u00e0 Sportiva Automobilistica\", Organization for Car Sports Racing Activities). Cesare Fiorio (previously in charge of the Lancia rally team) was appointed director, while Daniele Audetto was sporting director; the EASA headquarters were set up in Abarth's Corso Marche (Turin) offices.\nThe combined racing department developed the Lancia Beta Montecarlo Turbo Group 5 racing car which won the 1980 World Championship for Makes and the 1981 World Endurance Championship of Makes. It also created the Lancia Rally 037 Group B rally car, which won for Lancia the 1983 World Manufacturers' Championship).\nOn 1 October 1981, Abarth &amp; C. ceased to exist, and was replaced by Fiat Auto Gestione Sportiva, a division of the parent company specialised in the management of racing programmes that would remain in operation through to the end of 1999, when it changed to Fiat Auto Corse S.p.A. \nSome commercial models built by Fiat or its subsidiaries Lancia and Autobianchi were co-branded Abarth, including the Autobianchi A112 Abarth, a lightweight and inexpensive \"boy racer\". The A112 Abarth was introduced with a 58 hp engine, soon followed by a 70 hp one, and a specific \"A112 Abarth trophy\" was run from 1977 to 1984.\nIn the 1980s, Abarth name was mainly used to mark performance cars, such as the Fiat Ritmo Abarth 125/130 TC.\nIn 2000s, Fiat used the Abarth brand to designate a trim/model level, as in the Fiat Stilo Abarth.\n2007: Rebirth of Abarth &amp; C. S.p.A..\nOn 1 February 2007, Abarth was re-established as an independent unit with the launch of the current company, Abarth &amp; C. S.p.A., controlled 100% by Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A., the subsidiary of Fiat S.p.A. dealing with the production and selling of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles.\nThe first models launched were the Abarth Grande Punto and the Abarth Grande Punto S2000. The brand is based in the Officine 83, part of the old Mirafiori engineering plant. The CEO as of 2022 is Olivier Fran\u00e7ois.\nIn 2015, Abarth's parent company was renamed FCA Italy S.p.A., reflecting the incorporation of Fiat S.p.A. into Fiat Chrysler Automobiles that took place in the previous months.\nYamaha XSR900 Abarth.\nIn 2017, Abarth collaborated with Yamaha to produce a limited-edition motorcycle, the \"Sport Heritage caf\u00e9 racer special\". Named the XSR900 Abarth it was based on the 847\u00a0cc inline-triple standard neo-retro Yamaha XSR900.\nList of CEOs.\n\"Current\" Olivier Fran\u00e7ois (since 2011) \nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69784", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69784", "title": "Ghana/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "69785", "revid": "11171810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69785", "title": "Pelican", "text": "Genus of large water birds with a throat pouch\nPelicans (genus Pelecanus) are a genus of large water birds that make up the family Pelecanidae. They are characterized by a long beak and a large throat pouch used for catching prey and draining water from the scooped-up contents before swallowing. They have predominantly pale plumage, except for the brown and Peruvian pelicans. The bills, pouches, and bare facial skin of all pelicans become brightly coloured before the breeding season.\nThe eight living pelican species have a patchy, seasonally-dependent yet global distribution, ranging latitudinally from the tropics to the temperate zone. Pelicans are absent from interior Amazonian South America, from polar regions and the open ocean; at least one species is known to migrate to the inland desert of Australia's Red Centre, after heavy rains create temporary lakes. White pelicans are also observed at the American state of Utah's Great Salt Lake, for example, some 600 miles (965\u00a0km) from the nearest coastline (the Pacific West Coast). They have also been seen hundreds of miles inland in North America, having flown northwards along the Mississippi River and other large waterways.\nLong thought to be related to frigatebirds, cormorants, tropicbirds, and gannets and boobies, pelicans instead are most closely related to the shoebill and hamerkop storks (although these two birds are not actually true storks), and are placed in the order Pelecaniformes. Ibises, spoonbills, herons, and bitterns have been classified in the same order. Fossil evidence of pelicans dates back at least 36\u00a0million years to the remains of a tibiotarsus recovered from late Eocene strata of Egypt that bears striking similarity to modern species of pelican. They are thought to have evolved in the Old World and spread into the Americas; this is reflected in the relationships within the genus as the eight species divide into Old World and New World lineages. This hypothesis is supported by fossil evidence from the oldest pelican taxa.\nPelicans will frequent inland waterways but are most known for residing along maritime and coastal zones, where they feed principally on fish in their large throat pouches, diving into the water and catching them at/near the water's surface. They can adapt to varying degrees of water salinity, from freshwater and brackish to\u2014most commonly\u2014seawater. They are gregarious birds, travelling in flocks, hunting cooperatively, and breeding colonially. Four white-plumaged species tend to nest on the ground, and four brown or grey-plumaged species nest mainly in trees. The relationship between pelicans and people has often been contentious. The birds have been persecuted because of their perceived competition with commercial and recreational fishing. Their populations have fallen through habitat destruction, disturbance, and environmental pollution, and three species are of conservation concern. They also have a long history of cultural significance in mythology, and in Christian and heraldic iconography.\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nEtymology.\nThe name comes from the Ancient Greek word \"pelekan\" (\u03c0\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03ac\u03bd), which is itself derived from the word \"pelekys\" (\u03c0\u03ad\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03c5\u03c2) meaning \"axe\". In classical times, the word was applied to both the pelican and the woodpecker.\nTaxonomy history.\nThe genus \"Pelecanus\" was first formally described by Carl Linnaeus in his landmark 1758 10th edition of \"Systema Naturae\". He described the distinguishing characteristics as a straight bill hooked at the tip, linear nostrils, a bare face, and fully webbed feet. This early definition included frigatebirds, cormorants, and sulids, as well as pelicans. The family Pelecanidae was later introduced (as Pelicanea) by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815.\nOrder and related taxa.\nPelicans give their name to the Pelecaniformes, an order which has undergone significant revision. Tropicbirds (now Phaethontiformes), darters, cormorants, gannets, boobies, and frigatebirds (now Suliformes), all traditional members of the order, have since been removed from Pelecaniformes. In their place, herons, ibises, spoonbills, the hamerkop, and the shoebill have now been added into the Pelecaniformes.\nPhylogenetic relationships.\nMolecular data support a close relationship between pelicans, shoebills (\"Balaeniceps rex\"), and hamerkops (\"Scopus umbretta\"). Together, they form a distinct clade within Pelecaniformes, although their precise evolutionary relationships remain under study.\nEvolution and fossil record.\nThe oldest known pelican fossil is \"Eopelecanus aegyptiacus\", a tibiotarsus from the late Eocene (Priabonian) the Birket Qarun Formation in the Wadi El Hitan in Egypt (~36 million years ago). It shows striking similarities with modern species.\nLater fossils from the Early Miocene found at Luberon, France, include \"Pelecanus sp.\" and \"Miopelecanus gracilis\". Both fossils show a beak nearly morphologically identical to that of present-day pelicans. This remarkable stasis in pelican beak morphology may reflect strong functional constraints. Their specialized fish-eating beak has likely remained optimal over millions of years, with changes potentially reducing feeding efficiency. Some have also suggested that constraints imposed by flight may have limited the skeletal evolution of pelicans.\nNotable fossil species (sorted by region and age) include:\nExtant species and phylogeny.\nSpecies overview.\nThere are eight extant species of pelicans, which were historically divided into two groups based on plumage colouration and nesting behavior. One group includes four ground-nesting species with predominantly white plumage\u2014the Australian, Dalmatian, great white, and American white pelicans. The other group consists of four species with grey or brown plumage that nest either in trees or on coastal rocks\u2014the pink-backed, spot-billed, brown, and Peruvian pelicans. The largely marine brown and Peruvian pelicans, once considered conspecific, are sometimes placed in the subgenus \"Leptopelecanus\" due to their darker colouration and coastal habits. However, species with similar plumage and nesting behavior are found in both groups, indicating that these traits do not reflect deep evolutionary divisions.\nGenetic analyses using mitochondrial and nuclear DNA have revealed a different picture of pelican relationships. These studies support the existence of two major clades: a New World clade, comprising the American white, brown, and Peruvian pelicans, and an Old World clade that includes the Dalmatian, pink-backed, spot-billed, Australian, and great white pelicans. This phylogeny suggests that pelicans evolved in the Old World and later colonized the Americas. Furthermore, it indicates that nesting behavior is more strongly influenced by body size than by genetic lineage.\nDescription.\nPelicans are very large birds with very long bills characterised by a downcurved hook at the end of the upper mandible, and the attachment of a huge gular pouch to the lower. The slender rami of the lower bill and the flexible tongue muscles form the pouch into a basket for catching fish, and sometimes rainwater, though to not hinder the swallowing of large fish, the tongue itself is tiny. They have a long neck and short stout legs with large, fully webbed feet. Although they are among the heaviest of flying birds, they are relatively light for their apparent bulk because of air pockets in the skeleton and beneath the skin, enabling them to float high in the water. The tail is short and square. The wings are long and broad, suitably shaped for soaring and gliding flight, and have the unusually large number of 30 to 35 secondary flight feathers.\nMales are generally larger than females and have longer bills. The smallest species is the brown pelican, small individuals of which can be no more than and long, with a wingspan of as little as . The largest is believed to be the Dalmatian pelican, at up to and in length, with a maximum wingspan of . The Australian pelican's bill may grow up to long in large males, the longest of any bird.\nPelicans have mainly light-coloured plumage, the exceptions being the brown and Peruvian pelicans. The bills, pouches, and bare facial skin of all species become brighter before breeding season commences. The throat pouch of the Californian subspecies of the brown pelican turns bright red, and fades to yellow after the eggs are laid, while the throat pouch of the Peruvian pelican turns blue. The American white pelican grows a prominent knob on its bill that is shed once females have laid eggs. The plumage of immature pelicans is darker than that of adults. Newly hatched chicks are naked and pink, darkening to grey or black after four to 14 days, then developing a covering of white or grey down.\nAir sacs.\nAnatomical dissections of two brown pelicans in 1939 showed that pelicans have a network of air sacs under their skin situated across the ventral surface including the throat, breast, and undersides of the wings, as well as having air sacs in their bones. The air sacs are connected to the airways of the respiratory system, and the pelican can keep its air sacs inflated by closing its glottis, but how air sacs are inflated is not clear. The air sacs serve to keep the pelican remarkably buoyant in the water and may also cushion the impact of the pelican's body on the water surface when they dive from flight into water to catch fish. Superficial air sacs may also help to round body contours (especially over the abdomen, where surface protuberances may be caused by viscera changing size and position) to enable the overlying feathers to form more effective heat insulation and also to enable feathers to be held in position for good aerodynamics.\nDistribution and habitat.\nModern pelicans are found on all continents except Antarctica. They primarily inhabit warm regions, although breeding ranges extend to latitudes of 45\u00b0 South (Australian pelicans in Tasmania) and 60\u00b0 North (American white pelicans in western Canada). Birds of inland and coastal waters, they are absent from polar regions, the deep ocean, oceanic islands (except the Galapagos), and inland South America, as well as from the eastern coast of South America from the mouth of the Amazon River southwards. Subfossil bones have been recovered from as far south as New Zealand's South Island, although their scarcity and isolated occurrence suggests that these remains may have merely been vagrants from Australia (much as is the case today).\nBehaviour and ecology.\nPelicans swim well with their strong legs and their webbed feet. They rub the backs of their heads on their preen glands to pick up an oily secretion, which they transfer to their plumage to waterproof it. Holding their wings only loosely against their bodies, pelicans float with relatively little of their bodies below the water surface. They dissipate excess heat by gular flutter \u2013 rippling the skin of the throat and pouch with the bill open to promote evaporative cooling. They roost and loaf communally on beaches, sandbanks, and in shallow water.\nA fibrous layer deep in the breast muscles can hold the wings rigidly horizontal for gliding and soaring. Thus, they use thermals for soaring to heights of 3,000\u00a0m (10,000\u00a0ft) or more, combined both with gliding and with flapping flight in V formation, to commute distances up to to feeding areas. Pelicans also fly low (or \"skim\") over stretches of water, using a phenomenon known as ground effect to reduce drag and increase lift. As the air flows between the wings and the water surface, it is compressed to a higher density and exerts a stronger upward force against the bird above. Hence, substantial energy is saved while flying.\nAdult pelicans rely on visual displays and behaviour to communicate, particularly using their wings and bills. Agonistic behaviour consists of thrusting and snapping at opponents with their bills, or lifting and waving their wings in a threatening manner. Adult pelicans grunt when at the colony, but are generally silent elsewhere or outside breeding season. Conversely, colonies are noisy, as chicks vocalise extensively.\nBreeding and lifespan.\nPelicans are gregarious and nest colonially. Pairs are monogamous for a single season, but the pair bond extends only to the nesting area; mates are independent away from the nest. The ground-nesting (white) species have a complex communal courtship involving a group of males chasing a single female in the air, on land, or in the water while pointing, gaping, and thrusting their bills at each other. They can finish the process in a day. The tree-nesting species have a simpler process in which perched males advertise for females. The location of the breeding colony is constrained by the availability of an ample supply of fish to eat, although pelicans can use thermals to soar and commute for hundreds of kilometres daily to fetch food.\nThe Australian pelican has two reproductive strategies depending on the local degree of environmental predictability. Colonies of tens or hundreds, rarely thousands, of birds breed regularly on small coastal and subcoastal islands where food is seasonally or permanently available. In arid inland Australia, especially in the endorheic Lake Eyre basin, pelicans breed opportunistically in very large numbers of up to 50,000 pairs, when irregular major floods, which may be many years apart, fill ephemeral salt lakes and provide large amounts of food for several months before drying out again.\nIn all species, copulation takes place at the nest site; it begins shortly after pairing and continues for three to ten days before egg-laying. The male brings the nesting material, in ground-nesting species (which may not build a nest) sometimes in the pouch, and in tree-nesting species crosswise in the bill. The female then heaps the material up to form a simple structure.\nThe eggs are oval, white, and coarsely textured. All species normally lay at least two eggs; the usual clutch size is one to three, rarely up to six. Both sexes incubate with the eggs on top of or below the feet; they may display when changing shifts. Incubation takes 30\u201336 days; hatching success for undisturbed pairs can be as high as 95%, but because of sibling competition or siblicide, in the wild, usually all but one nestling dies within the first few weeks (later in the pink-backed and spot-billed species). Both parents feed their young. Small chicks are fed by regurgitation; after about a week, they are able to put their heads into their parents' pouches and feed themselves. Sometimes before, but especially after being fed the pelican chick may seem to \"throw a tantrum\" by loudly vocalizing and dragging itself around in a circle by one wing and leg, striking its head on the ground or anything nearby and the tantrums sometimes end in what looks like a seizure that results in the chick falling briefly unconscious; the reason is not clearly known, but a common belief is that it is to draw attention to itself and away from any siblings who are waiting to be fed.\nParents of ground-nesting species sometimes drag older young around roughly by the head before feeding them. From about 25 days old, the young of these species gather in \"pods\" or \"cr\u00e8ches\" of up to 100 birds in which parents recognise and feed only their own offspring. By six to eight weeks, they wander around, occasionally swimming, and may practise communal feeding. Young of all species fledge ten to 12 weeks after hatching. They may remain with their parents afterwards, but are now seldom or never fed. They are mature at three or four years old. Overall breeding success is highly variable. Pelicans live for 15 to 25 years in the wild, although one reached an age of 54 years in captivity.\nFeeding.\nThe diet of pelicans usually consists of fish, but occasionally amphibians, turtles, crustaceans, insects, birds, and mammals are also eaten. The size of the preferred prey fish varies depending on pelican species and location. For example, in Africa, the pink-backed pelican generally takes fish ranging in size from fry up to and the great white pelican prefers somewhat larger fish, up to , but in Europe, the latter species has been recorded taking fish up to . In deep water, white pelicans often fish alone. Nearer the shore, several encircle schools of small fish or form a line to drive them into the shallows, beating their wings on the water surface and then scooping up the prey. Although all pelican species may feed in groups or alone, the Dalmatian, pink-backed, and spot-billed pelicans are the only ones to prefer solitary feeding. When fishing in groups, all pelican species have been known to work together to catch their prey, and Dalmatian pelicans may even cooperate with great cormorants.\nLarge fish are caught with the bill-tip, then tossed up in the air to be caught and slid into the gullet head-first. A gull will sometimes stand on the pelican's head, peck it to distraction, and grab a fish from the open bill. Pelicans in their turn sometimes snatch prey from other waterbirds.\nThe brown pelican usually plunge-dives head-first for its prey, from a height as great as , especially for anchovies and menhaden. The only other pelican to feed using a similar technique is the Peruvian pelican, but its dives are typically from a lower height than the brown pelican. The Australian and American white pelicans may feed by low plunge-dives landing feet-first and then scooping up the prey with the beak, but they\u2014as well as the remaining pelican species\u2014primarily feed while swimming on the water. Aquatic prey is most commonly taken at or near the water surface. Although principally a fish eater, the Australian pelican is also an eclectic and opportunistic scavenger and carnivore that forages in landfill sites, as well as taking carrion and \"anything from insects and small crustaceans to ducks and small dogs\". Food is not stored in a pelican's throat pouch, contrary to popular folklore.\nPelicans may also eat birds. In southern Africa, eggs and chicks of the Cape cormorant are an important food source for great white pelicans. Several other bird species have been recorded in the diet of this pelican in South Africa, including Cape gannet chicks on Malgas Island as well as crowned cormorants, kelp gulls, greater crested terns, and African penguins on Dassen Island and elsewhere. The Australian pelican, which is particularly willing to take a wide range of prey items, has been recorded feeding on young Australian white ibis, and young and adult grey teals and silver gulls. Brown pelicans have been reported preying on young common murres in California and the eggs and nestlings of cattle egrets and nestling great egrets in Baja California, Mexico. Peruvian pelicans in Chile have been recorded feeding on nestlings of imperial shags, juvenile Peruvian diving petrels, and grey gulls. Cannibalism of chicks of their own species is known from the Australian, brown, and Peruvian pelicans. Non-native great white pelicans have been observed swallowing city pigeons in St. James's Park in London, England.\nStatus and conservation.\nPopulations.\nGlobally, pelican populations are adversely affected by these main factors: declining supplies of fish through overfishing or water pollution, destruction of habitat, direct effects of human activity such as disturbance at nesting colonies, hunting and culling, entanglement in fishing lines and hooks, and the presence of pollutants such as DDT and endrin. Most species' populations are more or less stable, although three are classified by the IUCN as being at risk. All species breed readily in zoos, which is potentially useful for conservation management.\nThe combined population of brown and Peruvian pelicans is estimated at 650,000 birds, with around 250,000 in the United States and Caribbean, and 400,000 in Peru. The National Audubon Society estimates the global population of the brown pelican at 300,000. Numbers of brown pelican plummeted in the 1950s and 1960s, largely as a consequence of environmental DDT pollution, and the species was listed as endangered in the US in 1970. With restrictions on DDT use in the US from 1972, its population has recovered, and it was delisted in 2009.\nThe Peruvian pelican is listed as near threatened because, although the population is estimated by BirdLife International to exceed 500,000 mature individuals, and is possibly increasing, it has been much higher in the past. It declined dramatically during the 1998 El Ni\u00f1o event and could experience similar declines in the future. Conservation needs include regular monitoring throughout the range to determine population trends, particularly after El Ni\u00f1o years, restricting human access to important breeding colonies, and assessing interactions with fisheries.\nThe spot-billed pelican has an estimated population between 13,000 and 18,000 and is considered to be near threatened in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Numbers declined substantially during the 20th century, one crucial factor being the eradication of the important Sittaung valley breeding colony in Burma through deforestation and the loss of feeding sites. The chief threats it faces are from habitat loss and human disturbance, but populations have mostly stabilised following increased protection in India and Cambodia.\nThe pink-backed pelican has a large population ranging over much of sub-Saharan Africa. In the absence of substantial threats or evidence of declines across its range, its conservation status is assessed as being of least concern. Regional threats include the drainage of wetlands and increasing disturbance in southern Africa. The species is susceptible to bioaccumulation of toxins and the destruction of nesting trees by logging.\nThe American white pelican has increased in numbers, with its population estimated at over 157,000 birds in 2005, becoming more numerous east of the continental divide, while declining in the west. However, whether its numbers have been affected by exposure to pesticides is unclear, as it has also lost habitat through wetland drainage and competition with recreational use of lakes and rivers.\nGreat white pelicans range over a large area of Africa and southern Asia. The overall trend in numbers is uncertain, with a mix of regional populations that are increasing, declining, stable, or unknown, but no evidence has been found of rapid overall decline, and the status of the species is assessed as being of least concern. Threats include the drainage of wetlands, persecution and sport hunting, disturbance at the breeding colonies, and contamination by pesticides and heavy metals.\nThe Dalmatian pelican has a population estimated at between 10,000 and 20,000 following massive declines in the 19th and 20th centuries. The main ongoing threats include hunting, especially in eastern Asia, disturbance, coastal development, collision with overhead power lines, and the over-exploitation of fish stocks. It is listed as near threatened by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species as the population trend is downwards, especially in Mongolia, where it is nearly extinct. However, several European colonies are increasing in size and the largest colony for the species, at the Small Prespa Lake in Greece, has reached about 1,400 breeding pairs following conservation measures.\nWidespread across Australia, the Australian pelican has a population generally estimated at between 300,000 and 500,000 individuals. Overall population numbers fluctuate widely and erratically depending on wetland conditions and breeding success across the continent. The species is assessed as being of least concern.\nCulling and disturbance.\nPelicans have been persecuted by humans for their perceived competition for fish, despite the fact that their diet overlaps little with fish caught by people. Starting in the 1880s, American white pelicans were clubbed and shot, their eggs and young were deliberately destroyed, and their feeding and nesting sites were degraded by water management schemes and wetland drainage. Even in the 21st century, an increase in the population of American white pelicans in southeastern Idaho in the US was seen to threaten the recreational cutthroat trout fishery there, leading to official attempts to reduce pelican numbers through systematic harassment and culling.\nGreat white pelicans on Dyer Island, in the Western Cape region of South Africa, were culled during the 19th century because their predation of the eggs and chicks of guano-producing seabirds was seen to threaten the livelihood of the guano collectors. More recently, such predation at South African seabird colonies has impacted on the conservation of threatened seabird populations, especially crowned cormorants, Cape cormorants, and bank cormorants. This has led to suggestions that pelican numbers should be controlled at vulnerable colonies.\nApart from habitat destruction and deliberate, targeted persecution, pelicans are vulnerable to disturbance at their breeding colonies by birdwatchers, photographers, and other curious visitors. Human presence alone can cause the birds to accidentally displace or destroy their eggs, leave hatchlings exposed to predators and adverse weather, or even abandon their colonies completely.\nPoisoning and pollution.\nDDT pollution in the environment was a major cause of decline of brown pelican populations in North America in the 1950s and 1960s. It entered the oceanic food web, contaminating and accumulating in several species, including one of the pelican's primary food fish \u2013 the northern anchovy. Its metabolite DDE is a reproductive toxicant in pelicans and many other birds, causing eggshell thinning and weakening, and consequent breeding failure through the eggs being accidentally crushed by brooding birds. Since an effective ban on the use of DDT was implemented in the US in 1972, the eggshells of breeding brown pelicans there have thickened and their populations have largely recovered.\nIn the late 1960s, following the major decline in brown pelican numbers in Louisiana from DDT poisoning, 500 pelicans were imported from Florida to augment and re-establish the population; over 300 subsequently died in April and May 1975 from poisoning by the pesticide endrin. About 14,000 pelicans, including 7,500 American white pelicans, perished from botulism after eating fish from the Salton Sea in 1990. In 1991, abnormal numbers of brown pelicans and Brandt's cormorants died at Santa Cruz, California, when their food fish (anchovies) were contaminated with neurotoxic domoic acid, produced by the diatom \"Pseudo-nitzschia\".\nAs waterbirds that feed on fish, pelicans are highly susceptible to oil spills, both directly by being oiled and by the impact on their food resources. A 2007 report to the California Fish and Game Commission estimated that during the previous 20 years, some 500\u20131,000 brown pelicans had been affected by oil spills in California. A 2011 report by the Center for Biological Diversity, a year after the April 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill, said that 932 brown pelicans had been collected after being affected by oiling and estimated that ten times that number had been harmed as a result of the spill.\nWhere pelicans interact with fishers, through either sharing the same waters or scavenging for fishing refuse, they are especially vulnerable to being hooked and entangled in both active and discarded fishing lines. Fish hooks are swallowed or catch in the skin of the pouch or webbed feet, and strong monofilament fishing line can become wound around bill, wings, or legs, resulting in crippling, starvation, and often death. Local rescue organisations have been established in North America and Australia by volunteers to treat and rehabilitate injured pelicans and other wildlife.\nParasites and disease.\nAs with other bird families, pelicans are susceptible to a variety of parasites. Avian malaria is carried by the mosquito \"Culex pipiens\", and high densities of these biting insects may force pelican colonies to be abandoned. Leeches may attach to the vent or sometimes the inside of the pouch. A study of the parasites of the American white pelican found 75 different species, including tapeworms, flukes, flies, fleas, ticks, and nematodes.\nThe brown pelican has a similarly extensive range of parasites. The nematodes \"Contracaecum multipapillatum\" and \"C. mexicanum\" and the trematode \"Ribeiroia ondatrae\" have caused illness and mortality in the Puerto Rican population, possibly endangering the pelican on this island.\nMany pelican parasites are found in other bird groups, but several lice are very host-specific. Healthy pelicans can usually cope with their lice, but sick birds may carry hundreds of individuals, which hastens a sick bird's demise. The pouch louse \"Piagetiella peralis\" occurs in the pouch and so it cannot be removed by preening. While this is usually not a serious problem even when present in such numbers that it covers the whole interior of the pouch, sometimes inflammation and bleeding may occur from it and harm the host.\nIn May 2012, hundreds of Peruvian pelicans were reported to have perished in Peru from a combination of starvation and roundworm infestation.\nSymbolism and cultural significance.\nThe pelican has played a prominent symbolic role in human cultures across time and geography. From ancient Egypt to Indigenous Australia, and from Christian allegory to modern logos and mascots, pelicans have been interpreted as emblems of protection, sacrifice, care, and transformation. Their distinctive appearance and behaviors have inspired myths, religious symbolism, heraldic devices, institutional emblems, and even the naming of other animal species. This section explores the rich and varied ways in which pelicans have been woven into spiritual, national, artistic, and popular narratives around the world.\nAncient and indigenous beliefs.\nThe pelican (\"henet\" in Egyptian) was associated in Ancient Egypt with death and the afterlife. It was depicted in art on the walls of tombs, and figured in funerary texts, as a protective symbol against snakes. \"Henet\" was also referred to in the Pyramid Texts as the \"mother of the king\" and thus seen as a goddess. References in nonroyal funerary papyri show that the pelican was believed to possess the ability to prophesy safe passage in the underworld for someone who had died.\nIn Jewish dietary law, pelican is not considered kosher (fit for consumption), as it is a type of seabird and therefore considered an unclean animal.\nAn origin myth from the Murri people of Queensland, cited by Andrew Lang, describes how the Australian pelican acquired its black and white plumage. The story tells that the pelican was once a black bird. During a flood, he made a canoe to save drowning people. He fell in love with a woman and decided to save her, but she and her friends tricked him and escaped. The pelican consequently began preparing to go to war against them by daubing himself with white clay as war paint. Before he had finished, another pelican, on seeing such a strange piebald creature, killed him with its beak, and all such pelicans have been black and white ever since.\nThe Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped nature. They placed emphasis on animals and often depicted pelicans in their art.\nChristian symbolism.\nMyth of self-sacrifice.\nThe \"Physiologus\", a didactic Christian text from the 3rd or 4th century, claims that pelicans kill their young when they grow and strike their parents in the face, but then the mother laments them for three days, after which she strikes her side and brings them back to life with her blood. The \"Physiologus\" explains this as mirroring the pain inflicted on God by people's idolatry, and the self-sacrifice of Jesus on the cross which redeems the sinful (see the blood and water gushing from the wound in his side). This text was widely copied, translated, and sometimes closely paraphrased during the Middle Ages, for instance by 13th-century authors Guillaume le Clerc and Bartholomaeus Anglicus.\nThe self-sacrificial characterization of the pelican was reinforced by widely read medieval bestiaries. The device of \"a pelican in her piety\" or \"a pelican vulning (from Latin \"vulner\u014d\", \"I wound, I injure, I hurt\") herself\" was used in religious iconography and heraldry.\nThe legends of self-wounding and the provision of blood occur across cultures. For example, an Indian folktale depicts a pelican that killed her young by rough treatment, but was then so contrite that she resurrected them with her own blood. Such legends may have arisen because of the impression a pelican sometimes gives that it is stabbing itself with its bill. In reality, it often presses this onto its chest to fully empty the pouch. Another possible derivation is the tendency of the bird to rest with its bill on its breast; the Dalmatian pelican has a blood-red pouch in the early breeding season and this may have contributed to the myth.\nReligious art and literature.\nIn a newer, also medieval version of the European myth, the pelican was thought to be particularly attentive to her young, to the point of providing them with blood by wounding her own breast when no other food was available. As a result, the pelican came to symbolise the Passion of Jesus and the Eucharist, supplementing the image of the lamb and the flag. This mythical characteristic is referenced in the hymn \"Adoro te devote\" (\"Humbly We Adore Thee\"), where in the penultimate verse, Saint Thomas Aquinas describes Christ as the loving divine pelican, one drop of whose blood can save the world. Similarly, the 1678 Christian allegorical novel \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" describes how \"the pelican pierce[s] her own breast with her bill \u2026 to nourish her young ones with her blood, and thereby to show that Christ the blessed so loveth his young, his people, as to save them from death by his blood.\"\nThe pelican is featured in many Christian artworks, especially in Europe. For example, the first (1611) edition of the King James Bible contains a depiction of a pelican feeding her young in an oval panel at the bottom of the title page. The \"pelican in her piety\" appears in the 1686 reredos by Grinling Gibbons in the church of St Mary Abchurch in the City of London. Earlier medieval examples of the motif appear in painted murals, for example, the mural in the parish church of Belchamp Walter, Essex (c. 1350).\nElizabeth I and the Church.\nElizabeth I of England adopted the symbol, portraying herself as the \"mother of the Church of England\". A portrait of her called the Pelican Portrait was painted around 1573, probably by Nicholas Hilliard.\nHeraldry and symbolism.\nHeraldic imagery.\nPelicans have featured extensively in heraldry, generally using the Christian symbolism of the pelican as a caring and self-sacrificing parent. Heraldic images featuring a \"pelican vulning\" refers to a pelican injuring herself, while a \"pelican in her piety\" refers to a female pelican feeding her young with her own blood. The King of Portugal John II adopted the pelican as is own personal sygil while he was Infante, evoking the Christian symbology to equate the sacrifice of his blood to feed the nation. The pelican as a symbol also became synonymous with the increasing charity efforts of the Santas Casas da Miseric\u00f3rdia during his reign and the reconstruction of the Hospital das Caldas da Rainha and the Hospital Real de Todos-os-Santos, which were mainly patronaged by his wife D. Leonor.\nPublic symbols.\nThe heraldic pelican also ended up as a pub name and image, though sometimes with the image of the ship \"Golden Hind\". Sir Francis Drake's famous ship was initially called \"Pelican\", and adorned the British halfpenny coin.\nEmblems and logos in institutions.\nEducational institutions.\nPelicans are widely used as emblems by educational institutions, especially universities. In Louisiana, the bird adorns the seals of Louisiana State University, Tulane University, Louisiana Tech University, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Loyola University New Orleans, Southeastern Louisiana University, and Southern University. The seal of the Packer Collegiate Institute, depicting a pelican feeding her young, has been in use since 1885. The medical faculties of Charles University in Prague also have a pelican as their emblem, invoking the bird's long-standing association with self-sacrifice in Christian symbolism.\nThe image became also linked to the medieval religious feast of Corpus Christi. The universities of Oxford and Cambridge each have colleges named for the religious festival nearest the dates of their establishment, and both Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, feature pelicans on their coats of arms.\nSports teams.\nIn sports, the pelican serves as a mascot and logo for various teams and university athletics. It is the mascot of the New Orleans Pelicans NBA team, the Lahti Pelicans ice hockey team, Tulane University, and the University of the West Indies.\nCommercial and nonprofit organizations.\nThe pelican has also been used as a corporate emblem. The logo of the renowned German stationery company Pelikan was inspired by the family coat of arms of G\u00fcnther Wagner, the company's former owner. He based the trademark on the heraldic image from his coat of arms, originally depicting a pelican feeding three chicks in a nest\u2014later changed to four after the birth of his fourth child. While Wagner modified the original shield shape, the nurturing pelican motif remained central to the brand's visual identity.\nCommercially, the pelican has been adopted as a corporate symbol in banking, publishing, and healthcare. A white pelican logo is used by the Portuguese bank Montepio Geral, The name and image were also employed by Pelican Books, an imprint of nonfiction titles published by Penguin Books. In the context of blood donation, where the pelican's symbolism of self-giving is especially resonant, the Irish Blood Transfusion Service features a pelican in its logo and operated for many years from Pelican House in Dublin. Similarly, Sanquin, the nonprofit organization responsible for blood supply in the Netherlands, uses a stylized pelican in its logo, continuing this humanitarian association.\nNational and regional symbols.\nAs a cultural symbol of nations and states, the pelican holds prominent status. The great white pelican is the national bird of Romania. The brown pelican is the national bird of three Caribbean countries\u2014Saint Kitts and Nevis, Barbados, and Sint Maarten\u2014and features on their coats of arms. A Dalmatian pelican is also depicted on the reverse of the Albanian 1 lek coin, issued in 1996. In the United States, it is the state bird of Louisiana, which is colloquially known as the Pelican State; the bird appears on both the state flag and state seal.\nAlcatraz Island was given its name by the Spanish because of the large numbers of brown pelicans nesting there. The word \"alcatraz\" is itself derived from the Arabic \"al-caduos\", a term used for a water-carrying vessel and likened to the pouch of the pelican. The English name albatross is also derived by corruption of the Spanish word. \nNamesakes in nature.\nArchaeidae, a family of spiders, are known as \"'pelican spiders\"'. The name refers to their unusually elongated jaws and necks used to catch their prey, which give them a profile similar to that of a pelican. They are found in Madagascar, South Africa, and Australia.\nLiterature and humor.\nThe pelican is the subject of a popular limerick originally composed by Dixon Lanier Merritt in 1910 with several variations by other authors. The original version ran:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nA wonderful bird is the pelican,\nHis bill will hold more than his belican,\nHe can take in his beak\nFood enough for a week,\nBut I'm damned if I see how the helican.&lt;/poem&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69786", "revid": "49194911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69786", "title": "Crosswords", "text": ""}
{"id": "69788", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69788", "title": "Hebrews", "text": "Semitic-speaking Israelites, especially in the pre-monarchic period\nThe Hebrews (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0; ) were an ancient Semitic-speaking people. Historians mostly consider the Hebrews as synonymous with the Israelites, with the term \"Hebrew\" denoting an Israelite from the nomadic era, which preceded the establishment of the Kingdom of Israel and Judah in the 11th century BCE. However, in some instances, the designation \"Hebrew\" may also be used historically in a wider sense, referring to the Phoenicians or other ancient Semitic-speaking civilizations, such as the Shasu on the eve of the Late Bronze Age collapse. It appears 34 times within 32 verses of the Hebrew Bible. Some scholars regard \"Hebrews\" as an ethnonym, while others do not, and others still hold that the multiple modern connotations of ethnicity may not all map well onto the sociology of ancient Near Eastern groups.\nBy the time of the Roman Empire, the term () could refer to any member of the Jewish people in general (as \"Strong's Hebrew Dictionary\" puts it: \"any of the Jewish nation\") or, at other times, specifically to those Jews who lived in Judea, which was a Roman province from 6 CE to 135 CE. However, at the time of early Christianity, the term instead referred to Jewish Christians, as opposed to the Judaizers and to the gentile Christians.\nIn Armenian, Georgian, Italian, Greek, Kurdish, Serbian, Romanian, and a few other languages, the transfer of the name from \"Hebrew\" to \"Jew\" never took place, and \"Hebrew\" (or the linguistic equivalent) remains the primary word used to refer to an ethnic Jew.\nWith the revival of the Hebrew language in the 19th century and with the emergence of the Yishuv, the term \"Hebrew\" has been applied to the Jewish people of this re-emerging society in Israel and Palestine or to the Jewish people in general.\nEtymology.\nThe biblical term \"Ivri\" (; ) is usually rendered as \"Hebrew\" in English (; ). The biblical word \"Ivri\" has the plural form \"Ivrim\", or \"Ibrim\". The definitive origin of the term \"Hebrew\" remains uncertain.\nThe most generally accepted hypothesis today is that the text intends \"ivri\" as the adjective (Hebrew suffix -i) formed from \"ever\" (\u05e2\u05b5\u05d1\u05b6\u05e8) 'beyond, across' (avar (\u05e2\u05b8\u05d1\u05b7\u05e8) 'he crossed, he traversed'), as a description of migrants 'from across the river' as the Bible describes the Hebrews. It is also supported by the 3rd century BCE Septuagint, which translates \"ivri\" to \"perates\" (\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03ae\u03c2), a Greek word meaning \"one who came across, a migrant\", from \"perao\" (\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u03ac\u03c9) \"to cross, to traverse\", as well as some early traditional commentary. Gesenius considers it the only linguistically acceptable hypothesis. The description of peoples and nations from their location \"from across the river\" (often the river Euphrates, sometimes the Jordan River) was common in this region of the ancient Near-East: it appears as \"eber nari\" in Akkadian and \"avar nahara\" in Aramaic (both corresponding to Hebrew \"ever nahar\"), the Aramaic expression's use being quoted verbatim in the Bible, for example in an Aramaic letter sent to the King of Persia in the Book of Ezra or in the Book of Nehemiah, sometimes rendered as Trans-Euphrates.\n refers to Shem, the elder brother of Ham and Japheth, and thus the first-born son of Noah, as the father of the sons of Eber (\u05e2\u05d1\u05e8), which may have a similar meaning.\nSome authors such as Radak and R. Nehemiah argue that \"Ibri\" denotes the descendants of the biblical patriarch Eber (Hebrew \u05e2\u05d1\u05e8), son of Shelah, a great-grandson of Noah and an ancestor of Abraham, hence the occasional anglicization \"Eberites\". Others disagree, arguing that the Eberites and Hebrews were two different ethnicities, with the former specifically inhabiting Assyria. Nonetheless, the descent of Hebrews from Eber is acknowledged.\nSince the 19th-century CE discovery of the second-millennium BCE inscriptions mentioning the Habiru, many theories have linked these to the Hebrews. Some scholars argue that the name \"Hebrew\" is related to the name of those semi-nomadic Habiru people recorded in Egyptian inscriptions of the 13th and 12th centuries BCE as having settled in Egypt. Other scholars rebut this, proposing that the Hebrews are mentioned in later texts of the 3rd Intermediate Period of Egypt (11th century BCE) as Shasu of \"Yhw\", while some scholars consider these two hypotheses compatible, \"\u1e2aabiru\" being a generic Akkadian form parallel to Hebrew \"\u02bfivri\" from the Akkadian equivalent of \"\u02bfever\" \"beyond, across\" describing foreign peoples \"from across the river\", where the letter ayin (\u05e2) in Hebrew corresponds to \"\u1e2b\" in Akkadian (as in Hebrew \"zeroa\u02bf\" corresponding to Akkadian \"zuru\u1e2b\"). Alternatively, some argue that Habiru refers to a social class found in every ancient Near Eastern society, which Hebrews could be part of.\nUse as synonym for \"Israelites\".\nIn the Hebrew Bible, the term \"Hebrew\" is normally used by foreigners (namely, the Egyptians) when speaking about Israelites and sometimes used by Israelites when speaking of themselves to foreigners, although Saul does use the term for his fellow countrymen in . In , Abraham (Abram) is described as a descendant of Eber; Josephus states \"Eber\" was the patriarch that Hebrew was named after proceeding from the Tower of Babel at the time of Eber's son Peleg, from which \"Hebrew\" would eventually become derived.\nAccording to the \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" the terms \"Hebrews\" and \"Israelites\" usually describe the same people, stating that they were called Hebrews before the conquest of the Land of Canaan and Israelites afterwards. \nProfessor Nadav Na'aman and others say that the conflation of Hebrew with Israelite is rare and is only used when Israelites are \"in exceptional and precarious situations, such as migrants or slaves.\" Professor Albert D. Friedberg similarly argues that Hebrews refer to socioeconomically disadvantaged Israelites, especially in the context of the Book of Exodus and Books of Samuel.\nIn , Abraham is described as \"Avram Ha-Ivri\" which translates literally as \"Abram the Hebrew.\" Hebrew, in this context, might refer to Abraham's descent from Eber. It might also refer to Abraham's primary language or his status as a migrant from the \"other side of the river\".\nTheologian Alexander MacLaren believes that Hebrew was a nickname for all migrants who migrated to Canaan from the other side of the Euphrates River (or the Jordan River), from the perspective of the 'long-settled' aboriginal inhabitants of Canaan. \nUse as synonym for \"Jews\".\n\"Hebrews\" can be used to designate the Jewish people, who are considered to be the descendants of the Hebrew people. The Epistle to the Hebrews, one of the books of the New Testament, was probably directed at Jewish Christians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n A friend of mine in Warsaw told me about a Polish journalist who visited Israel for the first time. On his return he reported with great excitement:\u201cYou know what I\u2019ve discovered? In Israel, too, there are Jews!\u201dFor this Pole, Jews are people who wear a long black kaftan and a big black hat. [...] This distinction between Israelis and Jews would not have surprised any of us 50 years ago. Before the foundation of the State of Israel, none of us spoke about a \u201cJewish state\u201d. In our demonstrations we chanted: \u201cFree Immigration! Hebrew State!\u201dIn almost all media quotations from those days, there appear the two words \u201cHebrew state\u201d, almost never \u201cJewish state\u201d.\n Uri Avnery, born in 1923.\nIn some modern languages, including Armenian, Greek, Italian, Romanian, and many Slavic languages, the name \"Hebrews\" (with linguistic variations) is the standard ethnonym for Jews; but in many other languages in which both terms exist, it is currently considered derogatory to call Jews \"Hebrews\".\nAmong certain left-wing or liberal circles of Judaic cultural lineage, the word \"Hebrew\" is used as an alternatively secular description of the Jewish people (e.g., Bernard Avishai's \"The Hebrew Republic\" or left-wing wishes for a \"Hebrew-Arab\" joint cultural republican state). It is also used in some circles as a secular description of people of Judaic cultural lineage who practice other religions or none, including Hebrew Catholics.\nUse in Zionism.\nBeginning in the late 19th century, the term \"Hebrew\" became popular among secular Zionists. In this context, the word alluded to the transformation of the Jewish people into a strong, independent, self-confident secular national group (\"the New Jew\") sought by classical Zionism. This use died out after the establishment of the state of Israel, when \"Hebrew\" was replaced with \"Jew\" or \"Israeli\".\nDavid Ben-Gurion, the first Prime Minister of Israel, believed that the Hebrews were the indigenous inhabitants of Canaan that joined Abraham's religion, after he settled in the region. He also believed that not all Hebrews joined Jacob's family when they migrated to Egypt and later, birthed the generation of Hebrews that endured the Exodus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69789", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69789", "title": "Viking age", "text": ""}
{"id": "69790", "revid": "47093768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69790", "title": "Broadsheet", "text": "Largest newspaper format\nA broadsheet is the largest newspaper format and is characterized by long vertical pages, typically of in height. Other common newspaper formats include the smaller Berliner and tabloid\u2013compact formats.\nHistorically, the broadsheet format emerged in the 17th century as a means for printing musical and popular prints, and later became a medium for political activism through the reprinting of speeches. In Britain, the broadsheet newspaper developed in response to a 1712 tax on newspapers based on their page counts. Outside Britain, the broadsheet evolved for various reasons, including style and authority.\nBroadsheets are often associated with more intellectual and in-depth content compared to their tabloid counterparts, featuring detailed stories and less sensational material. They are commonly used by newspapers aiming to provide comprehensive coverage and analysis of news events. The format allows for a more expansive layout, often featuring multiple stories on the front page, with the most important ones positioned \"above the fold\".\nIn the 21st century, some newspapers have switched from the broadsheet format to smaller sizes, such as the Berliner or compact formats, to improve convenience for readers, especially commuters. This trend has been observed in various countries, including the UK and the US, where notable broadsheets like \"The Independent\" and \"The Times\" have adopted smaller formats.\nDescription.\nMany broadsheets measure roughly per full broadsheet spread, twice the size of a standard tabloid. Australian and New Zealand broadsheets always have a paper size of A1 per spread (). South African broadsheet newspapers have a double-page spread sheet size of (single-page live print area of 380 x 545\u00a0mm). Others measure 22 in (560 mm) vertically.\nIn the United States, the traditional dimensions for the front page half of a broadsheet are wide by long. However, in efforts to save newsprint costs, many U.S. newspapers have downsized to wide by long for a folded page.\nMany rate cards and specification cards refer to the \"broadsheet size\" with dimensions representing the front page \"half of a broadsheet\" size, rather than the full, unfolded broadsheet spread. Some quote actual page size and others quote the \"printed area\" size.\nThe two versions of the broadsheet are:\nHistory.\nThe broadsheet, broadside, was used as a format for musical and popular prints in the 17th century. \nEventually, people began using the broadsheet as a source for political activism by reprinting speeches.\nBroadsheet newspapers developed in Britain after a 1712 tax was imposed on newspapers based on their page counts. However, larger formats had long been signs of status in printed objects and still are in many places. Outside of Britain the broadsheet developed for other reasons unrelated to the British tax structure including style and authority. With the early mechanization of the 19th century came an increased production of printed materials including the broadside, as well as the competing penny dreadful. Newspapers all over Europe were then starting to print their issues on broadsheets. However, in the United Kingdom, the main competition for the broadside was the gradual reduction of the newspaper tax, beginning in the 1830s until its eventual dismissal in 1855.\nWith the increased production of newspapers and literacy, the demand for visual reporting and journalists led to the blending of broadsides and newspapers, creating the modern broadsheet newspaper.\nPrinting considerations.\nModern printing facilities efficiently print broadsheet sections in multiples of eight pages (with four front pages and four back pages). The broadsheet is then cut in half during the process. Thus, the newsprint rolls used are defined by the width necessary to print four front pages. The width of a newsprint roll is called its web. The now-common 11-inch-wide front page broadsheet newspapers in the United States use a 44-inch web newsprint roll.\nWith profit margins narrowing for newspapers in the wake of competition from broadcast, cable television, and the internet, newspapers are looking to standardize the size of the newsprint roll. \"The Wall Street Journal\" with its 12-inch-wide front page was printed on 48-inch web newsprint. Early adopters in the downsizing of broadsheets used a 50-inch web (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;12+1\u20442-inch front pages). However, the 48-inch web is now rapidly becoming the definitive standard in the U.S. \"The New York Times\" held out on the downsizing until July 2006, saying it would stick to its 54-inch web (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;13+1\u20442-inch front page). However, the paper adopted the narrower format beginning Monday, 6 August 2007.\nThe smaller newspapers also have the advantage of being easier to handle, particularly among commuters.\nConnotations.\nIn some countries, especially Australia, Canada, the UK, and the US, broadsheet newspapers are commonly perceived to be more intellectual in content than their tabloid counterparts. They tend to use their greater size to publish stories exploring topics in-depth and carry less sensationalist and celebrity-oriented material. The distinction is most obvious on the front page since tabloids tend to have a single story dominated by a headline, and broadsheets allow two or more stories to be displayed of which the most important sit at the top of the page \"above the fold.\"\nA few newspapers, though, such as the German \"Bild-Zeitung\" and others throughout Central Europe are tabloids in terms of content but use the physical broadsheet format.\nSwitch to smaller sizes.\nIn the United Kingdom.\nIn 2003, \"The Independent\" started concurrent production of both broadsheet and tabloid (\"compact\") editions, carrying exactly the same content. \"The Times\" did likewise, but with less apparent success, with readers vocally opposing the change. \"The Independent\" ceased to be available in broadsheet format in May 2004, and \"The Times\" followed suit from November 2004; \"The Scotsman\" is also now published only in tabloid format. \"The Guardian\" switched to the \"Berliner\" or \"midi\" format found in some other European countries (slightly larger than a traditional tabloid) on 12 September 2005. In June 2017, the \"Guardian\" announced it would again change the format to tabloid size \u2013 the first tabloid edition was published on 15 January 2018.\nThe main motivation cited for this shift was that commuters prefer papers that they can hold easily on public transport and that other readers also might find the smaller formats more convenient.\nIn the United States.\nIn the United States, \"The Wall Street Journal\" made headlines when it announced its overseas version would convert to a tabloid on 17 October 2005. Strong debate occurred in the US on whether or not the rest of the national papers will or even should follow the trend of the European papers and \"The Wall Street Journal\". \"The Wall Street Journal\" overseas edition switched back to a broadsheet format in 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69792", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69792", "title": "Fealty", "text": "Pledge of allegiance of one person to another\nAn oath of fealty, from the Latin (faithfulness), is a pledge of allegiance of one person to another.\nDefinition.\nIn medieval Europe, the swearing of fealty took the form of an oath made by a vassal, or subordinate, to his lord. \"Fealty\" also referred to the duties incumbent upon a vassal that were owed to the lord, which consisted of service and aid.\nOne part of the oath of fealty included swearing to always remain faithful to the lord. The oath of fealty usually took place after the act of homage, when, by the symbolic act of kneeling before the lord and placing his hands between the hands of the lord, the vassal became the \"man\" of the lord. Usually, the lord also promised to provide for the vassal in some form, either through the granting of a fief or by some other manner of support. Typically, the oath took place upon a religious object such as a Bible or saint's relic, often contained within an altar, thus binding the oath-taker before God. Fealty and homage were key elements of European feudalism.\nFealty is distinct from other parts of the homage ceremony, and is usually used only to refer to that part of the ceremony where a vassal swore to be a good vassal to his lord.\nHistory.\nIn medieval Europe, an oath of fealty (German: Lehnseid) was a fundamental element of the feudal system in the Holy Roman Empire. It was sworn between two people, the feudal subject or liegeman (\"vassal\") and his feudal superior (\"liege lord\"). The oath of allegiance was usually carried out as part of a traditional ceremony in which the liegeman or vassal gave his lord a pledge of loyalty and acceptance of the consequences of a breach of trust. In return, the liege lord promised to protect and remain loyal to his vassal. This relationship formed the basis of landholding, known as feudal tenure, whereby the seizin vested in the tenant (the vassal) was so similar to actual possession that it was considered a separate estate described as utile domain (\"dominium utile\"), literally \"beneficial ownership\", whereas the landlord's estate was referred to as eminent domain or superiority (\"dominium directum\", lit. \"direct ownership\").\nIn the Late Middle Ages, the investiture and oath of fealty were invariably recorded by a deed; in modern times, this replaced the traditional ceremony. Where the geographical distance between the two parties was significant, the lord could name a representative before whom the oath was to be sworn.\nThe whole contract including the oath of fealty was part of a formal commendation ceremony that created the feudal relationship.\nThe term is also used by English-speakers to refer to similar oaths of allegiance in other feudal cultures, as with medieval Japan, as well as in modern organized crime.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69793", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69793", "title": "Cryptic crossword", "text": "Multifaceted crossword puzzle\nA cryptic crossword is a crossword puzzle in which each clue is a word puzzle. Cryptic crosswords are particularly popular in the United Kingdom, where they originated, as well as Ireland, the Netherlands, and in several Commonwealth nations, including Australia, Canada, India, Kenya, Malta, New Zealand, and South Africa. Compilers of cryptic crosswords are commonly called \"setters\" in the UK and \"constructors\" in the US. Particularly in the UK, a distinction may be made between cryptics and \"quick\" (i.e. standard) crosswords, and sometimes two sets of clues are given for a single puzzle grid.\nCryptic crossword puzzles come in two main types: the basic cryptic in which each clue answer is entered into the diagram normally, and \"themed\" or \"variety\" cryptics, in which some or all of the answers must be altered before entering, usually in accordance with a hidden pattern or rule which must be discovered by the solver.\nHistory and development.\nCryptic crosswords originated in the UK. The first British crossword puzzles appeared around 1923 and were purely definitional, but from the mid-1920s they began to include cryptic material: not cryptic clues in the modern sense, but anagrams, classical allusions, incomplete quotations, and other references and wordplay. Torquemada (Edward Powys Mathers), who set for \"The Saturday Westminster\" from 1925 and for \"The Observer\" from 1926 until his death in 1939, was the first setter to use cryptic clues exclusively and is often credited as the inventor of the cryptic crossword.\nThe first newspaper crosswords appeared in the \"Sunday\" and \"Daily Express\" from about 1924. Crosswords were gradually taken up by other newspapers, appearing in the \"Daily Telegraph\" from 1925, \"The Manchester Guardian\" from 1929 and \"The Times\" from 1930. These newspaper puzzles were almost entirely non-cryptic at first and gradually used more cryptic clues, until the fully cryptic puzzle as known today became widespread. In some papers this took until about 1960. Puzzles appeared in \"The Listener\" from 1930, but this was a weekly magazine rather than a newspaper, and the puzzles were much harder than the newspaper ones, though again they took a while to become entirely cryptic. Composer Stephen Sondheim, a lover of puzzles, is credited with introducing cryptic crosswords to American audiences, through a series of puzzles he created for \"New York\" magazine in 1968 and 1969.\nTorquemada's puzzles were extremely obscure and difficult, and later setters reacted against this tendency by developing a standard for fair clues, ones that can be solved, at least in principle, by deduction, without needing leaps of faith or insights into the setter's thought processes.\nThe basic principle of fairness was set out by \"Listener\" setter Afrit (Alistair Ferguson Ritchie) in his book \"Armchair Crosswords\" (1946), wherein he credits it to the fictional \"Book of the Crossword\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We must expect the composer to play tricks, but we shall insist that he play fair. The Book of the Crossword lays this injunction upon him: \"You need not mean what you say, but you must say what you mean.\" This is a superior way of saying that he can't have it both ways. He may attempt to mislead by employing a form of words which can be taken in more than one way, and it is your fault if you take it the wrong way, but it is his fault if you can't logically take it the right way.\nAn example of a clue which cannot logically be taken the right way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Hat could be dry (5)\"\nHere the composer intends the answer to be DERBY, with \"hat\" the definition, \"could be\" the anagram indicator, and BE DRY the anagram fodder. I.e., \"derby\" is an anagram of \"be dry\". But \"be\" is doing double duty, and this means that any attempt to read the clue cryptically in the form \"[definition] [anagram indicator] [fodder]\" fails: if \"be\" is part of the anagram indicator, then the fodder is too short, but if it is part of the fodder, there is no anagram indicator; to be a correct clue it would have to be \"Hat could be be dry (5)\", which is ungrammatical. A variation might read \"Hat turns out to be dry (5)\", but this also fails because the word \"to\", which is necessary to make the sentence grammatical, follows the indicator (\"turns out\") even though it is not part of the anagram indicated.\nTorquemada's successor at \"The Observer\" was Ximenes (Derrick Somerset Macnutt), and in his influential work, \"Ximenes on the Art of the Crossword Puzzle\" (1966), he set out more detailed guidelines for setting fair cryptic clues, now known as \"Ximenean principles\" and sometimes described by the phrase \"square-dealing\". The most important of them are tersely summed up by Ximenes' successor Azed (Jonathan Crowther):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;A good cryptic clue contains three elements:\nThe Ximenean principles are adhered to most strictly in the subgenre of \"advanced cryptics\"\u2014difficult puzzles using barred grids and a large vocabulary. Easier puzzles often have more relaxed standards, permitting a wider array of clue types, and allowing a little flexibility. The popular \"Guardian\" setter Araucaria (John Galbraith Graham) was a noted non-Ximenean, celebrated for his witty, if occasionally unorthodox, clues.\nPopularity.\nMost of the major national newspapers in the UK carry both cryptic and concise (quick) crosswords in every issue. The puzzle in \"The Guardian\" is well loved for its humour and quirkiness, and quite often includes puzzles with themes, which are extremely rare in \"The Times\".\nMany Canadian newspapers, including the \"Ottawa Citizen\", \"Toronto Star\" and \"The Globe and Mail\", carry cryptic crosswords.\nCryptic crosswords do not commonly appear in U.S. publications, although they can be found in magazines such as \"GAMES Magazine\", \"The Nation\", \"The New Yorker\", \"Harper's\", and occasionally in the Sunday \"New York Times\". The \"New York Post\" reprints cryptic crosswords from \"The Times\". In April 2018, The New Yorker published the first of a new weekly series of cryptic puzzles. Other sources of cryptic crosswords in the U.S. (at various difficulty levels) are puzzle books, as well as UK and Canadian newspapers distributed in the U.S. Other venues include the \"Enigma\", the magazine of the National Puzzlers' League, and formerly, \"The Atlantic Monthly\". The latter puzzle, after a long and distinguished run, appeared solely on \"The Atlantic\"'s website for several years, and ended with the October 2009 issue. A similar puzzle by the same authors now appears every four weeks in \"The Wall Street Journal\", beginning in January 2010. Cryptic crosswords have become more popular in the United States in the years following the COVID-19 lockdowns with several \"indie\" outlets and setters.\nCryptic crosswords are very popular in Australia. Most Australian newspapers will have at least one cryptic crossword, if not two. \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" and \"The Age\" in Melbourne publish daily cryptic crosswords, including Friday's challenging cryptic by 'DA' (David Astle). \"Lovatts\", an Australian puzzle publisher, regularly issues cryptic crossword puzzle books.\nHow cryptic clues work.\nA cryptic clue leads to its answer only if it is read in the right way. What the clue appears to say when read normally (the \"surface reading\") is usually a distraction with nothing to do with the solution. The challenge is to find the way of reading the clue that leads to the solution. A typical clue consists of two parts:\nSometimes the two parts of the clue are joined with a link word or phrase such as \"from\", \"gives\" or \"could be\". One of the tasks of the solver is to find the boundary between the definition and the wordplay, and insert a mental pause there when reading the clue \"cryptically\".\nThere are many sorts of wordplay, such as anagrams and double definitions, but they all conform to rules. The crossword setters do their best to stick to these rules when writing their clues, and solvers can use these rules and conventions to help them solve the clues. Noted cryptic setter Derrick Somerset Macnutt (who wrote cryptics under the pseudonym of Ximenes) discusses the importance and art of fair cluemanship in his seminal book on cryptic crosswords, \"Ximenes on the Art of the Crossword\" (1966, reprinted 2001).\nBecause a typical cryptic clue describes its answer in detail and often more than once, the solver can usually have a great deal of confidence in the answer once it has been determined. The clues are \"self-checking.\" This is in contrast to non-cryptic crossword clues which often have several possible answers and force the solver to use the crossing letters to distinguish which was intended.\nFor instance \"Type of tree (3)\" in a regular crossword could be any of \"ASH\", \"BAY\", \"ELM\", \"FIG\", \"FIR\" \"OAK\", \"YEW\", etc. \"Type of tree has changed (3)\" in a cryptic crossword can only be \"ASH\".\nHere is an example (taken from \"The Guardian\" crossword of 6 August 2002, set by \"Shed\").\n15D \"Very sad unfinished story about rising smoke (8)\"\nis a clue for TRAGICAL. This breaks down as follows.\nThere are many codewords or \"indicators\" that have a special meaning in the cryptic crossword context. (In the example above, \"about\", \"unfinished\" and \"rising\" all fall into this category). Learning these, or being able to spot them, is a useful and necessary part of becoming a skilled cryptic crossword solver.\nCompilers or setters often use slang terms and abbreviations, generally without indication, so familiarity with these is important for the solver. Abbreviations may be as simple as \"west\" = \"W\", \"New York\" = \"NY\", but may also be more difficult. Words that can mean more than one thing are commonly exploited; often the meaning the solver must use is completely different from the one it appears to have in the clue. Some examples are:\nOf these examples, \"flower\" is an invented meaning (using the verb \"flow\" and the suffix \"-er\"), and cannot be confirmed in a standard dictionary. A similar trick is played in the old clue \"A wicked thing\" for CANDLE, where the \"-ed\" suffix must be understood in its 'equipped with' meaning. In the case of the '-er' suffix, this trick could be played with other meanings of the suffix, but except for \"river\" \u2192 BANKER (a river is not a 'thing that banks' but a 'thing that has banks'), this is rarely done.\nSometimes \"compiler\", \"setter\", or the name or codename of the compiler (if visible by the crossword), codes for some form of the first-person pronoun (\"I\", \"me\", \"my\", \"mine\").\nIn the \"Daily Telegraph\" back page, Monday 15 March 2017, 7 down, is \"Banish spirits with zero ice upsetting imbibing times (8)\"; the answer is EXORCIZE: it means \"banish spirits\", and is ZERO ICE rearranged, including X (described as \"times\"). The word \"upsetting\" indicates an anagram and the word \"imbibing\" indicates an insertion. The word \"with\" in this clue is a linking word joining the definition with the wordplay; it is not part of either of them.\nGrids for cryptic crosswords.\nA typical cryptic crossword grid is generally 15\u00d715, with half-turn rotational symmetry. Unlike typical American crosswords, in which every square is almost always \"checked\" (that is, each square provides a letter for both an across and a down answer), only about half of the squares in a cryptic crossword are checked.\nIn most daily newspaper cryptic crosswords, grid designs are restricted to a set of stock grids. In the past this was because hot metal typesetting meant that new grids were expensive.\nSome papers have additional grid rules. In \"The Times\", for example, all words have at least half the letters checked, and although words can have two unchecked squares in succession, they cannot be the first two or last two letters of a word. The grid shown here breaks one \"Times\" grid rule: the 15-letter words at 9 and 24 across each have 8 letters unchecked out of 15. \"The Independent\" allows setters to use their own grid designs.\n\"Variety\" (UK: 'advanced') cryptic crosswords typically use a \"barred grid\" with no black squares and a slightly smaller size; 12\u00d712 is typical. Word boundaries are denoted by thick lines called \"bars\". In these variety puzzles, one or more clues may require modification to fit into the grid, such as dropping or adding a letter, or being anagrammed to fit other, unmodified clues; un-clued spaces may spell out a secret message appropriate for the puzzle theme once the puzzle is fully solved. The solver also may need to determine where answers fit into the grid.\nA July 2006 \"Puzzlecraft\" section in \"Games\" magazine on cryptic crossword construction noted that for cryptic crosswords to be readily solvable, no fewer than half the letters for every word should be checked by another word for a standard cryptic crossword, while nearly every letter should be checked for a variety cryptic crossword. In most UK advanced ('variety') cryptics, at least three-quarters of the letters in each word are checked.\nRegional variation.\nBritish and North American differences.\nThere are notable differences between British and North American (including Canadian) cryptics. American cryptics are thought of as holding to a more rigid set of construction rules than British ones. American cryptics usually require all words in a clue to be used in service of the wordplay or definition, whereas British ones allow for more extraneous or supporting words. In American cryptics, a clue is only allowed to have one subsidiary indication, but in British cryptics the occasional clue may have more than one; e.g., a \"triple definition\" clue would be considered an amusing variation in the UK but unsound in the US.\nOther languages.\nFor the most part, cryptic crosswords are an English-language phenomenon, although similar puzzles are popular in a Hebrew form in Israel (where they are called \"tashbetsey higayon\" (\u05ea\u05e9\u05d1\u05e6\u05d9 \u05d4\u05d2\u05d9\u05d5\u05df) \"Logic crosswords\") and (as \"Cryptogram\") in Dutch. In Poland similar crosswords are called \"Hetman crosswords\". 'Hetman', a senior commander, and also the name for a queen in Chess, emphasises their importance over other crosswords. In Finnish, this type of crossword puzzle is known as \"piilosana\" (literally \"hidden word\"), while \"krypto\" refers to a crossword puzzle where the letters have been coded as numbers. The German \"ZEITmagazin\" has a weekly cryptic crossword called \"Um die Ecke gedacht\" and the \"SZ Magazin\" features \"das Kreuz mit den Worten\".\nIn India the Telugu publication Sakshi carries a \"Tenglish\" (Telugu-English, bilingual) cryptic crossword; the Prajavani and Vijaya Karnataka crossword (Kannada) also employs cryptic wordplay. Enthusiasts have also created cryptic crosswords in Hindi. Since 1994, \"enigmista\" Ennio Peres has challenged Italians annually with \"Il cruciverba pi\u00f9 difficile del mondo\" (The World's Most Difficult Crossword), which has many features in common with English-style cryptics.\nIn Chinese something similar is the riddle of Chinese characters, where partial characters instead of substrings are clued and combined.\nTypes of cryptic clues.\nClues given to the solver are based on various forms of wordplay. Nearly every clue has two non-overlapping parts to it: one part that provides an unmodified but often indirect definition for the word or phrase, and a second part that includes the wordplay involved. In a few cases, the two definitions are one and the same, as often in the case of \"&amp;lit.\" clues. Most cryptic crosswords provide the number of letters in the answer, or in the case of phrases, a series of numbers to denote the letters in each word: \"cryptic crossword\" would be clued with \"(7,9)\" following the clue. More advanced puzzles may drop this portion of the clue.\nAnagrams.\nAn anagram is a rearrangement of a certain section of the clue to form the answer. This is usually indicated by a codeword which indicates change, movement, breakage or something otherwise amiss. One example:\n\"Chaperone shredded corset (6)\"\ngives ESCORT, which means \"chaperone\" and is an anagram, indicated by the word \"shredded\", of CORSET.\nAnagram clues are characterized by the codeword (the \"anagram indicator\" or \u2013 among enthusiasts \u2013 \"anagrind\") placed adjacent to a word or phrase made up of the letters to be rearranged (the \"anagram fodder\"). The indicator tells the solver an anagram exists, and the fodder provides the anagram to be solved. Indicators can come either directly before or directly after the fodder.\nIn an American cryptic, only the words given in the clue may be anagrammed; in some older puzzles, the words to be anagrammed may be clued and \"then\" anagrammed. This kind of clue is called an \"indirect anagram\". For example, in:\n\"Chew honeydew fruit (5)\"\n\"chew\" is the indicator, but \"honeydew\" does not directly provide the letters to be anagrammed. Instead, \"honeydew\" clues MELON, which can be rearranged to form the solution LEMON \u2013 another \"fruit\". Indirect anagrams are not used in the vast majority of cryptic crosswords, ever since they were criticised by Ximenes in \"On the Art of the Crossword\".\nIt is common for the setter to use a juxtaposition of indicator and fodder that together form a common phrase, to make the clue appear as normal as possible. For example:\n\"Lap dancing friend (3)\"\nuses \"dancing\" as the indicator because it combines naturally with the fodder LAP, disguising the anagram. The solution is PAL (\"friend\").\nCharade.\nIn a \"charade\" or \"Ikea clue\", the answer is formed by joining individually clued words to make a larger word.\nFor example:\n\"Outlaw leader managing money (7)\"\nThe answer is BANKING, formed by BAN for \"outlaw\" and KING for \"leader\". The definition is \"managing money\". With this example, the words appear in the same order in the clue as they do in the answer, and no special words are needed to indicate this. However, the order of the parts is sometimes indicated with words such as \"against\", \"after\", \"on\", \"with\" or \"above\" (in a down clue).\nAdditions.\n\"Additions\", \"container\" and \"insertion\" clues put one set of letters next to or inside another. So:\n\"Apostle's friend outside of university (4)\"\ngives PAUL (\"apostle\"), by placing PAL (\"friend\") outside of U (\"university\").\nA similar example:\n\"Utter nothing when there's wickedness about (5)\"\nThe answer is VOICE (\"utter\"), formed by placing O (\"nothing\") inside the word VICE (\"wickedness\").\nOther container or insertion indicators are \"inside\", \"over\", \"around\", \"about\", \"clutching\", \"enters\", and the like.\nDeletions.\nDeletion is a wordplay mechanism which removes some letters of a word to create a shorter word. Deletions consist of \"beheadments\", \"curtailments\", and \"internal deletions\". In beheadments, a word loses its first letter. In curtailments, it loses its last letter, and internal deletions remove an inner letter, such as the middle one.\nAn example of a beheadment:\n\"Beheaded celebrity is sailor (3)\"\nThe answer would be TAR, another word for \"sailor\", which is \"star\" (\"celebrity\") without the first letter (\"beheaded\").\nA similar example, but with a specification as to the letter being removed:\n\"Bird is cowardly, about to fly away (5)\"\nThe answer is RAVEN, which means \"bird\" and is \"craven\", or \"cowardly\", without the first letter (in this case \"C\", the abbreviation for \"circa\" or \"about\").\nOther indicators of beheadment include \"don't start\", \"topless\", and \"after the first\".\nAn example of curtailment:\n\"Shout, \"Read!\" endlessly (3)\"\nThe answer is BOO (a \"shout\"). If you ignore the punctuation, a \"read\" is a book, and \"book\" without its final letter (\"endlessly\") is the solution.\nOther indicators of curtailment include \"nearly\" and \"unfinished\".\nAn example of internal deletion:\n\"Challenging sweetheart heartlessly (6)\"\nThe answer is DARING, which means \"challenging\", and is \"darling\" without its middle letter, or \"heartlessly\".\nDouble definition.\nA clue may, rather than having a definition part and a wordplay part, have two definition parts. Thus:\n \"Not seeing window covering (5)\"\nwould have the answer BLIND, because \"blind\" can mean both \"not seeing\" and \"window covering\". Note that since these definitions come from the same root word, an American magazine might not allow this clue. American double definitions tend to require both parts to come from different roots, as in this clue:\n \"Eastern European buff (6)\"\nThis takes advantage of the two very different meanings (and pronunciations) of POLISH, the one with the long \"o\" sound meaning 'someone from Poland', and the one with the short \"o\" sound meaning 'make shiny'.\nThese clues tend to be short; in particular, two-word clues are almost always double-definition clues.\nIn the UK, multiple definitions are occasionally used; e.g.:\n \"Blue swallow feathers fell from above (4)\"\nis a quintuple definition of DOWN (\"blue\" (sad), \"swallow\" (drink), \"feathers\" (plumage), \"fell\" (cut down) and \"from above\"), but in the US this would be considered unsound.\nSome British newspapers have an affection for quirky clues of this kind where the two definitions are similar:\n \"Let in or let on (5)\" \u2013 ADMIT\nNote that these clues do not have clear indicator words.\nHidden words.\nIn \"hidden words\", \"embedded words\" or \"telescopic\" clues, the solution itself is written within the clue \u2013 either as part of a longer word or across more than one word. For example:\n\"Found ermine, deer hides damaged (10)\"\ngives UNDERMINED, which means (cryptically at least) \"damaged\" and appears across \"Found ermine deer\" (as indicated by \"hides\").\nPossible indicators of a hidden clue include \"in part\", \"partially\", \"in\", \"within\", \"hides\", \"conceals\", \"some\", and \"held by\".\nAnother example:\n\"Introduction to do-gooder canine (3)\"\ngives DOG, which is the first part of, or \"introduction to\", the word \"do-gooder\", and means \"canine\".\nThe opposite of a hidden word clue, where letters \"missing\" from a sentence have to be found, is known as a Printer's Devilry, and appears in some advanced cryptics.\nThere are several common variations on hidden word clues:\nInitial or final letters (often called \"acrostic\" clues).\nThe first or last letters of part of the clue are put together to give the answer.\nAn example of an initialism:\n\"Initially amiable person eats primate (3)\"\nThe answer would be APE, which is a type of \"primate\". \"Initially\" signals that you must take the first letters of \"amiable person eats\".\nAnother example would be:\n\"At first, actor needing new identity emulates orphan in musical theatre (5)\"\nThe answer would be ANNIE, the name of a famous \"orphan in musical theatre\". This is obtained from the first letters of \"actor needing new identity emulates\".\nWords that indicate initialisms also include \"firstly\", \"primarily\" and \"to start\".\nIt is possible to have initialisms just for certain parts of the clue. It is also possible to employ the same technique to the end of words. For example:\n\"Old country lady went round Head Office initially before end of day (7)\"\nThe answer would be DAHOMEY, which used to be a kingdom in Africa (an \"old country\"). Here, we take the first letters of only the words \"Head Office\" (HO) and we take the \"end of\" the word \"day\" (Y). The letters of the word DAME, meaning \"lady\", are then made to go around the letters HO to form DAHOMEY.\nThat the solver should use the last letters may also be indicated by such words as \"ends\", \"tails\", \"last\" etc. For instance:\n\"Bird with tips of rich aqua, yellow, black (4)\"\nWould be HAWK (a \"bird\") based on the letters at the ends of (\"tips of\") \"rich aqua, yellow, black\".\nOdd or even letters.\nEither the odd or even letters of words in the clue give the answer. An example is:\n\"Odd stuff of Mr. Waugh is set for someone wanting women to vote (10)\"\nThe answer would be SUFFRAGIST, which is \"someone wanting women to vote\". The word \"odd\" indicates that we must take only the odd-indexed letters of the rest of the clue (\"stuff of Mr. Waugh is set\"), i.e. every other letter beginning with the first.\nHomophones and homographs.\nHomophones are words that have different meanings, but the same pronunciation (regardless of spelling), such as \"night\" and \"knight\". Homographs are words that have different meanings, but the same spelling (regardless of pronunciation), such as \"lead\" (to guide) and \"lead\" (type of metal).\nHomophone and homograph clues always have an indicator word or phrase to identify them as needing to be spoken or heard. Examples indicators include \"reportedly\", \"they say\", \"utterly\" (here treated as \"utter(ing)-ly\" and not with its usual meaning), \"vocal\", \"to the audience\", \"auditioned\", \"by the sound of it\", \"is heard\", \"in conversation\" and \"on the radio\". \"Broadcast\" is a particularly devious indicator as it could indicate either a homophone or an anagram.\nAn example of a homophone clue is\n\"We hear twins shave (4)\"\nwhich is a clue for PARE, which means \"shave\" and is a homophone of \"pair\", or \"twins\". The homophone is indicated by \"we hear\".\nIf the two homophones are the same length, the clue should be phrased in such a way that only one of them can be the answer. This is usually done by having the indicator adjacent to the word that is not the definition; therefore, in the previous example, \"we hear\" was adjacent to \"twins\" and the answer must therefore be PARE rather than PAIR. The indicator could come between the homophones if they were of different lengths and the enumeration was given, such as in the case of \"right\" and \"rite\".\nLetter banks.\nThe letter bank form of cluing consists of a shorter word (or words) containing no repeated letters (an \"isogram\"), and a longer word or phrase built by using each of these letters (but no others) at least once but repeating them as often as necessary. This type of clue has been described by American constructors Joshua Kosman and Henri Picciotto, who write the weekly puzzle for \"The Nation\". The shorter word is typically at least three or four letters in length, while the target word or phrase is at least three letters longer than the bank word. For example, the four letters in the word TENS can be used as a bank to form the word TENNESSEE. Typically, the clue contains indicator words such as \"use,\" \"take,\" or \"implement\" to signal that a letter bank is being employed.\nA more complicated example of a letter bank is:\n \"Composer taking and retaking ingredients of Advil? Not! (7,7)\"\nIn this case, \"taking and retaking ingredients\" signals that the letters of both ADVIL and NOT form a letter bank. Those letters yield a \"composer\", and the solution, ANTONIO VIVALDI.\nKosman and Picciotto consider this to be a newer and more complicated form of cluing that offers another way, besides the anagram, of mixing and recombining letters.\nReversals.\nA word that gets turned around to make another is a reversal. For example:\n\"Returned beer fit for a king (5)\"\nThe answer is REGAL. LAGER (\"beer\") is reversed (\"returned\") to yield the solution (\"fit for a king\").\nOther indicator words include \"receding\", \"in the mirror\", \"going the wrong way\", \"returns\", \"reverses\" \"to the left\" or \"left\" (for across clues), and \"rising\", \"overturned\" or \"mounted\" or \"comes up\" (for down clues).\nCryptic definition.\nHere the clue appears to say one thing, but with a slight shift of viewpoint it says another. For example:\n\"Flower of London?\" (6)\ngives THAMES, a flow-er of London. Here, the surface reading suggests a blossom, which disguises the fact that the name of a river is required. Notice the question mark: this is often (though by no means always) used by compilers to indicate this sort of clue is one where you need to interpret the words in a different fashion. The way that a clue reads as an ordinary sentence is called its \"surface reading\" and is often used to disguise the need for a different interpretation of the clue's component words.\nThis type of clue is common in British and Canadian cryptics but is generally unused in American cryptics; in American-style crosswords, . It's almost certainly the oldest kind of cryptic clue: cryptic definitions appeared in the UK newspaper puzzles in the late 1920s and early 1930s that mixed cryptic and plain definition clues and evolved into fully cryptic crosswords.\nSpoonerism.\nA relatively uncommon clue type, a Spoonerism is a play on words where corresponding consonant clusters are switched between two words in a phrase (or syllables in a word) and the switch forms another pair of proper \"sounding\" words. For example: \"butterfly\" = \"flutter by\".\nBoth the solution word or phrase and its corresponding Spoonerism are clued for, and the clue type is almost always indicated by reference to William Archibald Spooner himself \u2013 with some regions/publications insisting his religious title \"Rev.\" or \"Reverend\" be included. In contrast to all other clue types, this makes them almost impossible to disguise. But that does not necessarily make them easy.\nAn example of a Spoonerism clue is:\n\"He will casually put down Spooner's angry bear (9)\"\nThe answer is LITTERBUG (\"he will casually put down\"). The Spoonerism is \"bitter lug\", i.e. \"angry\" and \"bear\" (as in carry).\nThe vast majority of Spoonerism clues swap the first consonants of words or syllables, but Spoonerisms are not strictly restricted to that form and some setters will take advantage of this. John Henderson (Enigmatist in the Guardian) once clued for RIGHT CLICK using the Spoonerism LIGHT CRICK, which did not sit well with many solvers.\nPalindrome.\nA clue in which the only hint to the letters in the solution is that it is a palindrome, for example:\n\"To and fro action (4)\"\nwhere the answer is DEED or:\n\"She's a lady, whichever way you look at it! (5)\"\nwhere the answer is MADAM.\nReverse anagrams.\nA \"reverse anagram\" or \"revenge\" clue (short for \"reverse engineer\") is one which gives an anagrammed word in its text, and the solver has to determine the anagrammed word(s) and indicator that make the solution matching the definition. Such clues may or may not use an indicator.\nAn example from \"The Guardian:\"\n\"Innovative way to make dog run? (6-8)\"\nThe phrase \"way to make\" indicates that the solver should look for a word and anagram indicator that could rearrange to the words DOG RUN; the solution, meaning \"innovative,\" is GROUND-BREAKING.\nRevenge clues are not limited to anagrams; for instance, \"Quickly grab containers for the setter? (4,2)\" indicates a revenge reversal of PANS, or SNAP UP (\"quickly grab\").\n&amp;lit..\nAn \"&amp;lit.\", \"literal\" or \"all-in-one\" clue is one where the entire clue simultaneously provides both the definition and the wordplay. \"&amp;lit.\" stands for \"and literally so\", and originates from Derrick Somerset Macnutt (known by his pen name Ximenes), who defined it as meaning: \"This clue both indicates the letters or parts of the required word, in one of the ways already explained in this book, and can also be read, , literally, as an indication of the meaning of the whole word, whether as a straight or as a veiled definition.\" In some publications, particularly in the United States, &amp;lit clues are indicated by an exclamation mark at the end of the clue.\nFor example:\n\"God incarnate, essentially! (4)\"\nThe answer is ODIN. The Norse god Odin is hidden in \"God incarnate\", as clued by \"essentially\", but the definition of Odin is also the whole clue, as Odin is essentially a God incarnate.\nAnother example:\n\"Spoil vote! (4)\"\nwould give the answer VETO. In the cryptic sense, \"spoil\" indicates an anagram of VOTE. Simultaneously, the whole clue is \u2013 with a certain amount of licence allowed to crossword setters \u2013 a definition.\nAnother example:\n\"E.g., origin of goose (3)\"\ngives the answer EGG. A goose is an example of something that finds its origin in an egg, so the whole clue gives a definition. The clue can also be broken down cryptically: \"E.g.\" loses its full stops to give EG, followed by the first letter of (i.e. the \"origin of\") the word \"goose\", G.\nSemi-&amp;lit..\nA \"semi-&amp;lit.\" clue is a variant of the &amp;lit. where the entire clue still provides the definition, but the wordplay is only given by part of the clue.\nFor example:\n\"Dressed up to hear a bit of Puccini? This may be part of it (5,3)\"\ngives OPERA HAT. The whole clue provides a definition of the answer (i.e. something that might be worn while listening to Puccini), but only the first part of the clue is wordplay (\"bit of Puccini\" cluing P, and \"dressed up\" clueing an anagram; overall an anagram of TO HEAR A P).\nAnother example:\n\"Dog in wild? Yes! (5)\"\ngives DINGO. Only the first part of the clue provides wordplay (\"wild\" indicating an anagram of DOG IN), but the whole clue can be interpreted as a definition of the answer.\nThe term \"clue-as-definition\" (CAD) can be used as an inclusive descriptor covering both &amp;lit. and semi-&amp;lit. clues.\nOther miscellaneous types.\nXimenes identifies various other types of clue in \"On The Art Of The Crossword\" (1966) in chapter VII, 'Improvised Clues', including:\nInitial or final letter clues are also mentioned in this chapter, to be used \"When the setter is in real desperation\".\nClueing techniques.\nCombination clues.\n\"Combination clues\" employ more than one method of wordplay; this is particularly common for longer grid entries. For example:\n\"Illustrious baron returns in pit (9)\"\nThe answer is HONORABLE. \"Baron\" is reversed (or \"returns\") to yield NORAB, and put inside HOLE (or \"pit\") to give the solution (clued by \"illustrious\").\nIn this example, the clue uses a combination of Reversal and Hidden clue types:\n\"Cruel to turn part of Internet torrid (6)\"\nThe answer to this clue is ROTTEN. \"To turn\" indicates a reversal, and \"part of\" suggests a piece of \"Internet torrid\"; the solution means \"cruel\".\nMisleading clues.\nTo make clues more difficult, cryptic constructors will frequently use traditional indicator words in a misleading manner.\nBits and pieces.\nAbbreviations are popular with crossword compilers for cluing individual letters or short sections of the answer. Consider this clue:\n\"About to come between little Desmond and worker for discourse (7)\"\nThere are two abbreviations used here. \"About\" is abbreviated C (for \"circa\"), and \"little Desmond\" indicates that the diminutive of Desmond (namely, DES) is required. The C is \"to come between\" DES and ANT (a worker; note that compilers also use \"worker\" to stand for 'bee' or 'hand'), giving DESCANT, which means \"discourse\".\nCompilers use many of these crossword abbreviations.\nAnother type of abbreviation in clues might be words that refer to letters. For example, 'you' refers to the letter U, 'why' refers to the letter Y, etc. A clue for instance:\n\"For example, why didn't you put the country? (5)\"\nThe answer is EGYPT. Three abbreviations are used here. \"For example\" clues the common abbreviation EG (for \"exempli gratia\"). \"Why\" clues the letter Y. The phrase \"didn't you put\" clues the letters PT (the word \"you\" refers to the letter \"U\", and word \"didn't\" indicates that this should be left out of the word \"put\"). Adding these together gets \"the country\".\nThere are many ways in which constructors can clue a part of a clue. In this clue:\n\"Exclamation of surprise about spectacles, from the top (3)\"\nThe word \"spectacles\" clues OO because these letters look like a pair of spectacles \"from the top\". The answer is thus COO, which is an \"exclamation of surprise\" with C coming from \"circa\", clued by \"about\".\nOften, Roman numerals are used to break down words into their component letter groups. E.g. In this clue:\n\"A team's first supporter is pivotal (4)\"\nThe answer is AXIS, and the direct meaning is conveyed by the words \"is pivotal\". The first A is followed by XI, which is 11 in Roman numerals (referring to the number of players on the field in a cricket or soccer \"team\"). \"First supporter\" refers to the letter S, which is the first letter of the word \"supporter\".\nClueing technique and difficulty.\nCryptic clue styles across newspapers are ostensibly similar, but there are technical differences which result in the work of setters being regarded as either Ximenean or Libertarian (and often a combination of both).\nXimenean rules are very precise in terms of grammar and syntax, especially as regards the indicators used for various methods of wordplay. Libertarian setters may use devices which \"more or less\" get the message across. For example, when treating the answer BEER the setter may decide to split the word into BEE and R and, after finding suitable ways to define the answer and BEE, now looks to give the solver a clue to the letter R. Ximenean rules would not allow something like \"reach first\" to indicate that R is the first letter of \"reach\" because, grammatically, that is not what \"reach first\" implies. Instead, a phrase along the lines of \"first to reach\" would be needed as this conforms to rules of grammar. Many Libertarian crossword editors would, however, accept \"reach first\" as it would be considered to reasonably get the idea across. For instance, a clue following Ximenean rules for BEER (BEE + R) may look as such:\n\"Stinger first to reach drink (4)\"\nWhile a clue following Libertarian rules may look as follows:\n\"Stinger reaches first drink (4)\"\n\"The Guardian\" is perhaps the most Libertarian of cryptic crosswords, while \"The Times\" is mostly Ximenean. The others tend to be somewhere in between; the \"Financial Times\" and \"Independent\" tend towards Ximenean, the \"Daily Telegraph\" also \u2013 although its Toughie crossword can take a very Libertarian approach depending on the setter. None of the major daily cryptics in the UK is \"strictly Ximenean\"; all allow clues which are just cryptic definitions, and strict Ximenean rules exclude such clues. There are other differences like nounal anagram indicators and in current \"Times\" crosswords, unindicated definition by example: \"bay\" in the clue indicating HORSE in the answer, without a qualification like \"bay, perhaps\".\nIn terms of difficulty, Libertarian clues can seem impenetrable to inexperienced solvers. However, more significant is the setter him/herself. Crosswords in the \"Times\" and \"Daily Telegraph\" are published anonymously, so the crossword editor ensures that clues adhere to a consistent house style. Inevitably each setter has an individual (and often very recognisable) approach to clue-writing, but the way in which wordplay devices are used and indicated is kept within a defined set of rules.\nIn the \"Guardian\", \"Independent\", \"Financial Times\" and \"Telegraph\" Toughie series the setters' pseudonyms are published, so solvers become familiar with the styles of individual setters rather than house rules. Thus the level of difficulty is associated with the setter rather than the newspaper, though puzzles by individual setters can actually vary in difficulty considerably.\nIt is effectively impossible, then, to describe one newspaper's crosswords as the toughest or easiest. For newcomers to cryptic puzzles the \"Daily Telegraph\" is often regarded as an ideal starting point, but this is contentious. Since all of the newspapers have different styles, concentrating on one of them is likely to lead to proficiency in only one style of clue-writing; moving to a different series, after perhaps years spent with just one, can leave the solver feeling as if they have gone back to square one. The better technique is to simply attempt as many different crosswords as possible, perhaps to find a \"comfort zone\" but, more importantly, to experience the widest possible range of Ximenean/Libertarian styles.\nVariety Cryptics.\n\"Themed\" or \"variety\" cryptics have developed a small but enthusiastic following in Britain, the United States, and elsewhere. Variety cryptics are arguably among the most difficult of all crossword puzzles, both to compile and to solve, since they often involve alterations to the answers before entry into the grid, meaning that there is no assurance that the cross clues will match up unless properly altered.\nAs an example, a puzzle entitled \"Trash Talk\" by Bob Stigger in the June 2019 issue of the U.S. publication \"Games World of Puzzles\" included the following instruction:\nIn this variety cryptic crossword, 18 clue answers are garbage, to be treated according to the mantra \"13-Across 6-Across and 40-across.\" Specifically, six answers are too long for the grid; delete one letter. Six others are too short, double one letter. And six more don't match the crossing letters; anagram them. \nPangrams.\nA crossword that includes all the letters of the alphabet within the clue answers is known as a pangram. Crosswords have been set with clue answers that contain all the letters of the alphabet twice, thrice, four times over, and even five times. This last, a pentapangram, was compiled by Maize and published in the \"i\" on January 1, 2018.\nCryptic crosswords in specific publications.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn Britain it is traditional\u2014dating from the cryptic crossword pioneer Edward (Bill) Powys Mathers (1892\u20131939), who called himself \"Torquemada\" after the Spanish Inquisitor\u2014for compilers to use evocative pseudonyms. \"Crispa\", named from the Latin for \"curly-headed\", who set crosswords for the \"Guardian\" from 1954 until her retirement in 2004, legally changed her surname to \"Crisp\" after divorcing in the 1970s. Some pseudonyms have obvious connotations: for example, Torquemada as already described, or \"Mephisto\" with fairly obvious devilish overtones. Others are chosen for logical but less obvious reasons, though \"Dinmutz\" (Bert Danher in the \"Financial Times\") was produced by random selection of Scrabble tiles.\nThe \"Telegraph\", like the \"Times\", does not identify the setter of each puzzle but, unlike the \"Times\", has a regular setter for each day of the week, plus a few occasional setters to cover holidays or sickness. Regular setters include John Halpern, Ray Terrell, Jeremy Mutch, Don Manley, Allan Smith, Steve Bartlett and Richard Palmer. The regular setters as of 1 November 2006 are shown in a photograph http://. The crossword editor is Chris Lancaster, who took over from Phil McNeill in early 2018. There is an advanced cryptic called Enigmatic Variations in the \"Sunday Telegraph\", and also a 15\u00d715 blocked-grid puzzle.\nIn September 2008 the \"Telegraph\" started printing a 'Toughie' crossword as well as the daily puzzle, from Tuesday to Friday. This is described by the paper as \"the toughest crossword in Fleet Street\" or similar and does include the setter's pseudonym. Comments from some solvers on these puzzles don't always agree with this assessment, rating maybe half of them as close to average broadsheet cryptic difficulty.\nAmong the notable compilers past and present of \"The Guardian\"'s cryptic crosswords are Enigmatist, Pasquale, Paul (John Halpern), Rufus (Roger Squires), Bunthorne (Bob Smithies) and Araucaria (John Galbraith Graham). The puzzle is edited by Alan Connor.\n\"The Independent\" went online only in 2016, but still has a cryptic crossword. Setters include Virgilius, Dac, Phi, Quixote, Nimrod, Monk, Nestor, Bannsider, Anax, Merlin, Mass, Math, Morph, Scorpion, Tees and Punk (John Halpern). The daily puzzle is edited by Eimi (Mike Hutchinson).\nThe \"i\" newspaper was launched in 2010 as a sister paper to The Independent, but was bought by Johnston Press in February 2016 when The Independent moved to digital-only publication. The fiendish Inquisitor puzzle is edited by John Henderson whose predecessor was a former \"Times\" crossword editor, Mike Laws. The crosswords are often themed and may contain a Nina: a hidden feature.\nLaunched in Scotland as \"The Newspaper that supports an independent Scotland\" on 24 November 2014 after the independence referendum on 18 September. The National has a daily cryptic crossword after a request from readers to include one. The National is the only daily pro-independence newspaper in Scotland and is edited by Sunday Herald editor Richard Walker.\nHome of the famous Azed crossword, which employs a barred grid and a wider vocabulary than standard cryptics, and in conjunction with its predecessors 'Torquemada' and 'Ximenes' is the longest-running series of barred-grid puzzles. On the first Sunday of every month and at Christmas, Azed runs a clue-writing competition, via which many of today's top compilers have learnt their trade. \"The Observer\" also features a standard cryptic crossword, the Everyman, compiled by Allan Scott.\nIn the early 1970s the satirical magazine \"Private Eye\" had a crossword set by the Labour MP Tom Driberg, under the pseudonym of \"Tiresias\" (supposedly \"a distinguished academic churchman\"). It is currently set by Eddie James under the name \"Cyclops\". This crossword is usually topical, and contains material varying from risqu\u00e9 to rude, in clues, answers and the solver's head; much of the rudeness is by innuendo. It also often includes references to the content of the rest of the magazine, or its jargon in which, for example, the current monarch of the UK is \"Brian\" and the last one \"Brenda\". The \u00a3150 prize for the first correct solution opened is unusually high for a crossword and attracts many entrants.\nRoger Prebble has compiled the cryptic crossword since 1999.\n\"Significance\" is a joint publication between the American Statistical Association and the Royal Statistical Society; it contains a cryptic crossword in its puzzle section. The magazine offers a randomly awarded $150 or \u00a3100 to spend on Wiley books for those that submit a correct entry.\nCryptics in the weekly \"Spectator\" often have a specific theme, such as a tribute to a public figure who has died recently or a historic event that has its anniversary this week. As in most British periodicals, the cryptic in the \"Spectator\" is numbered: in the \"Spectator\"'s case, a puzzle's theme may be related to its specific number (such as a historic event that occurred in the year corresponding to the four-digit number of the puzzle for that week). Compilers include Doc (the puzzle editor as well as chief setter), Dumpynose (an anagram for 'Pseudonym') and Columba.\n\"The Sunday Times\" cryptic crossword is compiled in rotation by three setters: Jeff Pearce, Dean Mayer and David McLean, the latter taking over from Tim Moorey in January 2016. (Mr Moorey's final puzzle included the hidden message 'Farewell from Tim'; he continues to set Mephisto puzzles.) The position of puzzles editor is now held by Peter Biddlecombe. Until her retirement in December 2010, Barbara Hall was puzzles editor for 32 years, and wrote about half the paper's cryptic crosswords. The \"Sunday Times\" is also home to the difficult barred-grid Mephisto puzzle, currently set in rotation by Don Manley, Paul McKenna and Tim Moorey. Previous Mephisto setters were Richard Kilner (only setter, 1959 to 1973), Richard Whitelegg (only setter, 1973 to 1995), Chris Feetenby (1995-2008) and Mike Laws (1995-2011).\nAdrian Bell was the first to set The \"Times\" crossword from 1930 and was one of those responsible for establishing its distinctive cryptic style. (The \"Times\" was a relatively late adopter: the \"Telegraph\" crossword started in 1925, and the \"Guardian\" in 1929.) The \"Times\" has a team of about 15 setters, many of whom set puzzles for other papers. The setter of each puzzle is not identified. The \"Times\" also has \"jumbo\" (23\u00d723) puzzles in the Saturday edition and since 1991 has provided a home for the famously difficult advanced cryptic puzzle which used to appear in the BBC's \"The Listener\".\nThe daily \"Times\" puzzle is syndicated in the \"New York Post\" (US) and \"The Australian\" (Aus) papers. In both cases, the puzzle appears some weeks after it appeared in \"The Times\".\nThe \"Times\" introduced the Quick Cryptic crossword on March 24, 2014. It is a smaller and easier version of the paper's main daily cryptic crossword, and is designed to be more accessible to beginners and those who want a quicker challenge. The Quick Cryptic is 13x13 squares in size, compared to the main cryptic's 15x15, and uses simpler wordplay. It also features semi-anonymous setters, so you can see who created the puzzle but not their real name.\nIn October 2007, \"The Bugle\"\u2014a TimesOnline podcast by John Oliver and Andy Zaltzman\u2014introduced the first, revolutionary \"Audio Cryptic Crossword.\"\nSince 2009 the adult comic magazine \"Viz\" has incorporated a cryptic crossword credited to Anus. This is a collaboration of two setters, one of whom has a minor role in supplying some pre-written clues. In keeping with the comic's \"top shelf\" status the puzzle content is an amalgam of humour and obscenity, although the clueing style retains both Libertarian and Ximenean disciplines.\n(see \"Sydney Morning Herald\")\n\"The Atlantic\" magazine had a long-running variety cryptic crossword, known as the Puzzler, created by Emily Cox and Henry Rathvon beginning in 1977, available only online since March 2006. The final original Puzzler was published in August 2009 for the September issue. An online archive of Puzzlers going back to 1997 is still available.\nThis online news-aggregator offers a weekly American cryptic to its subscribers.\nOriginally two separate publications, \"GAMES\" and \"World of Puzzles\", the two were merged in 2014 to become \"GAMES WORLD OF PUZZLES,\" published nine times a year. The publication currently features two basic cryptics and two variety cryptics in each issue. Some other puzzles in the publication include cryptic elements, such as double definition puzzles or hidden word puzzles.\n\"Canada's national newspaper\" includes a daily cryptic somewhat less difficult than its British cousins. The crossword also comes with another set of \"Quick Clues\" (American-style) which provide a completely different set of answers. Fraser Simpson compiles the Saturday cryptic; he also used to compile an advanced cryptic in \"The Walrus\". Until 2015, once a year on Canada Day, \"The Globe\" published a large 24\u00d724 bar-diagram cryptic.\nElsewhere.\nThe Geraldine News (New Zealand)\nThis weekly local paper carries a cryptic once a month. It is compiled by Geraldine resident Jim Walton and titled JW Cryptic Crossword. As at April 2019, Jim had provided 244 cryptic crosswords for the paper.\nThis magazine features a monthly variety cryptic by Richard Maltby, Jr., and previously also by E. R. Galli, aimed at advanced solvers.\n\"The Hindu\" newspaper carries cryptic crosswords in the main paper from Monday to Saturday, and a much tougher Sunday Crossword in the Sunday Magazine supplement. The weekday crosswords are set by setters with the pseudonyms Gridman, Arden, Incognito, Afterdark, Buzzer, Neyartha, Scintillator, xChequer, Lightning, Sunnet, Spinner, Aspartame, Mac, Dr. X, KrisKross, Hypatia among others. In every cycle, a setter publishes a certain number of crosswords allotted to him or her, unlike British papers where things are mostly random. The Sunday Crossword is a syndicated crossword from the UK newspaper \"The Observer\".\nThe first setter of the Monday-Saturday cryptic crosswords was Retired Admiral Ram Dass Katari of the Indian Navy, who took up the task in 1971 at the request of Gopalan Kasturi, then editor of \"The Hindu\". The crossword has a regular following, and while \"The Hindu\" publishes the solutions on the following day, the annotated solution is put up at the website 'http://' by a group of solvers on the same day.\nThe \"Irish Times\" originally provided a daily puzzle by \"Crosaire\" (Derek Crozier), which featured a fairly unorthodox style of clue-writing. The paper continued to run his puzzles after his death in April 2010. The last of Crozier's crosswords was published in the \"Irish Times\" on 22 October 2011. The \"Irish Times\"' cryptic crossword is currently set by Crosaire's successor Crosheir.\nThis weekly magazine includes a cryptic by David Tossman, who took over from RWH (Ruth Hendry) in 1997. RWH had been providing a mixed (some cryptic clues) puzzle since 1940.\nLovatts Crosswords are a range of magazines sold throughout the UK, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand. Christine Lovatt is the main cryptic compiler, and she has been so for 30 years.\nThis liberal American political weekly featured a weekly cryptic puzzle from 1947 to 2020. Frank W. Lewis wrote the puzzle from late 1947 until his retirement in late 2009. Lewis developed one of the most recognizably personal styles of cryptic setting, and \"The Nation\" published book collections of his puzzles. From December 2011, the weekly puzzle was written by Joshua Kosman and Henri Picciotto. Their last cryptic for the magazine was published in March 2020. Kosman and Picciotto continue to offer a weekly cryptic at their website leftfieldcryptics.com.\nCarries a weekly puzzle by Emily Cox and Henry Rathvon.\nStephen Sondheim's puzzles for \"New York Magazine\" have been collected in book form. Sondheim is himself a collector of old-time puzzles and board games.\nFor some of the time that this magazine was edited by Tina Brown (1997\u20131999), it included a small (8\u00d710) barred-grid cryptic crossword, set by a range of American and Canadian setters. These puzzles are also available in a book collection, and were republished online.\nStarting in June of 2021, a new cryptic is published each week on Sunday. It uses the same 8x10 barred-grid. \"The New Yorker\" stopped publishing cryptic crosswords in March 2024.\nTwo weeks in every 18, the \"variety puzzle\" in the Sunday edition is a cryptic crossword, usually by Emily Cox and Henry Rathvon, Richard Silvestri, or Fraser Simpson. One week in 18, it is a \"Puns and Anagrams\" puzzle, a relic of a 1940s attempt to introduce cryptic puzzles to the US.\nThe weekend edition features a cryptic crossword by \"Kropotkin\" (Rex Benson) in addition to The Observer's 'Everyman'. Rex died in 2019 but older Kropotkins are still published.\nThe \"Ottawa Citizen\" has carried a weekly puzzle by Susannah Sears since 2001.\nPrints the \"Stickler\" puzzle, set by David Stickley.\nFairfax Media papers, \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" and \"The Age\", print a daily puzzle, which was also available free on-line until 31 August 2009. Various compilers (setters) compose the puzzles, each being indicated by their initials. As of November 2013, compilers from Monday to Saturday include LR (Liam Runnalls), RM (Rose McGinley), DP (David Plomley), DH (Donald Harrison), NS (Nancy Sibtain), DA (David Astle), and DS (David Sutton).\nIncludes a cryptic crossword from the Sunday Times in the Saturday edition in the Puzzles section. Friday and Sunday papers each have a different cryptic by Caroline Andrews.\nStarting in January 2010, \"The Wall Street Journal\" publishes a variety cryptic by Emily Cox and Henry Rathvon every four weeks.\nSetters on more than one British national paper.\nSeveral setters appear in more than one paper. Some of these, with pseudonyms shown, are:\nx \u2013 Denotes a compiler operating without a pseudonym in this publication.\nIn addition, Roger Squires compiles for the Glasgow Herald and the Yorkshire Post.\nRoger Squires and Ruth Crisp set at various times in their careers for all 5 of the broadsheets.\nCryptic crossword research.\nResearch into cryptic crossword solving has been comparatively sparse. Several discrete areas have been explored: the cognitive or linguistic challenges posed by cryptic clues; the mechanisms by which the \"Aha!\" moment is triggered by solving cryptic crossword clues; the use of cryptic crosswords to preserve cognitive flexibility (\"use-it-or-lose-it\") in aging populations; and expertise studies into the drivers of high performance and ability in solving cryptics.\nRecent expertise studies by Friedlander and Fine, based on a large-scale survey of 805 solvers of all ability (mainly UK-based), suggest that cryptic crossword solvers are generally highly academically able adults whose education and occupations lie predominantly in the area of scientific, mathematical or IT-related fields. This STEM connection increases significantly with level of expertise, particularly for mathematics and IT. The authors suggest that cryptic crossword skill is bound up with code-cracking and problem-solving skills of a logical and quasi-algebraic nature.\nFriedlander and Fine also note that solvers are motivated predominantly by \"Aha!\" moments, and intrinsic rewards such as mental challenge. Solvers voluntarily choose to engage with intellectually and culturally stimulating activities like music, theatre, reading, and the arts in their leisure time, and pursue active musical participation such as singing or playing an instrument at noticeably higher levels than the UK national average. Solving cryptic crossword clues can lead to a succession of 'Aha!' or 'Penny-Dropping' Moments which is highly rewarding; Friedlander and Fine suggest that research could take advantage of the range of cryptic crossword devices to explore the mechanics of insight in more depth. Looking at expert cryptic crossword solvers \u2013 who speedily overcome the clue misdirection \u2013 and comparing them with typical, everyday solvers of equal experience may provide a better understanding of the kind of person who can overcome a solving 'hitch' more easily, and how they go about it.\nCryptic crosswords in fiction.\nCryptic crosswords often appear in British literature, and are particularly popular in murder mysteries, where they are part of the puzzle. The character Inspector Morse created by Colin Dexter is fond of solving cryptic crosswords, and the crosswords often become part of the mystery. Colin Dexter himself set crosswords for \"The Oxford Times\" for many years and was a national crossword champion. In the short story \"The Fascinating Problem of Uncle Meleager's Will\", by Dorothy L Sayers, Lord Peter Wimsey solves a crossword in order to solve the mystery, while the solution to Agatha Christie's \"Curtain\" hinges on an \"Othello\" themed crossword. Ruth Rendell has used the device in her novel \"One Across, Two Down\". Among non-crime writers, crosswords often feature in the works of P. G. Wodehouse, and are an important part of the short story \"The Truth About George\". Alan Plater's 1994 novel Oliver's Travels (turned into a BBC television serial of the same name in 1995) centres round crossword solving and the hunt for a missing compiler.\nCrosswords feature prominently in the 1945 British romantic drama film \"Brief Encounter\", scripted by playwright No\u00ebl Coward, which is number two in the British Film Institute's Top 100 British films. The plot of \"The Riddle of the Sphinx\", a 2017 episode of \"Inside No. 9\", revolves around the clues and answers to a particular crossword puzzle, which had appeared on the day of the original broadcast in \"The Guardian\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69794", "revid": "49548053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69794", "title": "Cryptogram", "text": "Puzzle\nA cryptogram is a type of puzzle that consists of a short piece of encrypted text. Generally the cipher used to encrypt the text is simple enough that the cryptogram can be solved by hand. Substitution ciphers where each letter is replaced by a different letter, number, or symbol are frequently used. To solve the puzzle, one must recover the original lettering. Though once used in more serious applications, they are now mainly printed for entertainment in newspapers and magazines.\nOther types of classical ciphers are sometimes used to create cryptograms. An example is the book cipher, where a book or article is used to encrypt a message.\nHistory.\nThe ciphers used in cryptograms were created not for entertainment purposes, but for real encryption of military or personal secrets.\nThe first use of the cryptogram for entertainment purposes occurred during the Middle Ages by monks who had spare time for intellectual games. A manuscript found at Bamberg states that Irish visitors to the court of Merfyn Frych ap Gwriad (died 844), king of Gwynedd in Wales, were given a cryptogram which could only be solved by transposing the letters from Latin into Greek. Around the thirteenth century, the English monk Roger Bacon wrote a book in which he listed seven cipher methods, and stated that \"a man is crazy who writes a secret in any other way than one which will conceal it from the vulgar.\" In the 19th century Edgar Allan Poe helped to popularize cryptograms with many newspaper and magazine articles.\nWell-known examples of cryptograms in contemporary culture are the syndicated newspaper puzzles Cryptoquip and Cryptoquote, from King Features. Celebrity Cipher, distributed by Andrew McMeel, is another cipher game in contemporary culture, challenging the player to decrypt quotes from famous personalities. \nA cryptoquip is a specific type of cryptogram that usually comes with a clue or a pun. The solution often involves a humorous or witty phrase.\nIn a public challenge, writer J.M. Appel announced on September 28, 2014, that the table of contents page of his short story collection, \"Scouting for the Reaper\", doubled as a cryptogram, and he pledged an award for the first to solve it.\nSolving a cryptogram.\nCryptograms based on substitution ciphers can often be solved by frequency analysis and by recognizing letter patterns in words, such as one-letter words, which, in English, can only be \"i\" or \"a\" (and sometimes \"o\"). Double letters, apostrophes, and the fact that no letter can substitute for itself in the cipher also offer clues to the solution. Occasionally, cryptogram puzzle makers will start the solver off with a few letters.\nA printed code key form (the alphabet with a blank under each letter to fill in the substituted letter) is usually not provided but can be drawn to use as a solving aid if needed. Skilled puzzle solvers should require neither a code key form nor starter clue letters.\nOther crypto puzzles.\nWhile the cryptogram has remained popular, over time other puzzles similar to it have emerged. One of these is the Cryptoquote, which is a famous quote encrypted in the same way as a cryptogram. A more recent version, with a biblical twist, is CodedWord. This puzzle makes the solution available only online, where it provides a short exegesis on the biblical text. A third is the Cryptoquiz. The top of this puzzle has a category (unencrypted), such as \"Flowers\". Below this is a list of encrypted words which are related to the stated category. The person must then solve for the entire list to finish the puzzle. Yet another type involves using numbers as they relate to texting to solve the puzzle.\nThe Zodiac Killer sent four cryptograms to police while he was still active. Despite much research, only two of these have been translated, which was of no help in identifying the serial killer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69795", "revid": "49791081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69795", "title": "Selena", "text": "American singer (1971\u20131995)\nSelena Quintanilla-P\u00e9rez (; April 16, 1971 \u2013 March 31, 1995) was an American singer-songwriter. Known as the \"Queen of Tejano Music\", her contributions to music and fashion made her one of the most celebrated Mexican-American entertainers of the late 20th century. In 2020, \"Billboard\" magazine put her in third place on their list of \"Greatest Latino Artists of All Time\", based on both Latin albums and Latin songs chart. Media outlets called her the \"Tejano Madonna\" for her clothing choices. She also ranks among the most influential Latin artists of all time and is credited for catapulting the Tejano genre into the mainstream market.\nThe youngest child of the Quintanilla family, she debuted on the music scene as a member of the band Selena y Los Dinos, which also included her elder siblings A.B. Quintanilla and Suzette Quintanilla. In the 1980s, she was often criticized and refused bookings at venues across Texas for performing Tejano music\u2014a male-dominated music genre. However, her popularity grew after she won the Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year in 1987, which she won nine consecutive times. She signed with EMI Latin in 1989 and released her self-titled debut album the same year, while her brother became her principal music producer and songwriter.\nSelena released \"Entre a Mi Mundo\" (1992), which peaked at number one on the US \"Billboard\" Regional Mexican Albums chart for eight consecutive months. The album's commercial success led music critics to call it the \"breakthrough\" recording of her musical career. One of its singles, \"Como la Flor\", became one of her most popular signature songs. \"Live!\" (1993) won Best Mexican/American Album at the 1994 Grammy Awards, becoming the first recording by a female Tejano artist to do so. In 1994, she released \"Amor Prohibido\", which became one of the best-selling Latin albums in the United States. It was critically acclaimed as being responsible for Tejano music's first marketable era as it became one of the most popular Latin music subgenres at the time.\nSelena was shot and killed on March 31, 1995, by Yolanda Sald\u00edvar, her friend and former manager of her Selena Etc. boutiques. Sald\u00edvar was subsequently convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison with possible parole after 30 years. Two weeks after Selena's murder, Texas governor George W. Bush declared April 16 as Selena Day in Texas. Her posthumous crossover album, \"Dreaming of You\" (1995), debuted atop the \"Billboard\" 200, making Selena the first Latin artist to accomplish this feat. In 1997, Warner Bros. released \"Selena\", a film about her life and career, which starred a then-unknown Jennifer Lopez as Selena, catapulting Lopez into fame. In 2020, Netflix released \"\" starring Christian Serratos. Selena has sold around 18 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling female artists in Latin music.\nLife and career.\n1971\u20131988: Early life and career beginnings.\nSelena Quintanilla was born on April 16, 1971, at Freeport Community Hospital in Lake Jackson, Texas. She was the youngest child of Marcella Ofelia Quintanilla (n\u00e9e Samora), who was Mexican-American with some Cherokee ancestry, and Abraham Quintanilla Jr., a Mexican-American former musician. The obstetrician-gynecologist at her birth was future House of Representatives member Ron Paul. Selena was raised as a Jehovah's Witness. Quintanilla Jr. noticed her musical abilities when she was six years old. He told \"People\" magazine, \"Her timing, her pitch were perfect, I could see it from day one.\" In 1980, Quintanilla Jr. opened his first Tex-Mex restaurant in Lake Jackson, Papa Gayo's, where Selena and her siblings A.B. (on bass guitar) and Suzette (on drums) would often perform. The following year, the restaurant was forced to close due to a recession caused by the 1980s oil glut. The family declared bankruptcy and was evicted from their home. They then settled in Corpus Christi, Texas; Quintanilla Jr. became manager of the newly formed band Selena y Los Dinos and began promoting it to support the family. The name Los Dinos came from the band Quintanilla Jr. was a part of in the 1970s. They played on street corners, at weddings, quincea\u00f1eras, and fairs.\nAs her popularity as a singer grew, the demands of Selena's performance and travel schedule began to interfere with her education. Her father took her out of school when she was in the eighth grade. Her teacher Marilyn Greer disapproved of Selena's musical career. She threatened to report Quintanilla Jr. to the Texas Board of Education, believing the conditions to which Selena was exposed were inappropriate for a girl her age. Quintanilla Jr. told Greer to \"mind her business\". Other teachers expressed their concerns when they noticed how tired Selena appeared when she arrived at school. At seventeen, Selena earned a high school diploma from the American School of Correspondence in Chicago and was also accepted at Louisiana State University. She enrolled at Pacific Western University, taking up business administration as her major subject.\nQuintanilla Jr. refurbished an old bus which he named \"Big Bertha\" and the band used it as their tour bus. In the first years of touring, the family sang for food and barely had enough money to pay for gasoline. In 1984, Selena recorded her first LP record, \"Selena y Los Dinos\", for Freddie Records. Despite wanting to record English-language songs, Selena recorded Tejano music compositions\u2014a male-dominated, Spanish-language genre with German influences of polka, jazz, and country music, popularized by Mexicans living in the United States.\nQuintanilla Jr. believed that Selena should record musical compositions related to her heritage. During the recording sessions for the album, Selena had to learn Spanish phonetically with guidance from her father. In 1985, to promote the album, Selena appeared on the \"Johnny Canales Show\", a popular Spanish-language radio program, on which she continued to appear for several years. Selena was discovered by musician Rudy Trevino, founder of the Tejano Music Awards, where she won the Female Vocalist of the Year award in 1987 and for nine consecutive years after.\nThe band was often turned down by Texas music venues because of the members' ages and because Selena was their lead singer. Her father was often told by promoters that Selena would never be successful because she was a woman in a genre historically dominated by men. By 1988, Selena had released five more LP records; \"Alpha\" (1986), \"Mu\u00f1equito de Trapo\" (1987), \"And the Winner Is...\" (1987), \"Preciosa\" (1988), and \"Dulce Amor\" (1988).\n1989\u20131991: \"Selena\", \"Ven Conmigo\", and relationship with Chris P\u00e9rez.\nJos\u00e9 Behar of newly formed label EMI Latin Records, together with the new head of Sony Music Latin, watched Selena perform at the 1989 Tejano Music Awards. Behar was searching for new Latin acts and wanted to sign Selena to EMI's label Capitol Records, while Sony Music Latin offered Quintanilla Jr. twice Capitol's signing fee. Behar thought he had discovered the \"next Gloria Estefan\" but his superior called Behar illogical because he had been in South Texas less than a week. Quintanilla Jr. chose EMI Latin's offer because of the potential for a crossover album and wanted his children to be the first musicians to sign to the label.\nBefore Selena began recording for her debut album, Behar and Stephen Finfer requested a crossover album for her. She recorded three English-language compositions for the heads of EMI's pop division. Behar and Finfer's request for a crossover album was denied and Selena was told she needed a bigger fan base to sell such an album. Behar thought EMI Records and the public did not believe that a Mexican American woman could have \"crossover potential\" after Charles Koppelman denied the project.\nSelena released her self-titled debut album on October 17, 1989. The singer recorded most of the songs at AMEN Studios in San Antonio, Texas; \"Sukiyaki\" and \"My Love\" were recorded at Sunrise Studios in Houston. Selena wrote \"My Love\" and wanted the song to be included on the album. Her brother A.B., became Selena's principal record producer and songwriter for most of her musical career, though did not write the tracks \"Sukiyaki\", \"Contigo Quiero Estar\", and \"No Te Vayas\". \"Sukiyaki\" was originally recorded in Japanese in the 1960s by Kyu Sakamoto; Selena used a translation into Spanish of an English version of the song by Janice Marie Johnson. \"Selena\" peaked at number seven on the US \"Billboard\" Regional Mexican Albums chart, becoming Selena's first recording to debut on a national music chart. The album performed better than other recordings from other contemporaneous female Tejano singers.\nIn the same year, Coca-Cola wanted Selena to become one of their spokespeople in Texas. The jingle used in her first two commercials for the company was composed by A.B. and Chris P\u00e9rez\u2014the latter of whom had joined Selena y Los Dinos several months earlier as the band's new guitarist. P\u00e9rez began having romantic feelings for Selena, despite having a girlfriend in San Antonio. After a trip down to Mexico with the band, P\u00e9rez thought it would be best for them both to distance themselves, but he found that impossible and chose to try to build a relationship with her. They expressed their feelings for each other at a Pizza Hut restaurant and shortly afterward became a couple. P\u00e9rez and Selena hid their relationship, fearing Quintanilla Jr. would try to break it up.\nSelena released her second studio album, \"Ven Conmigo\", in September 1990. Three tracks from \"Ven Conmigo\" were released as singles; \"Ya Ves\", \"La Tracalera\", and \"Baila Esta Cumbia\". The latter, a Tejano cumbia song, became one of Selena's most successful singles. Its popularity grew in Mexico, where a compilation album bearing the single's name was released there, which was certified platinum by the Asociaci\u00f3n Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON), denoting sales of 150,000 units.\nA registered nurse and fan named Yolanda Sald\u00edvar asked Quintanilla Jr. permission to start a fan club in San Antonio. Sald\u00edvar had the idea after attending one of Selena's concerts. Quintanilla Jr. approved Sald\u00edvar's request; he believed the fan club would bring more exposure for the band. Sald\u00edvar soon became a close friend to Selena and the family, opening the fan club in 1991 and fulfilling the role of president. That same year, Salvadoran singer \u00c1lvaro Torres composed a duet he wanted to record with Selena. The song, \"Buenos Amigos\", was produced by Enrique Elizondo and was released on Torres' tenth studio album \"Nada Se Compara Contigo\" (1991).\n\"Buenos Amigos\" peaked at number one on the US \"Billboard\" Top Latin Songs chart, giving Selena her first number-one single. The song's music video earned Selena and Torres two nominations at the 1992 \"Billboard\" Music Awards. The track was also nominated for Duo of the Year at the 1992 Tejano Music Awards. Biographer Deborah Par\u00e9dez wrote that the track enabled Selena to tour the west and east coasts of the United States. According to John Lannert of \"Billboard\" magazine, \"Buenos Amigos\" was helped by increased airplay on regional Mexican and Tejano radio stations, which had previously dismissed Selena's recordings.\n1992\u20131993: Elopement, \"Entre a Mi Mundo\", and \"Selena Live\".\nSelena's sister Suzette claimed to have caught Selena and P\u00e9rez flirting with each other and immediately informed their father. Quintanilla Jr. took P\u00e9rez off the bus and told him his relationship with Selena was over. Selena and P\u00e9rez continued their relationship despite Quintanilla Jr's disapproval; Selena's mother Marcella approved of their relationship. Quintanilla Jr. saw Selena and P\u00e9rez romantically together on the bus after he informed them of his disapproval; he pulled over and an argument between him and Selena ensued. He called P\u00e9rez a \"cancer in my family\" and threatened to disband the group if they continued their relationship.\nSelena and P\u00e9rez relented; Quintanilla Jr. fired P\u00e9rez from the band and prevented Selena from leaving with him. After his dismissal, P\u00e9rez and Selena secretly continued their relationship. On the morning of April 2, 1992, Selena and P\u00e9rez decided to elope, believing Quintanilla Jr. would never approve of their relationship. Selena thought her father would have to accept them if they were married and would not have to hide their feelings for each other. Within hours of their marriage, the media announced the couple's elopement.\nSelena's family tried to find her; Quintanilla Jr. did not take the news well and alienated himself for some time. Selena and P\u00e9rez moved into an apartment in Corpus Christi. In interviews, Quintanilla Jr. expressed how he feared P\u00e9rez could be a \"machista\" (Spanish for a male chauvinist), who would force Selena to end her career and music goals, a move that prevented Quintanilla Jr. to accept P\u00e9rez as being suitable for Selena at the time. Quintanilla Jr. later approached P\u00e9rez, apologized, accepted the marriage, and took P\u00e9rez back into the band.\nA month after her elopement, Selena released her third studio album, \"Entre a Mi Mundo\", in May 1992. The album was critically acclaimed as her \"breakthrough album\". The record peaked at number one on the US \"Billboard\" Regional Mexican Albums chart for eight consecutive months; it was certified 10\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA for sales of 600,000 album-equivalent units, while in Mexico, the album sold 385,000 units. \"Entre a Mi Mundo\" became the first Tejano album by a female artist to sell over 300,000 copies.\nSelena was booked for a high-profile border press tour in Monterrey, Mexico, with music media figures in a meet-and-greet conference. At the time, Tejanos were looked down on as \"hayseed pochos\" among Mexican citizens. The singer's Spanish was far from fluent; EMI Latin executives were \"terrified\" about the singer's limited Spanish during the press conference for the album in Mexico. According to Patoski, Selena \"played her cards right\" during the conference and won over the Mexican media after newspapers hailed her as \"an artist of the people\". The newspapers found her to be a refreshing change from Mexican telenovela actors \"who were fair-skinned, blond-haired, and green-eyed.\"\nAfter her publicity press, Selena was booked to play at several concerts throughout Mexico, including a performance at Festival Acapulco in May 1993, which garnered her critical acclaim. Her performance in Nuevo Le\u00f3n on September 17, 1993, was attended by 70,000 people, garnering her the title of the biggest Tejano act in Mexico. The album produced four singles; \"Como la Flor\", \"\u00bfQu\u00e9 Cre\u00edas?\", \"La Carcacha\", and \"Amame\". \"Como la Flor\" became Selena's signature recording; it was critically acclaimed by music critics as a career launcher for Selena.\n\"Como la Flor\" helped Selena to dominate the Latin music charts and become immensely popular in Mexico\u2014where Mexican-Americans were generally not liked among citizens\u2014and was well received by critics. The track was nominated for Song of the Year at the 1993 Tejano Music Awards. The single peaked at number six on the US \"Billboard\" Top Latin Songs chart. In 1994, \"Entre a Mi Mundo\" ranked as the second best-selling regional Mexican album of all-time.\nSelena released \"Live!\" a year after \"Entre a Mi Mundo\"; it was recorded during a free concert at the Memorial Coliseum in Corpus Christi, on February 7, 1993. The album included previously released tracks that were sung live and three studio recordings; \"No Debes Jugar\", \"La Llamada\", and \"T\u00fa Robaste Mi Coraz\u00f3n\"\u2014a duet with Tejano musician Emilio Navaira. The tracks \"No Debes Jugar\" and \"La Llamada\" peaked within the top five on the US \"Billboard\" Top Latin Songs chart. \"Live!\" won the Grammy Award for Best Mexican/American Album at the 36th Grammy Awards.\nIn May 1994, \"Live!\" was named Album of the Year by the \"Billboard\" Latin Music Awards. At the 1994 Tejano Music Awards, \"Live!\" won Album of the Year, while at the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards, it was nominated for Regional Mexican Album of the Year. \"Live!\" was certified gold by the RIAA for shipments of 500,000 copies, while in Mexico it sold 250,000 units. Selena briefly appeared opposite Erik Estrada in a Mexican telenovela titled \"Dos Mujeres, Un Camino\". In 1995 she entered negotiations to star in another telenovela produced by Emilio Larrosa. She appeared in two episodes, which garnered record ratings for the series.\n1994\u20131995: Fashion venture, film debut, and \"Amor Prohibido\".\nAside from music, in 1994 Selena began designing and manufacturing a line of clothing; she opened two boutiques called Selena Etc., one in Corpus Christi and the other in San Antonio. Both were equipped with in-house beauty salons. By the end of 1994, Selena Etc. had held two fashion shows to showcase their clothing line. Selena (alongside her band, Selena y Los Dinos) held a concert after Selena Etc.'s second fashion show on December 3, 1994, at the Hemisfair Arena in San Antonio. She was in negotiations to open more stores in Monterrey, Mexico, and Puerto Rico. Sald\u00edvar managed both boutiques after the Quintanilla family were impressed with the way she managed the fan club.\n\"Hispanic Business\" magazine reported that the singer earned over five million dollars from these boutiques. She was ranked among the twentieth-wealthiest Hispanic musicians who grossed the highest income in 1993 and 1994. Selena released her fourth studio album, \"Amor Prohibido\", in March 1994. The recording debuted at number three on the US \"Billboard\" Top Latin Albums chart and number one on the US \"Billboard\" Regional Mexican Albums charts. After peaking at number one on the Top Latin Albums, the album remained in the top five for the rest of the year and into early 1995.\n\"Amor Prohibido\" became the second Tejano album to reach year-end sales of 500,000 copies, which had previously only been accomplished by La Mafia. It became one of the best-selling Latin albums in the United States. \"Amor Prohibido\" spawned four number-one singles; the title track, \"Bidi Bidi Bom Bom\", \"No Me Queda M\u00e1s\", and \"Fotos y Recuerdos\". \"Amor Prohibido\" was among the best selling U.S. albums of 1995, and has been certified 36\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA for sales of 2.16 million album-equivalent units in the United States. The album was named on Tom Moon's list of the \"1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die: A Listener's Life List\" (2008).\n\"Amor Prohibido\" popularized Tejano music among a younger and wider audience than at any other time in the genre's history. The two singles, \"Amor Prohibido\" and \"No Me Queda M\u00e1s\", were the most successful US Latin singles of 1994 and 1995, respectively. The album's commercial success led to a Grammy nomination for Best Mexican/American Album at the 37th Grammy Awards in 1995. It won Record of the Year at the 1995 Tejano Music Awards and Regional/Mexican Album of the Year at the 1995 Lo Nuestro Awards. Selena was named \"one of Latin music's most successful touring acts\" during her \"Amor Prohibido\" tour.\nAfter \"Amor Prohibido\"'s release, Selena was considered \"bigger than Tejano itself\", and broke barriers in the Latin music world. She was called the \"Queen of Tejano Music\" by many media outlets. \"Billboard\" magazine ranked \"Amor Prohibido\" among the most essential Latin recordings of the past 50 years and included it on its list of the top 100 albums of all-time. In 2017, NPR ranked \"Amor Prohibido\" at number 19 on their list of the 150 greatest albums made by women. Sales of the album and its titular single represented Tejano music's first commercial success in Puerto Rico. Selena recorded a duet titled \"Donde Quiera Que Est\u00e9s\" with the Barrio Boyzz, which was released on their album of the same name in 1994. The song reached number one on the Top Latin Songs chart, which enabled Selena to tour in New York City, Argentina, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, and Central America, where she was not well known.\nIn late 1994, EMI chairman Charles Koppelman decided Selena had achieved her goals in the Spanish-speaking market. He wanted to promote her as an English-language solo pop artist. Selena continued touring while EMI began preparing the crossover album, engaging Grammy Award-winning composers. By the time Selena performed to a record-breaking, sold-out concert at the Houston Astrodome in February 1995, work had already begun on her crossover album. In 1995, she made a cameo appearance in \"Don Juan DeMarco\", which starred Marlon Brando, Johnny Depp, and Faye Dunaway.\nMurder.\nThe Quintanilla family appointed Yolanda Sald\u00edvar as manager of Selena's boutiques in early 1994. Eight months later, Selena signed Sald\u00edvar as her registered agent in San Antonio, Texas. After the agreement, Sald\u00edvar moved from San Antonio to Corpus Christi to be closer to Selena. In December 1994, the boutiques began to suffer after the number of staff for both stores had decreased. According to staff members, Sald\u00edvar often dismissed employees she disliked. Employees at the stores regularly complained about Sald\u00edvar's behavior to Selena, who dismissed the claims, believing Sald\u00edvar would not negatively impose erratic decisions on Selena's fashion venture.\nAccording to Quintanilla Jr., the staff later turned their attention to him and began informing him about Sald\u00edvar's behavior. Quintanilla Jr. took the claims seriously; he told Selena to \"be careful\" and said Sald\u00edvar might not be a good influence. Selena dismissed her father's inquiries because he had often distrusted people in the past. By January 1995, Selena's fashion designer Martin Gomez, her cousin Debra Ramirez, and clients had expressed their concerns over Sald\u00edvar's behavior and management skills. During an interview with Sald\u00edvar in 1995, reporters from \"The Dallas Morning News\" said her devotion to Selena bordered on obsession.\nAccording to Quintanilla Jr., in January 1995, he began receiving telephone calls from fans who said they had paid for membership in the Selena fan club and had received nothing in return for it, prompting him to launch an investigation. Quintanilla Jr. discovered that Sald\u00edvar had embezzled more than $30,000 via forged checks from both the fan club and the boutiques. Quintanilla Jr. held a meeting with Selena and Suzette on the night of March 9 at Q-Productions to confront Sald\u00edvar. Quintanilla Jr. presented Sald\u00edvar with the inconsistencies about the disappeared funds. Quintanilla Jr. told her that if she did not provide evidence that disproved his accusations, he would involve the local police. Quintanilla Jr. banned Sald\u00edvar from having any contact with Selena. However, Selena did not want to dissolve their friendship, as she thought Sald\u00edvar was essential to the success of the clothing line in Mexico. Selena also wanted to keep her close because she had bank records, statements, and financial records necessary for tax preparation.\nIn the days before Selena's death, Sald\u00edvar delayed handing over the bank statements and financial records by saying she had been physically and sexually assaulted in Mexico. Sald\u00edvar, along with Selena, appeared at a medical clinic on March 31, 1995, ostensibly to have Sald\u00edvar examined for an assault which she claimed happened to her in Monterrey. During that visit, Sald\u00edvar was given a brief physical examination by the clinic's doctor, but this did not include a gynecological exam specifically done in cases of sexual assault. It was suggested by nurse Carla Anthony that Sald\u00edvar needed to have the rape exam in San Antonio for three reasons: Sald\u00edvar was a resident of San Antonio, the clinic they were currently at was in Corpus Christi, and the assault occurred in Mexico.\nAfterward, Selena again met with Sald\u00edvar in her motel room at the Days Inn in Corpus Christi. At the motel, Selena demanded the financial papers. At 11:48\u00a0a.m. (CST), Sald\u00edvar got a gun from her purse and pointed it at Selena. As Selena attempted to flee, Sald\u00edvar shot her once on the right lower shoulder, severing the subclavian artery and causing a severe loss of blood. Critically wounded, Selena ran towards the lobby, leaving a trail of blood. She collapsed on the floor as the clerk called the emergency services, with Sald\u00edvar still chasing after her and calling her a \"bitch\". Before collapsing, Selena named Sald\u00edvar as her assailant and gave the number of the room where she had been shot. Meanwhile, Sald\u00edvar attempted to leave in her pickup truck. She was spotted by a responding police cruiser. She surrendered after a nearly nine-and-a-half-hour standoff with police and the FBI. By that time, hundreds of fans had gathered at the scene. Many wept as police took Sald\u00edvar away.\nSelena was taken to the Corpus Christi Memorial Hospital at 12:00\u00a0p.m. (CST). Her pupils were fixed and dilated, there was no evidence of neurological function, she had no vital signs, and was declared clinically brain dead. Dr. Louis Elkins, cardiac surgeon, arrived at Memorial Hospital and said he saw doctors making \"heroic efforts\" to revive Selena. They were able to establish an \"erratic heartbeat\" long enough to transfer her to the trauma room, and began blood transfusions in an attempt to re-establish blood circulation after opening Selena's chest and finding massive internal bleeding. By the time Elkins arrived, an emergency doctor began \"massaging her heart\" after it had stopped beating. Elkins reported how all efforts were futile and said had he been the receiving doctor, he would not have made any treatments on Selena. He felt \"obligated to continue\" after the emergency room doctor made the decision to reanimate the singer. After 50 minutes of surgery, she was pronounced dead from blood loss and cardiac arrest at 1:05\u00a0p.m. (CST).\nAn autopsy was performed on the same day due to the overwhelming media response. It revealed that the bullet had entered Selena's upper right back, near her shoulder blade, passed through her chest cavity, severed the right subclavian artery, and exited her right upper chest. Her official cause of death was described as \"exsanguinating internal and external hemorrhage due to perforating gunshot wound\" resulting in \"massive bleeding\". The internal examination revealed that she had not ingested any type of drug, nor was she pregnant, which was a rumor that began spreading after her death.\nFuneral.\nOn April 1, Bayfront Plaza in Corpus Christi held a vigil which drew 3,000 fans. During the event, it was announced that a public viewing of the casket would be held at the Bayfront Auditorium the following day. Fans lined up for almost . An hour before the doors opened, rumors that the casket was empty began circulating, which prompted the Quintanilla family to have an open-casket viewing. About 30,000 to 40,000 fans passed by Selena's casket. More than 78,000 signed a book of condolence. Flowers for the casket viewing were imported from The Netherlands. At the request of Selena's family, video and flash photography was banned.\nOn April 3, 1995, six hundred guests\u2014mostly family members\u2014attended Selena's burial at Seaside Memorial Park in Corpus Christi, Texas, which was broadcast live by a Corpus Christi and San Antonio radio station without the consent of her family. A Jehovah's Witness minister from Lake Jackson preached in English, quoting Paul the Apostle's words in 1 Corinthians 15. Hundreds of people began circling the area in their vehicles. Among the celebrities who attended Selena's funeral were Roberto Pulido, Bobby Pulido, David Lee Garza, Navaira, Laura Canales, Elsa Garcia, La Mafia, Ram Herrera, Imagen Latina, and Pete Astudillo. A special Mass held the same day at Los Angeles Sports Arena drew a crowd of 4,000. Coincidentally, Selena\u2019s funeral occurred on the same day as a workplace shooting (which also occurred in Corpus Christi) that resulted in the deaths of 5 people (excluding the perpetrator); news of the incident wasn\u2019t covered much since it was overshadowed by news coverage of the funeral.\nImpact.\nSelena's murder had a widespread impact. Reactions to her death were compared to those following the deaths of musicians John Lennon and Elvis Presley and that of U.S. president John F. Kennedy. Major television networks interrupted their regular programming to break the news\u2014Tom Brokaw referred to Selena as \"The Mexican Madonna\". Her death was front-page news in \"The New York Times\" for two days. Many vigils and memorials were held in her honor, and radio stations in Texas played her music non-stop. Her funeral drew 60,000 mourners, many of whom traveled from outside the United States.\nThe news struck the Hispanic community extremely hard. Many fans traveled thousands of miles to see Selena's house and boutiques, and the crime scene. By mid-afternoon, police were asked to form a detour because a line of cars began backing up traffic from the Quintanillas' houses. Among the celebrities who contacted the Quintanilla family to express their condolences were Gloria Estefan, Celia Cruz, Julio Iglesias, and Madonna. Other celebrities\u2014including Stefani Montiel, Jaime DeAnda (of Los Chamacos), and Shelly Lares\u2014appeared on radio stations to express their thoughts about Selena's death.\nAn issue of \"People\" magazine was released several days after her murder. Its publishers believed interest would soon wane. They released a commemorative issue within a week when it became clear it was growing. The issue sold nearly a million copies, selling the entire first and second print runs within two weeks. It became a collector's item, a first in the history of \"People\". Betty Cortina, an editor of \"People\", told \"Biography\" they never had an issue that was completely sold out; \"it was unheard of\". In the following months, the company released \"People en Espa\u00f1ol\" aimed at the Hispanic market, due to the success of the Selena issue. This was followed by \"Newsweek en Espanol\" and \"Latina\" magazine.\nA few days later, Howard Stern mocked Selena's murder and burial, poked fun at her mourners, and criticized her music. Stern said, \"This music does absolutely nothing for me. Alvin and the Chipmunks have more soul\u00a0...\u00a0Spanish people have the worst taste in music. They have no depth.\" Stern's comments outraged and infuriated the Hispanic community in Texas. Stern's sound effects man added gunshots to her music played in the background on his show. A South Texas judge issued a disorderly conduct arrest warrant in Stern's name, claiming \"I did it for all the Tejano fans\". Free-speech advocates said the warrant was unconstitutional. \"It fails the First Amendment test\", said Jay Jacobson, executive director for the Texas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union. \"It's a speech that is protected - being a music critic, no matter how harsh, is not grounds for criminal charges.\" Stern made an on-air statement, in Spanish, saying his comments were not made to cause \"more anguish to her family, friends and those who loved her\". The League of United Latin American Citizens boycotted Stern's show, finding his apology unacceptable.\nTexas retailers removed any products that were related to Stern, while Sears and McDonald's sent a letter stating their disapproval of Stern's comments to the media because some fans believed the companies sponsored Stern's show. Within a week, on NBC's \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\", Stern and Robin Quivers (his co-host) were asked whether Stern's remarks about Selena were acceptable. Quivers decided not to talk about the situation to avoid arguing with Stern. When Linda Ronstadt\u2014a pop singer of Mexican-American heritage\u2014appeared on the show, she and Quivers argued when Ronstadt defended Selena.\nOn April 12, 1995, two weeks after Selena's death, George W. Bush, governor of Texas at the time, declared her birthday, April 16, Selena Day in the state. He said Selena represented \"the essence of south Texas culture.\" Some European Americans in Texas wrote to the editor of the \"Brazosport Facts\" during April and May, asking what the big deal was; some were offended that Selena Day fell on Easter. Others said, \"Easter is \"more\" important than Selena Day\", and that they believed people should let Selena rest in peace and continue with their lives. Mexican Americans in Texas wrote vociferously to the newspaper. Some said others were too critical of Selena Day, and should not have responded so rudely.\nIn October 1995, a Houston jury convicted Sald\u00edvar of first-degree murder and she was sentenced to life in prison with the possibility of parole after 30 years in 2025. On March 27, 2025, Sald\u00edvar's appeal for parole was denied. She will be eligible again in March 2030. Life with the possibility of parole was the maximum prison term allowed in Texas that could be imposed at the time. In 2002, under a judge's order, the gun used to kill Selena was destroyed and the pieces were thrown into Corpus Christi Bay. Fans and historians disapproved of the decision to destroy the gun, saying the event was historical and the gun should have been in a museum.\nArtistry.\nSelena possessed a soprano vocal range. During her lifetime, she expressed her love and admiration for Gloria Estefan, who she credited with opening the door for female artists of hispanic descent. Selena's other major influences include Madonna, Roc\u00edo D\u00farcal, Paula Abdul, Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson, Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston, as well as rock bands such as AC/DC and KISS.\nIn an April 1995 interview with \"Billboard\" magazine, Behar said he saw Selena as a \"cross between Janet Jackson and Whitney Houston in style, feel, and vocal range\". Although Selena did not write most of her songs, she incorporated R&amp;B, Latin pop, technopop, country and western, and disco into her Tejano music repertoire. Mario Tarradell of \"The Dallas Morning News\" said that during her music career, Selena \"merges Tejano's infectious cumbia rhythm with street-savvy R&amp;B, old-school soul, dancehall reggae, sizzling salsa, and trippy, loopy funk\". Selena's recordings expressed \"love and pain, as well as strength and passion\", according to Charles Tatum. \nShe also recorded independently driven, female-empowerment-themed compositions; \"Si La Quieres\", \"\u00bfQu\u00e9 Cre\u00edas?\", \"Ya Ves\" and \"Ya No\", which centered around inappropriate relationships and recovery from domestic violence. Peter Watrous of \"The New York Times\" said Selena's voice \"sometimes quivered\", and that she \"roughed it up a bit\". He continued, \"[a]t its best, it had a coolness, a type of unadorned passion\". Ilan Stavans called her music \"cursi-melodramatic, cheesy, overemotional, not too far from Juan Gabriel and a relative of Iglesias\". Richard Corliss of \"Time\" magazine said her songs \"are perky, cheerful rather than soulful\", and that earlier recordings, \"with their tinny, Tijuana Brass charts, and keyboards that evoke calliopes are ideal for the fairground or merry-go-round\". Corliss calls Selena's singing an \"expert mimicry of everything from \u00c9dith Piaf's melodramatic contralto to the coloratura riffs of Mariah Carey. But the sounds are still lightly Hispanic.\"\n\"Newsweek\" magazine called Selena's English-language recordings \"a blend of urban pop and Latin warmth\". According to \"Texas Monthly\", Selena's brother modernized her music into a more \"funk and hip hop\" sound. Selena's use of emotive range during her musical career has been praised by critics as being her trademark. A.B. wrote increasingly cumbia-influenced songs for \"Ven Conmigo\" (1990); Ramiro Burr of \"Billboard\" said Selena and her band had \"evolved a rhythmic style that demonstrated its increasing prowess for catchy cumbias such as 'Baila Esta Cumbia' and the title track\". Italian essayist Gaetano Prampolini wrote that \"Selena's voice projected a sonorous warmth and joyfulness\" during his review of Selena's cumbia recordings. In his review of the remix album \"Enamorada de Ti\" (2012), Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that Selena's songs were \"rooted in the '90s and sound that way\".\nPublic image.\nQuintanilla Jr. sought to maintain Selena's image clean and family-oriented. In 1989, she was offered sponsorship from beer companies but her father turned them down. Selena was often refused gigs at Tejano venues because she was a female singer in a male-dominated music scene. Manuel Pe\u00f1a wrote that after 1989, Selena's popularity increased and she became a sex icon following the release of her debut album. Charles Tatum said Selena drew most attention from her \"beauty, sexuality, and youthful impact on the Tejano music scene\".\nSelena said she never wanted to record explicit songs due to her upbringing and because her fan base consisted largely of young children, who regarded her as a role model. She further commented on the question of her sexual appeal to men during her crossover attempt, asserting that she will \"stay the same\" and that her English-language recordings will refrain from foul language and sexual themes. In 1997, Mar\u00eda Celeste Arrar\u00e1s wrote in her book about Selena's death that the singer was a \"sweet and charismatic girl\". According to Arrar\u00e1s, Selena \"trusted everyone\"; she often went shopping alone, despite her father's concerns over her safety.\nBetty Cortina of \"People\" magazine said Selena's provocative choice of clothing was an acceptable emulation of Janet Jackson and Madonna, and that she wore \"sexy outfits that [accentuated] a body of a Latina woman\". Cortina also stated that Selena had a \"flamboyant style, an unbelievable body, curves and booty\". Arrar\u00e1s wrote that Selena \"began wearing clothes designed to emphasize her curvaceous figure\" and that she \"never came across as cheap\u2014simply sexy\". She also said Selena's makeup regimen was not being \"painted up or vulgar\". Arrar\u00e1s also noted Selena's \"fun-loving stage manner\" and said she was \"playful onstage and off\".\nMatt S. Meier wrote in his book \"The Mexican American Experience: An Encyclopedia\" (2010) that Selena exhibited \"contagious energy\" during her concerts and said she displayed \"warmth, passion, and sexuality\" while exuding a \"down-to-earth persona of the wholesome young girl next door\". Selena wore outfits that accented her physical attributes and was not afraid to wear outfits she liked, despite criticism from parents who thought Selena's choice of outfits were inappropriate for young girls, who began emulating Selena. Her views on public image in the fashion industry were bothersome; she said she was opposed to the image that all woman should be \"rail-thin\" and the notion that they must wear certain outfits and be \"super-young to be beautiful\".\nIn the early 1990s, Selena began wearing decorative bustiers, spandex or tight pants, and attractive, unbuttoned jackets during her concerts. She was inspired by Paula Abdul, Janet Jackson, and Madonna. During a 1992 interview, Selena said her choice of clothing does not reflect her personality. NBC News called Selena's outfit \"provocative\". Because of her choices of outfits and dance moves, she was named by her fans as the \"Mexican Madonna\". According to Suzette, Selena often designed and sewed her outfits backstage with her designers, moments before she was due on stage. Quintanilla Jr. disapproved of Selena's outfits, but he later accepted it when Selena discussed it being a fashion trend.\nSelena became an inactive member of the Jehovah's Witnesses due to her exotic clothing. During the photo shoot for \"Entre a Mi Mundo\" (1992), a photographer remarked on the ways Selena's choice of clothing affected Quintanilla Jr. tremendously; he often left sessions when Selena appeared in revealing outfits. Selena was credited as the first woman to change public perceptions of feminine beauty in the Tejano market; a feminist, she blazed a trail for other female artists during her career.\nFollowing Selena's death, some celebrities questioned her status as a role model among Hispanic women. In her about the singer, filmmaker Lourdes Portillo expressed concerns whether Selena was a great role model for young women. Portillo believed Selena was sending the wrong message to young girls by dancing in clothing that suggested hypersexualization. American author Sandra Cisneros agreed with Portillo's assessment that Selena was \"not a good role model to Latina women\". Media outlets also shared Portillo's views; they said the \"fairy tale story\" of Selena was one that her family would want to preserve, questioning Quintanilla Jr.'s role for pushing an image that Selena had \"never made mistakes\" into the media, calling it \"lies\" and \"not the real story\".\nPhilanthropy.\nDuring her childhood, Selena helped organizations such as Toys for Tots. She was active in the U.S. Latino community, visiting local schools to talk to students about the importance of education. At Fulmore Junior High School in Austin, she educated two hundred high school students about positive attitudes and setting life-goals in their adult lives. Selena urged children to stay in school, and that alcohol and drugs will lead them nowhere in life. She spent her free time helping her community. Selena performed in Washington, D.C. to celebrate the forming of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. Following the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, Selena helped victims in Florida by performing at a Houston benefit concert.\nIn August 1994, Selena hosted a charity baseball game to raise money for unspecified charities. She also donated her time to civic organizations such as D.A.R.E. and planned a fundraising concert to help AIDS patients. Selena participated with the Texas Prevention Partnership which was sponsored by the Texas Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse (Dep Corporation), which released an educational video that was sent to students for free. Her pro-education videos included \"My Music\" and \"Selena Agrees\". She was in the works for a Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America benefit concert.\nIn January 1995, Selena headlined the Teach the Children festival in San Antonio. The concert funded a non-profit program to provide school supplies to needy children. Selena was a spokesperson for women in abusive relationships. She also helped out at homeless shelters. According to the A&amp;E television series \"Biography\", Selena's fans were often minorities; she encouraged them to make the most of their lives.\nLegacy.\nSelena has been credited for helping redefine Latin music and its subgenres of Tejano, cumbia, and Latin pop. Selena broke barriers in the Latin music world. She is considered \"one of the most significant Mexican-American singers of the end of the twentieth century\". \"People\" magazine named Selena one of the most intriguing people of the 20th century. US Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison named Selena one of \"the spirited women who shaped [the United States].\"\nSelena became one of the \"most celebrated cultural products\" of the United States-Mexico borderlands. Selena was called the \"Queen of Tejano Music\", and was described as \"the most important and popular Tejano star of all time\". Her death was \"the most devastating loss\" in Tejano music history, according to Zach Quaintance of \"The Monitor\". At the time of her death, Selena became one of the most widely known Mexican-American vocal artists and the most popular Latin artist in the United States. She had a \"cult-like\" following among Hispanics.\nSelena has been named one of the most influential Latin artists of all-time and has been credited for elevating a music genre into the mainstream market. \"Latin Post\" called the singer \"one of the most iconic artists in Latin American music history\", while \"The New York Times\" called her \"arguably the most important Latina musician in the country, on her way to becoming one of the most important, period.\" Selena became a household name in the United States and Mexico following her death and became part of the American pop culture. She became more popular in death than when she was alive.\nAfter her death, her popularity among the Hispanic population was compared to those of Marilyn Monroe and Madonna in Anglo-American culture. According to author Carlota Caulfield, Selena was \"one of the most popular Latina singers of the 1990s\". Selena's popularity was drawn in by the LGBT community and minority groups in the United States. The popularity of Tejano music waned after her death and has not recovered. John Lannert of \"Billboard\" said in an interview with \"Biography\" in 2007 that when Selena died the \"Tejano market died with her\".\n\"Dreaming of You\", the crossover album Selena had been working on at the time of her death, was released in July 1995. It sold 175,000 copies on the day of its release in the U.S.\u2014a then-record for a female vocalist\u2014and sold 331,000 copies its first week. Selena became the third female artist to sell over 300,000 units in one week, after Janet Jackson and Mariah Carey. It debuted at number one on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200 chart, becoming the first album by a Hispanic artist to do so. \"Dreaming of You\" helped Selena to become the first solo artist to debut a posthumous album at number one. \"Dreaming of You\" joined five of Selena's studio albums on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart simultaneously, making Selena the first female artist in \"Billboard\" history to do so. The album was certified 59\u00d7\u00a0platinum (Latin field), for sales of 3.54 million album-equivalent units in the U.S. alone.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] it has sold over 2.942 million copies in the U.S. making it the best-selling Latin album of all-time in the country according to Nielsen SoundScan. As of 2015[ [update]], the recording has sold five million copies worldwide. In 2008, Joey Guerra of the \"Houston Chronicle\" said its lead single, \"I Could Fall in Love\", had \"made the Tejano goddess a posthumous crossover star\". Her death was believed to have sparked an interest in Latin music by people who were unaware of its existence. It was also believed her death \"open[ed] the doors\" to other Latin musicians such as Jennifer Lopez, Ricky Martin, and Shakira.\nIn 1995, the United States Social Security Administration ranked the name Selena one of the 100 most popular names for newborn girls, and namesake Selena Gomez acknowledged Quintanilla's influence. In December 1999, Selena was named the \"top Latin artist of the '90s\" and \"Best selling Latin artist of the decade\" by \"Billboard\" for her fourteen top-ten singles in the Top Latin Songs chart, including seven number-one hits. She was the best-selling Latin female singer of the 1990s in the U.S. and Mexico. Selena was named \"Best Female Vocalist of the '80s\" and \"Best Female Vocalist of the '90s\" at the 2010 Tejano Music Awards. In 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Selena at number 89 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nPosthumous film, streaming video and honors.\nIn the months following her death, several honors and tributes were erected. Several proposals were made, such as renaming streets, public parks, food products, and auditoriums. Two months later, a tribute was held at the 1995 Lo Nuestro Awards. The Spirit of Hope Award was created in Selena's honor in 1996; it was awarded to Latin artists who participated in humanitarian and civic causes. On March 16, 2011, the United States Postal Service released a \"Latin Legends\" memorial stamp to honor Selena, Carlos Gardel, Tito Puente, Celia Cruz, and Carmen Miranda. In February 2014, the Albany, New York \"Times Union\" named her one of \"100 Coolest Americans in History\". In 1998 Selena was commemorated with a museum.\nIn 1995, Selena was inducted into the \"Billboard\" Latin Music Hall of Fame, the Hard Rock Cafe's Hall of Fame, and the South Texas Music Hall of Fame. In 2001 she was inducted into the Tejano Music Hall of Fame. In 2017, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The unveiling ceremony of her star was attended by around 4,500 fans, which was the largest-ever crowd for an unveiling ceremony at the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She was named one of the 20 most influential Texans of all time by author Laurie Jasinski. She was ranked fifth of the \"100 most influential Latin musicians of the 20th century\" according to the \"Orange County Register\". The singer has been given many epithets by media outlets, including the \"Queen of Cumbia\" or \"Queen of Kumbia\", the \"Chicana Elvis\", the \"Queen of Hybrid Pop Culture\", the \"Hispanic Marilyn Monroe\", the \"Tupac Shakur of Latin Music\", the \"Corpus Christi Queen\", and the \"People's Princess\". Media have compared Selena's fashion sense to that of Madonna more times than any other celebrity.\nIn 1995, Mexican actress Salma Hayek was chosen to portray Selena in a biopic produced by the Quintanilla family and Warner Bros. However, Hayek turned down the role as she felt it was \"too early\" to base a film on Selena, and that it would be emotional since Selena's death was still being covered on American television. Over 21,000 people auditioned for the title role, becoming the second largest audition since the search for Scarlett O'Hara in \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939). Puerto Rican-American actress Jennifer Lopez replaced Hayek, which initially drew criticism because of Lopez's Puerto Rican ancestry, but after seeing her performance, fans changed their views. Gregory Nava directed the film, which was released on March 21, 1997. \"Selena\" opened in 1,850 theaters worldwide and grossed $11,615,722, making it the second-highest-grossing film debut that week. With a production budget of $20 million, the film grossed $35 million in the U.S. The film was a commercial and critical success and is often cited by critics as Lopez's breakthrough role. Lopez rose into pop culture, for which the film's success was credited.\nIn 1999, a Broadway-bound musical titled \"Selena\" was scheduled to premiere in San Antonio in March 2000 to commemorate the fifth anniversary of her murder. Broadway producers Tom Quinn, Jerry Frankel, Peter Fitzgerald, and Michael Vega staged the musical, and Edward Gallardo wrote the show's book and lyrics. Fernando Rivas composed the show's songs. In 2000, \"Selena Forever\" was first produced; the show embarked on a 30-city U.S. tour with a budget of over US$2\u00a0million. After a national casting call, producers chose Veronica Vasquez to portray Selena; Vasquez alternated in the role with Rebecca Valdez. The musical previewed on March 21, and opened on March 23 at the San Antonio Municipal Auditorium.\nSelena's family and her former band, Los Dinos, held a tribute concert on April 7, 2005, a week after the 10th anniversary of her murder. The concert, titled \"Selena \u00a1VIVE!\", was broadcast live on Univision and achieved a 35.9 household rating. It was the highest-rated and most-viewed Spanish-language television special in the history of American television. The special was also the number-one program in any language among adults ages 18 to 34 in Los Angeles, Chicago, and San Francisco; it tied for first in New York, beating that night's episode of Fox's reality show \"American Idol\". Among Hispanic viewers, \"Selena \u00a1VIVE!\" outperformed Super Bowl XLV and the telenovela \"Soy tu due\u00f1a\" during the \"most-watched NFL season ever among Hispanics\".\nIn January 2015, it was announced that a two-day annual event called Fiesta de la Flor would be held in Corpus Christi for Selena by the Corpus Christi Visitors Bureau. Musical acts for the first annual event included Kumbia All Starz, Chris P\u00e9rez, Los Lobos, Jay Perez, Little Joe y la Familia, Los Palominos, Stefani Montiel of Las 3 Divas, Girl in a Coma's Nina Diaz, Las Fenix, and \"The Voice\" contestant Clarissa Serna. The event raised $13 million with an attendance of 52,000 people, 72% of whom lived outside of Corpus Christi. The event sparked interest from people in 35 states and five different countries including Mexico, Brazil, and Ecuador.\nOn August 30, 2016, a wax statue of Selena was unveiled at Madame Tussauds Hollywood. In October 2016, MAC Cosmetics released a limited edition Selena makeup line after \"On Air with Ryan Seacrest\" senior producer Patty Rodriguez started a petition for the company to do so and it garnering over 37,000 signatures. It became the best-selling celebrity line in cosmetic history. She was inducted into the Texas Women's Hall of Fame at Texas Woman's University in October 2016. An exhibit at the National Museum of American History in Washington, D.C. that ran in 2017, focused on Selena's influence in marketing. \"Due to her massive appeal to both general and Latino markets, advertisers began targeting specific demographics for the first time.\"\nGoogle honored Selena on October 17, 2017, with a musical doodle of her life. On December 11, 2018, it was announced that a biographical television series based on Selena's life titled ' would be released on Netflix in December 2020. Actress Christian Serratos plays the leading role as Selena, which was shown in a teaser trailer in late 2019. The two-part series is being done with the participation of the Quintanilla family. ' is an American biographical drama streaming television series created by Mois\u00e9s Zamora and starring Christian Serratos. The first part of the series was released on Netflix on December 4, 2020. The second and final part premiered on May 4, 2021.\nForever 21 announced the launch of a clothing line celebrating her legacy named \"Selena: The White Rose Collection\", was released in 2019. In a 10-part podcast miniseries, \"Anything for Selena\", broadcast in 2021 by WBUR-FM and Futuro Media, Latina journalist Maria Garcia \"goes on an intimate, revelatory quest to understand how Selena has become a potent symbol for tensions around race, class and body politics in the United States\". In the same year, Selena was posthumously presented with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award which her family received on the artist's behalf.\nSelena was posthumously awarded a 2023 National Medal of Arts, which was accepted by her sister in a ceremony held in October 2024.\nTours.\nSelena Live! Tour (1993-1994)\nAmor Prohibido Tour (1994-1995)\nMonuments.\nMirador de la Flor () is Selena's own life-size bronze statue monument in Corpus Christi, Texas, sculpted by H.\u00a0W. \"Buddy\" Tatum and unveiled in 1997. About 30,000 people from around the world visit this monument every year. While the monument has remained a popular tourist attraction, the construction of the statue met some resistance from the local community. Dusty Durrill, a local philanthropist, financed the construction of the monument with support from local community leaders.\nDiscography.\nSelena y Los Dinos albums\nSolo studio albums\nFilmography.\nBiographical programming.\nTrue crime documentaries\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources / Bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69796", "revid": "770058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69796", "title": "Statue of Zeus at Olympia", "text": "Ancient Greek sculpture by Phidias\nThe Statue of Zeus at Olympia was a giant seated figure, about tall, made by the Greek sculptor Phidias around 435 BC at the sanctuary of Olympia, Greece, and erected in the Temple of Zeus there. Zeus is the sky and thunder god in ancient Greek religion, who rules as king of the gods on Mount Olympus.\nThe statue was a chryselephantine sculpture of ivory plates and gold panels on a wooden framework. Zeus sat on a painted cedarwood throne ornamented with ebony, ivory, gold, and precious stones. It was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. \nThe statue was lost and destroyed before the end of the 6th century AD, with conflicting accounts of the date and circumstances. Details of its form are known only from ancient Greek descriptions and representations on coins and art.\nHistory.\nThe statue of Zeus was commissioned by the Eleans, custodians of the Olympic Games, in the latter half of the fifth century BC for their newly constructed Temple of Zeus. Seeking to outdo their Athenian rivals, the Eleans employed sculptor Phidias, who had previously made the massive statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon.\nThe statue occupied half the width of the aisle of the temple built to house it. The geographer Strabo noted early in the 1st century BC that the statue gave \"the impression that if Zeus arose and stood erect he would unroof the temple.\" The \"Zeus\" was a chryselephantine sculpture, made with ivory and gold panels on a wooden substructure. No copy in marble or bronze has survived, though there are recognizable but only approximate versions on coins of nearby Elis and on Roman coins and engraved gems.\nThe 2nd-century AD geographer and traveler Pausanias left a detailed description: the statue was crowned with a sculpted wreath of olive sprays and wore a gilded robe made from glass and carved with animals and lilies. Its right hand held a small chryselephantine statue of crowned Nike, goddess of victory; its left a scepter inlaid with many metals, supporting an eagle. The throne featured painted figures and wrought images and was decorated with gold, precious stones, ebony, and ivory. Zeus' golden sandals rested upon a footstool decorated with an Amazonomachy in relief. The passage underneath the throne was restricted by painted screens.\nPausanias also recounts that the statue was kept constantly coated with olive oil to counter the harmful effect on the ivory caused by the \"marshiness\" of the Altis grove. The floor in front of the image was paved with black tiles and surrounded by a raised rim of marble to contain the oil. This reservoir acted as a reflecting pool which doubled the apparent height of the statue.\nAccording to the Roman historian Livy, the Roman general Aemilius Paullus (the victor over Macedon) saw the statue and \"was moved to his soul, as if he had seen the god in person\", and according to Plutarch, Aemilius Paullus \"made that utterance which is now on every mouth, that Pheidias had moulded the Zeus of Homer\". The 1st-centuryAD Greek orator Dio Chrysostom declared that a single glimpse of the statue would make a man forget all his earthly troubles.\nAccording to Strabo, when Phidias was asked about the model he would use for his Zeus, he answered that he would portray Zeus according to these words of Homer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The son of Cronos spoke, and bowed his dark brow in assent, and the ambrosial locks waved from the king's immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake (English translation by A.T. Murray).\nThe sculptor also was reputed to have immortalised Pantarkes, the winner of the boys' wrestling event at the eighty-sixth Olympiad who was said to have been his \"beloved\" (), by carving (\"Pantarkes is beautiful\") into Zeus's little finger, and by placing a relief of the boy crowning himself at the feet of the statue.\nAccording to Pausanias, \"when the image was quite finished Pheidias prayed the god to show by a sign whether the work was to his liking. Immediately, runs the legend, a thunderbolt fell on that part of the floor where down to the present day the bronze jar stood to cover the place.\"\nLoss and destruction.\nAccording to Roman historian Suetonius, the Roman Emperor Caligula gave orders that \"such statues of the gods as were especially famous for their sanctity or their artistic merit, including that of Jupiter at Olympia, should be brought from Greece, in order to remove their heads and put his own in their place.\" The emperor was assassinated before this could happen, in 41 AD; his death was supposedly foretold by the statue, which \"suddenly uttered such a peal of laughter that the scaffolding collapsed and the workmen took to their heels.\"\nIn 391 AD, the Christian Roman emperor Theodosius I banned participation in pagan cults and closed the temples. The sanctuary at Olympia fell into disuse. The circumstances of the statue's eventual destruction are unknown. The 11th-century Byzantine historian Georgios Kedrenos records a tradition that it was carried off to Constantinople, where it was destroyed in the great fire of the Palace of Lausus, in 475 AD. \nAlternatively, the statue perished along with the temple, which was severely damaged by fire in 425 AD. But earlier loss or damage is implied by Lucian of Samosata in the later 2nd century, who referenced it in \"Timon\": \"they have laid hands on your person at Olympia, my lord High-Thunderer, and you had not the energy to wake the dogs or call in the neighbours; surely they might have come to the rescue and caught the fellows before they had finished packing up the loot.\"\nPhidias' workshop.\nThe approximate date of the statue (the third quarter of the 5th century BC) was confirmed in the rediscovery (1954\u20131958) of Phidias' workshop, approximately where Pausanias said the statue of Zeus was constructed. Archaeological finds included tools for working gold and ivory, ivory chippings, precious stones and terracotta moulds. Most of the latter were used to create glass plaques, and to form the statue's robe from sheets of glass, naturalistically draped and folded, then gilded. A cup inscribed \"\u03a6\u0395\u0399\u0394\u0399\u039f\u03a5 \u0395\u0399\u039c\u0399\" or \"I belong to Phidias\" was found at the site. However, the inscription is considered by some to be a forgery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69798", "revid": "1312028271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69798", "title": "Mausoleum at Halicarnassus", "text": "One of the seven wonders of the ancient world\nThe Mausoleum at Halicarnassus or Tomb of Mausolus (; ) was a tomb built between 353 and 351\u00a0BC in Halicarnassus (present Bodrum, Turkey) for Mausolus, an Anatolian from Caria and a satrap in the Achaemenid Persian Empire, and his sister-wife Artemisia II of Caria. The structure was designed by the Greek architects Satyros and Pythius of Priene. Its elevated tomb structure is derived from the tombs of neighbouring Lycia, a territory Mausolus had invaded and annexed c.\u2009360 BC, such as the Nereid Monument.\nThe Mausoleum was approximately in height, and the four sides were adorned with sculptural reliefs, each created by one of four Greek sculptors: Leochares, Bryaxis, Scopas of Paros, and Timotheus. The Mausoleum contained 400 freestanding sculptures. The mausoleum was considered to be such an aesthetic triumph that Antipater of Sidon identified it as one of his Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. It was destroyed by successive earthquakes from the 12th to the 15th century; it was the last surviving of the six destroyed wonders.\nThe word \"mausoleum\" has now come to be used generically for an above-ground tomb.\nConquest.\nIn the 4th century BC, Halicarnassus was the capital of the small regional kingdom of Caria, within the Achaemenid Empire on the western coast of Asia Minor.\nIn 377\u00a0BC, the nominal ruler of the region, Hecatomnus of Milas, died and left control of the kingdom to his son, Mausolus. Hecatomnus, a local dynast under the Persians, took control of several of the neighboring cities and districts. After Artemisia and Mausolus, he had several other daughters and sons: Ada (adoptive mother of Alexander the Great), Idrieus, and Pixodarus. Mausolus extended his territory as far as the southwest coast of Anatolia, invading, in particular, the territory of Lycia, remarkable for its numerous monumental tombs such as the Tombs at Xanthos, from which he took his inspiration for his mausoleum.\nArtemisia and Mausolus ruled from Halicarnassus over the surrounding territory for 24 years. Mausolus, although descended from local people, spoke Greek and admired the Greek way of life and government. He founded many cities of Greek design along the coast and encouraged Greek democratic traditions.\nMausolus decided to build a new capital, one as safe from capture as it was magnificent to be seen. He chose the city of Halicarnassus. Artemisia and Mausolus spent huge amounts of tax money to embellish the city. They commissioned statues, temples and buildings of gleaming marble. In 353\u00a0BC, Mausolus died, leaving Artemisia to rule alone. As the Persian satrap, and as the Hecatomnid dynast, Mausolus had planned for himself an elaborate tomb. When he died the project was continued by his siblings. The tomb became so famous that Mausolus's name is now the eponym for all stately tombs, in the word \"mausoleum\".\nArtemisia lived for only two years after the death of her husband. The urns with their ashes were placed in the yet unfinished tomb. As a form of sacrifice, the bodies of a large number of dead animals were placed on the stairs leading to the tomb, and then the stairs were filled with stones and rubble, sealing the access. According to the historian Pliny the Elder, the craftsmen decided to stay and finish the work after the death of their patron \"considering that it was at once a memorial of his own fame and of the sculptor's art\".\nConstruction.\nIt is likely that Mausolus started to plan the tomb before his death, as part of the building works in Halicarnassus, so that when he died, Artemisia continued the building project. Artemisia spared no expense in building the tomb. She sent messengers to Greece to find the most talented artists of the time. These included Scopas, the man who had supervised the rebuilding of the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus. The famous sculptors were (in the Vitruvius order): Leochares, Bryaxis, Scopas, and Timotheus, as well as hundreds of other craftsmen.\nThe tomb was erected on a hill overlooking the city. The whole structure sat in an enclosed courtyard. At the center of the courtyard was a stone platform on which the tomb sat. A stairway flanked by stone lions led to the top of the platform, which bore along its outer walls many statues of gods and goddesses. At each corner, stone warriors mounted on horseback guarded the tomb. At the center of the platform, the marble tomb rose as a square tapering block to one-third of the Mausoleum's height. This section was covered with bas-reliefs showing action scenes, including the battle of the centaurs with the lapiths and Greeks in combat during the Amazonomachy.\nOn the top of this section of the tomb thirty-six slim columns, ten per side, with each corner sharing one column between two sides; rose for another third of the height. Standing between each pair of columns was a statue. Behind the columns was a solid cella-like block that carried the weight of the tomb's massive roof. The roof, which comprised most of the final third of the height, was pyramidal. Perched on the top was a quadriga: four massive horses pulling a chariot in which rode images of Mausolus and Artemisia.\nHistory.\nModern historians have pointed out that two years would not be enough time to decorate and build such a complex and extravagant building. Therefore, it is believed that construction was begun by Mausolus before his death or continued by the next leaders. The Mausoleum of Halicarnassus resembled a temple and the only way to tell the difference was its slightly higher outer walls. The Mausoleum was in the Greek-dominated area of Halicarnassus, which in 353 was controlled by the Achaemenid Empire. According to the Roman architect Vitruvius, it was built by Satyros and Pytheus who wrote a treatise about it; this treatise is now lost. Pausanias adds that the Romans considered the Mausoleum one of the greatest wonders of the world and it was for that reason that they called all their magnificent tombs mausolea, after it.\nIt is unknown exactly when and how the Mausoleum came to ruin: Eustathius, writing in the 12th century on his commentary of the \"Iliad\", says \"it was and is a wonder\". Because of this, Fergusson concluded that the building was ruined, probably by an earthquake, between this period and 1402, when the Knights of St John of Jerusalem arrived and recorded that it was in ruins. However, Luttrell notes that at that time, the local Greeks and Turks had no name for \u2013 or legends to account for \u2013 the colossal ruins, suggesting a destruction at a much earlier period.\nMany of the stones from the ruins were used by the knights to fortify their castle at Bodrum; they also recovered bas-reliefs with which they decorated the new building. Much of the marble was burned into lime. In 1846, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe obtained permission to remove these reliefs from the castle.\nAt the original site, all that remained by the 19th century were the foundations and some broken sculptures. This site was originally indicated by Professor Donaldson and was discovered definitively by Charles Newton, after which an expedition was sent by the British government. The expedition lasted three\u00a0years and ended in the sending of the remaining marbles. At some point before or after this, grave robbers broke into and destroyed the underground burial chamber, but in 1972, there was still enough of it remaining to determine a layout of the chambers when they were excavated.\nThis monument was ranked the seventh wonder of the world by the ancients, not because of its size or strength but because of the beauty of its design and how it was decorated with sculpture or ornaments. The mausoleum was Halicarnassus's principal architectural monument, standing in a dominant position on rising ground above the harbor.\nJar of Xerxes I.\nA jar in calcite or alabaster, an \"alabastron\", with the quadrilingual signature of Achaemenid ruler Xerxes I (ruled 486\u2013465 BC) was discovered in the ruins of the Mausoleum, at the foot of the western staircase. The vase contains an inscription in Old Persian, Egyptian, Babylonian, and Elamite:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \ud800\udfd0 \ud800\udfd0 &lt;br&gt;\n(\" X\u0161ay\u0101r\u0161\u0101 : X\u0160 : vazraka\")&lt;br&gt;\n\"Xerxes : The Great King.\"\nSuch jars, of Egyptian origin, were very precious to the Achaemenids, and may therefore have been offered by Xerxes to Carian rulers, and then kept as a precious object. In particular, the precious jar may have been offered by Xerxes to the Carian dynast Artemisia I, who had acted with merit as his only female Admiral during the Second Persian invasion of Greece, and particularly at the Battle of Salamis. The jar testifies to the close contacts between Carian rulers and the Achaemenid Empire.\nDimensions and statues.\nMuch of the information that has been gathered about the Mausoleum and its structure has come from the Roman polymath Pliny the Elder. He wrote some basic facts about the architecture and some dimensions. The building was rectangular, not square, surrounded by a colonnade of thirty-six columns. There was a pyramidal superstructure receding in twenty-four steps to the summit. On top there were 4 horse chariots of marble. The building was accented with both sculptural friezes and free-standing figures. \"The free standing figures were arranged on 5 or 6 different levels.\"\nWe are now able to justify that Pliny's knowledge came from a work written by the architect. It is clear that Pliny did not grasp the design of the mausoleum fully which creates problems in recreating the structure. He does state many facts which help the reader recreate pieces of the puzzle. Other writings by Pausanias, Strabo, and Vitruvius also help us to gather more information about the Mausoleum.\nAccording to Pliny, the mausoleum was north and south, shorter on other fronts, perimeter, and 25\u00a0cubits () in height. It was surrounded by 36 columns. They called this part the pteron. Above the pteron there was a pyramid on top with 24 steps and equal in height to the lower part. The height of the building was .\nThe only other author that gives the dimensions of the Mausoleum is Hyginus, a grammarian in the time of Augustus. He describes the monument as built with shining stones, high and in circumference. He likely meant cubits which would match Pliny's dimensions exactly but this text is largely considered corrupt and is of little importance. We learn from Vitruvius that Satyros and Phytheus wrote a description of their work which Pliny likely read. Pliny likely wrote down these dimensions without thinking about the form of the building.\nMany statues were found slightly larger than life-size, either or in length; these were 20 lion statues. Another important find was the depth on the rock on which the building stood. This rock was excavated to deep over an area . The sculptures on the north were created by Scopas, the ones on the east Bryaxis, on the south Timotheus and on the west Leochares.\nThe Mausoleum was adorned with many great and beautiful sculptures. Some of these sculptures have been lost or only fragments have been found. Several of the statues' original placements are only known through historical accounts. The great figures of Mausolus and Artemisia stood in the chariot at the top of the pyramid. The detached equestrian groups are placed at the corners of the sub-podium. The semi-colossal female heads may have belonged to the acroteria of the two gables which may have represented the six Carian towns incorporated in Halicarnassus. Work still continues today as groups continue to excavate and research the mausoleum's art.\nLater history.\nThe Mausoleum overlooked the city of Halicarnassus for many years. It was untouched when the city fell to Alexander the Great in 334\u00a0BC and still undamaged after attacks by pirates in 62 and 58\u00a0BC. It stood above the city's ruins for sixteen centuries. Then a series of earthquakes shattered the columns and sent the bronze chariot crashing to the ground. By AD 1404, only the base of the Mausoleum was still recognizable.\nThe Knights of St John of Rhodes invaded the region and built Bodrum Castle (\"Castle of Saint Peter\"). When they decided to fortify it in 1494, they used the stones of the Mausoleum. This is also about when \"imaginative reconstructions\" of the Mausoleum began to appear. In 1522, rumours of a Turkish invasion caused the Crusaders to strengthen the castle at Halicarnassus (which was by then known as Bodrum) and much of the remaining portions of the tomb were broken up and used in the castle walls. Sections of polished marble from the tomb can still be seen there today. Suleiman the Magnificent conquered the base of the knights on the island of Rhodes, who then relocated first briefly to Sicily and later permanently to Malta, leaving the Castle and Bodrum to the Ottoman Empire.\nDuring the fortification work, a party of knights entered the base of the monument and discovered the room containing a great coffin. In many histories of the Mausoleum one can find the following story of what happened: the party, deciding it was too late to open it that day, returned the next morning to find the tomb, and any treasure it may have contained, plundered. The bodies of Mausolus and Artemisia were missing too. The small museum building next to the site of the Mausoleum tells the story. Research done by archeologists in the 1960s shows that long before the knights came, grave robbers had dug a tunnel under the grave chamber, stealing its contents. Also, the museum states that it is most likely that Mausolus and Artemisia were cremated, so only an urn with their ashes was placed in the grave chamber. This explains why no bodies were found.\nBefore grinding and burning much of the remaining sculpture of the Mausoleum into lime for plaster, the Knights removed several of the best works and mounted them in the Bodrum castle. There they stayed for three centuries.\nDiscovery and excavation.\nIn the 19th century, a British consul obtained several of the statues from Bodrum Castle; these now reside in the British Museum. In 1852, the British Museum sent the archaeologist Charles Thomas Newton to search for more remains of the Mausoleum. He had a difficult job. He did not know the exact location of the tomb, and the cost of buying up all the small parcels of land in the area to look for it would have been astronomical. Instead, Newton studied the accounts of ancient writers like Pliny to obtain the approximate size and location of the memorial, then bought a plot of land in the most likely location. Digging down, Newton explored the surrounding area through tunnels he dug under the surrounding plots. He was able to locate some walls, a staircase, and finally three of the corners of the foundation. With this knowledge, Newton was able to determine which plots of land he needed to buy.\nNewton then excavated the site and found sections of the reliefs that decorated the wall of the building and portions of the stepped roof. Also discovered was a broken stone chariot wheel some in diameter, which came from the sculpture on the Mausoleum's roof. Finally, he found the statues of Mausolus and Artemisia that had stood at the pinnacle of the building. In October 1857, Newton carried blocks of marble from this site by and landed them in Malta. These blocks were used for the construction of a new dock in Malta for the Royal Navy. Today this dock is known as Dock No. 1 in Cospicua, but the building blocks are hidden from view, submerged in Dockyard Creek in the Grand Harbour.\nFrom 1966 to 1977, the Mausoleum was thoroughly researched by Kristian Jeppesen of Aarhus University, Denmark. He has produced a six-volume monograph, \"The Maussolleion at Halikarnassos\".\nThe beauty of the Mausoleum was not only in the structure itself, but in the decorations and statues that adorned the outside at different levels on the podium and the roof: statues of people, lions, horses, and other animals in varying scales. The four Greek sculptors who carved the statues: Bryaxis, Leochares, Scopas and Timotheus were each responsible for one side. Because the statues were of people and animals, the Mausoleum holds a special place in history, as it was not dedicated to the gods of Ancient Greece.\nToday, the massive castle of the Knights Hospitaller (Knights of St. John) still stands in Bodrum, and the polished stone and marble blocks of the Mausoleum can be spotted built into the walls of the structure. At the site of the Mausoleum, only the foundation remains, and a small museum. Some of the surviving sculptures at the British Museum include fragments of statues and many slabs of the frieze showing the battle between the Greeks and the Amazons. There the images of Mausolus and his queen watch over the few broken remains of the beautiful tomb she built for him.\nInfluence on modern architecture.\nModern buildings whose designs were based upon or influenced by interpretations of the design of the Mausoleum of Mausolus include Fourth and Vine Tower in Cincinnati; the Civil Courts Building in St. Louis; the National Newark Building in Newark, New Jersey; Grant's Tomb and 26 Broadway in New York City; Los Angeles City Hall; the Shrine of Remembrance in Melbourne; the spire of St. George's Church, Bloomsbury in London; the Indiana War Memorial (and in turn Salesforce Tower) in Indianapolis; the House of the Temple in Washington D.C.; the National Diet in Tokyo; the Soldiers and Sailors Memorial Hall in Pittsburgh; and the in Peoria, IL.\nGallery of 2nd-century replica site.\nIn Milas (also the site of the tomb of Hecatomnus, who was the father of Mausolus) is also the site of the G\u00fcm\u00fc\u015fkesen, a small-scale Roman-era (2nd century BC) copy of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69799", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69799", "title": "Secretary of the Navy", "text": ""}
{"id": "69801", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69801", "title": "Croats", "text": "South Slavic ethnic group\nThe Croats (; , ) are a South Slavic ethnic group native to Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other neighboring countries in Central and Southeastern Europe who share a common Croatian ancestry, culture, history and language. They form a sizeable minority in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nDue to political, social and economic reasons, many Croats migrated to North and South America as well as New Zealand and later Australia, establishing a diaspora in the aftermath of World War II, with grassroots assistance from earlier communities and the Catholic Church. In Croatia (the nation state), 3.9\u00a0million people identify themselves as Croats, and constitute about 90.4% of the population. Another 553,000 live in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups, predominantly living in Western Herzegovina, Central Bosnia and Bosnian Posavina. The minority in Serbia number about 70,000, mostly in Vojvodina. The ethnic Tarara people, indigenous to Te Tai Tokerau in New Zealand, are of mixed Croatian and M\u0101ori (predominantly Ng\u0101puhi) descent. Tarara Day is celebrated every 15 March to commemorate their \"highly regarded place in present-day M\u0101oridom\".\nCroats are mostly Catholics. The Croatian language is official in Croatia, the European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatian is a recognized minority language within Croatian autochthonous communities and minorities in Montenegro, Austria (Burgenland), Italy (Molise), Romania (Cara\u0219ova, Lupac) and Serbia (Vojvodina).\nEtymology.\nThe foreign ethnonym variation \"Croats\" of the native name \"Hrvati\" derives from Medieval Latin , itself a derivation of North-West Slavic , by liquid metathesis from Common Slavic period \"*Xorvat\", from proposed Proto-Slavic \"*X\u044arv\u00e1t\u044a\" which possibly comes from the 3rd-century Scytho-Sarmatian form attested in the Tanais Tablets as (', alternate forms comprise and '). The origin of the ethnonym is uncertain, but most probably is from Proto-Ossetian / Alanian *\"xurv\u00e6t-\" or *\"xurv\u0101t-\", in the meaning of \"one who guards\" (\"guardian, protector\"). The earliest preserved mentions of the ethnonym in stone inscriptions and written documents in the territory of Croatia are dated to the 8th-9th century (e.g. \"Dux Croatorum\" on Branimir inscription and \"Dux Chroatorum\" on Charter of Duke Trpimir), while in native Croatian language the earliest writing is from the Ba\u0161ka tablet (c.\u20091100), which in Glagolitic script reads: (\"Zvonimir, king of Croats\").\nHistory.\nArrival of the Slavs.\nEarly Slavs, especially Sclaveni and Antae, including the White Croats, invaded and settled Southeastern Europe in the 6th and 7th century.\nEarly medieval archaeology.\nArchaeological evidence shows population continuity in coastal Dalmatia and Istria. In contrast, much of the Dinaric hinterland and appears to have been depopulated, as virtually all hilltop settlements, from Noricum to Dardania, were abandoned and few appear destroyed in the early 7th century. Although the dating of the earliest Slavic settlements was disputed, recent archaeological data established that the migration and settlement of the Slavs/Croats have been in late 6th and early 7th century.\nCroat ethnogenesis.\nMuch uncertainty revolves around the exact circumstances of their appearance given the scarcity of literary sources during the 7th and 8th century Middle Ages. Traditionally, scholarship has placed the arrival of the White Croats from Great/White Croatia in Eastern Europe in the early 7th century, primarily on the basis of the later Byzantine document \"De Administrando Imperio\". As such, the arrival of the Croats was seen as part of main wave or a second wave of Slavic migrations, which took over Dalmatia from Avar hegemony. However, as early as the 1970s, scholars questioned the reliability of Porphyrogenitus' work, written as it was in the 10th century. Rather than being an accurate historical account, \"De Administrando Imperio\" more accurately reflects the political situation during the 10th century. It mainly served as Byzantine propaganda praising Emperor Heraclius for repopulating the Balkans (previously devastated by the Avars, Sclaveni and Antes) with Croats, who were seen by the Byzantines as tributary peoples living on what had always been 'Roman land'.\nScholars have hypothesized the name Croat (\"Hrvat\") may be Iranian, thus suggesting that the (Proto-)Croatian ethnogenesis is related to the Sarmatians, the major basis for this connection being inscriptions from the Tanais dated to the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD, mentioning the name . Similar arguments have been made for an alleged Gothic-Croat link. Whilst there is possible evidence of population continuity between Gothic and Croatian times in parts of Dalmatia, the idea of a Gothic origin of Croats was more rooted in the 20th century Usta\u0161e political aspirations than historical reality.\nOther polities in Dalmatia and Pannonia.\nOther, distinct polities and ethno-political groups existed around the Croat duchy. These included the Guduscans (based in Liburnia), Pagania (between the Cetina and Neretva River), Zachlumia (between Neretva and Dubrovnik), Bosnia, and Serbia in other eastern parts of ex-Roman province of \"Dalmatia\". Also prominent in the territory of future Croatia was the polity of Prince Ljudevit who ruled the territories between the Drava and Sava rivers (\"Pannonia Inferior\"), centred from his fort at Sisak. Although Duke Liutevid and his people are commonly seen as a \"Pannonian Croats\", he is, due to the lack of \"evidence that they had a sense of Croat identity\" referred to as \"dux Pannoniae Inferioris\", or simply a Slav, by contemporary sources. A closer reading of the \"DAI\" suggests that Constantine VII's consideration about the ethnic origin and identity of the population of Lower Pannonia, Pagania, Zachlumia and other principalities is based on tenth century political rule and does not indicate ethnicity, and although both Croats and Serbs could have been a small military elite which managed to organize other already settled and more numerous Slavs, it is possible that Narentines, Zachlumians and others also arrived as Croats or with Croatian tribal alliance.\nThe Croats became the dominant local power in northern Dalmatia, absorbing Liburnia and expanding their name by conquest and prestige. In the south, while having periods of independence, the Naretines merged with Croats later under control of Croatian Kings. With such expansion, Croatia became the dominant power and absorbed other polities between Frankish, Bulgarian and Byzantine empire. Although the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja has been dismissed as an unreliable record, the mentioned \"Red Croatia\" suggests that Croatian clans and families might have settled as far south as Duklja/Zeta. According to Martin Dimnik writing for \"The New Cambridge Medieval History\", \"at the beginning of the eleventh century the Croats lived in two more or less clearly defined regions\" of the \"Croatian lands\" which \"were now divided into three districts\" including Slavonia/Pannonian Croatia (between rivers Sava and Drava) on one side and Croatia/Dalmatian littoral (between Gulf of Kvarner and rivers Vrbas and Neretva) and Bosnia (around river Bosna) on other side, and that \"Croats, along with Serbs, also lived in Bosnia which at times came under the control of Croatian kings\".\nEarly medieval age.\nThe lands which constitute modern Croatia fell under three major geographic-politic zones during the Middle Ages, which were influenced by powerful neighbor Empires \u2013 notably the Byzantines, the Avars and later Magyars, Franks and Bulgars. Each vied for control of the Northwest Balkan regions. Two independent Slavic dukedoms emerged sometime during the 9th century: the Duchy of Croatia and Principality of Lower Pannonia.\nPannonian Principality (\"Savia\").\nHaving been under Avar control, lower Pannonia became a march of the Carolingian Empire around 800. Aided by Vojnomir in 796, the first named Slavic Duke of Pannonia, the Franks wrested control of the region from the Avars before totally destroying the Avar realm in 803. After the death of Charlemagne in 814, Frankish influence decreased on the region, allowing Prince Ljudevit Posavski to raise a rebellion in 819. The Frankish margraves sent armies in 820, 821 and 822, but each time they failed to crush the rebels. Aided by Borna the Guduscan, the Franks eventually defeated Ljudevit, who withdrew his forces to the Serbs and conquered them, according to the Frankish Annals.\nFor much of the subsequent period, Savia was probably directly ruled by the Carinthian Duke Arnulf, the future East Frankish King and Emperor. However, Frankish control was far from smooth. The Royal Frankish Annals mention several Bulgar raids, driving up the Sava and Drava rivers, as a result of a border dispute with the Franks, from 827. By a peace treaty in 845, the Franks were confirmed as rulers over Slavonia, whilst Srijem remained under Bulgarian clientage. Later, the expanding power of Great Moravia also threatened Frankish control of the region. In an effort to halt their influence, the Franks sought alliance with the Magyars, and elevated the local Slavic leader Braslav in 892, as a more independent Duke over lower Pannonia.\nIn 896, his rule stretched from Vienna and Budapest to the southern Croat duchies, and included almost the whole of ex-Roman Pannonian provinces. He probably died c. 900 fighting against his former allies, the Magyars. The subsequent history of Savia again becomes murky, and historians are not sure who controlled Savia during much of the 10th century. However, it is likely that the ruler Tomislav, the first crowned King, was able to exert much control over Savia and adjacent areas during his reign. It is at this time that sources first refer to a \"Pannonian Croatia\", appearing in the 10th century Byzantine work \"De Administrando Imperio\".\nDalmatian Croats.\nThe Dalmatian Croats were recorded to have been subject to the Kingdom of Italy under Lothair I, since 828. The Croatian Prince Mislav (835\u2013845) built up a formidable navy, and in 839 signed a peace treaty with Pietro Tradonico, doge of Venice. The Venetians soon proceeded to battle with the independent Slavic pirates of the Pagania region, but failed to defeat them. The Bulgarian king Boris I (called by the Byzantine Empire Archont of Bulgaria after he made Christianity the official religion of Bulgaria) also waged a lengthy war against the Dalmatian Croats, trying to expand his state to the Adriatic.\nThe Croatian Prince Trpimir I (845\u2013864) succeeded Mislav. In 854, there was a great battle between Trpimir's forces and the Bulgars. Neither side emerged victorious, and the outcome was the exchange of gifts and the establishment of peace. Trpimir I managed to consolidate power over Dalmatia and much of the inland regions towards Pannonia, while instituting counties as a way of controlling his subordinates (an idea he picked up from the Franks). The first known written mention of the Croats, dates from 4 March 852, in statute by Trpimir. Trpimir is remembered as the initiator of the Trpimirovi\u0107 dynasty, that ruled in Croatia, with interruptions, from 845 until 1091. After his death, an uprising was raised by a powerful nobleman from Knin \u2013 Domagoj, and his son Zdeslav was exiled with his brothers, Petar and Muncimir to Constantinople.\nFacing a number of naval threats by Saracens and Byzantine Empire, the Croatian Prince Domagoj (864\u2013876) built up the Croatian navy again and helped the coalition of emperor Louis II and the Byzantine to conquer Bari in 871. During Domagoj's reign piracy was a common practice, and he forced the Venetians to start paying tribute for sailing near the eastern Adriatic coast. After Domagoj's death, Venetian chronicles named him \"The worst duke of Slavs\", while Pope John VIII referred to Domagoj in letters as \"Famous duke\". Domagoj's son, of unknown name, ruled shortly between 876 and 878 with his brothers. They continued the rebellion, attacked the western Istrian towns in 876, but were subsequently defeated by the Venetian navy. Their ground forces defeated the Pannonian duke Kocelj (861\u2013874) who was suzerain to the Franks, and thereby shed the Frankish vassal status. Wars of Domagoj and his son liberated Dalmatian Croats from supreme Franks rule. Zdeslav deposed him in 878 with the help of the Byzantines. He acknowledged the supreme rule of Byzantine Emperor Basil I. In 879, the Pope asked for help from prince Zdeslav for an armed escort for his delegates across southern Dalmatia and Zahumlje, but on early May 879, Zdeslav was killed near Knin in an uprising led by Branimir, a relative of Domagoj, instigated by the Pope, fearing Byzantine power.\nBranimir's (879\u2013892) own actions were approved from the Holy See to bring the Croats further away from the influence of Byzantium and closer to Rome. Duke Branimir wrote to Pope John VIII affirming this split from Byzantine and commitment to the Roman Papacy. During the solemn divine service in St. Peter's church in Rome in 879, John VIII] gave his blessing to the duke and the Croatian people, about which he informed Branimir in his letters, in which Branimir was recognized as the Duke of the Croats (\"Dux Chroatorum\"). During his reign, Croatia retained its sovereignty from both the Holy Roman Empire and Byzantine rule, and became a fully recognized state. After Branimir's death, Prince Muncimir (892\u2013910), Zdeslav's brother, took control of Dalmatia and ruled it independently of both Rome and Byzantium as \"divino munere Croatorum dux\" (with God's help, duke of Croats). In Dalmatia, duke Tomislav (910\u2013928) succeeded Muncimir. Tomislav successfully repelled Magyar mounted invasions of the Arpads, expelled them over the Sava River, and united (western) Pannonian and Dalmatian Croats into one state.\nKingdom of Croatia (925\u20131102).\nTomislav (910\u2013928) became king of Croatia by 925. The chief piece of evidence that Tomislav was crowned king comes in the form of a letter dated 925, surviving only in 16th-century copies, from Pope John X calling Tomislav \"rex Chroatorum\". According to \"De Administrando Imperio\", Tomislav's army and navy could have consisted approximately 100,000 infantry units, 60,000 cavaliers, and 80 larger (\"sagina\") and 100 smaller warships (\"condura\"), but generally isn't taken as credible. According to the palaeographic analysis of the original manuscript of \"De Administrando Imperio\", an estimation of the number of inhabitants in medieval Croatia between 440 and 880 thousand people, and military numbers of Franks and Byzantines \u2013 the Croatian military force was most probably composed of 20,000\u2013100,000 infantrymen, and 3,000\u201324,000 horsemen organized in 60 allagions. The Croatian Kingdom as an ally of Byzantine Empire was in conflict with the rising Bulgarian Empire ruled by Tsar Simeon I. In 923, due to a deal of Pope John X and a Patriarch of Constantinopole, the sovereignty of Byzantine coastal cities in Dalmatia came under Tomislav's Governancy. The war escalated on 27 May 927, in the battle of the Bosnian Highlands, after Serbs were conquered and some fled to the Croatian Kingdom. There Croats under leadership of their king Tomislav completely defeated the Bulgarian army led by military commander Alogobotur, and stopped Simeon's extension westwards. The central town in the Duvno field was named Tomislavgrad (\"Tomislav's town\") in his honour in the 20th century.\nTomislav was succeeded by Trpimir II (928\u2013935), and Kre\u0161imir I (935\u2013945), this period, on the whole, however, is obscure. Miroslav (945\u2013949) was killed by his ban Pribina during an internal power struggle, losing part of islands and coastal cities. Kre\u0161imir II (949\u2013969) kept particularly good relations with the Dalmatian cities, while his son Stjepan Dr\u017eislav (969\u2013997) established better relations with the Byzantine Empire and received a formal authority over Dalmatian cities. His three sons, Svetoslav (997\u20131000), Kre\u0161imir III (1000\u20131030) and Gojslav (1000\u20131020), opened a violent contest for the throne, weakening the state and further losing control. Kre\u0161imir III and his brother Gojslav co-ruled from 1000 until 1020, and attempted to restore control over lost Dalmatian cities now under Venetian control. Kre\u0161imir was succeeded by his son Stjepan I (1030\u20131058), who continued his ambitions of spreading rule over the coastal cities, and during whose rule was established the diocese of Knin between 1040 and 1050 which bishop had the nominal title of \"Croatian bishop\" (Latin: \"episcopus Chroatensis\").\nKre\u0161imir IV (1058\u20131074) managed to get the Byzantine Empire to confirm him as the supreme ruler of the Dalmatian cities. Croatia under Kre\u0161imir IV was composed of twelve counties and was slightly larger than in Tomislav's time, and included the closest southern Dalmatian duchy of Pagania. From the outset, he continued the policies of his father, but was immediately commanded by Pope Nicholas II first in 1059 and then in 1060 to further reform the Croatian church in accordance with the Roman rite. This was especially significant to the papacy in the aftermath of the Great Schism of 1054.\nHe was succeeded by Dmitar Zvonimir, who was of the Svetoslavi\u0107 branch of the House of Trpimirovi\u0107, and a Ban of Slavonia (1064\u20131075). He was crowned on 8 October 1076 at Solin in the Basilica of Saint Peter and Moses (known today as \"Hollow Church\") by a representative of Pope Gregory VII.\nHe was in conflict with dukes of Istria, while historical records \"Annales Carinthi\u00e6\" and \"Chronica Hungarorum\" note he invaded Carinthia to aid Hungary in war during 1079/83, but this is disputed. Unlike Petar Kre\u0161imir IV, he was also an ally of the Normans, with whom he joined in wars against Byzantium. He married in 1063 Helen of Hungary, the daughter of King Bela I of the Hungarian \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty, and the sister of the future King Ladislaus I. As King Zvonimir died in 1089 in unknown circumstances, with no direct heir to succeed him, Stjepan II (r. 1089\u20131091) last of the main Trpimirovi\u0107 line came to the throne but reigned for two years.\nAfter his death civil war and unrest broke out shortly afterward as northern nobles decided Ladislaus I for the Croatian King. In 1093, southern nobles elected a new ruler, King Petar Sna\u010di\u0107 (r. 1093\u20131097), who managed to unify the Kingdom around his capital of Knin. His army resisted repelling Hungarian assaults, and restored Croatian rule up to the river Sava. He reassembled his forces in Croatia and advanced on Gvozd Mountain, where he met the main Hungarian army led by King Coloman I of Hungary. In 1097, in the Battle of Gvozd Mountain, the last native king Peter was killed and the Croats were decisively defeated (because of this, the mountain was this time renamed to Petrova Gora, \"Peter's Mountain\", but identified with the wrong mountain). In 1102, Coloman returned to the Kingdom of Croatia in force, and negotiated with the Croatian feudal lords resulting in joining of Hungarian and Croatian crowns (with the crown of Dalmatia held separate from that of Croatia).\nAccording to \"The New Cambridge Medieval History\", \"at the beginning of the eleventh century the Croats lived in two more or less clearly defined regions\" of the \"Croatian lands\" which \"were now divided into three districts\" including Slavonia/Pannonian Croatia (between rivers Sava and Drava) on one side and Croatia/Dalmatian littoral (between Gulf of Kvarner and rivers Vrbas and Neretva) and Bosnia (around river Bosna) on other side.\nPersonal union with Hungary (1102\u20131918).\nIn the 11th and 12th centuries \"the Croats were never unified under a strong central government. They lived in different areas - Pannonian Croatia, Dalmatian Croatia, Bosnia - which were at times ruled by indigenous kings but more frequently controlled by agents of Byzantium, Venice and Hungary. Even during periods of relatively strong centralized government, local lords frequently enjoyed an almost autonomous status\".\nIn the union with Hungary, institutions of separate Croatian statehood were maintained through the Sabor (an assembly of Croatian nobles) and the ban (viceroy). In addition, the Croatian nobles retained their lands and titles. Coloman retained the institution of the Sabor and relieved the Croatians of taxes on their land. Coloman's successors continued to crown themselves as Kings of Croatia separately in Biograd na Moru. The Hungarian king also introduced a variant of the feudal system. Large fiefs were granted to individuals who would defend them against outside incursions thereby creating a system for the defence of the entire state. However, by enabling the nobility to seize more economic and military power, the kingdom itself lost influence to the powerful noble families. In Croatia the \u0160ubi\u0107 were one of the oldest Croatian noble families and would become particularly influential and important, ruling the area between Zrmanja and the Krka rivers. The local noble family from Krk island (who later took the surname Frankopan) is often considered the second most important medieval family, as ruled over northern Adriatic and is responsible for the adoption of one of oldest European statutes, Law codex of Vinodol (1288). Both families gave many native bans of Croatia. Other powerful families were Nelipi\u0107 from Dalmatian Zagora (14th\u201315th centuries); Ka\u010di\u0107 who ruled over Pagania and were famous for piracy and wars against Venice (12th\u201313th centuries); Kurjakovi\u0107 family, a branch of the old Croatian noble Gusi\u0107 family from Krbava (14th\u201316th centuries); Baboni\u0107 who ruled from western Kupa to eastern Vrbas and Bosna rivers, and were bans of Slavonia (13th\u201314th centuries); Ilo\u010dki family who ruled over Slavonian stronghold-cities, and in the 15th century rose to power. During this period, the Knights Templar and the Knights Hospitaller also acquired considerable property and assets in Croatia.\nIn the second half of the 13th century, during the \u00c1rp\u00e1d and Anjou dynasty struggle, the \u0160ubi\u0107 family became hugely powerful under Paul I \u0160ubi\u0107 of Bribir, who was the longest Croatian Ban (1274\u20131312), conquering Bosnia and declaring himself \"Lord of all of Bosnia\" (1299\u20131312). He appointed his brother Mladen I \u0160ubi\u0107 as Ban of Bosnia (1299\u20131304), and helped Charles I from House of Anjou to be the King of Hungary. After his death in 1312, his son Mladen II \u0160ubi\u0107 was the Ban of Bosnia (1304\u20131322) and Ban of Croatia (1312\u20131322). The kings from House of Anjou intended to strengthen the kingdom by uniting their power and control, but to do so they had to diminish the power of the higher nobility. Charles I had already tried to crash the aristocratic privileges, intention finished by his son Louis the Great (1342\u20131382), relying on the lower nobility and towns. Both kings ruled without the Parliament, and inner nobility struggles only helped them in their intentions. This led to Mladen's defeat at the battle of Bliska in 1322 by a coalition of several Croatian noblemen and Dalmatian coastal towns with support of the King himself, in exchange of \u0160ubi\u0107's castle of Ostrovica for Zrin Castle in Central Croatia (thus this branch was named Zrinski) in 1347. Eventually, the Baboni\u0107 and Nelipi\u0107 families also succumbed to the king's offensive against nobility, but with the increasing process of power centralization, Louis managed to force Venice by the Treaty of Zadar in 1358 to give up their possessions in Dalmatia. When King Louis died without successor, the question of succession remained open. The kingdom once again entered the time of internal unrest. Besides King Louis's daughter Mary, Charles III of Naples was the closest king male relative with claims to the throne. In February 1386, two months after his coronation, he was assassinated by order of the queen Elizabeth of Bosnia. His supporters, bans John of Palisna, John Horvat and Stjepan Lackovi\u0107 planned a rebellion, and managed to capture and imprison Elizabeth and Mary. By orders of John of Palisna, Elizabeth was strangled. In retaliation, Magyars crowned Mary's husband Sigismund of Luxembourg.\nKing Sigismund's army was catastrophically defeated at the Battle of Nicopolis (1396) as the Ottoman invasion was getting closer to the borders of the Hungarian-Croatian kingdom. Without news about the king after the battle, the then ruling Croatian ban Stjepan Lackovi\u0107 and nobles invited Charles III's son Ladislaus of Naples to be the new king. This resulted in the Bloody Sabor of Kri\u017eevci in 1397, loss of interest in the crown by Ladislaus and selling of Dalmatia to Venice in 1403, and spreading of Croatian names to the north, with those of Slavonia to the east. The dynastic struggle didn't end, and with the Ottoman invasion on Bosnia the first short raids began in Croatian territory, defended only by local nobles.\nAs the Turkish incursion into Europe started, Croatia once again became a border area between two major forces in the Balkans. Croatian military troops fought in many battles under command of Italian Franciscan priest fra John Capistrano, the Hungarian Generalissimo John Hunyadi, and Hungarian King Matthias Corvinus, like in the Hunyadi's long campaign (1443\u20131444), battle of Varna (1444), second battle of Kosovo (1448), and contributed to the Christian victories over the Ottomans in the siege of Belgrade (1456) and Siege of Jajce (1463). At the time they suffered a major defeat in the battle of Krbava field (Lika, Croatia) in 1493 and gradually lost increasing amounts of territory to the Ottoman Empire. Pope Leo X called Croatia the \"forefront of Christianity (Antemurale Christianitatis)\" in 1519, given that several Croatian soldiers made significant contributions to the struggle against the Ottoman Turks. Among them there were ban Petar Berislavi\u0107 who won a victory at Dubica on the Una river in 1513, the captain of Senj and prince of Klis Petar Kru\u017ei\u0107, who defended the Klis Fortress for almost 25 years, captain Nikola Juri\u0161i\u0107 who deterred by a magnitude larger Turkish force on their way to Vienna in 1532, or ban Nikola IV Zrinski who helped save Pest from occupation in 1542 and fought in the Battle of Szigetvar in 1566. During the Ottoman conquest tens of thousands of Croats were taken in Turkey, where they became slaves.\nThe Battle of Moh\u00e1cs (1526) and the death of King Louis II ended the Hungarian-Croatian union. In 1526, the Hungarian parliament elected two separate kings J\u00e1nos Szapolyai and Ferdinand I Habsburg, but the choice of the Croatian sabor at Cetin prevailed on the side of Ferdinand I, as they elected him as the new king of Croatia on 1 January 1527, uniting both lands under Habsburg rule. In return they were promised the historic rights, freedoms, laws and defence of Croatian Kingdom.\nHowever, the Hungarian-Croatian Kingdom was not enough well prepared and organized and the Ottoman Empire expanded further in the 16th century to include most of Slavonia, western Bosnia and Lika. For the sake of stopping the Ottoman conquering and possible assault on the capital of Vienna, the large areas of Croatia and Slavonia (even Hungary and Romania) bordering the Ottoman Empire were organized as a Military Frontier which was ruled directly from Vienna military headquarters. The invasion caused migration of Croats, and the area which became deserted was subsequently settled by Serbs, Vlachs, Germans and others. The negative effects of feudalism escalated in 1573 when the peasants in northern Croatia and Slovenia rebelled against their feudal lords due to various injustices. After the fall of Biha\u0107 fort in 1592, only small areas of Croatia remained unrecovered. The remaining were referred to as the \"reliquiae reliquiarum of the once great Croatian kingdom\".\nCroats stopped the Ottoman advance in Croatia at the battle of Sisak in 1593, 100 years after the defeat at Krbava field, and the short Long Turkish War ended with the Peace of Zsitvatorok in 1606, after which Croatian classes tried unsuccessfully to have their territory on the Military Frontier restored to rule by the Croatian Ban, managing only to restore a small area of lost territory but failed to regain large parts of Croatian Kingdom (present-day western Bosnia and Herzegovina), as the present-day border between the two countries is a remnant of this outcome.\nCroatian national revival (1593\u20131918).\nIn the first half of the 17th century, Croats fought in the Thirty Years' War on the side of Holy Roman Empire, mostly as light cavalry under command of imperial generalissimo Albrecht von Wallenstein. Croatian Ban, Juraj V Zrinski, also fought in the war, but died in a military camp near Bratislava, Slovakia, as he was poisoned by von Wallenstein after a verbal duel. His son, future ban and captain-general of Croatia, Nikola Zrinski, participated during the closing stages of the war.\nIn 1664, the Austrian imperial army was victorious against the Turks, but Emperor Leopold failed to capitalize on the success when he signed the Peace of Vasv\u00e1r in which Croatia and Hungary were prevented from regaining territory lost to the Ottoman Empire. This caused unrest among the Croatian and Hungarian nobility which plotted against the emperor. Nikola Zrinski participated in launching the conspiracy which later came to be known as the Magnate conspiracy, but he soon died, and the rebellion was continued by his brother, Croatian ban Petar Zrinski, Fran Krsto Frankopan and Ferenc Wessel\u00e9nyi. Petar Zrinski, along the conspirators, went on a wide secret diplomatic negotiations with a number of nations, including Louis XIV of France, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden, the Republic of Venice and even the Ottoman Empire, to free Croatia from the Habsburg sovereignty.\nImperial spies uncovered the conspiracy and on 30 April 1671 executed four esteemed Croatian and Hungarian noblemen involved in it, including Zrinski and Frankopan in Wiener Neustadt. The large estates of two most powerful Croatian noble houses were confiscated and their families relocated, soon after extinguished. Between 1670 and the revolution of 1848, there would be only 2 bans of Croatian nationality. The period from 1670 to the Croatian cultural revival in the 19th century was Croatia's political Dark Age. Meanwhile, with the victories over Turks, Habsburgs all the more insistent they spent centralization and germanization, new regained lands in liberated Slavonia started giving to foreign families as feudal goods, at the expense of domestic element. Because of this the Croatian Sabor was losing its significance, and the nobility less attended it, yet went only to the one in Hungary.\nIn the 18th century, Croatia was one of the crown lands that supported Emperor Charles's Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and supported Empress Maria Theresa in the War of the Austrian Succession of 1741\u201348. Subsequently, the empress made significant contributions to Croatian matters, by making several changes in the feudal and tax system, administrative control of the Military Frontier, in 1745 administratively united Slavonia with Croatia and in 1767 organized Croatian royal council with the ban on head, however, she ignored and eventually disbanded it in 1779, and Croatia was relegated to just one seat in the governing council of Hungary, held by the ban of Croatia. To fight the Austrian centralization and absolutism, Croats passed their rights to the united government in Hungary, thus to together resist the intentions from Vienna. But the connection with Hungary soon adversely affected the position of Croats, because Magyars in the spring of their nationalism tried to Magyarize Croats, and make Croatia a part of a united Hungary. Because of this pretensions, the constant struggles between Croats and Magyars emerged, and lasted until 1918. Croats were fighting in unfavorable conditions, against both Vienna and Budapest, while divided on Banska Hrvatska, Dalmatia and Military Frontier. In such a time, with the fall of the Venetian Republic in 1797, its possessions in eastern Adriatic mostly came under the authority of France which passed its rights to Austria the same year. Eight years later they were restored to France as the Illyrian Provinces, but won back to the Austrian crown 1815. Though now part of the same empire, Dalmatia and Istria were part of Cisleithania while Croatia and Slavonia were in Hungarian part of the Monarchy.\nIn the 19th century Croatian romantic nationalism emerged to counteract the non-violent but apparent Germanization and Magyarization. The Croatian national revival began in the 1830s with the Illyrian movement. The movement attracted a number of influential figures and produced some important advances in the Croatian language and culture. The champion of the Illyrian movement was Ljudevit Gaj who also reformed and standardized Croatian. The official language in Croatia had been Latin until 1847, when it became Croatian. The movement relied on a South Slavic and Panslavistic conception, and its national, political and social ideas were advanced at the time.\nBy the 1840s, the movement had moved from cultural goals to resisting Hungarian political demands. By the royal order of 11 January 1843, originating from the chancellor Metternich, the use of the Illyrian name and insignia in public was forbidden. This deterred the movement's progress but it couldn't stop the changes in the society that had already started. On 25 March 1848, was conducted a political petition \"Zahtijevanja naroda\", which program included thirty national, social and liberal principles, like Croatian national independence, annexation of Dalmatia and Military Frontier, independence from Hungary as far as finance, language, education, freedom of speech and writing, religion, nullification of serfdom etc. In the revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire, the Croatian Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 cooperated with the Austrians in quenching the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 by leading a military campaign into Hungary, successful until the Battle of P\u00e1kozd.\nCroatia was later subject to Hungarian hegemony under ban Levin Rauch when the Empire was transformed into a dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary in 1867. Nevertheless, Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 had succeeded in the abolition of serfdom in Croatia, which eventually brought about massive changes in society: the power of the major landowners was reduced and arable land became increasingly subdivided, to the extent of risking famine. Many Croatians began emigrating to the New World countries in this period, a trend that would continue over the next century, creating a large Croatian diaspora.\nFrom 1804 to 1918, as many as 395 Croats received the rank of general or admiral, of which 379 in the army of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, 8 in the Russian Empire, two each in the French and Hungarian armies, and one each in the armies of the Ottoman Empire, the Republic of Venice, Portuguese Empire and Serbia. By rank, 173 were brigadier generals, 142 major generals, 55 lieutenant generals, two generals, three staff generals, 17 rear admirals, one viceadmiral and two admirals.\nModern history (1918\u2013present).\nAfter the First World War and dissolution of Austria-Hungary, most Croats were united within the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, created by unification of the short-lived State of SHS with the Kingdom of Serbia. Croats became one of the constituent nations of the new kingdom. The state was transformed into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929 and the Croats were united in the new nation with their neighbors \u2013 the South Slavs-Yugoslavs.\nIn 1939, the Croats received a high degree of autonomy when the Banovina of Croatia was created, which united almost all ethnic Croatian territories within the Kingdom. In the Second World War, the Axis forces created the Independent State of Croatia led by the Usta\u0161e movement which sought to create an ethnically pure Croatian state on the territory corresponding to present-day countries of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Post-WWII Yugoslavia became a federation consisting of 6 republics, and Croats became one of two \"constituent peoples\" of two \u2013 Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croats in the Serbian autonomous province of Vojvodina are one of six main ethnic groups composing this region.\nFollowing the democratization of society, accompanied with ethnic tensions that emerged ten years after the death of Josip Broz Tito, the Republic of Croatia declared independence, which was followed by war. In the first years of the war, over 200,000 Croats were displaced from their homes as a result of the military actions. In the peak of the fighting, around 550,000 ethnic Croats were displaced altogether during the Yugoslav wars.\nPost-war government's policy of easing the immigration of ethnic Croats from abroad encouraged a number of Croatian descendants to return to Croatia. The influx was increased by the arrival of Croatian refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina. After the war's end in 1995, most Croatian refugees returned to their previous homes, while some (mostly Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Janjevci from Kosovo) moved into the formerly-held Serbian housing.\nGenetics.\nGenetically, on the Y-chromosome DNA line, a majority (65%) of male Croats from Croatia belong to haplogroups I2 (39%-40%) and R1a (22%-24%), while a minority (35%) belongs to haplogroups E (10%), R1b (6%-7%), J (6%-7%), I1 (5-8%), G (2%), and others in &lt;2% traces. The distribution, variance and frequency of the I2 and R1a subclades (&gt;65%) among Croats are related to the early medieval Slavic migrations to the Balkans, most probably from the territory of present-day Ukraine and Southeastern Poland. Genetically, on the maternal mitochondrial DNA line, a majority (&gt;65%) of Croats from Croatia (mainland and coast) belong to three of the eleven major European mtDNA haplogroups \u2013 H (45%), U (17.8\u201320.8%), J (3\u201311%), while a large minority (&gt;35%) belongs to many other smaller haplogroups. Based on autosomal IBD survey the speakers of Croatian share a very high number of common ancestors dated to the migration period approximately 1,500 years ago with Poland and Romania-Bulgaria clusters among others in Eastern Europe. It was caused by the early medieval Slavic migrations, a small population which expanded into vast regions of \"low population density beginning in the sixth century\". Other IBD and admixture studies also found even patterns of admixture events among South, East and West Slavs at the time and area of Slavic expansion, and that the shared ancestral Balto-Slavic component among South Slavs is between 55 and 70%. A 2023 archaeogenetic study showed that the Croats roughly have 66.5% Central-Eastern European early medieval Slavic-ancestry, 31.2% local Roman and 2.4% West Anatolian ancestry.\nLanguage.\nCroats primarily speak Croatian, a South Slavic lect of the Western South Slavic subgroup. Standard Croatian is considered a normative variety of Serbo-Croatian, and is mutually intelligible with the other three national standards, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin (see Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian) which are all based on the Shtokavian dialect.\nBesides Shtokavian, Croats from the Adriatic coastline speak the Chakavian dialect, while Croats from the continental northwestern part of Croatia speak the Kajkavian dialect. Vernacular texts in the Chakavian dialect first appeared in the 13th century, and Shtokavian texts appeared a century later. Standardization began in the period sometimes called \"Baroque Slavism\" in the first half of the 17th century, while some authors date it back to the end of the 15th century. The modern Neo-Shtokavian standard that appeared in the mid 18th century was the first unified standard Croatian. Croatian is written in Gaj's Latin alphabet.\nThe beginning of written Croatian can be traced to the 9th century, when Old Church Slavonic was adopted as the language of the Divine liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil. This language was gradually adapted to non-liturgical purposes and became known as the Croatian version of Old Slavonic. The two variants of the language, liturgical and non-liturgical, continued to be a part of the Glagolitic service as late as the middle of the 19th century. The earliest known Croatian Church Slavonic Glagolitic are \"Vienna Folios\" from the late 11th/early 12th century. Until the end of the 11th century Croatian medieval texts were written in three scripts: Latin, Glagolitic, and Cyrillic, and also in three languages: Croatian, Latin, and Old Slavonic. The latter developed into what is referred to as the Croatian variant of Church Slavonic between the 12th and 16th centuries.\nThe most important early monument of Croatian literacy is the Ba\u0161ka tablet from the late 11th century. It is a large stone tablet found in the small Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor on the Croatian island of Krk which contains text written mostly in Chakavian, today a dialect of Croatian, and in Shtokavian script. It mentions Zvonimir, the king of Croatia at the time. However, the luxurious and ornate representative texts of Croatian Church Slavonic belong to the later era, when they coexisted with the Croatian vernacular literature. The most notable are the \"Missal of Duke Novak\" from the Lika region in northwestern Croatia (1368), \"Evangel from Reims\" (1395, named after the town of its final destination), Hrvoje's Missal from Bosnia and Split in Dalmatia (1404). and the first printed book in Croatian, the Glagolitic Missale Romanum Glagolitice (1483).\nDuring the 13th century Croatian vernacular texts began to appear, the most important among them being the \"Istrian Land Survey\" of 1275 and the \"Vinodol Codex\" of 1288, both written in the Chakavian dialect. The Shtokavian dialect literature, based almost exclusively on Chakavian original texts of religious provenance (missals, breviaries, prayer books) appeared almost a century later. The most important purely Shtokavian dialect vernacular text is the Vatican Croatian Prayer Book (ca. 1400).\nReligion.\nCroats are predominantly practicing Catholics of the Latin Church. Before their Christianization, they practiced Slavic paganism or Roman paganism. The earliest record of contact between the Pope of Rome and the Croats dates from a mid-7th century entry in the \"Liber Pontificalis\". Pope John IV (John the Dalmatian, 640\u2013642) sent an abbot named Martin to Dalmatia and Istria to pay ransom for some prisoners and the relics of old Christian martyrs. This abbot is recorded as having travelled through Dalmatia with the help of the Croatian leaders, and he established the foundation for future relations between the Pope and the Croats.\nThe beginnings of the Christianization are also disputed in the historical texts: the Byzantine texts talk of Duke Porin who started this at the incentive of Emperor Heraclius (610\u2013641), then of Duke Porga who mainly Christianized his people after the influence of missionaries from Rome. However, it can be reliably said that the Christianization of Croats began in the 7th century, initially probably encompassing only the elite and related people, but completed mainly by the 9th century. The earliest known Croatian autographs from the 8th century are found in the Latin Gospel of Cividale.\nCroats were never obliged to use Latin\u2014rather, they held masses in their own language and used the Glagolitic alphabet. In 1886 it arrived to the Principality of Montenegro, followed by the Kingdom of Serbia in 1914, and the Republic of Czechoslovakia in 1920, but only for feast days of the main patron saints. The 1935 concordat with the Kingdom of Yugoslavia anticipated the introduction of the Church Slavonic for all Croatian regions and throughout the entire state.\nSmaller groups of Croats adhere to other religions, like Eastern Orthodoxy (especially in \u017dumberak), Protestantism and Islam. According to an official population census of Croatia by ethnicity and religion, roughly 16,600 ethnic Croats adhered to Orthodoxy, roughly 8,000 were Protestants, roughly 10,500 described themselves as \"other\" Christians, and roughly 9,600 were followers of Islam.\nCulture.\nTradition.\nThe area settled by Croats has a large diversity of historical and cultural influences, as well as the diversity of terrain and geography. The coastland areas of Dalmatia and Istria were subject to Roman Empire, Venetian and Italian rule; central regions like Lika and western Herzegovina were a scene of battlefield against the Ottoman Empire, and have strong epic traditions. In the northern plains, Austro-Hungarian rule has left its marks. The most distinctive features of Croatian folklore include klapa ensembles of Dalmatia, tamburitza orchestras of Slavonia. Folk arts are performed at special events and festivals, perhaps the most distinctive being Alka of Sinj, a traditional knights' competition celebrating the victory against Ottoman Turks. The epic tradition is also preserved in epic songs sung with gusle. Various types of kolo circular dance are also encountered throughout Croatia.\nUNESCO | Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in Croatia.\nList of Cultural Intangible Heritage e.g.:\nArts.\nArchitecture in Croatia reflects the influences of bordering nations. Austrian and Hungarian influence is visible in public spaces and buildings in the north and in the central regions, architecture found along the coasts of Dalmatia and Istria exhibits Venetian influence. Large squares named after culture heroes, well-groomed parks, and pedestrian-only zones, are features of these orderly towns and cities, especially where large scale Baroque urban planning took place, for instance in Vara\u017edin and Karlovac. Subsequent influence of the Art Nouveau was reflected in contemporary architecture. Along the coast, the architecture is Mediterranean with a strong Venetian and Renaissance influence in major urban areas exemplified in works of Giorgio da Sebenico and Niccol\u00f2 Fiorentino such as the Cathedral of St. James in \u0160ibenik. The oldest preserved examples of Croatian architecture are the 9th-century churches, with the largest and the most representative among them being the Church of St. Donatus.\nBesides the architecture encompassing the oldest artworks in Croatia, there is a long history of artists in Croatia reaching to the Middle Ages. In that period the stone portal of the Trogir Cathedral was made by Radovan, representing the most important monument of Romanesque sculpture in Croatia. The Renaissance had the greatest impact on the Adriatic Sea coast since the remainder of Croatia was embroiled in the Hundred Years' Croatian\u2013Ottoman War. With the waning of the Ottoman Empire, art flourished during the Baroque and Rococo. The 19th and the 20th centuries brought about the affirmation of numerous Croatian artisans, helped by several patrons of the arts such as bishop Josip Juraj Strossmayer. Croatian artists of the period achieving worldwide renown were Vlaho Bukovac and Ivan Me\u0161trovi\u0107.\nThe Ba\u0161ka tablet, a stone inscribed with the Glagolitic alphabet found on the Krk island which is dated to 1100, is considered to be the oldest surviving prose in Croatian. The beginning of more vigorous development of Croatian literature is marked by the Renaissance and Marko Maruli\u0107. Besides Maruli\u0107, Renaissance playwright Marin Dr\u017ei\u0107, Baroque poet Ivan Gunduli\u0107, Croatian national revival poet Ivan Ma\u017eurani\u0107, novelist, playwright and poet August \u0160enoa, poet and writer Antun Gustav Mato\u0161, poet Antun Branko \u0160imi\u0107, expressionist and realist writer Miroslav Krle\u017ea, poet Tin Ujevi\u0107 and novelist and short story writer Ivo Andri\u0107 are often cited as the greatest figures in Croatian literature.\nSymbols.\nThe flag of Croatia consists of a red-white-blue tricolour with the Coat of Arms of Croatia in the middle. The red-white-blue tricolor flag was chosen as those were the colours of Pan-Slavism, popular in the 19th century.\nThe Coat of arms of Croatia consists of the traditional red and white squares representing Croatian checkerboard on a coat-of-arms. It has been used to symbolise Croatia for centuries, with the earliest confirmed and dated to 1495 in Innsbruck, Austria during the time of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, and Chiesa dei Domenicani in Bolzano, Italy also from the late 15th century. The first and only time was officially used in the Kingdom of Croatia in the 16th century was during 1527 election in Cetin when Croatian noblemen elected Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor as the new King of Croatia. Before that, another CoA was official coat of arms of Croatia, dated at earliest since 1347 with three leopard or lion heads (later associated only with Dalmatia), while another with silver crescent moon and six pointed star (so-called Leliwa) is common misconception to be oldest CoA of Croatia. Region of Slavonia has oldest confirmed CoA, showcasing a marten between rivers Sava and Drava above which is six pointed star and officially granted in 1496 by Vladislaus II of Hungary. It was used as an official seal by the Slavonian Sabor since 1497, and since 1558 until early 19th century by the united Croatian and Slavonian Sabor. The first coat of arms uniting all three CoA of the Kingdoms of Dalmatia, Croatia and Slavonia dates to 1610.\nThe current design added the five crowning shields, which represent the historical regions from which Croatia originated. Unlike in many countries, Croatian design more commonly uses symbolism from the coat of arms, rather than from the Croatian flag. This is partly due to the geometric design of the shield which makes it appropriate for use in many graphic contexts (e.g. the insignia of Croatia Airlines or the design of the shirt for the Croatia national football team), and partly because neighbouring countries like Slovenia and Serbia use the same Pan-Slavic colours on their flags as Croatia. The Croatian interlace ( or ) is also a commonly used symbol which originally comes from monasteries built between the 9th and 12th centuries. The interlace can be seen in various emblems and is also featured in modern Croatian military ranks and Croatian police ranks insignia.\nCommunities.\nIn Croatia (the nation state), 3.9\u00a0million people identify themselves as Croats and constitute about 90.4% of the population. Another 553,000 live in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups, predominantly living in Western Herzegovina, Central Bosnia and Bosnian Posavina. The minority in Serbia number about 70,000, mostly in Vojvodina, where also vast majority of the \u0160okci consider themselves Croats, as well as many Bunjevci (the latter, as well as other nationalities, settled the vast, abandoned area after the Ottoman retreat; this Croat subgroup originates from the south, mostly from the region of Ba\u010dka). Smaller Croat autochthonous minorities exist in Slovenia (mainly in Slovene Littoral, Prekmurje and in the Metlika area in Lower Carniola regions \u2013 35,000 Croats), Montenegro (mostly in the Bay of Kotor \u2013 6,800 Croats), and a regional community in Kosovo called Janjevci who nationally identify as Croats. In the 1991 census, Croats consisted 19.8% of the overall population of Yugoslavia; there were around 4.6\u00a0million Croats in the entire country.\nThe subgroups of Croats are commonly based on regional affiliation, like Dalmatians, Slavonians, Zagorci, Istrians etc., while inside and outside Croatia there exist several Croatian sub-ethnic groups: \u0160okci (Croatia, Serbia, Hungary), Bunjevci (Croatia, Serbia, Hungary), Burgenland Croats (Austria), Molise Croats (Italy), Bokelji (Montenegro), Raci (Hungary), Krashovani (Romania), and Janjevci (Kosovo).\nDiaspora.\nThere are currently 4\u20134.5\u00a0million Croats in diaspora worldwide. The Croat diaspora was the consequence of either mostly economic or political (coercion or expulsions) reasons:\nThe count for diaspora is approximate because of incomplete statistical records and naturalization. Overseas, the United States contains the largest Croatian emigrant group (414,714 according to the 2010 census), mostly in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois and California, with a sizable community in Alaska, followed by Australia (133,268 according to the 2016 census, with concentrations in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth) and Canada (133,965 according to the 2016 census, mainly in Southern Ontario, British Columbia and Alberta).\nVarious estimations put the total number of Americans and Canadians with at least some Croatian ancestry at 2 million, many of whom do not identify as such in the countries' censuses.\nCroats have also emigrated in several waves to South America: chiefly Chile, Argentina, and Brazil; estimates of their number vary wildly, from 150,000 up to 500,000. Both the presidents of Chile (Gabriel Boric) and Argentina (Javier Milei) are of Croatian descent.\nThere are also smaller groups of Croatian descendants in Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, South Africa, Mexico, and South Korea. The most important organizations of the Croatian diaspora are the Croatian Fraternal Union, Croatian Heritage Foundation and the Croatian World Congress.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "69802", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69802", "title": "Community of Madrid", "text": "Autonomous community of Spain\nThe Community of Madrid (; ) is one of the seventeen autonomous communities and 50 provinces of Spain. It is located at the heart of the Iberian Peninsula and Central Plateau (); its capital and largest municipality is Madrid. The Community of Madrid is bounded to the south and east by Castilla\u2013La Mancha and to the north and west by Castile and Le\u00f3n. It was formally created in 1983, in order to address the particular status of the city of Madrid as the capital of the Spanish State and in urban hierarchy. Its boundaries are coextensive with those of the province of Madrid, which was until then conventionally included in the historical region of New Castile (\"Castilla la Nueva\").\nThe Community of Madrid is the third most populous in Spain with 7,058,041 (2024) inhabitants, roughly a seventh of the national total, mostly concentrated in the metropolitan area of Madrid. It is also the most densely populated autonomous community. Madrid has both the largest nominal GDP, slightly ahead of that of Catalonia, and the highest GDP per capita in the country. Madrid's economy is highly tertiarised, having a leading role in Spain's logistics and transportation.\nThe Community of Madrid is almost entirely comprised in the Tagus Basin, from the Central System (\"Sistema Central\") reliefs in the north and northwest to the Tagus River bed in the southern border. The climate is generally temperate, ranging from mediterranean to semi-arid, except in the Central System highlands. It contains four World Heritage Sites: the Monastery and Royal Site of El Escorial, the university and historic centre of Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, the cultural landscape of Aranjuez and the Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro park in Madrid City. In addition, the Montejo Beech Forest is part of the transnational Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe world heritage site.\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDespite the existence of a large urban area of nearly 7 million people, the Community of Madrid still retains some remarkably unspoiled and diverse habitats and landscapes. Madrid is home to mountain peaks rising above 2,000 m, holm oak dehesas and low-lying plains. The slopes of the Guadarrama mountain range are cloaked in dense forests of Scots pine and Pyrenean oak. The Lozoya Valley supports a large black (monk) vulture colony, and one of the last bastions of the Spanish imperial eagle in the world is found in the Park Regional del Suroeste in dehesa hills between the Gredos and Guadarrama ranges. The recent possible detection of the existence of Iberian lynx in the area between the Cofio and Alberche rivers is testament to the biodiversity of the area. Taking advantage of the orography, there are several reservoirs and local dams, with the Santillana reservoir being the largest.\nThe province of Madrid is shaped approximately like an equilateral triangle, with the city of Madrid located near its center. First, by the western side, it borders the \"Sistema Central\" (the Guadarrama mountain range), the southern border features a protrusion following the Tagus River in order to include the royal site of Aranjuez in the region; the eastern edge of the triangle comes from the rupture of the fluvial river basins. This autonomous community is located in the basin of the Tagus River. The Tagus passes through the southern border of the Autonomy in its path west toward the Atlantic Ocean, draining the waters of the Jarama River (collecting in turn the waters of the Lozoya, the Guadalix, the Manzanares, the Henares and the Taju\u00f1a), the Alberche and the Guadarrama in the Community.\nThis autonomous community also includes the exclave of Dehesa de la Cepeda (part of the municipality of Santa Mar\u00eda de la Alameda), a mostly open-area geographically located between the provinces of \u00c1vila and Segovia in the autonomous community of Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nThe Province of Madrid occupies a surface area of approximately (1.6% of all Spanish territory). More specifically, the exact position of Madrid is 3\u00b0 40' of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and 40\u00b0 23' north of the equator.\nMost of the province lies between 600 and 1,000\u00a0m above sea level. However, there the altitude ranges from 2,428\u00a0metres of Pe\u00f1alara to 430 metres at the Alberche river when it leaves Villa del Prado into the province of Toledo. Other considerable heights, as well as being famous, are the Bola del Mundo (\"Ball of the World\") in Navacerrada, at a height of 2,258\u00a0m, the Siete Picos (\"Seven Peaks\") in Cercedilla, at 2,138\u00a0m, and the Pe\u00f1a Cebollera (2,129\u00a0m) at the northernmost end of the province, a tripoint between the Madrid region and the provinces of Segovia and Guadalajara.\nFauna.\nAmong the protected species of birds nesting in the region stand out the Spanish imperial eagle, the golden eagle, the Bonelli's eagle, the cinereous vulture, the peregrine falcon and the black stork.\nExotic invasive species of birds and mammals in the region include the red-eared slider, the monk parakeet, the common snapping turtle, the rose-ringed parakeet, the American mink and the raccoon. Species described as \"out of place\" and with an increasing population include the black-headed gull, the lesser black-backed gull, the great cormorant and Eurasian collared dove, while the emblematic iberian ibex is presented as a case of a species \"gone out of control\" in La Pedriza following its re-introduction in the region in 1990 after roughly a century disappeared from the Madrilenian mountains.\nThe mountain amphibians living at a high altitude include the fire salamander, the marbled newt, the alpine newt, the iberian frog, the European tree frog or the common midwife toad. At a middle elevation in the mountain reaches close to water streams there are species such as the Bosca's newt, the southern marbled newt, the mediterranean tree frog or the iberian midwife toad. The common parsley frog and the \"Alytes obstetricans pertinax\" dwell in the limestone lowlands near the Tagus in the south-east of the region. Among the all-around amphibians adaptable to different heights stand out the natterjack toad, the common toad and the iberian green frog. Other species with a wide distribution range (although in this case restricted by altitude) are the gallipato, the iberian spadefoot toad, the iberian painted frog, and the Spanish painted frog.\nRegarding the reptiles, species such as the Cyren's rock lizard, the European wall lizard, the iberian emerald lizard, the deaf adder, and snakes such as the smooth snake or the \"Vipera latastei\" dwell in the mountain heights. At the lower reaches of the mountains the European pond turtle and the Brediaga's skink can be found, while the western false smooth snake is restricted to areas in the south of the region. Among the species of all-around reptiles, adaptable to different biomes stand out the Spanish pond turtle, the salamanquesa, the western three-toed skink, the spiny-footed lizard, the ocellated lizard, the Algerian sand racer, Spanish psammodromus, the ubiquitous iberian wall lizard, the iberian worm lizard, the \"Coronella girondica\", the Montpellier snake; grass snake and the viperine snake.\nThe fish species are affected by the high number of reservoirs in the region. Among the threatened species in the rivers stand out the European eel, the iberian barbel, the \"Squalius alburnoides\", the \"Cobitis calderoni\" and, potentially, the \"Chondrostoma lemmingii\". Conversely the set of invasive species of fish includes pike, black bullhead catfish, pumpkinseed, zander, common bleak, and black-bass.\nVegetation.\nIn the vicinity of the mountain peaks, oromediterranean vegetation such as \"Agrostula truncatula\", \"Armeria caespitosa\", \"Festuca indigesta\", \"Jasione crispa\", \"Jurinea humilis\", \"Minuartia recurva\", \"Pilosella vahlii\", \"Plantago holosteum\" and the \"Thymus praecox\" is common. Below the summit line, shrubby species such as the Cytisus oromediterraneus and the common juniper as well as the Scots pine take over. There are also masses of black pine and the pyrenean oak situated above the domain of the holm oak.\nEurosiberian flora is not common in the region, and species such as the moor birch and the silver birch are restricted to very specific humid valley areas with special climate conditions.\nThe climax vegetation in the \"campi\u00f1a\" is the holly oak. Some of the species that take over when the holly oak forest degrades are the \"sticky shrub\", the Retama sphaerocarpa, the French lavender, the \"Thymus mastichina\" and the \"Thymus zygis\".\nThe lower reaches of Guadarrama Mountain Range are populated by species such as the \"Juniperus thurifera\", the maritime pine, the Portuguese oak, the stone pine; only in the somewhat more humid westernmost end of the region, near the Alto del Mirlo, there are forests of chestnut trees.\n54,4% of the surface of the region is soil categorised as forest areas of which the 51.4% (27.7% of the total of the region) it is already covered by forests, so there is room for tree re-population. The first modest efforts towards tree re-population were taken in the Lozoya Valley in the late 19th century intending to achieve a purer water from the river, that provided the capital with water for consumption. However, the bulk of the process took place after the Spanish Civil War, with a largely successful repopulation with several species of conifers.\nClimate.\nThe Madrid region features a climate marked by dry summers, while average temperature varies with altitude, marking different climate subtypes. Most of the region has a climate intermediate between a hot-summer mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csa\") and a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BSk\"), with a dry summer and a moderate to low amount of rain primarily distributed throughout the rest of the year (in the case of the capital, roughly an equinoctial pattern of precipitation maximums), as well as summer temperature averages over 22\u00a0\u00b0C (with daily maximums consistently surpassing 30\u00a0\u00b0C in July and August). The capital has a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") and in the west it borders the Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\"). The areas at a higher altitude close to the Sierra de Guadarrama feature a colder climate, also generally with more precipitation (particularly in the winter), with climate subtypes ranging from the \"Csa\" to the warm-summer mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb\") and the dry summer continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dsb\") on the peaks of the mountain range, with temperature averages below freezing point during January and February in the later case. It is the European capital with the lowest average annual precipitation.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe territory of the Community of Madrid has been populated since the Lower Paleolithic, mainly in the valleys between the rivers of Manzanares, Jarama, and Henares, where several archaeological findings have been made.\nSome notable discoveries of the region the bell-shaped vase of Ciempozuelos (between 1970 and 1470 BCE), from the Bell beaker culture.\nRomans and Visigoths.\nDuring the Roman Empire, the region was part of the Citerior Tarraconese province, except for the south-west portion of it, which belonged to Lusitania. It was crossed by two important Roman roads, the \"via xxiv-xxix\" (joining Astorga to Laminium and \"via xxv\" (which joined Emerita Augusta and Caesaraugusta), and contained some important conurbations. The city of Complutum (today Alcal\u00e1 de Henares) became an important metropolis, whereas Titulcia and Miaccum were important crossroad communities.\nDuring the period of the Visigothic Kingdom, the region lost its importance. The population was scattered amongst several small towns. Complutum was designated the bishopric seat in the 5th century by orders of Asturio, archbishop of Toledo, but this event was not enough to bring back the lost splendor of the city.\nAl-Andalus.\nThe centre of the peninsula (the Middle Mark of Al-Andalus or \"a\u1e6f-\u1e6ea\u1e21r al-Awsa\u1e6d\") became a strategic military post in the 11th century. The Muslim rulers created a defensive system of fortresses and towers all across the region with which they tried to stop the advance of the Christian kingdoms of the north.\nThe fortress of \"Mayrit\" (Madrid) was built somewhere between 860 and 880 AD, as a walled precinct where a military and religious community lived, and which constituted the foundation of the city. It soon became the most strategic fortress in defense of the city of Toledo above the fortresses of Talamanca and Qal'-at'-Abd-Al-Salam (Alcal\u00e1 de Henares). In 1083 (or 1085) Alfonso VI took the city of Madrid in the context of his wider campaign to conquer Toledo. Alcal\u00e1 de Henares fell in 1118 in a new period of Castilian annexation.\nChristian repopulation.\nThe recently conquered lands by the Christian kingdoms were desegregated into several constituencies, as a consequence of a long process of repopulation that took place over the course of four centuries. The feudal and ecclesiastical lords came into constant conflict with the different councils that had been granted the authority to repopulate.\nIn the 13th century, Madrid was the only town of the current-day region that preserved its own juridical personality, at first with the Old \"Fuero\" (Charter) and later with the Royal \"Fuero\", granted by Alfonso X of Castile in 1262 and ratified by Alfonso XI in 1339. On the other hand, the town of Buitrago del Lozoya, Alcal\u00e1 de Henares and Talamanca de Jarama, which were rapidly repopulated until that century, were under the dominion of the feudal or ecclesiastical lords. Specifically, Alcal\u00e1 de Henares was under the hands of the archbishopric of Toledo and remained so until the 19th century.\nAround the town of Madrid, an administrative territory was created known as \"Tierra de Madrid\" (Land of Madrid), the origin of the province that included the areas of the current municipalities of San Sebasti\u00e1n de los Reyes, Cobe\u00f1a, Las Rozas de Madrid, Rivas-Vaciamadrid, Torrej\u00f3n de Velasco, Alcorc\u00f3n, San Fernando de Henares, and Gri\u00f1\u00f3n.\nMadrid was in constant strife with the powerful council of Segovia, whose jurisdiction extended south of the Guadarrama Mountains; they both fought for the control of the Real de Manzanares, a large comarca (shire) that was finally given to the House of Mendoza.\nCastilian monarchs showed a predilection for the center of the peninsula, with abundant forests and game. \"El Pardo\" was a region visited frequently by kings since the time of Henry III, in the 14th century. The Catholic Monarchs started the construction of the Royal Palace of Aranjuez. In the 16th century, San Lorenzo de El Escorial was built and became another royal site of the province.\nEarly modern period.\nThe town of Madrid, which was one of the eighteen cities with the right to vote in the Cortes of Castile, was seat of the Courts themselves on several occasions and was the residence of several monarchs, amongst them the emperor Charles I who reformed and expanded the \"Alc\u00e1zar\" or Castle of the city. Alcal\u00e1 de Henares grew in importance as cultural center since the foundation by the Cardinal Cisneros of its university.\nIn 1561, King Philip II made Madrid the capital of the Hispanic Monarchy. The surrounding territories became economically subordinated to the town itself, even beyond the present day limits of the Community of Madrid. But it was not a unified region as several lords and churches had jurisdiction over their own autonomous territories.\nDuring the 18th century, the fragmented administration of the region was not solved despite several attempts. During the reign of Philip V, the \"intendencia\" was created as a political and administrative division. Nonetheless, the \"intendencia\" of Madrid did not fully solve the problem, and the region was still fragmented into several small dominions even though some processes were centralized. This territorial dispersion had a negative effect on its economic growth; while the town of Madrid received economic resources from the entire country as the capital, the surrounding territories\u2014in hands of noblemen or the clergy\u2014became impoverished.\nDuring the eighteenth century, the town of Madrid was transformed through several grandiose buildings and monuments as well as through the creation of many social, economic, and cultural institutions, some of which are still operating. Madrid grew to a population of 156,672 inhabitants by the end of the eighteenth century.\nProvince.\nThe current territory of the region was roughly defined with the 1833 reorganization of Spain into provinces promoted by Javier de Burgos, in which the province of Madrid was classified in the region of New Castile (lacking the later any sort of administrative institution at the regional level nonetheless). The government institution at the provincial level was the deputation (\"diputaci\u00f3n\"). In addition to the former body, another provincial political authority was the civil governor discretionarily designated by the central government. Two modest changes to the 1833 provincial boundaries that concerned Madrid took place shortly before 1845, when Aranjuez (187\u00a0km2) left the province of Toledo and joined that of Madrid, and in 1850, when the small municipality of Valdeavero (19\u00a0km2), until then part of the province of Guadalajara, joined the province of Madrid.\nOne of the limits so far for the growth of the capital, water supply, experienced a substantial change in 1858 following the arrival to the city of Madrid of water from the Lozoya River with the inauguration of the bringing of the Canal de Isabel II.\nIn decadence since the middle 18th century, the city of Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, experienced a relative demographic and economic upturn in the second half of the 19th century, based on its newly acquired condition of military outpost, to which an embryonic industrial nucleus was also added.\nDuring the reign of Ferdinand VII the south of the province was made up of small agricultural settlements of limited population. Among them, Getafe stood out in population, and became the seat of a judicial district in 1834, with the main economic activity of the former jurisdiction still being non-irrigated agriculture. Rail transport arrived in 1851, with the Strawberry train, the railway connecting Madrid and Aranjuez.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939), the territory was divided by the battlefront, with the southwest of the province controlled by the rebel faction, and the capital as well as a great part of the rest of the province by the side loyal to the Republic. The city of Madrid was target of many bombings during the conflict, becoming the first big city in Europe to suffer such systematic and massive air attacks.\nSince the 1970s, a process of a population transfer from the capital to the rest of municipalities of the metropolitan area emerged. This process accelerated when the autonomous community was founded, and it took place along a strong decrease of birth rates.\nAutonomous community.\nThe creation of the contemporary Community of Madrid was preceded by an intense political debate. Autonomous communities were to be created by one or more provinces with a distinct regional identity. Since the 1833 provincial organization, Madrid was part of the historical region of New Castile along with the provinces of Guadalajara, Toledo, Cuenca and Ciudad Real. Thus, it was first planned that the province of Madrid would be part of the future community of Castile\u2013La Mancha (which was roughly similar to New Castile, with the addition of Albacete) but with some special considerations as the home of the national capital. The other provinces that were to become part of Castile\u2013La Mancha expressed fears of inequality if Madrid were associated with them. These provinces opposed such a special status, and after considering other options for Madrid\u2014like its inclusion in the community of Castile and Le\u00f3n or its constitution as an entity similar to a federal district\u2014it was decided that the province of Madrid would become a single-province autonomous community by virtue of Article 144 of the Constitution, which empowers the Cortes to create an autonomous community in the \"nation's interest\" even if it did not satisfy the requirement of having a distinct historical identity. Thus, in 1983, the Community of Madrid was constituted and a Statute of Autonomy was approved taking over all the competences of the old \"Diputaci\u00f3n Provincial\" and the new ones the Statute considered.\nDuring the first 25 years of the \"autonomic\" period, this autonomous community accounted for the biggest economic growth in Spain, becoming a platform for the internationalisation of the Spanish economy, featuring a marked preponderance of the service sector. By the turn of the 21st century, a strong boost to the construction sub-sector also took place. During this period the Community of Madrid stood out due to its role as centre for welcoming immigration, due to its condition as transport node vis-\u00e0-vis the Spanish geography, and due to its condition as scientific and cultural centre of the country.\nGovernment and politics.\nAutonomous institutions of government.\nLike the rest of autonomous communities, the Community of Madrid is organized politically within a parliamentary system; that is, the head of government\u2014known as the \"president\"\u2014is dependent on the direct support from the autonomous legislature, whose members elect him by a majority.\nThe Statute of Autonomy of the Madrid Autonomous Community is the fundamental organic law in conjunction with (and subordinated to) the Spanish constitution. The Statute of Autonomy establishes that the powers through which the self-government of the autonomous community is exercised are the following institutions:\nDelegation of the Central Government.\nSince the creation of autonomous communities, the Government of Spain appoints a special representative to each autonomous community, the Government Delegate, part of the Peripheral State Administration. Unlike other single-province autonomous communities, the Government also appoints the Government Sub-delegate, the successor office to the provincial civil governor. The seats of both the delegation and the subdelegation are located at the Borghetto Palace in Madrid.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Community of Madrid, following the long-standing form of local government in Spain, is divided administratively into 179 municipalities (featuring 801 towns and entities). Its municipalities comprise 2.2% of the Spanish territory (8,110). It is ranked 23rd amongst Spanish provinces in number of municipalities, which is slightly above average.\nThe average is 165 municipalities by province. The \"ayuntamiento\", presided by its \"alcalde\" (Mayor) is the formal institution charged with the government and administration of most municipalities. The municipal councillors forming the deliberative assembly of the \"ayuntamiento\" are directly elected through proportional representation with closed party lists and a 5% electoral threshold. In turn, the councillors are charged with electing from among themselves (by default candidates are the head of each electoral list) the Mayor presiding over the \"ayuntamiento\".\nThere are twenty judicial districts (\"partidos judiciales\"), whose seats correspond to the municipalities of Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, Alcobendas, Alcorc\u00f3n, Aranjuez, Arganda del Rey, Collado Villalba, Colmenar Viejo, Coslada, Fuenlabrada, Getafe, Legan\u00e9s, Madrid, Majadahonda, M\u00f3stoles, Navalcarnero, Parla, San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Torrej\u00f3n de Ardoz, Torrelaguna, Valdemoro, and Valdaracete (the historical judicial district of San Mart\u00edn de Valdeiglesias is no longer a judicial district as of 1985). These jurisdictions relate to the judicial administration, with their seat having at least one court of first instance.\nEconomy.\nMadrid is the autonomous community with the highest income per capita in Spain, at \u20ac38,435 in 2022 \u2013 significantly above the national average and ahead of the Basque Country, with \u20ac35,832, Navarra, \u20ac33,798, and Catalonia, \u20ac32,550. In that year, the GDP per capita growth was 8.6%. Madrid has a GDP of \u20ac230.8 billion ($281 billion) as of 2018; making it the largest economy of Spain, ahead of Catalonia, where regional GDP amounted to \u20ac228.7 billion and the most populated Spanish region, Andalusia (\u20ac160.6 billion).\nIn 2005, the Community of Madrid was the main receptor of foreign investment in the country, at 34.3% of the total. The community ranks 34th amongst all European regions (evaluated in 2002), and 50th amongst the most competitive cities-regions worldwide, ahead of Barcelona and Valencia, the other two largest metropolitan areas of Spain. The strengths of the economy of the community are its low unemployment rate, its high investment in research, its high development, and the added-value services therein performed. Its weaknesses include the low penetration of broadband and new technologies of information and an unequal male to female occupation.\nThe service, construction, and industry sectors are prominent in Madrid's commercial productive structure. According to the \"Directorio Central de Empresas\" (Central Companies Directory of the INE), Madrid's active businesses stand in third place nationally in terms of numbers as at 1 January 2006. The branches of activity with most active businesses are other business activities, retail trade, construction, wholesale trade, hospitality, property activities, land transport, and pipeline transport.\nMadrid's levels of industrial activity set it at fourth place in Spain. The following areas predominate in terms of business numbers: publishing and graphic arts, manufacture of metal products (except machinery and equipment), manufacture of furniture and other manufacturing industries, wearing apparel and fur industry, and food product industry. The province also boasts a higher concentration of high and medium technology activities and services than the rest of Spain. This is the case in the following areas: manufacture of office machinery and IT equipment; manufacture of electronic products, manufacture of radio equipment, and devices; manufacture of medical and surgical, precision, optical and timekeeping equipment and instruments; post and telecommunications; IT activities; and research and development.\nRegional authorities have put a notable effort in the development of logistics infrastructures in both the region of Madrid and the city proper. These include the Coslada Dry Port, the freight zone of the Madrid-Barajas Airport, Mercamadrid, the Madrid-Abro\u00f1igal logistics centre, the Villaverde's Logistics Centre and the Vic\u00e1lvaro's Logistics Centre to name a few. Overall, logistics companies has greatly developed along the A-2 highway (Coslada, San Fernando de Henares, Torrej\u00f3n de Ardoz) in the eastern part of the region, the so-called \"Henares Corridor\" to become what has come to be termed as the \"golden mile\" of logistics and e-commerce in Spain.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 10% in 2019 and was lower than the national average.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Population density by municipalityaccording to the Institute for Statistics ofthe Community of Madrid (2017):&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2265 600/km2 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0200\u2013600/km2 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a090\u2013200/km2 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a020\u201390/km2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0&lt;20/km2\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;As of 1 January 2024, the Community of Madrid has a registered population of 7,001,715 inhabitants, and it is the most populated province and third most populated autonomous community in Spain. Population density is 829.62 hab/km2, much higher than the national average of 93.8 hab/km2. Population density varies with the community itself; the municipality of Madrid has a density of 5,300 hab/km2, whereas the Sierra Norte has a population density of less than 10 hab/km2. The vast majority of the population lives in the capital and its metropolitan area, which is the most populated in Spain.\nMadrid also has the greatest population density in Spain. Its inhabitants are mainly concentrated in the capital (which is the Spanish city with the highest resident population) and in a series of municipalities (M\u00f3stoles, Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, Fuenlabrada, Legan\u00e9s, Alcorc\u00f3n, Getafe, Torrej\u00f3n de Ardoz, and Alcobendas), as opposed to in rural areas with low population density. Its citizens have diverse origins, and Madrid is the province with the highest number of residents born outside its territory and with the largest foreign population (13.32%). It is a focus of attraction for those migrating for reasons of employment. Population growth in Madrid is mainly due to the arrival of foreigners.\nAs of 1 January 2024, the region's population included 1,038,671 people born in Spanish-speaking countries from the Americas, up from 81,552 in 1999.\nThe Community of Madrid is the EU-Region with the highest average life expectancy at birth. The average life expectancy was 82.2 years for males and 87.8 for females in 2016.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nForeign population.\nAs of 2022, the region had a foreign-born population of 949,969. The largest groups of foreigners were those of Romanian, Moroccan, Venezuelan, Colombian, Chinese, Peruvian and Italian citizenship.\nEducation.\nState Education in Spain is free and compulsory from six to sixteen years of age. The current education system is called LOMLOE (Ley Org\u00e1nica 3/2020, de 29 de diciembre, por la que se modifica la Ley Org\u00e1nica 2/2006, de 3 de mayo, de Educaci\u00f3n).\nLevels.\nChildren from three to five years old in Spain have the option of attending the pre-school stage, which is non-compulsory and free for all students. It is regarded as an integral part of the education system with infantil classes in almost every primary school. There are some separate Colegios Infantiles or nursery schools.\nSpanish students aged six to sixteen undergo primary and secondary school education, which are compulsory and free of charge. Successful students are awarded a Secondary Education Certificate, which is necessary for entering further (optional) education as is Bachillerato for their University or Formaci\u00f3n Profesional (vocational studies).\nOnce students have finished their Bachillerato, they can take their University Entrance Exam (Pruebas de Acceso a la Universidad, popularly called \"Selectividad\") which differs greatly from region to region.\nThe secondary stage of education is normally referred to by its initials, e. g., ESO or Educaci\u00f3n Secundaria Obligatoria for secondary education.\nhttps:// is the educational platform that offers teachers and students in these and other non-university studies (professional studies, arts, languages, adult education and others) a virtual environment with all the necessary Internet services, in compliance with GDPR. It is safe, free, sustainable and based on Open source software.\nUniversities.\nMadrid is home to a large number of public and private universities.\nThe Complutense University of Madrid is one of the most prestigious, and the largest, university in Spain and one of the oldest universities in the world. It has 10,000 staff members and a student population of 117,000. Nearly all academic staff are Spanish. It is located on two campuses, in the university quarter Ciudad Universitaria at Moncloa in Madrid, and in Somosaguas. The Complutense University of Madrid was founded in Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, old Complutum, by Cardinal Cisneros in 1499. Nevertherless, its real origin dates back from 1293, when King Sancho IV of Castile built the General Schools of Alcal\u00e1, which would give rise to Cisnero's Complutense University. During the course of 1509\u20131510 five schools were already operative: Artes y Filosof\u00eda (Arts &amp; Philosophy), Teolog\u00eda (Theology), Derecho Can\u00f3nico (Canonical Laws), Letras (Liberal Arts) and Medicina (Medicine). In 1836, during the reign of Isabel II, the university was moved to Madrid, where it took the name of Central University and was located at San Bernardo Street. Subsequently, in 1927, a new University City (\"Ciudad Universitaria\") was planned to be built in the district of Moncloa-Aravaca. The Spanish Civil War turned the University City into a war zone, with several faculties sustaining severe damage during the conflict. By 1943 the Central University started to be known as the University of Madrid.\nIn 1970 the University of Madrid was renamed to Complutense University of Madrid. It was then when the new campus at Somosaguas was created in order to house the new School of Social Sciences. The old Alcal\u00e1 campus was reopened as the independent University of Alcal\u00e1 in 1977.\nAnother important university is the Autonoma, perhaps Spain's best university for research along with the Complutense, was instituted under the leadership of the famous physicist, Nicol\u00e1s Cabrera. The Autonoma is widely recognised for its research strengths in theoretical physics. Known simply as \"la Aut\u00f3noma\" in Madrid, its main site is the Cantoblanco Campus, situated 15 kilometers to the north of the capital (M-607) and close to the municipal areas of Madrid, namely Alcobendas, San Sebasti\u00e1n de los Reyes, Tres Cantos and Colmenar Viejo.\nLocated on the main site are the Rectorate building and the Faculties of Science, Philosophy and Fine Arts, Law, Economic Science and Business Studies, Psychology, Higher School of Computing Science and Engineering, and the Faculty of Teacher Training and Education. The Medical School is located outside the main site and beside the Hospital Universitario La Paz.\nOther local universities, among many others, are the Technical University of Madrid, as the result of merging the different Technical Schools of Engineering; the Universidad de Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, founded in 1499; the Carlos III, whose philosophy is to create responsible free-thinking people with a sensitivity to social problems and an involvement in the concept of progress based on freedom, justice and tolerance and the Universidad Pontificia Comillas, involved in a number of academic exchange programmes, work practice schemes and international projects with over 200 Higher Education Institutions in Europe, South America, North America, and Asia.\nOther universities in Madrid: Rey Juan Carlos University (public), Alfonso X El Sabio University, Universidad Antonio de Nebrija, Universidad Camilo Jos\u00e9 Cela, Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Universidad Europea de Madrid, and Universidad San Pablo (all of them private).\nMadrid is also home to the Escuela Superior de M\u00fasica Reina Sof\u00eda, the Real Conservatorio Superior de M\u00fasica de Madrid, and many other private educational institutions.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nMadrid is served by Barajas International Airport. Barajas is the main hub of Iberia Airlines and consequently serves as the main gateway to the Iberian peninsula from Europe, the Americas, and the rest of the world. Current passenger volumes range upwards of 52 million passengers per year, putting it in the top 10 busiest airports in the world. Given annual increases close to 10%, a new fourth terminal has been constructed. It has significantly reduced delays and doubled the capacity of the airport to more than 70 million passengers per year. Two additional runways have also been constructed, making Barajas a fully operational four-runway airport.\nCommuter rail.\nCercan\u00edas Madrid is the commuter rail service that serves Madrid, the capital of Spain, and its metropolitan area. It is operated by Cercan\u00edas, the commuter rail division of Renfe, the former monopoly of rail services in Spain. The system is infamous for being the target of 11 March 2004 Madrid train bombings. The attacks triggered a small reduction in the ridership of the system, but it is still the most used and most profitable (by 2004) of the commuter rail services in Spain. The total length spans .\nSpain's railway system, the \"Red Nacional de Ferrocarriles Espa\u00f1oles\" (Renfe), operates the vast majority of Spain's railways. In Madrid, the main rail terminals are Atocha in the south and Chamart\u00edn in the north.\nHigh-speed rail.\nThe crown jewel of Spain's next decade of infrastructure construction is the Spanish high-speed rail network, Alta Velocidad Espa\u00f1ola AVE. Currently, an ambitious plan includes the construction of a network, centered on Madrid. The overall goal is to have all important provincial cities be no more than four hours away from Madrid and no more than six hours away from Barcelona. As of 2008, AVE high-speed trains link Madrid-Atocha station to Seville, M\u00e1laga, and Toledo in the south, Valencia, Albacete, Cuenca and Alicante in the east, and to Zaragoza, Tarragona, Girona, Leida, Huesca and Barcelona in the north-east. AVE trains also arrive to Segovia, Valladolid, Zamora and Le\u00f3n.\nAlready connected by tunnels used by conventional rail lines, a tunnel link connecting the Atocha and Chamart\u00edn stations with high-speed rail services is finished but, as of August 2019, yet to be inaugurated.\nMetro.\nServing the city's population of some six million, the Madrid Metro is one of the most extensive and fastest-growing metro networks in the world. With the addition of a loop serving suburbs to Madrid's south-west \"Metrosur\", it is now the second largest metro system in Western Europe, second only to London's Underground. In 2007, Madrid's metro system was expanded, and it currently runs over of line. The province of Madrid is also served by an extensive commuter rail network called Cercan\u00edas.\nMetro fees are regulated by the Consorcio Regional de Transportes de Madrid (CRTM) jointly with fees for commuter rail, bus transport and light-rail.\nCulture.\nSymbols.\nThe flag, coat of arms and hymn of the Community of Madrid were set through the regional Law 2/1983 published in the official regional gazette on 24 December 1983:\nThe flag is described as follows: \"\"the flag of the Community of Madrid is crimson red, with seven silver five-pointed stars, arranged 4 and 3 on the centre of the canvas\". According to the law, the flag should wave both at the outdoors (occupying a preferential place next to the flag of Spain) and at the indoors of every public building of the autonomous administration as well as every public building of the municipal administrations located within the territory of the autonomous community.\nThe arms are described as follows:\n\"The coat of arms of the Community of Madrid features just one partition gules, and on it, two paired, embattled, turreted, castles or, with port and windows tinctured azure, masoned sable, surmounted by seven five-pointed stars argent arranged four and three on chief.\"\" The crest describes the heraldic representation of the royal crown of Spain.\nThe official anthem was defined along the flag and coat of arms. However it has very limited institutional use, and thus, it is barely known.\nCuisine.\nAlthough the region does not produce enough food to be self-sufficient, the varied territory of the region outside the urbanised centre provides enough food commodities to create its own cuisine: cheese of Campo Real, vine with Vinos de Madrid DO, strawberries and aspargus from Aranjuez, melons from Villaconejos, artichokes from Ciempozuelos, \"judiones\" from Montejo de la Sierra, garlic from Chinch\u00f3n, chickpeas from Navalcarnero, lentils from Colmenar de Oreja, cauliflower from Gri\u00f1\u00f3n or a number of vegetables from the Alberche Valley.\nIn addition, due to the rich restaurant business in the region, \"all the regional cuisines of Spain are represented in Madrid\" according to Jos\u00e9 del Corral Raya. As the madrilenian cuisine has absorbed much from the rest of regional cuisines of Spain, there is ambiguity when it comes to define the former; however, dishes such as the \"cocido madrile\u00f1o\", the \"potaje de garbanzos\", the \"callos a la madrile\u00f1a\", the \"sopa de ajo\" or the \"tortilla de patatas\" are considered part of the madrilenian cuisine regardless of their geographical specificity. By April 2011 the region had over 40,000 bars, 2,700 coffee shops and nearly 10,000 restaurants.\nReligion.\nThe majority of the religious population is Catholic, Roman Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in Community of Madrid. According to a 2019 CIS poll, 18.9% of the surveyed people in the region identified as practising Catholic and 43.0% as non-practising Catholic. The most important religious minorities are evangelicals, Jews and Muslims.\nAmong the evangelical denominations the following denominations stand out:\nSpanish Evangelical Church (IEE), several Presbiterian or Reformed Churches, the Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church (IERE), Baptist and Free churches (Uni\u00f3n Evang\u00e9lica Bautista Espa\u00f1ola, Federaci\u00f3n de las Iglesias Evang\u00e9licas Independientes de Espa\u00f1a), the Asambleas de Hermanos), Pentecostal Churches (Asambleas de Dios, Iglesia de la Biblia Abierta, Iglesia Filadelfia, Iglesia Cuadrangular), Charismatic churches (Iglesias de Buenas Noticias, Asamblea Cristiana, Asamblea para la Evangelizaci\u00f3n Mundial para Cristo), minor churches such as The Salvation Army, Mennonite Churches and Hermanos en Cristo), non-grouped evangelical churches, and adventist churches. Pentecostal churches have lately experienced a notable growth due to the arrival of immigrants from Latin-America. Evangelicals also have a notable following among the Romani population. The Muslim population includes the first contemporary Muslims in Spain (who came from Middle East and had middle class university background), converts (chiefly sunni Muslims) and representatives of a second arrival of Muslim economic migrants (with more of an economic migrant profile than the first wave).\nSince the second half of the 20th century the Jewish population in the region grew due to both Sephardi Jews that came from the MENA, as well as exiles from Latin America (mostly Argentinians) primordially Ashkenazim.\nThere are also Greek, Romanian and Russian orthodox Christians, Jehovah Witnesses (15,031 according to 2001 estimations) and Mormons (6,700 according to 2007 estimations). There are some buddhists (the majority of which have Spanish citizenship and are from the middle to upper middle class), and small minorities of believers of religions of vedic origin: hinduism (primordially Sindhis), sikhism, Hare Krishna and Brahma Kumaris. There are a scarce amount of believers of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Other confessions, often derided as \"cults\" (\"sectas\") in the country, such as the Unification movement and Scientology, have a marginal presence.\nFeasts.\nThe regional day is the 2 May, commemorating the Dos de Mayo Uprising of the citizens of Madrid against the French occupation in 1808 that triggered the wave of insurrections marking the beginning of the Peninsular War. It is a public holiday in the Community of Madrid since 1984, when it was approved by the regional legislature and sanctioned as law.\nA floral tribute is traditionally offered to the fallen \"heroes\" by the regional authorities. The ceremony of presentation of commemorative medals to stand out individuals also take place on this day in the Royal House of the Post Office.\nSports.\nAccording to a 2010 study by the National Sports Council (CSD), madrilenians led the country in terms of grassroots sports practice.\nRoughly a 52% of the regional population between 15 and 75 years old practised one sports modality, while a 10% of the population between 15 and 75 years old practised two or more sports. The most practised sports modalities were: fitness gymnastics (43.6%), football (22.1%), swimming (20.7%), cycling (19.6%), jogging/running (16.2%), padel (9.9%), athletics (8.3%), basketball (6.9%), other football modalities (6.6%), hiking (6.1%), martial arts (4.5%), body-building (3.5%), shooting/hunting (0.9%), and recreational fishing (0.2%).\nAssociation football is the most popular sport in Spain in terms of passive following. The Madrid Football Federation is the governing body of the sport of football in region. The Community of Madrid has its own autonomous team, the Madrid autonomous football team, taking part in friendly fixtures. It currently has 2 top flight men's football teams: Real Madrid and Atl\u00e9tico Madrid. The first of them, Real Madrid, has become one of the most valuable sports teams in the planet.\nThe regional administration had its own big track and field stadium, \"La Peineta\", inaugurated in 1994. It was later transferred to the Madrid City Council, becoming the center of two unsuccessful bids of the city of Madrid to the Summer Olympics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69804", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69804", "title": "Phidias", "text": "Greek sculptor, painter and architect (c.480\u2013430 BC)\nPhidias or Pheidias (; , \"Pheidias\"; c.\u2009480\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009430 BC) was an Ancient Greek sculptor, painter, and architect, active in the 5th century BC. His Statue of Zeus at Olympia was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Phidias also designed the statues of the goddess Athena on the Athenian Acropolis, namely the \"Athena Parthenos\" inside the Parthenon, and the \"Athena Promachos\", a colossal bronze which stood between it and the Propylaea, a monumental gateway that served as the entrance to the Acropolis in Athens. Phidias was the son of Charmides of Athens. The ancients believed that his masters were Hegias and Ageladas.\nPlutarch discusses Phidias's friendship with the Greek statesman Pericles, recording that enemies of Pericles tried to attack him through Phidias \u2013 who was accused of stealing gold intended for the Parthenon's statue of Athena, and of impiously portraying himself and Pericles on the shield of the statue. The historical value of this account, as well as the legend about accusations against the 'Periclean circle', is debatable, but Aristophanes mentions an incident with Phidias around that time.\nPhidias is often credited as the main instigator of the Classical Greek sculptural design. Today, most critics and historians consider him one of the greatest of all ancient Greek sculptors.\nLife and work.\nOf Phidias's life, little is known apart from his works. Although no original works exist that can be attributed to him with certainty, numerous Roman copies of varying degrees of fidelity are known to exist.\nThe earliest of Phidias's works were dedications in memory of Marathon, celebrating the Greek victory. His first commission was a group of national heroes with Miltiades as a central figure. At Delphi he created a great group in bronze including the figures of Greek gods Apollo and Athena, several Attic heroes, and General Miltiades the Younger. On the Acropolis of Athens, Phidias constructed a colossal bronze statue of Athena, the \"Athena Promachos\", which was visible far out at sea. Athena was the goddess of wisdom and warriors and the protector of Athens. At Pellene in Achaea, and at Plataea, Phidias made two other statues of Athena, as well as a statue of the goddess Aphrodite in ivory and gold for the people of Elis.\nIn antiquity, Phidias was celebrated for his statues in bronze and his chryselephantine works (statues made of gold and ivory). In the \"Hippias Major\", Plato claims that Phidias seldom, if ever, executed works in marble unlike many sculptors of his time. Plutarch writes that he superintended the great works ordered by Greek statesman Pericles on the Acropolis. Ancient critics take a very high view of the merits of Phidias. They especially praise the ethos or permanent moral level of his works as compared with those of the later so called \"pathetic\" school. Both Pausanias and Plutarch mention works of his depicting the warlike Athena Areia. Demetrius calls his statues sublime, and at the same time precise.\nIn 447 BC, Pericles commissioned several sculptures for Athens from Phidias to celebrate the Greek victory against the Persians at the Battle of Marathon during the Greco-Persian Wars (490\u00a0BC). Pericles used some of the money from the maritime League of Delos, to rebuild and decorate Athens to celebrate this victory. Inscriptions prove that the marble blocks intended for the pedimental statues of the Parthenon were not brought to Athens until 433\u2013434BC. It is therefore possible that most of sculptural decoration of the Parthenon was the work of Phidias's workshop including pupils of Phidias, such as Alcamenes and Agoracritus.\nAccording to Pausanias (1.28.2), the original bronze \"Athena Lemnia\" was created by Phidias (c.\u00a0450\u2013440BC) for Athenians living on Lemnos. He described it as \"the best of all Pheidias's works to see\". Adolf Furtw\u00e4ngler suggested that he found a copy of the \"Athena Lemnia\" in a statue of which the head is located in Bologna and the body is at Dresden. Some 5th-centuryBC torsos of Athena have been found at Athens. The torso of Athena in the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts at Paris, which has lost its head, gives some idea of what the original statue may have looked like.\nFor the ancient Greeks, two works of Phidias far outshone all others: the colossal chryselephantine Statue of Zeus (c.\u00a0432BC), which was erected in the Temple of Zeus at Olympia, and the \"Athena Parthenos\" (lit.\u2009'Athena the Virgin'), a sculpture of the virgin goddess Athena, which was housed in the Parthenon in Athens. Both sculptures belong to about the middle of the 5th century BC. A number of replicas and works inspired by it, both ancient and modern, have been made. Upon completing the \"Athena Parthenos\", Phidias was accused of embezzlement. Specifically, he was charged with shortchanging the amount of gold that was supposed to be used for the statue and keeping the extra for himself. It seems that the charge was politically motivated\u00a0\u2013 a result of his friendship with Pericles, who had many enemies in Athens.\nPhidias supposedly weighed the gold robe of the \"Athena Parthenos\" to prove his innocence, but was then accused of impiously portraying himself and Pericles on the shield of the statue, which was apparently true.\nPlutarch records that Phidias was imprisoned and died in jail.\nAristophanes's play \"Peace\" () mentions an unfortunate incident involving Phidias, but little context is provided.\nAccording to Philochorus, as quoted by a scholiast on Aristophanes, Phidias was put to death by the Eleans after he completed the Statue of Zeus at Olympia for them.\nFrom the late 5th century\u00a0BC, small copies of the statue of Zeus were found on coins from Elis, which give a general notion of the pose and the character of the head. The god was seated on a throne, every part of which was used for sculptural decoration. His body was of ivory, his robe of gold. His head was of a somewhat archaic type; the bust of Zeus found at Otricoli, which used to be regarded as a copy of the head of the Olympian statue, is certainly more than a century later in style.\nArchaeological discovery.\nA significant advancement in the knowledge of Phidias's working methodology came during 1954\u20131958 with the excavation of the workshop at Olympia where he created the Statue of Zeus. Tools, terracotta molds and a cup inscribed on the bottom \"\u03a6\u03b5\u03b9\u03b4\u03af\u03bf\u03c5 \u03b5\u1f30\u03bc\u03af\" (Pheid\u00edou eim\u00ed) \u2013 \"I belong to Phidias\"; literally: \"of Phidias I am\", were found here, just where Pausanias said the statue was constructed. The discovery has enabled archaeologists to re-create the techniques used to make the statue.\nAnother probable workshop of Phidias, on the southern slope of the Acropolis, was excavated in 1878, 1963/1964 and from 2001 onwards and seems to belong to the Athena Promachos.\nLegacy.\nBy 1910, mathematician Mark Barr began using the Greek letter Phi (\u03c6) as a symbol for the golden ratio after Phidias. However, Barr later wrote that he thought it unlikely that Phidias actually used the golden ratio.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69805", "revid": "30089549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69805", "title": "Roman Catholicism", "text": ""}
{"id": "69807", "revid": "204694225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69807", "title": "Murcia (city)", "text": ""}
{"id": "69808", "revid": "36449898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69808", "title": "Egyptian", "text": "Egyptian describes something of, from, or related to Egypt.\nEgyptian or Egyptians may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69810", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69810", "title": "Erik Balling", "text": "Danish film director\nErik Balling (29 November 1924\u00a0\u2013 19 November 2005) was a Danish TV and film director. He created two of Denmark's most popular TV-series, \"Matador\" and \"Huset p\u00e5 Christianshavn\".\nHis feature film \"Qivitoq\" (1956) was nominated for a Golden Palm at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival, and for an Oscar as Best Foreign Language Film. His 1962 film \"Den k\u00e6re familie\" was entered into the 3rd Moscow International Film Festival.\nTogether with Henning Bahs, he also created the hugely popular series of \"Olsen Gang\" feature films.\nBiography.\nBalling started working for the largest and oldest Danish film production company, Nordisk Films Kompagni, in 1946. He later became the boss of the company.\nHis made his directing debut with \"Adam &amp; Eva\" (1953), which was nominated for a Bodil-award as Best Film.\nIn 1956 he directed \"Kispus\", which was the first Danish movie filmed in color.\nThe most popular films directed by Balling were the feature film comedies about a trio of small-time crooks, the Olsen Gang.\nThere were 13 episodes of this movie series between 1968 and 1981, starting with \"Olsen-banden\". They were remade in several languages.\nIn 1998, Erik Balling received an Honorary Robert Award.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69811", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69811", "title": "Lillie Langtry", "text": "British socialite, actress, and theatrical producer (1853\u20131929)\nEmilie Charlotte, Lady de Bathe (n\u00e9e Le Breton, formerly Langtry; 13 October 1853 \u2013 12 February 1929), known as Lillie (or Lily) Langtry and nicknamed \"The Jersey Lily\", was a British socialite, stage actress and producer.\nBorn and raised on the island of Jersey, she moved to London in 1876, two years after marrying. Her looks and personality attracted interest, commentary, and invitations from artists and society hostesses, and she was celebrated as a young woman of great beauty and charm. During the aesthetic movement in England, she was painted by aesthete artists. In 1882, she became the poster-girl for Pears soap, and thus the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product.\nIn 1881, Langtry became an actress and made her West End debut in the comedy \"She Stoops to Conquer\", causing a sensation in London by becoming the first socialite to appear on stage. She starred in many plays in both the United Kingdom and the United States, including \"The Lady of Lyons\", and Shakespeare's \"As You Like It\". Eventually she ran her own stage production company. In later life she performed \"dramatic sketches\" in vaudeville. From the mid-1890s until 1919, Langtry lived at Regal Lodge at Newmarket in Suffolk, England. There she maintained a successful horse racing stable. The Lillie Langtry Stakes horse race is named after her.\nOne of the most glamorous British women of her era, Langtry was the subject of widespread public and media interest. Her acquaintances in London included Oscar Wilde, who encouraged Langtry to pursue acting. She was known for her relationships with royal figures and noblemen, including Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VII), Lord Shrewsbury, and Prince Louis of Battenberg. \nLangtry refused to write her \"real reminiscences\", and remains somewhat of an enigmatic personality. Even though she lived the most public of lives \u2013 as a \u2018professional beauty\u2019, as a royal mistress, as an actress, as a racehorse owner, as a squanderer of fortunes and collector of lovers \u2013 she remains elusive. Opinions about her are contradictory. To some, she was simply a calculating, cold-hearted creature who used her physical attractions to further her own career; to others she appeared charming, open, with \u201cfar more heart than she was given credit for\u201d.\nLife.\nBorn in 1853 and known as Lillie from childhood, she was the daughter of the Very Reverend William Corbet Le Breton and his wife, Emilie Davis (n\u00e9e Martin), a recognised beauty. Lillie's parents had eloped to Gretna Green in Scotland, and, in 1842, married at St Luke's Church, Chelsea, London. The couple lived in Southwark, London, before William was offered the post of rector and Dean of Jersey. Emilie Charlotte (Lillie) was born at the Old Rectory, St Saviour, on Jersey. She was baptised in St Saviour on 9 November 1853.\nLillie was the sixth of seven children and the only girl. Her brothers were Francis Corbet Le Breton (1843\u20131872), William Inglis Le Breton (1846\u20131924), Trevor Alexander Le Breton (1847\u20131870), Maurice Vavasour Le Breton (1849\u20131881), Clement Martin Le Breton (10 January 1851 \u2013 1 July 1927), and Reginald Le Breton (1855\u20131876). Purportedly, one of their ancestors was Richard le Breton, allegedly one of the assassins in 1170 of Thomas Becket.\nIn an 1882-interview Lillie said: 'Yes, I was born and educated in Jersey, but it is not correct for you to say that I spent my bread-and-butter days there. I never had any bread-and-butter days. As the only sister of six stout brothers I shared their outdoor sports in a most boyish fashion. It would be more accurate to describe my girlhood as my \" tomboy days,\" I think.'\nLillie's French governess was reputed to have been unable to manage her, so Lillie was educated by her brothers' tutor. This education was of a wider and more solid nature than that typically given to girls at that time. Although their father held the respectable position of Dean of Jersey, he earned an unsavoury reputation as a philanderer, and fathered illegitimate (or natural) children by various of his parishioners. When his wife Emilie finally left him in 1880, he left Jersey.\nLife in London.\nOn 9 March 1874, 20-year-old Lillie married 26-year-old Edward Langtry (1847\u20131897), a landowner from Ulster in the north of Ireland. 'Ned' Langtry was the widower of Jane Frances Price, whose sister, Elizabeth Ann Price, was the wife of Lillie's brother William. Lillie and Edward held their wedding reception at The Royal Yacht Hotel in St Helier, Jersey. Ned Langtry owned a large sailing yacht called \"Red Gauntlet\", and Lillie insisted that he take her away from the Channel Islands. In 1876 they rented an apartment in Eaton Place, Belgravia, London.\nIn 1877, Lillie's brother Clement married Alice, an illegitimate daughter of Viscount Ranelagh, their father's friend. After meeting her in London, Ranelagh invited her to a reception attended by several notable artists at the home of Sir John and Lady Sebright on 29 April 1877. Here she attracted notice for her beauty and wit. Langtry was in mourning for her youngest brother, who had been killed in a riding accident, so in contrast to the elaborate clothes of most women in attendance, she wore a simple black dress (which was to become her trademark) and no jewellery. Before the end of the evening, Frank Miles had completed several sketches of her that became very popular on postcards. Lady Sebrights' salon, where artistic and aristocratic audiences overlapped, was 'the ideal springboard' for Langtry. This company was 'always on the outlook for new diversion, new sensations and new faces'. In an 1882-interview, Langtry told how \"[m]y life in Jersey had been spent almost entirely in the open air, and as Mr Langtry was fond of yachting I became an expert yachtswoman and was very fond of all sorts of outdoor exercise, but I longed to see something more of the world.\" She would later remember Miles as one of her \"most enthusiastic\" friends, who first saw her at a theatre then asked around about the unknown \"beauty\". After learning Lillie's identity, Miles \"begged [her] to sit for a portrait.\" The painting made then was purchased by Prince Leopold, and Lillie became famous and popular among the nobles of London and the royal family.\nAnother guest, Sir John Everett Millais, also a Jersey native, eventually painted her portrait, titling it \"A Jersey Lily\" after the Jersey lily flower (\"Amaryllis belladonna\"), a symbol of the country. The portrait popularised Jersey Lily as Langtry's nickname, although Langtry was portrayed holding a Guernsey lily (\"Nerine sarniensis\") in the painting, as no Jersey lilies were available. According to tradition, the two Jersey natives spoke J\u00e8rriais during the sittings. The painting attracted great interest when exhibited at the Royal Academy and had to be roped off to avoid damage by the crowds. A friend of Millais, Rupert Potter (father of Beatrix Potter), was a keen amateur photographer and took pictures of Lillie during her visit to Millais in Scotland in 1879. She also sat for Sir Edward Poynter and is depicted in works by Sir Edward Burne-Jones. In early 1878, the Langtrys moved to 17 Norfolk Street (now 19 Dunraven Street) off Park Lane to accommodate the growing demands of Lillie's society visitors.\nLillie Langtry arrived in the late 1870s, the heyday of 'the Professional Beauties'. Margot Asquith later explained that Langtry's youth was the time 'of the great beauties. London worshipped beauty like the Greeks'. According to Asquith, Langtry became the centre of a social excitement excelling that around the other 'Beauties'. '\"The Jersey Lily\" \u2013 as Mrs. Langtry was called \u2013 had Greek features, a transparent skin, arresting eyes, fair hair, and a firm white throat. She held herself erect, refused to tighten her waist, and to see her walk was as if you saw a beautiful hound set upon its feet. It was a day of conspicuous feminine looks and the miniature beauties of to-day would have passed with praise, but without emotion.' Langtry was beautiful in an 'unusual' way in vogue with pre-Raphaelite ideals: 'the column of a neck, the square jaw, the well-defined lips, the straight nose, the slate-blue eyes, the pale skin (she was nicknamed Lillie, she tells us, because of her lily-white complexion), even the hair loosely knotted in the nape off the neck'.\nHer looks offered a good opportunity for painters: '[m]y sketches of Lillie during her first London season', wrote Miles twenty years later, 'earned far more than I've ever made on the largest commissions for my most expensive paintings.' Winning Lillie even wider recognition were her photographic likenesses, a relatively new art. The 'Professional Beauties', all members of high society, were photographed in every conceivable attitude. The craze for collecting these pictures \u2013 a craze foreshadowing the popularity of first film stars and then pop stars \u2013 was not confined to the middle classes. Also many an aristocratic drawing room boasted a leather-bound, brass-locked album featuring the faces of the \"Professional Beauties\" of the season.\nAsquith heard from her sister, Chartie Ribblesdale, about a ball at which \"several fashionable ladies had stood upon their chairs to see Mrs. Langtry come into the room. In a shining top-hat, and skin-tight habit, she rode a chestnut thoroughbred of conspicuous action every evening in Rotten Row. Among her adorers were the Prince of Wales, (King Edward) and the present Earl of Lonsdale.\" Ribblesdale also remembered a story about Langtry and Lonsdale \"paus[ing] at the railings in Rotten Row to talk to a man of her acquaintance. I do not know what she could have said to him, but after a brief exchange of words, Lord Lonsdale jumped off his horse, sprang over the railings, and with clenched fists hit Mrs. Langtry's admirer in the face. Upon this, a free fight ensued, and to the delight of the surprised spectators, Lord Lonsdale knocked his adversary down.'\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRecollections of Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick\n\"In the studio I found the loveliest woman I have ever seen. And how can any words of mine convey that beauty? I may say that she had dewy, violet eyes, a complexion like a peach, and a mass of lovely hair drawn back in a soft knot at the nape of her classic head. But how can words convey the vitality, the glow, the amazing charm, that made this fascinating woman the centre of any group that entered? She was in the freshness of her young beauty that day in the studio. She was poor, and wore a dowdy black dress, but my stepfather lost his heart to her [...] The friends we had invited to meet the lovely Lily Langtry were as willingly magnetised by her unique personality as we were. To show how little dress has to do with the effect she produced, I may say that for that evening she wore the same dowdy black dress as on the previous day, merely turned back at the throat and trimmed with a Toby frill of white lisse, as some concession to the custom of evening dress. Soon we had the most beautiful woman of the day down at Easton, and my sisters and myself were her admiring slaves. [...] [M]y own infatuation, for it was little less, for lovely Lily Langtry continued for many a day... [...] The average of good looks to-day is much higher, but there is none to equal Lily Langtry.\"\nThe royal biographer Theo Aronson has highlighted the importance of social changes that formed the backdrop of Langtry's success. In the late 1870s, high society became less exclusive following the example of the Prince of Wales, who preferred the company of 'very rich men', regardless of whether they had an aristocratic lineage. By the time Langtry was introduced, '[b]usiness acumen, beauty and, to a lesser extent, brains were becoming enough to get one accepted'. This 'opening-up' partially explains the success of Langtry. While she was not an aristocrat and would not have been welcomed during previous decades, her husband was a wealthy landowner and her father, as a clergyman, counted on the same level as landed gentry. Her behaviour was in line with aristocratic expectations: 'her air, despite her vivacity and sensuality, was well-bred: she knew how to conduct herself in public'. \nIn 1878, Langtry attracted a lot of attention during the Ascot races, being 'at the height of her beauty and fame'. Crowds followed her everywhere she went, and she became 'the most advertised beauty in Europe'. According to Lady Augusta Fane's recollections, Langtry was made so popular by her 'naturalness' and charm; 'she had no affectations and no \"make-up,\" either of face or mind; she was just herself, so no one could help loving her, with her gay, light-hearted nature'. However, there was another reason why Langtry attracted so much attention in 1878: the Prince of Wales was often seen in public with her.\nRoyal mistress.\nOn 24 May, 1877, while his wife was staying in Athens with her brother, King George I of the Hellenes, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, took supper with the Arctic explorer Sir Allen Young. There, he met Edward and Lillie Langtry. The 23-year-old Lillie had been discovered only a month earlier but had already taken London society by storm. It was soon presumed that Langtry had become the mistress of the Prince of Wales, but no immediate scandal arose. The Prince's wife, Alexandra of Denmark, accepted the situation and received her at parties in Marlborough House, the couple's London residence.\nHowever, there are some doubts. Jane Ridley has questioned the myth which Lillie Langtry created about herself, especially the role of the future Edward VII. She critiques Langtry's narrative of herself as an innocent country girl to whom success just happened. Ridley considers Langtry's entrance to London society to have been carefully planned, even if more successful than she could have hoped. In an 1882 interview, Langtry herself said that '[m]y pedigree was good and my person in Jersey society being assured, it was not surprising that I should be well-received'. At the same time, she denied that she had ever set herself up as a beauty. 'I never thought I was one, and I don't think I am now. I am never in the least surprised when I hear people say they are very much disappointed about my beauty'.\nRidley also expressed doubts on the nature of Langtry's relationship with the Prince of Wales. No letters from this time have survived, and many of the stories seem to be exaggerated or wrong. For example, Langtry is alleged to have consummated her relationship with Prince Edward when his wife, Alexandra, refused to accompany him to a royal house party at Crichel in January 1878. In fact, Alexandra played a central role at this event.\nAccording to Ridley, Langtry published a false story about her presentation at court to Queen Victoria. Langtry alleges that despite being presented towards the end of the evening, by when the Queen had usually retired, Victoria waited to see her. At a ball later that night, she was supposedly told that the Queen had 'had a great desire to see [her], and had stayed on in order to satisfy herself as to [Langtry's] appearance. It was even added that she was annoyed because [she] was so late in passing'. Ridley concludes that this anecdote was made up by Langtry, as she alleged the presence of the Prince and Princess of Wales, who were in Paris at the time, probably on purpose to avoid embarrassing them by presenting the alleged mistress of Bertie. In Ridley's view, Langtry invented stories implying that she was recognised as royal mistress. Langtry Manor in Bournemouth, supposedly built for clandestine meetings between the Prince and Lillie at his orders, was in fact built for Emily Langton Langton.\nRidley could find no evidence about the exact nature of the relationship between Lillie Langtry and the Prince of Wales. However, there is correspondence between the Prince's private secretary, Francis Knollys, and the Prince's solicitor, George Lewis, which suggests that Edward Langtry used George Lewis as a broker, offering his silence and cash in exchange for the Prince's love letters. Lewis kept Knollys closely informed about the death of Edward Langtry in 1897. The Prince of Wales, meanwhile, maintained a lifelong friendship with Lillie. \nWhatever it exactly was, Lillie's liaison with the Prince lasted from late 1877 to June 1880.\nThe Shrewsbury scandal.\nIn July 1879, Langtry began an affair with Lord Shrewsbury; in January 1880, they were planning to run away together. In the autumn of 1879, Adolphus Rosenberg wrote in \"Town Talk\" of rumours that her husband would divorce her and cite, among others, the Prince of Wales as co-respondent. The Prince of Wales instructed his solicitor George Lewis to sue. Rosenberg pleaded guilty and was sentenced to two years in prison.\nIn 1880, Langtry's reputation was tarnished by the Shrewsbury scandal, rumours of divorce, and a secret pregnancy. Many people refused to receive her, and with the withdrawal of royal favour, creditors started demanding their money. The Langtrys' finances were not equal to their lifestyle. In October 1880, Langtry sold many of her possessions to meet her debts, allowing him to avoid a declaration of bankruptcy. Lillie went abroad to give birth. Afterwards, the Prince of Wales, staunch in friendship, procured an opening for her: he introduced her to the actor-manager Squire Bancroft, who controlled the Haymarket Theatre and the Prince of Wales\u2019 theatres. The Prince of Wales encouraged her by visiting the theatre while she was on stage and did everything in his power to help her.\nDaughter.\nLillie Langtry had a short affair with Prince Louis of Battenberg from March 1880.\nThe discovery of letters of Lillie Langtry to Arthur Clarence Jones (1854\u20131930), gives the impression she also had an affair or at least an intimate friendship with the childhood friend of her brothers who continued to live on Jersey. Arthur Jones was the brother of her sister-in-law; both were illegitimate children of Lord Ranelagh. \nIn June 1880, Lillie became pregnant. Her husband was not the father. Edward Langtry had walked out after a libel case. The obvious candidate was Prince Louis of Battenburg. Jane Ridley compared the dates with the diary of the Prince of Wales: Prince Louis was staying at Marlborough House on June 27, the likely conception date. Anyway, Lillie led Prince Louis to believe that he was the father of her child. Lillie was lent 2000 pounds by the Prince of Wales to pay her debts. At the same time, Edward Langtry, who often visited her unannounced, was prevented from seeing her. Edward Langtry was constantly occupied with invitations to shoot or fish. Keeping him in ignorance of the pregnancy was vital: he was angry and resentful. The worry was that if Edward Langtry discovered that his wife was pregnant by another man, he might sue for divorce, dragging the Prince of Wales into the law courts. Lillie spent the summer holiday in Jersey. One Friday in October, by now four months pregnant, she visited London briefly and saw the Prince of Wales. On 17 October, the Prince of Wales held a meeting with his doctor, Oscar Clayton, and saw Louis Battenberg. The same day, Louis departed on a two-year voyage round the world on the aptly named warship . Lillie herself was spirited away to France. On 18 March 1881 she gave birth to a baby\u2014a girl named Jeanne Marie. \nThe moment it became clear Lillie Langtry was pregnant, Battenberg's parents acted promptly and resolutely. An aide-de-camp was sent from the German Jugenheim to arrange a financial settlement. Louis was told that there could be no question of marriage. Suddenly, the Admiralty found an appointment for Louis Mountbatten on \"The Inconstant\". The passionate affair was ended before the child was born and with Louis Battenberg out of the way.\nThe discovery in 1978 of Langtry's letters to Arthur Jones and publication of quotations from them by Laura Beatty in 1999 support the idea that Jones was the father of Langtry's daughter. Possibly she told him \"he\" was the father of the child. Anyway, in a letter she pressed Jones to go a chemist to buy potions to make her miscarry. During her pregnancy she wrote him passionately written letters and assured him how much she needed him. Jones probably stayed with her in Paris after she wrote him a letter with the dates she would give birth\u2014according to her doctor.\nPrince Louis' son, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, however, had always maintained that his father was the father of Jeanne Marie.\nJeanne Marie was only told who her father was, by Margot Asquith, when she was 20 years old. A story around this discovery tells Jeanne Marie complained bitterly of her illegitimacy. She was asked sharply by her mother, 'Who would you prefer to have as a father, a penniless drunken Irishman or a Royal Prince and the most handsome of all naval officers?'\nDescendants.\nIn 1902, Jeanne Marie Langtry married the Scottish politician Sir Ian Malcolm at St Margaret's, Westminster. They had four children, three sons and a daughter. Jeanne Marie died in 1964. \nHer daughter Mary Malcolm was one of the first two female announcers on the BBC Television Service (now BBC One) from 1948 to 1956. She died on 13 October 2010, aged 92. \"The Guardian\" published an obituary mentioning Mary Malcolm was the granddaughter of King Edward VII. It was rectified: 'This obituary of the postwar BBC television announcer Mary Malcolm said her mother, Jeanne-Marie, was the daughter of Lillie Langtry and Edward VII, the only one of his illegitimate children he acknowledged. Although Langtry was Edward VII's mistress, the father of her daughter was acknowledged to be Prince Louis of Battenberg, grandfather of Prince Philip.' \"The Times\" published an obituary mentioning Jeanne Marie Langtry had grown-up believing she was the daughter of Edward VII: 'Malcolm had an aristocratic pedigree. She was a granddaughter of Lillie Langtry, actress, beauty and mistress of the Prince of Wales, later Edward VII. Her mother, Jeanne Marie, was conceived and born out of wedlock, and [Lady] Malcolm grew up believing that she was the daughter of a king. Only later did she learn that her father was Prince Louis of Battenberg, whose legitimate children included the future Earl Mountbatten of Burma.' It wasn't rectified. The prestigious Oxford Dictionary of National Biography also names Louis Mountbatten as grandfather of Mary Malcolm. 'Her mother was frequently assumed to be the illegitimate offspring of Edward VII (when prince of Wales). She was not. Jeanne-Marie's father was (or at least was acknowledged to be) German-born Prince Louis of Battenberg. He anglicized his name on settling in Britain and it was his grandson Philip Mountbatten who in due course would marry into royalty and become duke of Edinburgh and consort of Queen Elizabeth II.' Arthur Jones isn't mentioned. The \"Daily Telegraph\" did mention Lillie Langtry, but not the assumed (grand)father.\nJeanne Marie's second son, Victor Neill Malcolm, married English actress Ann Todd. They divorced in the late 1930s. Victor Malcolm remarried in 1942, to an American, Mary Ellery Channing.\nActing career and manager.\nIn 1881, Langtry was in need of money. Her close friend Oscar Wilde suggested she try the stage, and Langtry embarked upon a theatrical career. She first auditioned for an amateur production in the Twickenham Town Hall on 19 November 1881. It was a comedy two-hander called \"A Fair Encounter\", with Henrietta Labouch\u00e8re taking the other role and coaching Langtry in her acting. Labouch\u00e8re had been a professional actress before she met and married Liberal MP Henry Labouch\u00e8re.\nFollowing favourable reviews of this first attempt at the stage, and with further coaching, Langtry made her debut before the London public, playing Kate Hardcastle in \"She Stoops to Conquer\" at the West End's Haymarket Theatre in December 1881. Critical opinion was mixed, but she was a success with the public. She next performed in \"Ours\" at the same theatre. Although her affair with the Prince of Wales was over, he supported her new venture by attending several of her performances and helping attract an audience.\nEarly in 1882, Langtry quit the production at the Haymarket and started her own company, touring the UK with various plays. She was still under the tutelage of Henrietta Labouch\u00e8re.&lt;ref name=\"Dudley 1958 Chapters 6/7/8\" &gt;&lt;/ref&gt; American impresario Henry Abbey arranged a tour in the United States for Langtry. She arrived in October 1882 to be met by the press and Oscar Wilde, who was in New York on a lecture tour. Her first appearance was eagerly anticipated, but the theatre burnt down the night before the opening. The show moved to another venue and opened the following week. Eventually, her production company started a coast-to-coast tour of the US, ending in May 1883 with a \"fat profit.\" Before leaving New York, she had an acrimonious break with Henrietta Labouch\u00e8re over Langtry's relationship with Frederick Gebhard, a wealthy young American. Her first tour of the US (accompanied by Gebhard) was an enormous success, which she repeated in subsequent years. While the critics generally condemned her interpretations of roles such as Pauline in \"The Lady of Lyons\" or Rosalind in \"As You Like It\", the public loved her. After her return from New York in 1883, Langtry registered at the Conservatoire in Paris for six weeks' intensive training to improve her acting technique.\nIn 1889, she took on the part of Lady Macbeth in Shakespeare's \"Macbeth.\" In 1896 she played the role of Mrs Barry in \"Gossip\", at the Comedy Theatre, London, the play written by Clyde Fitch and Leo Dietrichstein was based on \"suggestions found in a Novel\" by Jules Claretie, 'Monsieur le ministre'. The New York Times thought that \"Mrs Langtry's jewels were worth $100,000; her attire was so wonderful, so dazzling, so recklessly inappropriate -as it seemed- that a murmur of surprise ran through the auditorium\". In 1903, she starred in the US in \"The Crossways\", written by her in collaboration with J. Hartley Manners, husband of actress Laurette Taylor. She returned to the US for tours in 1906 and again in 1912, appearing in vaudeville. She last appeared on stage in America in 1917. Later that year, she made her final appearance in the theatre in London.\nFrom 1900 to 1903, with financial support from Edgar Israel Cohen, Langtry became the lessee and manager of London's Imperial Theatre. It opened on 21 April 1901, following an extensive refurbishment. On the site of the theatre is now the Westminster Central Hall. In a film released in 1913 directed by Edwin S. Porter, Langtry starred opposite Sidney Mason in the role of Mrs Norton in \"His Neighbor's Wife\" in what would be her only film appearance.\nThoroughbred racing.\nFor nearly a decade, from 1882 to 1891, Langtry had a relationship with an American, Frederick Gebhard, described as a young clubman, sportsman, horse owner, and admirer of feminine beauty, both on and off the stage. Gebhard's wealth was inherited; his maternal grandfather Thomas E. Davis was one of the wealthiest New York real estate owners of the period. His paternal grandfather, Dutchman Frederick Gebhard, came to New York in 1800 and developed a mercantile business that expanded into banking and railroad stocks. Gebhard's father died when he was 5 years old and his mother died when he was about 10. He and his sister, Isabelle, were raised by a guardian, paternal uncle William H Gebhard.\nWith Gebhard, Langtry became involved in horse racing. In 1885, she and Gebhard brought a stable of American horses to race in England. On 13 August 1888, Langtry and Gebhard travelled in her private carriage attached to an Erie Railroad express train bound for Chicago. Another railcar was transporting 17 of their horses when it derailed at Shohola, Pennsylvania, at 1:40 am. Rolling down an embankment, it burst into flames. One person died in the fire, along with Gebhard's champion runner Eole and 14 racehorses belonging to him and Langtry. Two horses survived the wreck, including St Saviour, full brother to Eole. He was named for St Saviour's Church in Jersey, where Langtry's father had been rector and where she chose to be buried. Despite speculation, Langtry and Gebhard never married. In 1895, he married Lulu Morris of Baltimore; they divorced in 1901. In 1905 he married Marie Wilson; he died in 1910.\nIn 1889, Langtry met \"an eccentric young bachelor, with vast estates in Scotland, a large breeding stud, a racing stable, and more money than he knew what to do with\": this was George Alexander Baird or Squire Abington, as he came to be known. He inherited wealth from his grandfather, who with seven of his sons, had developed and prospered from coal and iron workings. Baird's father had died when he was a young boy, leaving him a fortune in trust. In addition, he inherited the estates of two wealthy uncles who had died childless.\nLangtry and Baird met at a racecourse when he gave her a betting tip and the stake money to place on the horse. The horse won and, at a later luncheon party, Baird also offered her the gift of a horse named Milford. She at first demurred, but others at the table advised her to accept, as this horse was a very fine prospect. The horse won several races under Langtry's colours; he was registered to \"Mr Jersey\" (women were excluded from registering horses at this time). Langtry became involved in a relationship with Baird, from 1891 until his death in March 1893.\nWhen Baird died, Langtry purchased two of his horses, Lady Rosebery and Studley Royal, at the estate dispersal sale. She moved her training to Sam Pickering's stables at Kentford House and took Regal Lodge as a residence in the village of Kentford, near Newmarket, Suffolk. The building is a short distance from Baird's original racehorse breeding establishment, which has since been renamed Meddler Stud.\nLangtry found mentors in Captain James Octavius Machell and Joe Thompson, who provided guidance on all matters related to the turf. When her trainer Pickering failed to deliver results, she moved her expanded string of 20 horses to Fred Webb at Exning. In 1899, James Machell sold his Newmarket stables to Colonel Harry Leslie Blundell McCalmont, a wealthy racehorse owner, who was Langtry's brother-in-law, having married Hugo de Bathe's sister Winifred in 1897. He was also related to Langtry's first husband, Edward, whose ship-owning grandfather George had married into the County Antrim Callwell family, being related in marriage to the McCalmonts.\nTold of a good horse for sale in Australia called Merman, she purchased it and had it shipped to England; such shipments were risky and she had a previous bad experience with a horse arriving injured (Maluma). Merman was regarded as one of the best stayers; he eventually went on to win the Lewes Handicap, the Cesarewitch, Jockey Club Cup, Goodwood Stakes, Goodwood Cup, and Ascot Gold Cup (with Tod Sloan up). Langtry later had a second Cesarewitch winner with Yentoi, and a third place with Raytoi. An imported horse from New Zealand called Uniform won the Lewes Handicap for her.\nOther trainers used by Langtry were Jack Robinson, who trained at Foxhill in Wiltshire, and a very young Fred Darling, whose first big success was Yentoi's 1908 Cesarewitch.\nLangtry owned a stud at Gazely, Newmarket. This venture was not a success. After a few years, she gave up attempts to breed blood-stock. Langtry sold Regal Lodge and all her horse-racing interests in 1919 before she moved to Monaco. Regal Lodge had been her home for twenty-three years and received many celebrated guests, notably the Prince of Wales.\nIn honour of her contributions to thoroughbred racing, since 2014 the Glorious Goodwood meeting has held the Group 2 Lillie Langtry Stakes.\nWilliam Ewart Gladstone \u2013 Prime Minister.\nDuring her stage career, Lillie Langtry became friendly with William Ewart Gladstone (1809\u20131898), who was the Prime Minister on four occasions during the reign of Queen Victoria. In her memoirs, Langtry says that she first met Gladstone when she was posing for her portrait at Millais' studio. Later he became a mentor to her.\nHowever, this was probably also a make-belief by Lillie Langtry herself. The biographers of William Ewart Gladstone think otherwise.They are also quite cynical about Lillie's motives.\nLillie Langtry in \"The Days I Knew\": 'One of the most gratifying features of my debut was the concern in my new departure displayed by that gifted being, W.E. Gladstone. Although we had met casually at Millais's studio I had not known him further. But now he came often to see me and would drop in (he was Prime Minister at the time) to find me eating my dinner before going to the theatre. How wonderful it seemed that this great and universally sought-after man should give me and my work even a passing thought. But he did more. His comprehensive mind and sweet nature grasped the difficult task that lay before me, the widely different orbit in which my life would henceforth move, and he knew how adrift I felt. And out of his vast knowledge of the public he realised how much he could help me\u2014so the salmon advised the minnow. Never shall I forget the wisdom of Gladstone and the uplifting effects of his visits. Sometimes he read aloud his favourite passages from Shakespeare. Then, again, he would bring me books. He was truly religious, believing, he told me \"with the simple faith of a child\". And one could not be in his company without feeling that goodness emanating from him... Among his many excellent admonitions I remember, and shall always remember, this sound piece of advice. He said. In \"In your professional career, you will receive attacks, personal and critical, just and unjust. Bear them, never reply, and, above all, never rush into print to explain or defend yourself. And I never have.'\nHowever, it was not Gladstone who sought Lillie out; the approach came from Lillie. Abraham Hayward, an influential journalist, wrote Gladstone a letter, dated 8 January 1882: 'Mrs Langtry, who is an enthusiastic admirer of yours, told me this afternoon that she should be feel highly flattered if you would call on her, and I tell you this, although I fear you have other more pressing overtures just at present. Her address is 18 Albert Mansions, Victoria Street, and she is generally at home about six.'\nThe published diaries of Gladstone show there were indeed contacts between Lillie Langtry and one of the most important British statesmen. However, the editor of Gladstone diaries doubts the friendship was, from Gladstone's point of view, important. Gladstone was a regular theatre-goer and moved enthusiastically among some theatre-sets. He frequently visited performances of drawing-room comedies and drama. Rumours were not surprising given Lillie's reputation and the gossip about Gladstone's nocturnal activities which circulated in London clubs. Gladstone was in the habit of wanting to \"rescue\" prostitutes by trying to convince them it was best not to live in sin and to find a decent job. Gladstone noted on 3 April 1882 in his diary: 'I hardly know what estimate to form of her. Her manners are very pleasing, &amp; she has a working spirit in her'. On 16 February 1885 he wrote: 'Saw Mrs Langtry: probably for the last time.' Gladstone's private secretary was worried about the contacts between Lillie Langtry and Gladstone: he was afraid she tried to make social capital out of their contacts. 'Last week Mr. G. received an invitation to a Sunday \"at home\" from Mrs Langtry. He did not avail himself of it, but he went and called at her house. He did not even see her, but all kinds of rumours are already abroad about his intimacy with the \"professional beauty\". These rumours would have had much greater currency and better foundation, had he gone to the evening party, out of which I think we managed to frighten him and the card for which I first thought of hiding and saying nothing about. Certainly Rosebery spoke not a day too early about the night walks, which are now openly talked of in Society.' Things even became worse. Gladstone presented Lillie Langry a copy of his favourite book, \"Sister Dora\" \u2013 a biography of a high-born woman who worked as a nurse among the poor. Hamilton:'She is evidently trying to make social capital out the acquaintance which scraped with him. Most disagreeable things with all kinds of exaggeration are being said. I took the occasion of putting a word and cautioning him against the wiles of the woman, whose reputation is in such bad odour that, despite all the endeavours of H.R.H., nobody will receive in their houses.' It seems Lillie Langtry had become by April 1882 a social outcast, with two important men who tried to help her: the Prince of Wales and the Prime Minister. Hamilton tried to protect his boss, but had a shrewd woman against him. 'She had evidently been told to resort to the double-envelope system which secures respect from our rude hand; and she is now making pretty constant use of this privilege and boasting in proportion.' Hamilton could do nothing: the letters became more frequently, but he couldn't read them. However, the much later published diaries of Gladstone himself show Hamilton had little to fear: there were little personal contacts with Lillie Langtry. Gladstone wrote her exactly one letter in the short period after Lillie tried to (re)make contact with him while Gladstone didn't know well how to deal with the situation.\nIn 1925, Captain Peter Emmanuel Wright published a book called \"Portraits and Criticisms\". In it, he claimed that Gladstone had numerous extramarital affairs, including one with Langtry. Gladstone's son Herbert Gladstone wrote a letter calling Wright a liar, a coward and a fool; Wright sued him. During the trial, a telegram, sent by Langtry from Monte Carlo, was read out in court saying, \"I strongly repudiate the slanderous accusations of Peter Wright.\" The jury found against Wright, saying that the \"gist of the defendant's letter of 27 July was true\" and that the evidence vindicated the high moral standards of the late Gladstone.\nAmerican citizenship and divorce.\nIn 1888, Langtry became a property owner in the United States when she and Frederick Gebhard purchased adjoining ranches in Lake County, California. She established a winery with an area of in Guenoc Valley, producing red wine. She sold it in 1906. Bearing the Langtry Farms name, the winery and vineyard are still in operation in Middletown, California.\nDuring her travels in the United States, Langtry became an American citizen and on 13 May 1897, divorced her husband Edward in Lakeport, California. Her ownership of land in America was introduced in evidence at her divorce to help demonstrate to the judge that she was a citizen of the country. In June of that year Edward Langtry issued a statement giving his side of the story, which was published in the \"New York Journal.\"\nEdward died a few months later in Chester Asylum, after being found by police in a demented condition at Crewe railway station. His death was probably the result of a brain haemorrhage after a fall during a steamer crossing from Belfast to Liverpool. He was buried in Overleigh Cemetery; a verdict of accidental death was returned at the inquest. A letter of condolence later written by Langtry to another widow reads in part, \"I too have lost a husband, but alas! it was no great loss.\"\nLangtry continued to have involvement with her husband's Irish properties after his death. These were compulsorily purchased from her in 1928 under the Northern Ireland Land Act, 1925. This was passed after the Partition of Ireland, with the purpose of transferring certain lands from owners to tenants.\nHugo Gerald de Bathe.\nAfter the divorce from her husband, Langtry was linked in the popular press to Prince Paul Esterhazy, an Austro-Hungarian diplomat. They shared time together and both had an interest in horse-racing. However, in 1899, she married 28-year-old Hugo Gerald de Bathe (1871\u20131940), son of General Sir Henry de Bathe, 4th Baronet (1823-1907), an Anglo-Irish nobleman, and Charlotte Clare. Hugo's parents had initially not married, because of objections from the de Bathe family. They lived together and seven of their children were born out of wedlock. They married after the death of Sir Henry's father in 1870. Hugo was their first son to be born in wedlock\u2014making him heir to the baronetcy.\nThe wedding between Langtry and de Bathe took place in St Saviour's Church, Jersey, on 27 July 1899, with her daughter Jeanne Marie Langtry being the only other person present, apart from the officials. This was the same day that Langtry's horse Merman won the Goodwood Cup. In December 1899, de Bathe volunteered to join the British forces in the Boer War. He was assigned to the Robert's Horse Mounted brigade as a lieutenant. In 1907, General de Bathe, Hugo's father, died; Hugo thus became the 5th Baronet, and Langtry became Lady de Bathe.\nWhen Sir Hugo de Bathe became the 5th Baronet, he inherited properties in Sussex, Devon and Ireland; those in Sussex were in the hamlet of West Stoke near Chichester. These were Woodend, with 17 bedrooms and set in 71 acres; Hollandsfield, with 10 bedrooms and set in 52 acres; and Balsom's Farm of 206 acres. Woodend was retained as the de Bathe residence whilst the smaller Hollandsfield was let. Today the buildings retain their period appearance. Modifications and additions have been made, and the complex is now multi-occupancy. One of the houses on the site is named Langtry and another Hardy. The de Bathe properties were all sold in 1919, the same year Lady de Bathe sold Regal Lodge.\nFinal days.\nDuring her final years, Langtry, as Lady de Bathe, resided in Monaco whilst her husband, Sir Hugo de Bathe, lived in Vence, Alpes Maritimes. The two saw one another at social gatherings or in brief private encounters. During World War I, Hugo de Bathe was an ambulance driver for the French Red Cross.\nLangtry's closest companion during her time in Monaco was her friend Mathilde Marie Peat. Peat was at Langtry's side during the final days of her life as she was dying of pneumonia in Monte Carlo. Langtry left Peat \u00a310,000, the Monaco property known as Villa le Lys, clothes, and her motor car.\nLangtry died in Monaco at dawn on 12 February 1929. She had asked to be buried in her parents' tomb at St Saviour's Church in Jersey. Blizzards delayed the journey, but her body was taken to St Malo and across to Jersey on 22 February aboard the steamer \"Saint Brieuc\". Her coffin lay in St Saviour's overnight surrounded by flowers, and she was buried on the afternoon of 23 February.\nThe death of the famous Lillie Langtry made headlines in British newspapers.\nThe \"Daily Mail\" remembered Lillie Langtry as one of the most famous beauties of the closed century. 'In more modern times it was her acting that brought her renown, but in her youth she took London by storm on account of her dazzling loveliness, and it was indeed her good looks and her wit that enabled her to go on the stage when her first husband lost his fortune.' In the following weeks the popular newspaper reported about her estate, her funeral and a memorial service.\nThe \"Daily Telegraph\" published both a news article and an obituary full of memories of a contemporary of Lillie Langtry who had known her in society years and had followed her acting career. 'Never a real actress' was the verdict, but Lillie Langtry had made the wise and honourable decision to use her celebrity to find a career and her living in her own way and by her own resources instead of becoming dependent on offers of aristocratic male friends after her separation from her husband. \u2018She was one of the first and probably the most popular of the ladies who were universally known at that time as \"Society beauties\u201d \u2026 Eventually she resolved to go on the stage, and she did an immense amount of work in America as well as in England during a period of about 35 years. She overcame many obstacles, and, although she was never a great actress, her beauty and her charm of manner brought her a large measure of success.\u2019 \n\"The Times\" published on three different pages a news alert from the correspondent in Paris, a photograph and an obituary. In the obituary the newspaper looked back at the start and the development of Langtry's career. On her first appearance on 15 December 1881\u2014as Kate Hardcastle, in She Stoops to Conquer\u2014all sections of society had fought for highly priced seats in the theatre. \u2018The audience, which included the Prince and Princess of Wales, and representatives of eminence in fashion, art, and literature, received Mrs. Langtry very quietly, but the debutante soon overcame the feeling of prejudice\u2026. Mrs. Langtry became so popular in America that she paid many visits to that country, her last being in 1915. Her personality counted for much, and she gradually acquired the technique of the stage. But she never succeeded in touching the emotions, the common chord of humanity\u2026.\u2019 \nThe \"Manchester Guardian\" remembered Lillie Langtry mainly as a \"reigning beauty\". 'The London of the eighties and nineties, when the \"Jersey Lily,\" whose death is announced, had her heyday, seems even more remote than the passage of years warrants. To a generation whose manifold interests in life have enormously increased in comparison with their fathers' it seems incredible that barely a generation ago crowds should have assembled in thousands to stare at or cheer a \"reigning beauty.\" Yet Mrs. Langtry, though the most famous of her kind, was no exception as a social institution...A world with the \"movies\" and the wireless to amuse it, a world, moreover, in which the sexes meet on more practical terms than in the past, has more to do than mob a handsome woman for the sake of her looks. But it can at least admire the \"Jersey Lily\" for one fact in her curious career \u2013 that when hard times came she turned to hard work for the theatre. That work was seldom artistically notable but it revealed a force of character on which those who reckoned her by looks alone had hardly counted.' The famous Victorian beauty did have qualities and made some inventions.'Mrs. Langtry was not perhaps a great actress, but her beauty carried everything before it. She was a woman who knew how to make the most of her graces. As she said long afterwards, \"I was the first woman in England to have my hands manicured.\" She knew all the niceties of artistic dressing. It was one of her plaints that \"to-day women are becoming so standardised in figure and dress that they all seem to look like each other.\" Her own grace and graciousness and her ability to please her fellow-creatures she retained to the end. She danced with the vitality of a young woman when she was seventy she wrote a book of reminiscences a year later, and even after a severe illness the beauty of her complexion and of her eyes still remained.' \nIn the United States the death of Lillie Langtry was front page news for the \"New York Times\". 'Actress, Once called World's Greatest Beauty succumbs to Heart Disease and Influenza.' The article, with the streamer 'was idolized by society', was continued with a large obituary at page 12.\nThe \"Washington Post\" reported the news on page 13, but still in a prominent way: a friend of King of Edward VII and one of the most popular women of stage had died. On 17 February 1929 the \"Washington Post\" continued: especially in New York the former actress was adored, but this didn't spoil the famous English beauty. \nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" paid tribute to the former actress and her 'notable career' on page 1.\nBequests.\nImmediately after her death, the \"Daily Mail\" published exclusive news: \u2018The Daily Mail understands that Lady de Bathe , (Mrs. Langtry, \" the Jersey Lily \"), who died at Monte Carlo on February 12, has made a number of personal bequests in her will. The famous actress has (left \u00a310,000, her jewellery, and her villa, Le Lys, Monte Carlo, to Mrs. Peat, who was with her during her last illness and for 16 years her constant friend and companion. To her daughter, Lady (Ian) Malcolm, Lady de Bathe left the family old silver from Jersey. To the two daughters of Lady (Ian) Malcolm she left \u00a35,000 each. Lady de Bathe left her motorcar to her maid Mathilde, who was with her for 15 years. The daughter of the Very Rev. W. C. E. le Breton, Dean of Jersey, Lady de Bathe offered to the museum at St. Helier, Jersey, antique furniture, with the proviso that should the museum authorities not want the furniture it is to revert to the maid Mathilde. Mrs. Peat, a pale, middle-aged woman wearing a black fur coat over a black gown, left Paddington for Jersey last night. She was accompanied by Lady Malcolm and the solicitor to the estate.\u2019\nIn 1928 the \"Daily Mail\" reported an Italian man was arrested charged with the theft of nearly \u00a31,000 worth of jewellery from Lady de Bathe at her villa, Le Lys. Only one of the missing jewels, a ring, had been recovered.\nIn her will, Langtry left \u00a32,000 to a young man of whom she had become fond in later life, named Charles Louis D'Albani; the son of a Newmarket solicitor, he was born in about 1891. She also left \u00a31,000 to A. T. Bulkeley Gavin of 5 Berkeley Square, London, a physician and surgeon who treated wealthy patients. In 1911 he had been engaged to author Katherine Cecil Thurston, who died before they could marry; she had already changed her will in favour of Bulkeley Gavin.\nCultural influence and portrayals.\nOne of the most glamorous British women of her era, Langtry used her high public profile to endorse commercial products such as cosmetics and soap\u2014an early example of celebrity endorsement. She used her famous ivory complexion to generate income, being the first woman to endorse a commercial product when she began advertising Pears soap in 1882. The aesthetic movement in England became directly involved in advertising, and Pears (under advertising pioneer Thomas J. Barratt) recruited Langtry\u2014who had been painted by aesthete artists\u2014to promote their products, which included putting her \"signature\" on the advertisements.\nIn the 1944 Universal film \"The Scarlet Claw\", Lillian Gentry, the first murder victim, wife of Lord William Penrose and former actress, is an oblique reference to Langtry.\nLangtry has been portrayed in two films. Lilian Bond played her in \"The Westerner\" (1940), and Ava Gardner in \"The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean\" (1972). Bean was played by Walter Brennan in the former, and by Paul Newman in the latter film.\nIn 1978, Langtry's story was dramatised by London Weekend Television and produced as \"Lillie\", starring Francesca Annis in the title role (Annis received the British Academy Television Award for Best Actress). Annis previously played Langtry in two episodes of ATV's \"Edward the Seventh\". Jenny Seagrove played her in the 1991 television film \"Incident at Victoria Falls\".\nLangtry is a featured character in the fictional \"The Flashman Papers\" novels of George MacDonald Fraser, in which she is noted as a former lover of arch-cad Harry Flashman, who, nonetheless, describes her as one of his few true loves.\nLangtry is suggested as an inspiration for Irene Adler, a character in the Sherlock Holmes fiction of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. In \"A Scandal in Bohemia\", Adler bests Holmes, perhaps the only woman to do so.\nLangtry is used as a touchstone for old-fashioned manners in Preston Sturges's comedy \"The Lady Eve\" (1941), in a scene where a corpulent woman drops a handkerchief on the floor and the hero ignores it. Jean (Barbara Stanwyck) begins to describe, comment, and anticipate the events that we see reflected in her hand mirror: \"The dropped kerchief! That hasn't been used since Lillie Langtry ... you'll have to pick it up yourself, madam ... it's a shame, but he doesn't care for the flesh, he'll never see it.\"\nLillie Langtry is the inspiration for The Who's 1967 hit single \"Pictures of Lily\", as mentioned in Pete Townshend's 2012 memoir \"Who I Am\". Dixie Carter portrays Langtry as a \"songbird\" and Brady Hawkes' love interest in Kenny Rogers' 1994 \"\", the last of the Gambler series for CBS that started in 1980. Langtry is depicted as a singer, not an actress, and Dixie Carter's costuming appears closer to Mae West than anything Langtry ever wore.\nIn \"The Simpsons\" 1994 episode \"Burns' Heir\", the auditions are held in the Lillie Langtry Theater on Burns' estate.\nLangtry is a featured character in the play \"Sherlock Holmes and the Case of the Jersey Lily\" by Katie Forgette. In this work, she is blackmailed over her past relationship with the Prince of Wales, with intimate letters as proof. She and Oscar Wilde employ Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson to investigate the matter.\nPlaces connected with Lillie Langtry.\nResidences and historical namesakes.\nWhen first married (1874), Edward and Lillie Langtry had a property called Cliffe Lodge in Southampton, Hampshire. In 1876 they rented an apartment in Eaton Place, Belgravia, London. From early 1878 they lived at 17 Norfolk Street (now 19 Dunraven Street) in Mayfair, London. Langtry lived at 21 Pont Street, London, from 1890 to 1897, and had with her eight servants at the 1891 census. Although from 1895 the building was operated as the Cadogan Hotel, she would stay in her former bedroom there. A blue plaque (which erroneously states that she was born in 1852) on the hotel commemorates this, and the hotel's restaurant is named 'Langtry's' in her honour.\nA short walk from Pont Street was a house at number 2 Cadogan Place where she lived in 1899. From 1886 to 1894, she owned a house in Manhattan at 362 West 23rd Street, a gift from Frederick Gebhard.\nLangtry's London address from 1916 until at least 1920 was Cornwall Lodge, Allsop Place, Regent's Park. She gave this address when sailing on the liner \"St Paul\" across the Atlantic in August 1916, and the 1920 London electoral register has de Bathe, Emilie Charlotte (Lady), listed at the same address. A letter sold at auction in 2014 from Langtry to Dr. Harvey dated 1918 is also headed with this address. Langtry was a cousin of local politician Philip Le Breton, pioneer for the preservation of Hampstead Heath, whose wife was Anna Letitia Aikin.\nThere are two bars in New York City devoted to the memory of Lillie Langtry, operating under the title Lillie's Victorian Establishment. \nJudge Roy Bean named the saloon, in Pecos, Texas, The Jersey Lily, which also served as the judge's courthouse, for her, in Langtry, Texas (named after the unrelated engineer George Langtry).\nSpurious associations.\nBournemouth.\nIn 1938 the new owners of the Red House at 26 Derby Road, Bournemouth, which had been built in 1877 by the widowed women's rights campaigner and temperance activist Emily Langton Langton, converted the large house into a hotel, the Manor Heath Hotel, and advertised it as having been built for Lillie Langtry by the Prince of Wales, believing that the inscription 'E.L.L. 1877' in one of the rooms related to Lillie Langtry. A plaque was later placed on the hotel by Bournemouth Council repeating the assertion, and in the late 1970s the hotel was renamed Langtry Manor. However, despite the hotel's claims and local legend, no actual association between Langtry and the house ever existed and the Prince never visited it.\nSouth Hampstead.\nOn 2 April 1965 the \"Evening Standard\" reported an interview with Electra Yaras (born c. 1922), leaseholder and resident of Leighton House, 103 Alexandra Road, South Hampstead, who claimed in the interview that Langtry had lived in the house and regularly entertained the Prince of Wales there. Yaras claimed that she herself had been visited in the house several times by Langtry's ghost.\nOn 11 April 1971 \"The Hampstead News\" said that the house had been built for Langtry by Lord Leighton. These claims by Yaras and later by \"The Hampstead News\" were made in order to suggest an historical importance for the house and support its preservation from the demolition which had been originally ordered in 1965 and revived in 1971. The claims were supported in 1971 by actress Adrienne Corri, who lived nearby and signed a petition, and were publicised in \"The Times\" on 8 October 1971 and \"The Daily Telegraph\" on 9 October 1971. They were given further publicity by Anita Leslie in 1973 in a book on the Marlborough House set.\nThe house was nevertheless demolished in 1971 to make way for the Alexandra Road Estate.\nIn 2021, published research revealed that the house had been built in the 1860s by Samuel Litchfield and was likely named after his wife's birthplace of Leighton Buzzard. Lengthy research into local records by Dick Weindling and Marianne Colloms revealed no connection whatever with Langtry.\nThe persistence of the myth, propounded in a time when stories about the royal family were easy to publicise and received no critical or substantiating research, resulted in Langtry's name still being in use in some place names and locales in the South Hampstead area. These include Langtry Road off Kilburn Priory; Langtry Walk in the Alexandra Road Estate; and the Lillie Langtry pub at 121 Abbey Road (defunct since late 2022), built in 1969 to replace The Princess of Wales hotel, and briefly called The Cricketers from 2007 to 2011. The mythologising also includes The Lillie Langtry pub at 19 Lillie Road in Fulham\u2014the road actually took its name from local landowner John Scott Lillie.\nSteam yacht \"White Ladye\".\nLangtry owned a luxury steam auxiliary yacht called \"White Ladye\" from 1891 to 1897. The yacht was built in 1891 for Lord Asburton by Ramage &amp; Ferguson of Leith, Scotland, from a design by W. C. Storey. She had three masts, was 204 feet in length and 27 feet in breadth and was powered by a 142\u00a0hp steam engine. She had originally been named \"Ladye Mabel\".\nIn 1893, Ogden Goelet leased the vessel from Langtry and used it until his death in 1897. Langtry put the \"White Ladye\" up for auction in November 1897 at the Mart, Tokenhouse Yard, London. It was sold to Scottish entrepreneur John Lawson Johnston, the creator of Bovril. He owned it until his death on board in 1900. From 1902 to 1903, the yacht was recorded in the Lloyd's Yacht Register as being owned by shipbuilder William Cresswell Gray, Tunstall Manor, West Hartlepool, and remained so until 1915. Following this the Lloyd's Register records that she became adapted as French trawler \"La Champagne\" based in F\u00e9camp, northwest France; she was broken up in 1935.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69812", "revid": "97297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69812", "title": "Cambodia/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "69813", "revid": "50263362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69813", "title": "Houtman Abrolhos", "text": "Group of islands and reefs off Western Australia\nThe Houtman Abrolhos (often called the Abrolhos Islands) is a chain of 122 islands and associated coral reefs in the Indian Ocean off the west coast of Australia about west of Geraldton, Western Australia. It is the southernmost true coral reef in the Indian Ocean, and one of the highest latitude reef systems in the world.\nIt is one of the world's most important seabird breeding sites, and the centre of Western Australia's largest single-species fishery, the western rock lobster fishery. It has a small seasonal population of fishermen, and a limited number of tourists are permitted for day trips, but most of the land area is off-limits as a conservation habitat. It is the site of numerous shipwrecks, the most famous being two Dutch ships: , which was wrecked in 1629 (followed by massacre of over 100 survivors by mutineers), and , wrecked in 1727.\nThe islands are an unincorporated area with no municipal government, subject to direct administration of the Government of Western Australia. In July 2019, the Houtman Abrolhos was declared a national park by the state government.\nGeography.\nWallabi GroupEaster GroupPelsaert Group Houtman Abrolhos from space\nThe Houtman Abrolhos archipelago is in the Indian Ocean off the west coast of Australia, about west of Geraldton in the state of Western Australia. Its 122 islands and associated coral reefs comprise three island groups, the Wallabi Group, Easter Group and Pelsaert Group.\nThe most northerly group, the Wallabi Group, consists of an island clump about by , and also takes in the outlying North Island to the north-west. The main islands of the Wallabi Group are North Island, West Wallabi Island, East Wallabi Island and Beacon Island. The group is best known for the shipwreck of \"Batavia\" on Morning Reef near Beacon Island in 1629, and the subsequent mutiny and massacre that took place among the survivors.\nThe Easter Group lies to the southeast of the Wallabi Group, from which it is separated by a channel named Middle Channel. It is about , and consists of a number of islands, including Rat Island, Wooded Island, Morley Island, Suomi Island and Alexander Island.\nFurther to the southeast, across Zeewijk Channel, lies the Pelsaert Group, the most southerly true coral reef in the Indian Ocean. The main islands of this group are Middle Island, Square Island, Long Island, Pelsaert Island, Basile Island and the Mangrove Group. A great many ships have been wrecked in the Pelsaert Group, most notably \"Zeewijk\", which was wrecked on the Half Moon Reef in 1727, the survivors staying on Gun Island for some time afterwards. Other wrecks include \"Ocean Queen\", wrecked on the Half Moon Reef in 1842; \"Ben Ledi\", wrecked off Pelsaert Island in 1879; \"Windsor\", wrecked on the Half Moon Reef in 1908.; and possibly \"Ridderschap van Holland\" in 1694 and \"Aagtekerke\" in 1727.\nGovernance.\nThe islands are a part of Western Australia. They are part of the Electoral district of Geraldton, and the City of Greater Geraldton. In July 2019, the Houtman Abrolhos was declared a national park by the Western Australian Government.\nIn early November 2022, the government published its three-part plan to manage the site in the following 10 years, based on research and community consultation carried out after the preceding two years. Some critics thought that the plan did not encourage land-based tourism to the archipelago enough. A spokesperson for Western Australia's Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development said that their top priority is preservation of the wildlife on the islands.\nHistory.\nAboriginal people visited the islands during the Holocene, as indicated by the discovery on Beacon Island of a flaked stone artefact made from Eocene fossiliferous chert.\nDiscovery by Europeans.\nAccording to the surviving historical record, the first sighting of the Houtman Abrolhos by Europeans was in 1619, sailing the Dutch VOC ships \"Dordrecht\" and \"Amsterdam\", only three years after Dirk Hartog made the first authenticated sighting of what is now Western Australia, and only 13 years after the first authenticated European voyage to Australia by the \"Duyfken\", in 1606. Discovery of the islands was credited to Frederick de Houtman, Captain-General of \"Dordrecht\", as it was Houtman who later wrote about the discovery in a letter to the directors of the Dutch East India Company:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the 29th do. deeming ourselves to be in an open sea, we shaped our course north-by-east. At noon we were in 29\u00b0 32' S. Lat.; at night about three hours before daybreak, we again unexpectedly came upon a low-lying coast, a level, broken country with reefs all round it. We saw no high land or mainland, so that this shoal is to be carefully avoided as very dangerous to ships that wish to touch at this coast. It is fully ten miles in length, lying in 28\u00b0 46.\nThe word is Portuguese, making the Houtman Abrolhos one of only two Australian places with a Portuguese name, the other being Pedra Branca in Tasmania. The noun means 'thorn', and originally designated the spiny fruit of the bindii plant (\"Tribulus terrestris\"). Etymologically it is a contraction of the Portuguese expression (transl.\u2009open your eyes; that is, to protect yourself). As a technical term this phytonym was later applied to caltrops (chevaux de frise), i.e. \"spiked obstructions\", and Portuguese sailors used the word to refer to offshore reefs.\nHoutman thus named the islands using a Portuguese loanword that was current in the Dutch marine terminology of the time. John Forsyth states that the islands are named after the Abrolhos Archipelago off the east coast of Brazil, which was discovered and named by Portuguese navigators early in the 16th century. That position is supported by the fact that Houtman was familiar with the Abrolhos Archipelago, having sailed through it in 1598. Others assert that \"abrolhos\" was a Portuguese lookout's cry which, like many other Portuguese maritime terms, was taken up by sailors of other nationalities, becoming, by Houtman's time, a Dutch loan word for offshore reefs. Additionally, Frederick De Houtman had at least some grasp of Portuguese, having been sent by Amsterdam merchants to Lisbon from 1592\u00a0\u2013 1594 with his brother Cornelis to learn about the Portuguese route to the Indies. Frederick also appears to have been a keen linguist, having published the first-known Dutch-Malay and Dutch-Malagasy dictionaries in 1603. He appears to have been fluent-enough in Portuguese that he might have used an evocative Portuguese word if it described the area better than any Dutch word did.\nIt has been argued by proponents of the theory of Portuguese discovery of Australia that the Portuguese name is evidence that the islands were charted by Portuguese navigators in the 16th century. Kenneth McIntyre, for example, claimed that Houtman was in possession of Portuguese maps of the west coast of Australia, and that he named the islands \"abrolhos\" in accordance with the name on those maps. Charting of the islands was previously credited to Jorge de Menezes, but is now only listed as a possibility.\nThe primary piece of evidence used to support the claim of Portuguese priority is the 16th century Dieppe maps, some of which are alleged to show the west coast of Australia, including an island at the position of the Houtman Abrolhos. That island is unlabelled on most of the Dieppe maps but, on Pierre Desceliers' 1550 map, it is labelled \"Arenes\". In 1895, George Collingridge suggested that \"Arenes\" was a corruption of \"Abrolhos\", but that was mocked by J.\u2009E. Heeres in 1898, and, according to J.\u2009S. Battye, \"this suggestion can scarcely be regarded seriously. It certainly does not in any way add to the merit of the Portuguese claim\".\nSetting aside the Portuguese claims, the Houtman Abrolhos first appear on a map in 1622, on a little-known portolan by Hessel Gerritsz. They are unlabelled, marked merely as a group of small circles. They are first named in print in Gerritsz' 1627 map \"Caert van't Landt van d'Eendracht\", where they bear the label \"Fr. Houtman's abrolhos\". On a map produced by Gerritsz the following year, they are labelled \"Houtman's Abrolhos\".\nOn British Admiralty charts, the islands are labelled \"Houtman's Rocks\".\nWreck of \"Batavia\".\nIn 1629, some of the islands were the scene of an infamous shipwreck and mutiny. The Dutch ship , under the command of Francisco Pelsaert, ran aground on her maiden voyage to the port of Batavia, the capital of the Dutch East Indies. Pelsaert and some of his crew set off in an open boat to Batavia (now Jakarta) to get help. A group of the crew who remained on some of the islets terrorised and killed many of the other crew and passengers, including women and children. When Pelsaert returned, a number of the culprits were executed.\nWreck of \"Zeewijk\".\nThe was the last of the four Dutch East Indiamen to be wrecked on the west coast of Australia. Due to the Ship's Council having made the inexplicable decision to disregard sailing orders and actually seek out the west coast of Australia, the ship ran onto the Half Moon Reef at about 7:30\u00a0pm on 9 June 1727. It did not break up immediately, and the heavy swell made evacuation impossible until 18 June. The longboat was launched on that day, and the crew and stores were thereafter gradually transferred to nearby Gun Island. Later, the men landed ten chests of money, containing 315,836 guilders and weighing a total of .\nThe crew of \"Zeewijk\" were stranded in the Pelsaert Group for ten months, during which time they lived off seals, seabirds, eggs, and victuals salvaged from the wreck. They obtained some water from rainfall, but were forced to explore throughout the group in search of further supplies. A great many men died on the islands, including two boys who were accused of sodomy and marooned on separate islands of the Mangrove Group.\nOn 10 July the longboat, fitted for a voyage and crewed with eleven men, was sent to Batavia to obtain help. It never arrived there, and nothing is known of its fate. Four months later the castaways began building a boat, sufficient to carry all the men and the money chests. Completed in March 1728 and affectionately named \"Sloepie\" (\"little sloop\"), it was the first ocean-going vessel built in Australian history. On 26 March 1728, the surviving men set sail for Batavia, arriving in Sunda Strait late the following month.\nGun Island and phosphate mining.\nDuring Admiralty surveys of the north west coast in 1840, crew from discovered a brass gun of about three pounds calibre, an iron swivel on which paint still adhered as well as numerous other artefacts signifying European occupation, on the largest island in the Pelsart Group. The commander, John Clements Wickham, named the place Gun Island and the passage between the Easter and Pelsart Groups, Zeewijk Channel. Later during the 19th century many islets were used by men collecting guano.\nA lease to mine rock phosphate on the islands was obtained by Charles Broadhurst in 1884. After surveying the area he constructed a plant, stone jetty and tramways on Rat Island, a number of buildings on Rat, Gun and Pelsaert islands and had over 40 Malay workers mining and processing the phosphate for export. Over was shipped between 1884 and 1896.\nTenure, governance and management.\nThe islands are a part of the Division of Durack in the federal House of Representatives and the electoral district of Geraldton in the Western Australian Legislative Council. Management is vested in the Department of Fisheries.\nGeology.\nSome of the islands are considered to be remnants of the mainland isolated by rising sea level during the last 8,000 to 10,000 years. Others were more recently formed from coral rubble.\nOceanography.\nBathymetry.\nThe Houtman Abrolhos lies in the Indian Ocean about 60 kilometres (40\u00a0mi) off the coast of Western Australia, near the edge of Australia's continental shelf. At less than 50 metres (160\u00a0ft) deep, the shelf is quite shallow. It is also fairly level, the depth increasing to the west at a modest gradient of about 1.3 metres per kilometre (7\u00a0ft/mi). About five kilometres (3\u00a0mi) to the west of the Houtman Abrolhos lies the shelf break, beyond which the seabed falls away much more steeply, averaging around 50 metres per kilometre (260\u00a0ft/mi).\nThe islands of each island group arise from a single carbonate platform, so the waters within an island group are mostly shallow. The channels between groups are deep, so no impediment to the exchange of offshore and inshore waters.\nCurrents.\nThe Houtman Abrolhos lies almost directly in the path of the Leeuwin Current, which draws warm, low-saline water of tropical origin southwards along the coast of Western Australia. This current flows all year round, but is strongest during Southern Hemisphere winter months. In general the Leeuwin Current runs along the shelf break, and thus passes close by the western edge of the Abrolhos. It meanders, sometimes passing well out to sea and sometimes directly through the island chain, bathing it in warm tropical water; Although the direction of the Leeuwin Current is predominantly southerly, Shark Bay and the Houtman Abrolhos together act as a topographical trigger for the forming of eddies, so the Abrolhos can experience currents from any direction, even when the Leeuwin Current is flowing strongly.\nUnlike most other major ocean currents, there is no large-scale coastal upwelling associated with the Leeuwin Current. There is limited evidence for some sporadic, localised upwelling in the vicinity of the Abrolhos, but if so it appears to have little effect on the extremely low levels of nutrients in the water.\nTemperature and salinity.\nSea temperature at the islands varies according to a diurnal cycle, with the water at its coldest between six and eight in the morning, and at its warmest between three and four in the afternoon. In summer the daily temperature range is around 1\u00a0\u00b0C (2\u00a0\u00b0F); in winter it is about half that.\nThere is also an annual cycle, with sea temperature varying by a little less than 4\u00a0\u00b0C (7\u00a0\u00b0F) over the year, peaking at nearly 24\u00a0\u00b0C (75\u00a0\u00b0F) in March, and falling to around 20\u00a0\u00b0C (68\u00a0\u00b0F) in September. This variability is much less than in nearby coastal waters, which reaches a similar peak in summer but drops as low as 18\u00a0\u00b0C (64\u00a0\u00b0F) in winter. The relatively low variability in sea temperatures at the Abrolhos is largely attributable to the Leeuwin Current, which bathes the islands in warm tropical water during winter months.\nA similar annual pattern occurs in salinity. There is a clear seasonal variation, with values ranging from a summer high of around 35.7 ppt, to a winter low of around 35.4 ppt. As with water temperatures, the variability in salinity is much smaller than in coastal waters, where summer salinity reaches 36.4 ppt. This difference is partly due to the low-salinity waters of the Leeuwin Current, but there are a number of other factors involved, including high evaporation of coastal waters in summer.\nTemperatures can also vary substantially from year to year. Annual mean temperatures vary by as much as 1\u00a0\u00b0C (2\u00a0\u00b0F); with cooler years usually cooler throughout the year. There is evidence that annual mean temperatures are related to El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation events.\nThe water column is generally well-mixed, with no evidence of a significant halocline or thermocline. Mean differences in water temperature between sea surface and sea bed range from only half a degree (Celsius; 1\u00a0\u00b0F) in summer to almost zero in winter, and differences in salinity are very small even when the Leeuwin Current is at its strongest.\nSea levels.\nAs with the rest of southwestern Australia, tides at the Houtman Abrolhos are small and irregular. There is little tidal data available for the islands, but what there is accords very closely with the data for Geraldton. Geraldton tides follow a diurnal pattern, with maximum tidal ranges of around 1 metre (3\u00a0ft).\nMean sea levels at Geraldton show seasonal fluctuations, being higher in winter when the Leeuwin Current is at its peak. There are also variations from year to year, which are strongly associated with the El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle. Apparently, ENSO events induce a weaker Leeuwin Current, which results in lower sea levels.\nThere is no published information on wave heights in the Abrolhos. In the open ocean, waves are typically a little over two metres high all year round. Nearer the mainland, they are usually less than , with a calmer period in March and April, and another in October and November.\nClimate.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the Australian Bureau of Meteorology has not published climatic data for the Houtman Abrolhos. An automatic weather station has been installed on North Island since 1990, and hourly measures of precipitation, air temperature, wind speed, wind direction, relative humidity and atmospheric pressure have been publicly available since then. Based on this and other data, researchers have put together a picture of the Abrolhos' climate.\nThe islands have a Mediterranean climate (semi-arid climate, or BSh, under K\u00f6ppen climate classification) with warm dry summers and cooler, wet winters. Mean temperatures range from in July, and from in February. These temperatures have a substantially smaller range than on the mainland: the summer temperature is typically a degree cooler, while winter temperatures are a good deal warmer. This is due to the influence of the ocean, and to the Leeuwin Current.\n86% of the rain falls between April and September; on average there are 89 raindays, resulting in of rain. The wettest month is June, when over typically falls. In contrast, only about can be expected to fall between October and March.\nIt is nearly always windy. During summer a high pressure ridge lies to the south, causing persistent winds from the southeast or southwest, at speeds exceeding almost half the time. During autumn and winter, the ridge moves northwards, increasing the atmospheric pressure over the islands, resulting in highly variable winds. Winter tends to produce both the strongest gales and the most frequent periods of calm.\nIn addition to these winds, there is daily pattern of land breezes in the morning, followed by the onset of south-westerly sea breezes in the afternoon. This pattern is caused by temperature differences between the land and the ocean, and is not as strong in the Houtman Abrolhos as on the mainland, but is present nonetheless.\nThree classes of storm have been identified for the region. Brief squalls may occur between December and April. A tropical cyclone occurs in the area about once in three years, between January and April; these may generate extremely high wind speeds that are potentially destructive. During winter, extra-tropical cyclones sometimes pass south of Geraldton, generating winter gales with gusts of up to 35 metres per second, the wind direction from the northwest initially, then gradually moving around to southerly.\nBiogeography.\nUnder the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA), the islands of the Houtman Abrolhos fall within the Geraldton Hills subregion of the Geraldton Sandplains region. The main biogeographic significance of the islands is their isolation, allowing them to provide refugia for such threatened fauna as tammar wallabies (\"Macropus eugenii\"), Australian sea lions (\"Neophoca cinerea\") and rare breeding seabirds.\nIn marine terms, the Houtman Abrolhos is located within the Southwest Shelf Transition, an Integrated Marine and Coastal Regionalisation of Australia (IMCRA) biotone that takes in the continental shelf from Perth to Geraldton. This province is defined as the area of shelf where tropical waters intergrade into temperate, thus supporting both tropical and temperate biota. In addition, this area contains the highest concentration of west coast endemics.\nConsistent with this, the Houtman Abrolhos contains a mix of tropical, temperate and west coast endemic fauna, resulting in unusual associations such as the occurrence of tropical corals in close association with temperate macro-algae. The proportions of tropical, temperate and west coast endemic biota vary from taxonomic group to group, but in general the biota is dominated by tropical species. This is attributable to the location of the Houtman Abrolhos at the northern limit of the Southwest Shelf Transition, together with the warming influence of the Leeuwin Current.\nUnder IMCRA, the Southwest Shelf Transition divides into two meso-scale bioregions. One is named \"Abrolhos Islands\", and covers the shelf waters surrounding the Houtman Abrolhos, with an area of . The other bioregion, Central West Coast, covers the remaining area.\nTerrestrial flora.\nThe vegetation of the Houtman Abrolhos islands is dominated by chenopod shrubs. The flora is generally the same as the coastal flora of the adjacent mainland, with the exception of the islands' mangrove, saltbush and salt lake vegetation.\nFlora.\nThe vascular flora of the Houtman Abrolhos has been thoroughly surveyed, and species lists have been published for 119 islands. As of 2001, these lists totalled 239 species from 68 families. A further six species have been collected in the Houtman Abrolhos, but cannot be allocated to islands because insufficient location information was recorded. There have also been collections of mosses, liverworts and lichens, but no information has been published on these non-vascular groups.\nThe islands with the greatest floristic diversity are East and West Wallabi Islands, with 124 and 97 species respectively. 54 species occur in all three island groups. The most widely distributed species are \"Nitraria billardierei\" (nitre bush), which has been recorded on 106 islands; the exotic \"Mesembryanthemum crystallinum\" (iceplant), on 88 islands; \"Threlkeldia diffusa\" (coast bonefruit), on 72 islands; and \"Atriplex cinerea\" (grey saltbush), on 70 islands. On the other hand, \"Eucalyptus oraria\" (ooragmandee) and \"Acacia didyma\" occur only on East Wallabi Island.\nAs of 2001, five species of priority flora occurred on the islands. One, \"Acacia didyma\", is no longer considered a priority species. The remaining priority species are \"Chthonocephalus tomentellus\", which is rated Priority Two under the Department of Environment and Conservation's Declared Rare and Priority Flora List; \"Calocephalus aervoides\" and \"Galium migrans\", both Priority Three; and \"Lepidium puberulum\", Priority Four.\nNinety-five exotic species from 29 families have been recorded. In general, islands that have or had human settlements are the weediest. Of greatest concern is the noxious weed \"Lycium ferocissimum\" (African boxthorn), which has long spines that can trap birds. This weed was recorded on the islands as early as 1970. Efforts to eradicate it began in 1990; there was a lull in eradication in the late 1990s, but the program was later reinstated, and in July 2007, the Department of Environment and Conservation reported that the species had been eradicated from 14 of the 18 islands on which it had been recorded. Other noxious weeds include \"Opuntia stricta\" (prickly pear), \"Verbesina encelioides\" and \"Echium plantagineum\" (Paterson's curse).\nTerrestrial fauna.\nBirds.\nThe Houtman Abrolhos is home to around 100 species of bird; for a complete list, see list of birds of the Houtman Abrolhos. Six species are land birds, and three are shore birds. The remainder, the vast majority, are seabirds. Most seabird species have a tropical distribution, but some occur in both tropical and warm-temperate seas, and a small number are warm-temperate only.\nWhen numbers of individuals are taken into account, the tropical birds overwhelmingly dominate. The islands are one of the most important breeding sites for tropical seabirds in Australia and have been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area (IBA). They contain by far the largest colonies of wedge-tailed shearwater in the eastern Indian Ocean, with over a million breeding pairs recorded there in 1994. They also contain Western Australia's only breeding colonies of the lesser noddy, and the largest colonies in Western Australia of the little shearwater, white-faced storm petrel, common noddy, Caspian tern, crested tern, roseate tern and fairy tern. In addition, they contain important breeding areas for the Pacific reef heron, Pacific gull, bridled tern, white-bellied sea eagle and osprey.\nThere are two subspecies of bird endemic to the islands. The Abrolhos painted button-quail occurs only on five islands in the Wallabi Group, and is protected as rare under the \"Wildlife Conservation Act 1950\". Also gazetted as rare, the Australasian subspecies of the lesser noddy, \"Anous tenuirostris melanops\", breeds only on Wooded Island, Morley Island and Pelsaert Island.\nMammals.\nOnly two species of land mammal are indigenous to the Houtman Abrolhos, the tammar wallaby (\"Macropus eugenii\") and the bush rat (\"Rattus fuscipes\"). Both are native only to West and East Wallabi Islands, although \"R.\u00a0fuscipes\" has not been collected on East Wallabi Island since August 1967, and is probably extinct there. The tammar wallaby was seen on West Wallabi Island by survivors of the \"Batavia\" shipwreck, and recorded by Francisco Pelsart in his 1629 \"Ongeluckige Voyagie\". This represents the first recorded sighting of a macropod by Europeans, and probably also the first sighting of an Australian mammal. Tammar wallabies were introduced to North Island from East Wallabi Island by fishermen, probably in the 1950s, but failed to establish themselves. In 1987 they were reintroduced again, this time successfully. By the 2000s, there were over 400 wallabies on the island, resulting in overgrazing of native vegetation and increased erosion. Research into the effectiveness of controlling population levels by the use of implanted contraceptives was begun in 2005, but in July 2007 the research was discontinued and the population culled instead.\nTwo introduced mammals are established on the islands. The domestic cat (\"Felis silvestris catus\") was introduced to Rat Island around 1900, and the house mouse (\"Mus musculus\") was introduced onto North Island in the 1970s, presumably with food. In 1995 the house mouse was reported as also present on Rat Island for many years before 1987, but a recent report makes no mention of this. In addition, three introduced mammals were previously established in the Houtman Abrolhos, but have since been eradicated. The black rat (\"Rattus rattus\") was established on Pigeon and Rat Islands, but has been eradicated by poisoning. The European rabbit (\"Oryctolagus cuniculus\") has been introduced at various times onto Leo Island, Middle Island, Morley Island, Pelsaert Island and Wooded Island. In the case of Pelsaert Island, it is not clear whether it ever established; in all other cases, established populations have been eradicated by poisoning. The domestic goat (\"Capra aegagrus hircus\") is also reported to have been present on East Wallabi Island, but is no longer.\nReptiles.\n23 terrestrial reptile species are known to occur on the islands of the Houtman Abrolhos. This relatively low biodiversity is apparently due to the homogeneity of habitat on the islands, which provide few distinct ecological niches. The most significant terrestrial reptile species are the spiny-tailed skink (\"Egernia stokesii stokesii\") and the carpet python (\"Morelia spilota imbricata\"), both of which are listed as rare and therefore afforded special protection under the \"Wildlife Conservation Act 1950\"; and the Abrolhos dwarf bearded dragon (\"Pogona minor minima\"), a Houtman Abrolhos endemic that is listed as a Priority 4 species by the Department of Environment and Conservation. For a full list of species, see list of reptiles of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nAmphibians.\nSpecimens of the pobblebonk (\"Limnodynastes dorsalis\") and the turtle frog (\"Myobatrachus gouldii\") were collected from the Houtman Abrolhos during the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition of 1913 and 1915, but no amphibians have been recorded on the islands since that time.\nMarine flora.\nAlgae.\n260 species of benthic algae have been recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos. This figure comprises 178 species of red algae (Rhodophyta), 50 species of brown algae (Phaeophyta) and 32 species of green algae (Chlorophyta). Both temperate and tropical species are present, in many cases near the northern or southern extent of their range. For a full list, see list of algae of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nSeagrass.\nOnly ten species of seagrass have been recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos. Seven of these are temperate species at or near the northern limit of their range; the other three have a tropical distribution. That there are so few tropical species may be due to periods of low sea temperatures, or the small areas of suitable habitat at the Abrolhos; alternatively it may be that more collecting effort is needed in habitats that suit tropical species. The seagrass species recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos islands are:\nMarine fauna.\nFish.\nAt last count, a total of 389 species of fish have been recorded from the Houtman Abrolhos. 16 species occur in very large numbers; in decreasing order of abundance, these are:\nCommercially important species include \"Pagrus auratus\" (pink snapper), \"Choerodon rubescens\" (baldchin groper), \"Glaucosoma hebraicum\" (westralian dhufish) and \"Plectropomus leopardus\" (coral trout). For a complete list of fish species recorded at the Houtman Abrolhos, see List of fishes of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nAbout two-thirds of the total number of species are tropical in distribution, the remainder being subtropical or warm-temperate. This ratio also holds for the most abundant species, eleven of the sixteen species being tropical. On the other hand, over 70% of tropical species occur in extremely low numbers, so low in fact that they are thought not to maintain breeding populations at the Abrolhos; rather, populations are maintained by larvae carried to the islands by the Leeuwin Current from populations further north.\nMarine mammals.\nThe Houtman Abrolhos maintains a breeding population of Australian sea lions (\"Neophoca cinerea\"), probably numbering between 75 and 100. Historical data suggests numbers were previously much higher; for example, in 1727, survivors of the \"Zeewyk\" shipwreck killed over 150 sea lions in the Southern Group alone. This has led to a 1727 population estimate of between 290 and 580 animals for the entire Houtman Abrolhos. Populations apparently fell dramatically between the 1840s and the 1880s, largely due to extensive commercial sealing in the area. In addition to direct killing of the animals, it is likely that much of the mangrove habitat on the islands was cleared as fuel for trypots, and this may have affected the survival of young pups. Populations are thought to have been fairly stable for the last fifty years, although the lack of genetic diversity in the smaller population remains of concern, as does climate change.\nSea lions come ashore to rest on leeward beaches throughout the island chain, but only a small number of these \"haulout sites\" are used for breeding. Breeding has been observed on Serventy Island, Gilbert Island, Alexander Island, Suomi Island, Keru Island, Square Island, Stick Island, Gibson Island, Gun Island, Morley Island and Wooded Island. All but the last three of these are considered current breeding sites, and are therefore considered by the Department of Fisheries to have a high conservation value.\nLittle information is available on other marine mammals at the Abrolhos, as no direct research on this subject has been undertaken. Sightings of the humpback whale (\"Megaptera novaeangliae\"), followed by southern rights (\"Eubalaena australis\"), are common between April and October, when the whales are migrating. Other marine mammals sometimes sighted at the islands include pygmy Bryde's whale (\"Balaenoptera edeni\"), orca (\"Orcinus orca\"), bottlenose dolphin (\"Tursiops aduncus\"), common dolphin (\"Delphinus delphis\"), and striped dolphin (\"Stenella coeruleoalba\").\nMarine reptiles.\nThe green turtle (\"Chelonia mydas\") and the loggerhead turtle (\"Caretta caretta\") both live in the waters off the Houtman Abrolhos, albeit in low numbers. Neither species breeds in the area, as water temperatures are too low.\nCoral.\nThe Houtman Abrolhos is unusual in having a luxuriant and diverse living coral reef at such a high latitude. 194 species in 50 genera have been recorded there, all but two of which are tropical. This is a surprisingly high coral diversity, considering the high latitude of the reef, and the relatively low diversity of other biota. For a full list, see list of corals of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nThe coral reef community at the Houtman Abrolhos is unusual in having tropical coral growing alongside and in direct competition with, temperate seaweed. As a result of this competition for light, space and nutrients, coral at the Houtman Abrolhos tends to grow more slowly and die younger than is usual. Reef production is to a large extent due to the production of carbon by coralline algae rather than by coral.\nCrustaceans.\nThe most notable species of crustacean at the Houtman Abrolhos is the western rock lobster (\"Panulirus cygnus\"). 44 species of crab and 9 species of amphipod were recorded there by the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition of 1916.\nMolluscs.\n492 species of marine mollusc have been recorded from the shallow waters of the Houtman Abrolhos. These are predominantly gastropods (346 species, 70%) and bivalves (124, 25%); the remaining 5% of species consist of cephalopods (14 species), chitons (5 species) and scaphopods (3 species). About two-thirds of the species have a tropical distribution, temperate species account for 20%, and the remaining 11% are endemic to Western Australia. For a full list, see List of molluscs of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nThe southern saucer scallop (\"Amusium balloti\") is the only commercially important species. This occurs in sheltered areas of medium-fine sand in deep water to the north-east of the reefs; it is usually the dominant species there.\nEchinoderms.\nHoutman Abrolhos has an extremely high diversity of echinoderms, with 172 species having been recorded there. 63% of these are tropical species, 14% are temperate, and 22% are endemic to Western Australia. None is endemic to the Houtman Abrolhos. Published surveys have not included observations of the crown-of-thorns starfish (\"Ananthaster planci\"), but individuals have occasionally been observed there. For a complete list of species, see list of echinoderms of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nSponges, worms and hydroids.\nThe sponges of the Houtman Abrolhos are poorly studied, although 109 species of demosponge have been collected there. In the most recent survey, 77 species were collected, of which around half are probably new to science. Only two locations were surveyed in this study, so this figure is likely to represent only a small proportion of the total sponge fauna of the Houtman Abrolhos; the islands are therefore thought to harbour an extremely rich diversity of sponges. A preliminary assessment suggested that there were more temperate species than tropical, which stands in marked contrast to most other groups.\nThe marine worms identified at the Houtman Abrolhos include 22 species of the polychaete family Terebellidae, and 16 species of the family oligochaete family Tubificidae. For a list of species, see list of worms of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nA total of 38 hydroid species have been collected at the Houtman Abrolhos. 34 of these are leptothecates, the remainder being anthoathecates. 92% of the species attach to temperate algae, the others to coral rubble. For a list of species, see list of hydroids of the Houtman Abrolhos.\nHuman uses.\nFishing and tourism.\nFresh water has always been a significant constraint on any permanent settlement. Aside from the early castaways noted above, the Islands have only had a small seasonal population of fishermen. The present fishermen all have permanent residence elsewhere, mainly in Geraldton, but their island shacks are used as a base during the season. For example, North Island has a seasonal camp for western rock lobster fishers, with individual moorings and simple dwellings. During lobster season, which runs from 15 March to 30 June, the island hosts up to 130 people. The camp is serviced by a carrier boat, the North Islander, which visits the island every three days, bringing supplies and taking out the catch and any domestic waste.\nTourists are not allowed to camp, and the conservation designation of the Island group forbids any real expansion in human occupation.\nWestern rock lobster.\nThe islands are the centre of the western rock lobster fishery, the largest single-species fishery in Western Australia.\nSaucer scallops.\nAfter Shark Bay, the Houtman Abrolhos supports Western Australia's second largest saucer scallop fishery. This fishery is managed under the \"Abrolhos Islands and Mid West Trawl Limited Entry Fishery Notice 1993\". Only 17 licences have been issued, and no more will be made available, as the saucer scallop is considered fully exploited. Licensees are constrained to operate only during scallop season, which generally runs from 1 April to 30 June, and are also subject to restrictions on gear design, boat size and crew numbers.\nScallop fishers mainly operate east of the Houtman Abrolhos and between the island groups, in waters deeper than . Activity is targeted at sheltered areas of bare sand, where scallops tend to settle. Catches vary greatly from year to year; from 2001 to 2003, for example, the total annual catch totalled (whole weight) respectively. This variability is apparently related to the strength of the Leeuwin Current, as strong current is correlated with low scallop recruitment.\nThe total value of the fishery in 2003 was A$19.6 million, although this figure includes a small prawn fishery operating out of Port Gregory. Most of the catch is frozen and exported to Asia.\nFinfish.\nThe Houtman Abrolhos is the site of some wetlining activity.\nAquaculture.\nThe Department of Fisheries have issued a number of licences to cultivate black-lip pearl oysters in the Abrolhos. The first recipient of a license was Abrolhos Pearls in 1996. By 2000, another license had been issued and four more applications had been received. A year later, there were licensed for the culture of pearl oysters in the Abrolhos, of which about 21% was actually in use, carrying over 210,000 shell. Six licences had been issued by 2002, and by 2007 that number had grown to eight.\n95% of the pearl aquaculture is carried out in the Pelsaert Group. Most licenses are over areas of sand, but some areas contain small amounts of coral reef. The colour of the pearls produced is quite different from that of Pacific black pearls, and this is considered a potential marketing tool.\nIn addition to pearl aquaculture, a pilot sea cage finfish farm was licensed in 2004, although as of 2007[ [update]] the license had not been exercised. Interest has also been expressed in the culture of live rock and coral for the aquarium industry. The Department of Fisheries has identified a number of species as having potential for aquaculture in the Abrolhos, including the Shark Bay pearl oyster (\"Pinctada albina\"), the maxima clam (\"Tridacna maxima\"), rock oysters (\"Saccostrea\" sp.), the saucer scallop (\"Amusium balloti\"), the western rock lobster, and a number of species of finfish, most of which are filter feeders.\nMineral exploration.\nPetroleum exploration wells were drilled in Abrolhos waters in the 1960s and 1970s, but were capped and abandoned. The Abrolhos was amongst the areas released for further exploration in 2002.\nRecreation.\nThe Abrolhos provides some of the best snorkelling, diving and deep sea fishing in the world, along with some of Australia's most significant historical sights, such as the shipwreck of the \"Batavia\".\nAlthough an important tourist destination, the tourists are not allowed to stay overnight.\nCultural references.\nThe majority of cultural references to the Houtman Abrolhos relate to the islands' shipwrecks, particularly the \"Batavia\". The events surrounding the loss of the \"Batavia\" is one of the most celebrated episodes in Australian popular history; in the words of Henrietta Drake-Brockman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Australia, poets and schoolboys, artists and historians, have been inspired for half a century by the tragedy of an ancient shipwreck, a disaster that piled horror upon horror yet revealed so much of human fortitude as to invite comparison with the epic tales of Greece.\nThe story has spawned a massive body of literature, both fiction and non-fiction, as well as numerous works in other media.\nOther shipwrecks, notably \"Zeewijk\" (also spelled \"Zeewyk\"), have also become the subject of books and other works. Other cultural references to the Houtman Abrolhos are rare. By far the best known book on it is Malcolm Uren's \"Sailormen's ghosts: The Abrolhos islands in three hundred years of romance, history, and adventure\". First published in 1940, this book saw numerous editions published in the 1940s, and was even republished in 1980 as a \"West Australian classic\". In it, Uren tells both the history of the islands and the story of his own visit to the islands.\nOther books include William Bede Christie's 1909 \"Christmas on the briny: the innocents abroad, or, a holiday trip to the Abrolhos islands\", Deborah Lisson's 1991 The Devil's Own, and Alison Louise Wright's 1998 \"Abrolhos Islands Conversations\". The latter, a book of interviews and portraits of the people of the Abrolhos, won the Special Award in the 1999 Western Australian Premier's Book Awards.\nThe islands featured in the first episode of \"Surfing the Menu\", an eight-part food and travel series produced for the ABC in 2003, and the following year were featured on \"Getaway\", Australia's longest-running and most popular holiday and travel television programme. They were the subject of a motion picture entitled \"Eye opener\", published by The Film Centre WA in 1981, and of a piece of classical music entitled \"Abrolhos: A ceremonial overture\", written by William Stewart in 1988 under commission to the Geraldton Town Council.\nIn April 2019 the Houtman Abrolhos became the site of the failure of reportedly one of Australia's biggest drug smuggling operations, worth $73 million.\nIn 2020 a Western Australian man briefly established the Houtman Abrolhos Micro Nation, based on Uncle Margie Island. The self-declared 'prince' represented himself in the four-day trial in 2023 and relied on a bevy of pseudolegal claims to challenge the Department of Primary Industries &amp; Regional Development (DPIRD).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69814", "revid": "38446207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69814", "title": "Jethou", "text": "Island in Guernsey\n&lt;mapframe\ntext=\"Jethou\"\nwidth=230 \nheight=230 \nzoom=12\nlatitude=49.458333\nlongitude=-2.4625/&gt;\nJethou ( ) is a small island that is part of the Bailiwick of Guernsey in the Channel Islands. It is privately leased from the Crown, and not open to the public. Resembling the top of a wooded knoll, it is immediately southwest of Herm and covers approximately .\nHistory.\nThere is evidence of flint manufacturing in an area exposed only at low water between the island and Crevichon which shows occupation around 10,000 BC. It is said that in AD 709 a storm washed away the strip of land that connected the island with Herm.\nThe Vikings called the island . The island's current name retains the related Norman \"-hou\" suffix, meaning 'small island' or 'small hill'.\nIn 1416, it became part of Henry V's estate and still remains Crown property, now leased to the States of Guernsey.\nOn the top is a marker. It is said that in earlier times, pirates were hanged on it with chains, as on nearby Crevichon.\nModern history.\nIn 1867, Lt Colonel Montague Fielden became the island's tenant. However, he was discovered using the island as a storehouse for smuggling brandy from France.\nFrom 1920 to 1934, it was leased by the Scottish novelist Compton MacKenzie, along with Herm, and remained part of that estate for years, although it is currently part of a different one.\nFrom September 1964 until December 1971, the island was occupied by the Faed family: Angus Faed, his wife Susan Faed and their four children, Colin, Erik, Colette and Amanda. Mrs Susan Faed was the 22nd tenant of Jethou.\nIn the 1950s and 60s the island was open to the public. During that period postage stamps were issued. Local stamps on the Bailiwick of Guernsey were banned on 1 October 1969, and the Isle of Jethou was closed to the public from 1970.\nIn 1972, Charles Hayward, founder of the Firth Cleveland Group of Companies, purchased the Crown tenancy of the island and lived there with his wife Elsie Darnell George until his death in 1983.\nIn 1996 the island was leased by Sir Peter Ogden of IT company Computacenter.\nIt was recognised in 2016 as an area of international environmental importance under the Ramsar Convention.\nIt is flanked by two islets, Crevichon to the north and Fauconni\u00e8re to the south. There is one house on the island and two cottages, as well as a large garage, where vehicles such as quad bikes and tractors are stored.\nGovernance.\nUnlike the largely autonomous islands of Sark and Alderney within the Bailiwick, Jethou is administered entirely by the States of Guernsey. It belonged to the Electoral District of Saint Peter Port South, until the binding 2018 referendum implemented a single, island-wide constituency of which Jethou was a part of.\nWildlife.\nAt the back (east) of Jethou, puffins can be seen swimming off the rocks.\nJethou in popular culture.\nThe British 1957 musical \"Free as Air\" by Dorothy Reynolds and Julian Slade was set on the minor and fictitious Channel Island of 'Terhou', which was based on Jethou.\nMary Gentle's 2007 novel \"\" has a villainous noblewoman exiled to a convent in Jethou.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69815", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69815", "title": "Guernsey/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "69816", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69816", "title": "Malaysia/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "69817", "revid": "50553897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69817", "title": "Forensic engineering", "text": "Investigation of failures associated with legal intervention\nForensic engineering has been defined as \"the investigation of failures\u2014ranging from serviceability to catastrophic\u2014which may lead to legal activity, including both civil and criminal\". The forensic engineering field is very broad in terms of the many disciplines that it covers, investigations that use forensic engineering are case of environmental damages to structures, system failures of machines, explosions, electrical, fire point of origin, vehicle failures and many more.\nIt includes the investigation of materials, products, structures or components that fail or do not operate or function as intended, causing personal injury, damage to property or economic loss. The consequences of failure may give rise to action under either criminal or civil law including but not limited to health and safety legislation, the laws of contract and/or product liability and the laws of tort. The field also deals with retracing processes and procedures leading to accidents in operation of vehicles or machinery. Generally, the purpose of a forensic engineering investigation is to locate cause or causes of failure with a view to improve performance or life of a component, or to assist a court in determining the facts of an accident. It can also involve investigation of intellectual property claims, especially patents. In the US, forensic engineers require a professional engineering license from each state.\nHistory.\nAs the field of engineering has evolved over time, so has the field of forensic engineering. Early examples include investigation of bridge failures such as the Tay rail bridge disaster of 1879 and the Dee bridge disaster of 1847. Many early rail accidents prompted the invention of tensile testing of samples and fractography of failed components.\nInvestigation.\nVital to the field of forensic engineering is the process of investigating and collecting data related to the: materials, products, structures or components that failed. This involves: inspections, collecting evidence, measurements, developing models, obtaining exemplar products, and performing experiments. Often, testing and measurements are conducted in an Independent testing laboratory or other reputable unbiased laboratory.\nWhen investigating a case a forensic engineer will follow a series of standard steps of their investigation process. First thing is when the forensic engineer arrives to the scene is to establish safety, they make sure that all the hazards have been dealt with an are safe to handle and be analyzed. The next step would be to do an initial incident appraisal, this is done before any analysis is done and they take a quick observation of what the solution is at hand. The third step in the investigative process is to plan how to the investigation will go and would resources they will need to obtain to do the analysis accurately. Next would be establishing the terms of reverence, this is when the forensic engineer will consult with the client on what they want done in the investigation. The next step is to create the investigative team, once there is plan on how to investigate they will make a team of the experts in the given field needed to conduct the analysis. lastly would be to start the investigation, and this is where they conduct their analysis.\nAnalysis.\nThere are two main types of analysis done in forensic engineering: root cause analysis and failure analysis. Root cause analysis is defined as looking at the system as a whole and what led to the system failing, and is done with large-scale object, for example, a building collapse. Failure analysis is defined as the analysis of one part in the system that failed to operate. An example of this would be a car failure causing an accident. These two types of analysis are the initial assessments done when forensic engineering investigators start their investigation.\nFailure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) and fault tree analysis methods also examine product or process failure in a structured and systematic way, in the general context of safety engineering. However, all such techniques rely on accurate reporting of failure rates and precise ID, of the failure modes involved.\nThere is some common ground between forensic science and forensic engineering, such as scene of crime and scene of accident analysis, integrity of the evidence, and court appearances. Both disciplines make extensive use of optical and scanning electron microscopes, for example. They also share common use of spectroscopy (infrared, ultraviolet, and nuclear magnetic resonance) to examine critical evidence. Radiography using X-rays (such as X-ray computed tomography), or neutrons is also very useful in examining thick products for their internal defects before destructive examination is attempted. Often, however, a simple hand lens may reveal the cause of a particular problem.\nTrace evidence is sometimes an important factor in reconstructing the sequence of events in an accident. For example, tire burn marks on a road surface can enable vehicle speeds to be estimated, when the brakes were applied and so on. Ladder feet often leave a trace of movement of the ladder during a slip and may show how the accident occurred. When a product fails for no obvious reason, SEM and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) performed in the microscope can reveal the presence of aggressive chemicals that have left traces on the fracture or adjacent surfaces. Thus an acetal resin water pipe joint suddenly failed and caused substantial damages to a building in which it was situated. Analysis of the joint showed traces of chlorine, indicating a stress corrosion cracking failure mode. The failed fuel pipe junction mentioned above showed traces of sulfur on the fracture surface from the sulfuric acid, which had initiated the crack.\nExtracting physical evidence from digital photography is a major technique used in forensic accident reconstruction. Camera matching, photogrammetry, and photo rectification techniques are used to create three-dimensional and top-down views from the two-dimensional photos typically taken at an accident scene. Overlooked or undocumented evidence for accident reconstruction can be retrieved and quantified as long as photographs of such evidence are available. By using photographs of the accident scene including the vehicle, \"lost\" evidence can be recovered and accurately determined.\nForensic materials engineering involves methods applied to specific materials, such as metals, glasses, ceramics, composites and polymers.\nOrganizations.\nThe National Academy of Forensic Engineers (NAFE) was founded in 1982 by Marvin M. Specter, P.E., L.S.; Paul E. Pritzker, P.E., and William A. Cox Jr., P.E. to identify and bring together professional engineers having qualifications and expertise as practicing forensic engineers to further their continuing education and promote high standards of professional ethics and excellence of practice. It seeks to improve the practice, elevate the standards, and advance the cause of forensic engineering. Full membership in the academy is limited to Registered Professional Engineers who are also members of the National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE). They must also be members in an acceptable grade of a recognized major technical engineering society. NAFE also offers Affiliate grades of membership to those who do not yet qualify for Member grade. Full members are board-certified through the \"Council of Engineering and Scientific Specialty Boards\" and earn the title \"Diplomate of Forensic Engineering\", or \"DFE\". This is typically used after their designation as Profesional Engineer.\nExamples.\nThe broken fuel pipe shown at left caused a serious accident when diesel fuel poured out from a van onto the road. A following car skidded and the driver was seriously injured when she collided with an oncoming lorry. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed that the nylon connector had fractured by stress corrosion cracking (SCC) due to a small leak of battery acid. Nylon is susceptible to hydrolysis when in contact with sulfuric acid, and only a small leak of acid would have sufficed to start a brittle crack in the injection moulded nylon\u00a06,6 connector by SCC. The crack took about 7 days to grow across the diameter of the tube. The fracture surface showed a mainly brittle surface with striations indicating progressive growth of the crack across the diameter of the pipe. Once the crack had penetrated the inner bore, fuel started leaking onto the road.\nThe nylon\u00a06,6 had been attacked by the following reaction, which was catalyzed by the acid:\nDiesel fuel is especially hazardous on road surfaces because it forms a thin, oily film that cannot be easily seen by drivers. It is much like black ice in its slipperiness, so skids are common when diesel leaks occur. The insurers of the van driver admitted liability and the injured driver was compensated.\nApplications.\nMost manufacturing models will have a forensic component that monitors early failures to improve quality or efficiencies. Insurance companies use forensic engineers to prove liability or nonliability. Most engineering disasters (structural failures such as bridge and building collapses) are subject to forensic investigation by engineers experienced in forensic methods of investigation. Rail crashes, aviation accidents, and some automobile accidents are investigated by forensic engineers in particular where component failure is suspected. Furthermore, appliances, consumer products, medical devices, structures, industrial machinery, and even simple hand tools such as hammers or chisels can warrant investigations upon incidents causing injury or property damages. The failure of medical devices is often safety-critical to the user, so reporting failures and analysing them is particularly important. The environment of the body is complex, and implants must both survive this environment, and not leach potentially toxic impurities. Problems have been reported with breast implants, heart valves, and catheters, for example.\nFailures that occur early in the life of a new product are vital information for the manufacturer to improve the product. New product development aims to eliminate defects by testing in the factory before launch, but some may occur during its early life. Testing products to simulate their behavior in the external environment is a difficult skill, and may involve accelerated life testing for example. The worst kind of defect to occur after launch is a safety-critical defect, a defect that can endanger life or limb. Their discovery usually leads to a product recall or even complete withdrawal of the product from the market. Product defects often follow the bathtub curve, with high initial failures, a lower rate during regular life, followed by another rise due to wear-out. National standards, such as those of ASTM and the British Standards Institute, and International Standards can help the designer in increasing product integrity.\nHistoric examples.\nThere are many examples of forensic methods used to investigate accidents and disasters, one of the earliest in the modern period being the fall of the Dee bridge at Chester, England. It was built using cast iron girders, each of which was made of three very large castings dovetailed together. Each girder was strengthened by wrought iron bars along the length. It was finished in September 1846, and opened for local traffic after approval by the first Railway Inspector, General Charles Pasley. However, on 24 May 1847, a local train to Ruabon fell through the bridge. The accident resulted in five deaths (three passengers, the train guard, and the locomotive fireman) and nine serious injuries. The bridge had been designed by Robert Stephenson, and he was accused of negligence by a local inquest.\nAlthough strong in compression, cast iron was known to be brittle in tension or bending. On the day of the accident, the bridge deck was covered with track ballast to prevent the oak beams supporting the track from catching fire, imposing a heavy extra load on the girders supporting the bridge and probably exacerbating the accident. Stephenson took this precaution because of a recent fire on the Great Western Railway at Uxbridge, London, where Isambard Kingdom Brunel's bridge caught fire and collapsed.\nOne of the first major inquiries conducted by the newly formed Railway Inspectorate was conducted by Captain Simmons of the Royal Engineers, and his report suggested that repeated flexing of the girder weakened it substantially. He examined the broken parts of the main girder, and confirmed that the girder had broken in two places, the first break occurring at the center. He tested the remaining girders by driving a locomotive across them, and found that they deflected by several inches under the moving load. He concluded that the design was flawed, and that the wrought iron trusses fixed to the girders did not reinforce the girders at all, which was a conclusion also reached by the jury at the inquest. Stephenson's design had depended on the wrought iron trusses to strengthen the final structures, but they were anchored on the cast iron girders themselves, and so deformed with any load on the bridge. Others (especially Stephenson) argued that the train had derailed and hit the girder, the impact force causing it to fracture. However, eyewitnesses maintained that the girder broke first and the fact that the locomotive remained on the track showed otherwise.\nPublications.\nProduct failures are not widely published in the academic literature or trade literature, partly because companies do not want to advertise their problems. However, it then denies others the opportunity to improve product design so as to prevent further accidents.\nThe journal \"Engineering Failure Analysis\" (), published in affiliation with the European Structural Integrity Society, publishes case studies of a wide range of different products, failing under different circumstances.\nA publication dealing with failures of buildings, bridges, and other structures, is the \"Journal of Performance of Constructed Facilities\", which is published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, under the umbrella of its Technical Council on Forensic Engineering.\nThe \"Journal of the National Academy of Forensic Engineers\" is a peer-reviewed open access journal that provides a multi-disciplinary examination of the forensic engineering field. Submission is open to NAFE members and the journal's peer review process includes in-person presentation for live feedback prior to a single-blind technical peer review.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69818", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69818", "title": "Victor Emmanuel II", "text": "King of Italy from 1861 to 1878\nVictor Emmanuel II (; full name: \"Vittorio Emanuele Maria Alberto Eugenio Ferdinando Tommaso di Savoia\"; 14 March 1820 \u2013 9 January 1878) was King of Sardinia (also informally known as Piedmont\u2013Sardinia) from 23 March 1849 until 17 March 1861, when he assumed the title of King of Italy and became the first king of an independent, united Italy since the 6th century, a title he held until his death in 1878. Borrowing from the old Latin title \"Pater Patriae\" of the Roman emperors, the Italians gave him the epithet of \"Father of the Fatherland\" ().\nBorn in Turin as the eldest son of Charles Albert, Prince of Carignano, and Maria Theresa of Austria, Victor Emmanuel fought in the First Italian War of Independence (1848\u20131849) before being made King of Sardinia following his father's abdication. He appointed Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, as his Prime Minister, and he consolidated his position by suppressing the republican left. In 1855, he sent an expeditionary corps to side with French and British forces during the Crimean War; the deployment of Italian troops to the Crimea, and the gallantry shown by them in the Battle of the Chernaya (16 August 1855) and in the siege of Sevastopol led the Kingdom of Sardinia to be among the participants at the peace conference at the end of the war, where it could address the issue of the Italian unification to other European powers. This allowed Victor Emmanuel to ally himself with Napoleon III, Emperor of France. France then supported Sardinia in the Second Italian War of Independence, resulting in the liberation of Lombardy from Austrian rule; as payment for the help, Victor Emmanuel ceded Savoy and Nice to France.\nVictor Emmanuel supported the Expedition of the Thousand (1860\u20131861) led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, which resulted in the rapid fall of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in southern Italy; however, Victor Emmanuel halted Garibaldi when he appeared ready to attack Rome, still under the Papal States, as it was under French protection. In 1860, Tuscany, Modena, Parma, and Romagna decided to side with Sardinia, and Victor Emmanuel then marched victoriously in the Marche and Umbria after the victorious Battle of Castelfidardo over the Papal forces. This led to his excommunication from the Catholic Church. He subsequently met Garibaldi at Teano, receiving from him the control of southern Italy and becoming the first King of Italy on 17 March 1861.\nIn 1866, the Third Italian War of Independence allowed Italy to annex Veneto. In 1870, Victor Emmanuel also took advantage of the Prussian victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War to conquer the Papal States after the French withdrew. He entered Rome on 20 September 1870 and set up the new capital there on 2 July 1871. He died in Rome in 1878, soon after his excommunication had been lifted, and was buried in the Pantheon. The Italian national Victor Emmanuel II Monument in Rome, containing the Altare della Patria, was built in his honour.\nBiography.\nVictor Emmanuel was born in Palazzo Carignano, Turin as the eldest son of Carlo Alberto Prince of Carignano, and Maria Theresa of Tuscany. His father succeeded a distant cousin as King of Sardinia in 1831. He lived for some years of his youth in Florence and showed an early interest in politics, the military, and sports. In 1842, he married his cousin, Adelaide of Austria. He was styled as the Duke of Savoy prior to becoming King of Sardinia. He took part in the First Italian War of Independence (1848\u20131849) under his father, King Charles Albert, fighting in the front line at the battles of Pastrengo, Santa Lucia, Goito and Custoza.\nVictor Emmanuel became King of Sardinia in 1849 when his father abdicated the throne, after being defeated by the Austrians at the Battle of Novara. Victor Emmanuel was immediately able to obtain a rather favourable armistice at Vignale by the Austrian imperial army commander, Radetzky. The treaty, however, was not ratified by the Piedmontese lower parliamentary house, the Chamber of Deputies, and Victor Emmanuel retaliated by firing his Prime Minister, Claudio Gabriele de Launay, replacing him with Massimo D'Azeglio. After new elections, the peace with Austria was accepted by the new Chamber of Deputies. In 1849, Victor Emmanuel also fiercely suppressed a revolt in Genoa, defining the rebels as a \"vile and infected race of canailles\".\nIn 1852, Victor Emmanuel appointed Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, as Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Sardinia. Cavour was a clever strategist focused on establishing the House of Savoy as Italy's rulers. He applied liberalism and nationalism to dismantle the traditional structures of the Kingdom of Sardinia while advancing an anti-clerical agenda that started during Charles Albert. Cavour modernized the kingdom for war to expel the Austrians from Italy, facilitating Victor Emmanuel's eventual ascension as king. He also played a key role in securing an alliance with Napoleon III, leading to French support that enabled Emmanuel\u2019s forces to capture Milan and other Austrian territories, though Venice remained under Austrian control. Victor Emmanuel II soon became the symbol of \"Risorgimento\", the Italian unification movement of the 1850s and early 60s. He was especially popular in Piedmont\u2013Sardinia because of his respect for the new constitution and his liberal reforms.\nCrimean War.\nFollowing Victor Emmanuel's advice, Cavour joined Britain and France in the Crimean War against Russia. Cavour was reluctant to go to war due to the power of Russia at the time and the expense of doing so; however, Victor Emmanuel was convinced of the rewards to be gained from the alliance created with Britain and more importantly France. After successfully seeking British support and ingratiating himself with France and Napoleon III at the Congress of Paris in 1856 at the end of the war, Count Cavour arranged a secret meeting with the French emperor. In 1858, they met at Plombi\u00e8res-les-Bains (in Lorraine), where they agreed that if the French were to help Piedmont in its war against Austria, which still reigned over the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia in northern Italy, France would be awarded Nice and Savoy.\nWars of Italian Unification.\nThe Italo-French campaign against Austria in 1859 started successfully; however, sickened by the casualties of the war and worried about the mobilisation of Prussian troops, Napoleon III secretly made a treaty with Franz Joseph of Austria at Villafranca whereby Piedmont would only gain Lombardy. France did not as a result receive the promised Nice and Savoy but Austria kept Venetia, a major setback for the Piedmontese, in no small part because the treaty had been prepared without their knowledge. After several quarrels about the outcome of the war, Cavour resigned, and the king had to find other advisors. France only gained Nice and Savoy after the Treaty of Turin was signed in March 1860, after Cavour had been reinstalled as Prime Minister, and a deal with the French was struck for plebiscites to take place in the Central Italian Duchies.\nLater that same year, Victor Emmanuel II sent his forces to fight the papal army at Castelfidardo and drove the Pope into Vatican City. His success at these goals led him to be excommunicated from the Catholic Church until 1878 when it was lifted just before his death. Then, Giuseppe Garibaldi conquered Sicily and Naples, and Piedmont\u2013Sardinia grew even larger. On 17 March 1861, the Kingdom of Italy was officially established and Victor Emmanuel II became its king.\nVictor Emmanuel supported Giuseppe Garibaldi's Expedition of the Thousand (1860\u20131861), which resulted in the rapid fall of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in southern Italy; however, the king halted Garibaldi when he appeared ready to attack Rome, still under the Papal States, as it was under French protection. In 1860, through local plebiscites, Tuscany, Modena, Parma, and Romagna decided to side with Piedmont\u2013Sardinia. Victor Emmanuel then marched victoriously in the Marche and Umbria after the victorious battle of Castelfidardo (1860) over the Papal forces.\nThe king subsequently met with Garibaldi at Teano, receiving from him the control of southern Italy. Another series of plebiscites in the occupied lands resulted in the proclamation of Victor Emmanuel as the first King of Italy by the new Parliament of unified Italy, on 17 March 1861. He did not renumber himself after assuming the new royal title, and Turin became the capital of the new state. Only Lazio, Veneto, and Trentino remained to be conquered.\nCompletion of the unification.\nIn 1866, Victor Emmanuel allied himself with Prussia in the Third Italian War of Independence. Although not victorious in the Italian theatre, he managed to receive Veneto after the Austrian defeat in Germany. The British Foreign Secretary, Lord Clarendon, visited Florence in December 1867 and reported to London after talking to various Italian politicians: \"There is universal agreement that Victor Emmanuel is an imbecile; he is a dishonest man who tells lies to everyone; at this rate, he will end up losing his crown and ruining both Italy and his dynasty.\" In 1870, after two failed attempts by Garibaldi, he also took advantage of the Prussian victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War to capture Rome after the French withdrew. He entered Rome on 20 September 1870 and set up the new capital there on 2 July 1871, after a temporary move to Florence in 1864. The new Royal residence was the Quirinal Palace.\nThe rest of Victor Emmanuel II's reign was much quieter. After the Kingdom of Italy was established, he decided to continue on as King Victor Emmanuel II instead of Victor Emmanuel I of Italy. This was a terrible move as far as public relations went, as it was not indicative of the fresh start that the Italian people wanted and suggested that Piedmont\u2013Sardinia had taken over the Italian peninsula rather than unifying it. Despite this mishap, the remainder of Victor Emmanuel II's reign was consumed by wrapping up loose ends and dealing with economic and cultural issues. His role in day-to-day governing gradually dwindled, as it became increasingly apparent that a king could no longer keep a government in office against the will of Parliament. As a result, while the wording of the Statuto Albertino stipulating that ministers were solely responsible to the crown remained unchanged, in practice they were now responsible to Parliament.\nVictor Emmanuel died in Rome in 1878, after meeting with the envoys of Pope Pius IX, who had reversed the excommunication, and received last rites. He was buried in the Pantheon. His successor was his son Umberto I.\nFamily and children.\nIn 1842, Victor Emmanuel married his paternal first cousin (aunt's daughter) Adelaide of Austria (1822\u20131855). With her, he had eight children:\nIn 1869 he married morganatically his principal mistress Rosa Vercellana (3 June 1833 \u2013 26 December 1885). Popularly known in Piedmontese as \"Bela Rosin\", she was born a commoner but made Countess of Mirafiori and Fontanafredda in 1858. Their offspring were:\nIn addition to his morganatic second wife, Victor Emmanuel II had several other mistresses:\n1) Laura Bon at Stupinigi, who bore him two children:\n2) Baroness Vittoria Duplesis who bore him another daughter:\n3) Unknown mistress at Mondov\u00ec, mother of:\n4) Virginia Rho at Turin, mother of two children:\n5) Rosalinda Incoronata De Domenicis (1846\u20131916), mother of one daughter:\n6) Angela Rosa De Filippo, mother of:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69819", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69819", "title": "Morocco/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "69820", "revid": "1086707070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69820", "title": "Long boom", "text": "Long boom refers to various periods of economic growth, most commonly:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69821", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69821", "title": "Johnston Atoll/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "69827", "revid": "1215448426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69827", "title": "Victor Emmanuel", "text": "Victor Emmanuel may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69829", "revid": "156441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69829", "title": "Pepin III, King of the Franks", "text": ""}
{"id": "69830", "revid": "221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69830", "title": "Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas", "text": "Spanish clergyman and writer (1484\u20131566)\nBartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, OP ( ; ); 11 November 1484 \u2013 18 July 1566) was a Spanish lawyer, clergyman, writer, and activist best known for his work as a historian and social reformer. He arrived in Hispaniola as a layman, then became a Dominican friar. He was appointed as the first resident Bishop of Chiapas, and the first officially appointed \"Protector of the Indians\". His extensive writings, the most famous being \"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\" and \"Historia de Las Indias\", chronicle the first decades of colonization of the Caribbean islands. He described and railed against the atrocities committed by the conquistadores against the Indigenous peoples.\nArriving as one of the first Spanish settlers in the Americas, Las Casas initially participated in the colonial economy built on forced Indigenous labor, but eventually felt compelled to oppose the abuses committed by European colonists against the Indigenous population. In 1515 he gave up his Native American laborers and \"encomienda\". He then advocated, before Charles V, on behalf of rights for the natives. In his early writings, he advocated the use of African slaves to replace Indigenous labor. He did so without knowing that the Portuguese were carrying out \"brutal and unjust wars in the name of spreading the faith\". Later in life, he retracted this position, as he regarded both forms of slavery as equally wrong.\nIn 1522, Las Casas tried to launch a new kind of peaceful colonialism on the coast of Venezuela, but this venture failed. He then entered the Dominican Order and became a friar, leaving public life for a decade. He traveled to Central America, acting as a missionary among the Maya of Guatemala and participating in debates among colonial churchmen about how best to bring the natives to the Christian faith.\nTravelling back to Spain to recruit more missionaries, he continued lobbying for the abolition of the \"encomienda\", gaining an important victory by the passage of the New Laws in 1542. He was appointed Bishop of Chiapas, but served only for a short time before he was forced to return to Spain because of resistance to the New Laws by the \"encomenderos\", and conflicts with Spanish settlers because of his pro-Indian policies and activist religious stance. He served in the Spanish court for the remainder of his life; there he held great influence over Indies-related issues. In 1550, he participated in the Valladolid debate, in which Juan Gin\u00e9s de Sep\u00falveda argued that the Indians were less than human, and required Spanish masters to become civilized. Las Casas maintained that they were fully human, and that forcefully subjugating them was unjustifiable.\nLas Casas spent 50 years of his life actively fighting slavery and the colonial abuse of Indigenous peoples, especially by trying to convince the Spanish court to adopt a more humane policy of colonization. Although he did not completely succeed in changing Spanish views on colonization, his efforts did result in improvement of the legal status of the natives, and in an increased colonial focus on the ethics of colonialism.\nFollowing his death in 1566, Las Casas was widely venerated as a holy figure, resulting in the opening of his cause for canonization in the Catholic Church.\nLife and times.\nBackground and arrival in the New World.\nBartolom\u00e9 de las Casas was born in Seville on 11 November 1484. For centuries, Las Casas's birthdate was believed to be 1474; however, in the 1970s, scholars conducting archival work demonstrated this to be an error, after uncovering in the \"Archivo General de Indias\" records of a contemporary lawsuit that demonstrated he was born a decade later than had been supposed. Subsequent biographers and authors have generally accepted and reflected this revision. His father, Pedro de las Casas, a merchant, descended from one of the families that had migrated from France to found the Christian Seville; his family also spelled the name \"Casaus\". According to one biographer, his family was of \"converso\" heritage, although others refer to them as ancient Christians who migrated from France. Following the testimony of Las Casas's biographer Antonio de Remesal, tradition has it that Las Casas studied a \"licentiate\" at Salamanca, but Las Casas does not say so in his own writings.\nLas Casas's first encounter with Indigenous peoples happened before he even sailed to the Americas. In his \"Historia de las Indias\", he wrote of Christopher Columbus' return to Seville, in 1493. Las Casas recorded having seen \"seven Indians\" in the entourage of Christopher Columbus, being exhibited in the vicinity of the Iglesia de San Nicol\u00e1s de Bari, along with \"beautiful green parrots, vibrant in color\" and Indigenous artifacts. Pedro de Las Casas, Bartolom\u00e9's merchant father, left in Columbus' second expedition. Upon his return, in 1499, Pedro de Las Casas brought to his son \"a young Amerinidian.\"\nThree years later, in 1502, Las Casas immigrated with his father to the island of Hispaniola, on the expedition of Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando. Las Casas became a \"hacendado\" and slave owner, receiving a piece of land in the province of Cibao. He participated in slave raids and military expeditions against the native Ta\u00edno population of Hispaniola. In 1506, he returned to Spain and completed his studies of canon law at Salamanca. That same year, he was ordained a deacon and then traveled to Rome, where he was ordained a secular priest in 1507.\nIn September 1510, a group of Dominican friars arrived in Santo Domingo led by Pedro de C\u00f3rdoba; appalled by the injustices they saw committed by the slave owners against the Indians, they decided to deny slave owners the right to confession. Las Casas was among those denied confession for this reason. In December 1511, a Dominican preacher Fray Antonio de Montesinos preached a fiery sermon that implicated the colonists in the genocide of the native peoples. He is said to have preached: \"Tell me by what right of justice do you hold these Indians in such a cruel and horrible servitude? On what authority have you waged such detestable wars against these people who dealt quietly and peacefully on their own lands? Wars in which you have destroyed such an infinite number of them by homicides and slaughters never heard of before. Why do you keep them so oppressed and exhausted, without giving them enough to eat or curing them of the sicknesses they incur from the excessive labor you give them, and they die, or rather you kill them, in order to extract and acquire gold every day.\" Las Casas himself argued against the Dominicans in favor of the justice of the encomienda. The colonists, led by Diego Columbus, dispatched a complaint against the Dominicans to the King, and the Dominicans were recalled from Hispaniola.\nConquest of Cuba and change of heart.\nIn 1513, as a chaplain, Las Casas participated in Diego Vel\u00e1zquez de Cu\u00e9llar's and P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez' conquest of Cuba. He participated in campaigns at Bayamo and Camag\u00fcey and in the massacre of Hatuey. He witnessed many atrocities committed by Spaniards against the native Ciboney and Guanahatabey peoples. He later wrote: \"I saw here cruelty on a scale no living being has ever seen or expects to see.\" Las Casas and his friend Pedro de la Renter\u00eda were awarded a joint encomienda which was rich in gold and slaves, located on the Arimao River close to Cienfuegos. During the next few years, he divided his time between being a colonist and his duties as an ordained priest.\nIn 1514, Las Casas was studying a passage in the book Ecclesiasticus (Sirach) 34:18\u201322 for a Pentecost sermon and pondering its meaning. Las Casas was finally convinced that all the actions of the Spanish in the New World had been illegal and that they constituted a great injustice. He made up his mind to give up his slaves and encomienda, and started to preach that other colonists should do the same. When his preaching met with resistance, he realized that he would have to go to Spain to fight there against the enslavement and abuse of the native people. Aided by Pedro de C\u00f3rdoba and accompanied by Antonio de Montesinos, he left for Spain in September 1515, arriving in Seville in November.\nLas Casas and King Ferdinand.\nLas Casas arrived in Spain with the plan of convincing the King to end the encomienda system. This was easier thought than done, as most of the people who were in positions of power were themselves either encomenderos or otherwise profiting from the influx of wealth from the Indies. In the winter of 1515, King Ferdinand lay ill in Plasencia, but Las Casas was able to get a letter of introduction to the king from the Archbishop of Seville, Diego de Deza. On Christmas Eve of 1515, Las Casas met the monarch and discussed the situation in the Indies with him; the king agreed to hear him out in more detail at a later date. While waiting, Las Casas produced a report that he presented to the Bishop of Burgos, Juan Rodr\u00edguez de Fonseca, and secretary Lope Conchillos, who were functionaries in complete charge of the royal policies regarding the Indies; both were encomenderos. They were not impressed by his account, and Las Casas had to find a different avenue of change. He put his faith in his coming audience with the king, but it never came, for King Ferdinand died on 25 January 1516.\nThe regency of Castile passed on to Ximenez Cisneros and Adrian of Utrecht who were guardians for the under-age Prince Charles. Las Casas was resolved to see Prince Charles who resided in Flanders, but on his way there he passed Madrid and delivered to the regents a written account of the situation in the Indies and his proposed remedies. This was his \"Memorial de Remedios para Las Indias\" of 1516. In this early work, Las Casas advocated importing black slaves from Africa to relieve the suffering Indians, a stance he later retracted, becoming an advocate for the Africans in the colonies as well. This shows that Las Casas's first concern was not to end slavery as an institution, but to end the physical abuse and suffering of the Indians. In keeping with the legal and moral doctrine of the time, Las Casas believed that slavery could be justified if it was the result of Just War, and at the time he assumed that the enslavement of Africans was justified. Worried by Las Casas' descriptions of the situation in the Indies, Cardinal Cisneros decided to send a group of Hieronymite monks to take over the government of the islands.\nProtector of the Indians.\nThree Hieronymite monks, Luis de Figueroa, Bernardino de Manzanedo, and Alonso de Santo Domingo, were selected as commissioners to take over the authority of the Indies. Las Casas had a considerable part in selecting them and writing the instructions under which their new government would be instated, largely based on Las Casas's \"memorial\". Las Casas himself was granted the official title of Protector of the Indians, and given a yearly salary of one hundred pesos. In this new office Las Casas was expected to serve as an advisor to the new governors with regard to Indian issues, to speak the case of the Indians in court, and send reports back to Spain. Las Casas and the commissioners traveled to Santo Domingo on separate ships, and Las Casas arrived two weeks later than the Hieronimytes. During this time the Hieronimytes had time to form a more pragmatic view of the situation than the one advocated by Las Casas; their position was precarious as every encomendero on the Islands was fiercely against any attempts to curtail their use of native labor. Consequently, the commissioners were unable to take any radical steps towards improving the situation of the natives. They did revoke some encomiendas from Spaniards, especially those who were living in Spain and not on the islands themselves; they even repossessed the encomienda of Fonseca, the Bishop of Burgos. They also carried out an inquiry into the Indian question at which all the encomenderos asserted that the Indians were quite incapable of living freely without their supervision. Las Casas was disappointed and infuriated. When he accused the Hieronymites of being complicit in kidnapping Indians, the relationship between Las Casas and the commissioners broke down. Las Casas had become a hated figure by Spaniards all over the islands, and he had to seek refuge in the Dominican monastery. The Dominicans had been the first to indict the encomenderos, and they continued to chastise them and refuse the absolution of confession to slave owners, and even stated that priests who took their confession were committing a mortal sin. In May 1517, Las Casas was forced to travel back to Spain to denounce to the regent the failure of the Hieronymite reforms. Only after Las Casas had left did the Hieronymites begin to congregate Indians into towns similar to what Las Casas had wanted.\nLas Casas and Emperor Charles V: The peasant colonization scheme.\nWhen he arrived in Spain, his former protector, regent, and Cardinal Ximenez Cisneros, was ill and had become tired of Las Casas's tenacity. Las Casas resolved to meet instead with the young king Charles I. Ximenez died on 8 November, and the young King arrived in Valladolid on 25 November 1517. Las Casas managed to secure the support of the king's Flemish courtiers, including the powerful Chancellor Jean de la Sauvage. Las Casas's influence turned the favor of the court against Secretary Conchillos and Bishop Fonseca. Sauvage spoke highly of Las Casas to the king, who appointed Las Casas and Sauvage to write a new plan for reforming the governmental system of the Indies.\nLas Casas suggested a plan where the encomienda would be abolished and Indians would be congregated into self-governing townships to become tribute-paying vassals of the king. He still suggested that the loss of Indian labor for the colonists could be replaced by allowing importation of African slaves. Another important part of the plan was to introduce a new kind of sustainable colonization, and Las Casas advocated supporting the migration of Spanish peasants to the Indies where they would introduce small-scale farming and agriculture, a kind of colonization that did not rely on resource depletion and Indian labor. Las Casas worked to recruit a large number of peasants who would want to travel to the islands, where they would be given lands to farm, cash advances, and the tools and resources they needed to establish themselves there. The recruitment drive was difficult, and during the process the power relation shifted at court when Chancellor Sauvage, Las Casas's main supporter, unexpectedly died. In the end a much smaller number of peasant families were sent than originally planned, and they were supplied with insufficient provisions and no support secured for their arrival. Those who survived the journey were ill-received, and had to work hard even to survive in the hostile colonies. Las Casas was devastated by the tragic result of his peasant migration scheme, which he felt had been thwarted by his enemies. He decided instead to undertake a personal venture which would not rely on the support of others, and fought to win a land grant on the American mainland which was in its earliest stage of colonization.\nThe Cuman\u00e1 venture.\nFollowing a suggestion by his friend and mentor Pedro de C\u00f3rdoba, Las Casas petitioned a land grant to be allowed to establish a settlement in northern Venezuela at Cuman\u00e1. Founded in 1515, there was already a small Franciscan monastery in Cumana, and a Dominican one at Chiribichi, but the monks there were being harassed by Spaniards operating slave raids from the nearby Island of Cubagua. To make the proposal palatable to the king, Las Casas had to incorporate the prospect of profits for the royal treasury. He suggested fortifying the northern coast of Venezuela, establishing ten royal forts to protect the Indians and starting up a system of trade in gold and pearls. All the Indian slaves of the New World should be brought to live in these towns and become tribute paying subjects to the king. To secure the grant, Las Casas had to go through a long court fight against Bishop Fonseca and his supporters Gonzalo de Oviedo and Bishop Quevedo of Tierra Firme. Las Casas's supporters were Diego Columbus and the new chancellor Gattinara. Las Casas's enemies slandered him to the king, accusing him of planning to escape with the money to Genoa or Rome. In 1520 Las Casas's concession was finally granted, but it was a much smaller grant than he had initially proposed; he was also denied the possibilities of extracting gold and pearls, which made it difficult for him to find investors for the venture. Las Casas committed himself to producing 15,000 ducats of annual revenue, increasing to 60,000 after ten years, and to erecting three Christian towns of at least 40 settlers each. Some privileges were also granted to the initial 50 shareholders in Las Casas's scheme. The king also promised not to give any encomienda grants in Las Casas's area. That said, finding fifty men willing to invest 200 ducats each and three years of unpaid work proved impossible for Las Casas. He ended up leaving in November 1520 with just a small group of peasants, paying for the venture with money borrowed from his brother in-law.\nArriving in Puerto Rico, in January 1521, he received the terrible news that the Dominican convent at Chiribichi had been sacked by Indians, and that the Spaniards of the islands had launched a punitive expedition, led by Gonzalo de Ocampo, into the very heart of the territory that Las Casas wanted to colonize peacefully. The Indians had been provoked to attack the settlement of the monks because of the repeated slave raids by Spaniards operating from Cubagua. As Ocampo's ships began returning with slaves from the land Las Casas had been granted, he went to Hispaniola to complain to the Audiencia. After several months of negotiations Las Casas set sail alone; the peasants he had brought had deserted, and he arrived in his colony already ravaged by Spaniards.\nLas Casas worked there in adverse conditions for the following months, being constantly harassed by the Spanish pearl fishers of Cubagua island who traded slaves for alcohol with the natives. Early in 1522, Las Casas left the settlement to complain to the authorities. While he was gone the native Caribs attacked the settlement of Cuman\u00e1, burned it to the ground, and killed four of Las Casas's men. He returned to Hispaniola in January 1522, and heard the news of the massacre. The rumours even included him among the dead. To make matters worse, his detractors used the event as evidence of the need to pacify the Indians using military means.\nLas Casas as a Dominican friar.\nDevastated, Las Casas reacted by entering the Dominican monastery of Santa Cruz in Santo Domingo as a novice in 1522 and finally taking holy vows as a Dominican friar in 1523. There he continued his theological studies, being particularly attracted to Thomist philosophy. He oversaw the construction of a monastery in Puerto Plata on the north coast of Hispaniola, subsequently serving as prior of the convent. In 1527 he began working on his \"History of the Indies\", in which he reported much of what he had witnessed first hand in the conquest and colonization of New Spain. In 1531, he wrote a letter to Garcia Manrique, Count of Osorno, protesting again the mistreatment of the Indians and advocating a return to his original reform plan of 1516. In 1531, a complaint was sent by the encomenderos of Hispaniola that Las Casas was again accusing them of mortal sins from the pulpit. In 1533 he contributed to the establishment of a peace treaty between the Spanish and the rebel Ta\u00edno band of chief Enriquillo. In 1534, Las Casas made an attempt to travel to Peru to observe the first stages of conquest of that region by Francisco Pizarro. His party made it as far as Panama, but had to turn back to Nicaragua due to adverse weather. Lingering for a while in the Dominican convent of Granada, he got into conflict with Rodrigo de Contreras, Governor of Nicaragua, when Las Casas vehemently opposed slaving expeditions by the Governor. In 1536, Las Casas followed a number of friars to Guatemala, where they began to prepare to undertake a mission among the Maya Indians. They stayed in the convent founded some years earlier by Fray Domingo Betanzos and studied the K\u02bciche\u02bc language with Bishop Francisco Marroqu\u00edn, before traveling into the interior region called Tuzulutlan, \"The Land of War\", in 1537.\nAlso in 1536, before venturing into Tuzulutlan, Las Casas went to Oaxaca, Mexico, to participate in a series of discussions and debates among the bishops of the Dominican and Franciscan orders. The two orders had very different approaches to the conversion of the Indians. The Franciscans used a method of mass conversion, sometimes baptizing many thousands of Indians in a day. This method was championed by prominent Franciscans such as Toribio de Benavente, known as \"Motolinia\", and Las Casas made many enemies among the Franciscans for arguing that conversions made without adequate understanding were invalid. Las Casas wrote a treatise called \"De unico vocationis modo\" (On the Only Way of Conversion) based on the missionary principles he had used in Guatemala. Motolinia would later be a fierce critic of Las Casas, accusing him of being all talk and no action when it came to converting the Indians. As a direct result of the debates between the Dominicans and Franciscans and spurred on by Las Casas's treatise, Pope Paul III promulgated the Bull \"Sublimis Deus\", which stated that the Indians were rational beings and should be brought peacefully to the faith as such.\nLas Casas returned to Guatemala in 1537 wanting to employ his new method of conversion based on two principles: 1) to preach the Gospel to all men and treat them as equals, and 2) to assert that conversion must be voluntary and based on knowledge and understanding of the faith. It was important for Las Casas that this method be tested without meddling from secular colonists, so he chose a territory in the heart of Guatemala where there were no previous colonies and where the natives were considered fierce and war-like. Because the land had not been possible to conquer by military means, the governor of Guatemala, Alonso de Maldonado, agreed to sign a contract promising that if the venture was successful he would not establish any new encomiendas in the area. Las Casas's group of friars established a Dominican presence in Rabinal, Sacapulas, and Cob\u00e1n. Through the efforts of Las Casas's missionaries the so-called \"Land of War\" came to be called \"Verapaz\", \"True Peace\". Las Casas's strategy was to teach Christian songs to merchant Indian Christians who then ventured into the area. In this way he was successful in converting several native chiefs, among them those of Atitl\u00e1n and Chichicastenango, and in building several churches in the territory named Alta Verapaz. These congregated a group of Christian Indians in the location of what is now the town of Rabinal. In 1538 Las Casas was recalled from his mission by Bishop Marroqu\u00edn who wanted him to go to Mexico and then on to Spain to seek more Dominicans to assist in the mission. Las Casas left Guatemala for Mexico, where he stayed for more than a year before setting out for Spain in 1540.\nThe New Laws.\nIn Spain, Las Casas started securing official support for the Guatemalan mission, and he managed to get a royal decree forbidding secular intrusion into the Verapaces for the following five years. He also informed the Theologians of Salamanca, led by Francisco de Vitoria, of the mass baptism practiced by the Franciscans, resulting in a dictum condemning the practice as sacrilegious.\nBut apart from the clerical business, Las Casas had also traveled to Spain for his own purpose: to continue the struggle against the colonists' mistreatment of the Indians. The encomienda had, in fact, legally been abolished in 1523, but it had been reinstituted in 1526, and in 1530 a general ordinance against slavery was reversed by the Crown. For this reason it was a pressing matter for Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas to plead once again for the Indians with Charles V who was by now Holy Roman Emperor and no longer a boy. He wrote a letter asking for permission to stay in Spain a little longer to argue for the emperor that conversion and colonization were best achieved by peaceful means.\nWhen the hearings started in 1542, Las Casas presented a narrative of atrocities against the natives of the Indies that would later be published in 1552 as \"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\". Before a council consisting of Cardinal Garc\u00eda de Loaysa, the Count of Osorno, Bishop Fuenleal, and several members of the Council of the Indies, Las Casas argued that the only solution to the problem was to remove all Indians from the care of secular Spaniards, by abolishing the encomienda system and putting them instead directly under the Crown as royal tribute-paying subjects. On 20 November 1542, the emperor signed the New Laws abolishing the encomiendas and removing certain officials from the Council of the Indies. The New Laws made it illegal to use Indians as carriers, except where no other transport was available, it prohibited all taking of Indians as slaves, and it instated a gradual abolition of the encomienda system, with each encomienda reverting to the Crown at the death of its holders. It also exempted the few surviving Indians of Hispaniola, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Jamaica from tribute and all requirements of personal service. However, the reforms were so unpopular in the New World that riots broke out and threats were made against Las Casas's life. The Viceroy of New Spain, himself an encomendero, decided not to implement the laws in his domain, and instead sent a party to Spain to argue against the laws on behalf of the encomenderos. Las Casas himself was also not satisfied with the laws, as they were not drastic enough and the encomienda system was going to function for many years still under the gradual abolition plan. He drafted a suggestion for an amendment arguing that the laws against slavery were formulated in such a way that it presupposed that violent conquest would still be carried out, and he encouraged once again beginning a phase of peaceful colonization by peasants instead of soldiers.\nBishop of Chiapas.\nBefore Las Casas returned to Spain, he was also appointed as Bishop of Chiapas, a newly established diocese of which he took possession in 1545 upon his return to the New World. He was consecrated in the Dominican Church of San Pablo on 30 March 1544. As Archbishop Loaysa strongly disliked Las Casas, the ceremony was officiated by Loaysa's nephew, Diego de Loaysa, Bishop of Modru\u0161, with Pedro Torres, Titular Bishop of \"Arbanum\", and Crist\u00f3bal de Pedraza, Bishop of Comayagua, as co-consecrators. As a bishop Las Casas was involved in frequent conflicts with the encomenderos and secular laity of his diocese: among the landowners there was the conquistador Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo. In a pastoral letter issued on 20 March 1545, Las Casas refused absolution to slave owners and encomenderos even on their death bed, unless all their slaves had been set free and their property returned to them. Las Casas furthermore threatened that anyone who mistreated Indians within his jurisdiction would be excommunicated. He also came into conflict with the Bishop of Guatemala Francisco Marroqu\u00edn, to whose jurisdiction the diocese had previously belonged. To Las Casas's dismay Bishop Marroqu\u00edn openly defied the New Laws. While bishop, Las Casas was the principal consecrator of Antonio de Valdivieso, Bishop of Nicaragua (1544).\nThe New Laws were finally repealed on 20 October 1545, and riots broke out against Las Casas, with shots being fired against him by angry colonists. After a year he had made himself so unpopular among the Spaniards of the area that he had to leave. Having been summoned to a meeting among the bishops of New Spain to be held in Mexico City on 12 January 1546, he left his diocese, never to return. At the meeting, probably after lengthy reflection, and realizing that the New Laws were lost in Mexico, Las Casas presented a moderated view on the problems of confession and restitution of property, Archbishop Juan de Zum\u00e1rraga of Mexico and Bishop Juli\u00e1n Garc\u00e9s of Puebla agreed completely with his new moderate stance, Bishop Vasco de Quiroga of Michoac\u00e1n had minor reservations, and Bishops Francisco Marroqu\u00edn of Guatemala and Juan Lopez de Z\u00e1rate of Oaxaca did not object. This resulted in a new resolution to be presented to viceroy Mendoza. His last act as Bishop of Chiapas was writing a \"confesionario\", a manual for the administration of the sacrament of confession in his diocese, still refusing absolution to unrepentant encomenderos. Las Casas appointed a vicar for his diocese and set out for Europe in December 1546, arriving in Lisbon in April 1547 and in Spain on November 1547.\nThe Valladolid debate.\nLas Casas returned to Spain, leaving behind many conflicts and unresolved issues. Arriving in Spain he was met by a barrage of accusations, many of them based on his Confesionario and its 12 rules, which many of his opponents found to be in essence a denial of the legitimacy of Spanish rule of its colonies, and hence a form of treason. The Crown had for example received a fifth of the large number of slaves taken in the recent Mixt\u00f3n War, and so could not be held clean of guilt under Las Casas's strict rules. In 1548, the Crown decreed that all copies of Las Casas's Confesionario be burnt, and his Franciscan adversary, Motolinia, obliged and sent back a report to Spain. Las Casas defended himself by writing two treatises on the \"Just Title\" \u2013 arguing that the only legality with which the Spaniards could claim titles over realms in the New World was through peaceful proselytizing. All warfare was illegal and unjust and only through the papal mandate of peacefully bringing Christianity to heathen peoples could \"Just Titles\" be acquired.\nAs a part of Las Casas's defense by offense, he had to argue against Juan Gin\u00e9s de Sep\u00falveda. Sep\u00falveda was a doctor of theology and law who, in his book \"Democrates Alter, sive de justis causis apud Indos\" (Another Democrates, or A New Democrates, or on the Just Causes of War against the Indians) had argued that some native peoples were incapable of ruling themselves and should be pacified forcefully. The book was deemed unsound for publication by the theologians of Salamanca and Alcal\u00e1 for containing unsound doctrine, but the pro-encomendero faction seized on Sep\u00falveda as their intellectual champion.\nTo settle the issues, a formal debate was organized, the famous Valladolid debate, which took place in 1550\u201351 with Sep\u00falveda and Las Casas each presenting their arguments in front of a council of jurists and theologians. First Sep\u00falveda read the conclusions of his \"Democrates Alter\", and then the council listened to Las Casas read his counterarguments in the form of an \"Apolog\u00eda\". Sep\u00falveda argued that the subjugation of certain Indians was warranted because of their sins against Natural Law; that their low level of civilization required civilized masters to maintain social order; that they should be made Christian and that this in turn required them to be pacified; and that only the Spanish could defend weak Indians against the abuses of the stronger ones. Las Casas countered that the scriptures did not in fact support war against all heathens, only against certain Canaanite tribes; that the Indians were not at all uncivilized nor lacking social order; that peaceful mission was the only true way of converting the natives; and finally that some weak Indians suffering at the hands of stronger ones was preferable to all Indians suffering at the hands of Spaniards.\nThe judge, Fray Domingo de Soto, summarised the arguments. Sep\u00falveda addressed Las Casas's arguments with twelve refutations, which were again countered by Las Casas. The judges then deliberated on the arguments presented for several months before coming to a verdict. The verdict was inconclusive, and both debaters claimed that they had won.\nSep\u00falveda's arguments contributed to the policy of \"war by fire and blood\" that the Third Mexican Provincial Council implemented in 1585 during the Chichimeca War. According to Lewis Hanke, while Sep\u00falveda became the hero of the conquistadors, his success was short-lived, and his works were never published in Spain again during his lifetime.\nLas Casas's ideas had a more lasting impact on the decisions of the king, Philip II, as well as on history and human rights. Las Casas's criticism of the encomienda system contributed to its replacement with reducciones. His testimonies on the peaceful nature of the Native Americans also encouraged nonviolent policies concerning the religious conversions of the Indians in New Spain and Peru. It also helped convince more missionaries to come to the Americas to study the indigenous people, such as Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, who learned the native languages to discover more about their cultures and civilizations.\nThe impact of Las Casas's doctrine was also limited. In 1550, the king had ordered that the conquest should cease, because the Valladolid debate was to decide whether the war was just or not. The government's orders were hardly respected; conquistadors such as Pedro de Valdivia went on to wage war in Chile during the first half of the 1550s. Expanding the Spanish territory in the New World was allowed again in May 1556, and a decade later, Spain started its conquest of the Philippines.\nLater years and death.\nHaving resigned the Bishopric of Chiapas, Las Casas spent the rest of his life working closely with the imperial court in matters relating to the Indies. In 1551 he rented a cell at the College of San Gregorio, where he lived with his assistant and friend Fray Rodrigo de Ladrada. He continued working as a kind of procurator for the natives of the Indies, many of whom directed petitions to him to speak to the emperor on their behalf. Sometimes indigenous nobility even related their cases to him in Spain, for example, the Nahua noble Francisco Tenamaztle from Nochistl\u00e1n. His influence at court was so great that some even considered that he had the final word in choosing the members of the Council of the Indies.\nIn 1552, Las Casas published \"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\". This book, written a decade earlier and sent to the attention of then-prince Philip II of Spain, contained accounts of the abuses committed by some Spaniards against Native Americans during the early stages of colonization. In 1555 his old Franciscan adversary Toribio de Benavente Motolinia wrote a letter in which he described Las Casas as an ignorant, arrogant troublemaker. Benavente described indignantly how Las Casas had once denied baptism to an aging Indian who had walked many leagues to receive it, only on the grounds that he did not believe that the man had received sufficient doctrinal instruction. This letter, which reinvoked the old conflict over the requirements for the sacrament of baptism between the two orders, was intended to bring Las Casas in disfavour. However, it did not succeed.\nOne matter in which he invested much effort was the political situation of the Viceroyalty of Peru. In Peru, power struggles between conquistadors and the viceroy became an open civil war in which the conquistadors led by Gonzalo Pizarro rebelled against the New Laws and defeated and executed the viceroy Blasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez Vela in 1546. The emperor sent Pedro de la Gasca, a friend of Las Casas, to reinstate the rule of law, and he in turn defeated Pizarro. To restabilize the political situation the encomenderos started pushing not only for the repeal of the New Laws, but for turning the encomiendas into perpetual patrimony of the encomenderos \u2013 the worst possible outcome from Las Casas's point of view. The encomenderos offered to buy the rights to the encomiendas from the Crown, and Charles V was inclined to accept since his wars had left him in deep economic troubles. Las Casas worked hard to convince the emperor that it would be a bad economic decision, that it would return the viceroyalty to the brink of open rebellion, and could result in the Crown losing the colony entirely. The emperor, probably because of the doubts caused by Las Casas's arguments, never took a final decision on the issue of the encomiendas.\nIn 1561, he finished his \"Historia de las Indias\" and signed it over to the College of San Gregorio, stipulating that it could not be published until after forty years. In fact it was not published for 314 years, until 1875. He also had to repeatedly defend himself against accusations of treason: someone, possibly Sep\u00falveda, denounced him to the Spanish Inquisition, but nothing came from the case. Las Casas also appeared as a witness in the case of the Inquisition for his friend Archbishop Bartolom\u00e9 Carranza de Miranda, who had been falsely accused of heresy. In 1565, he wrote his last will, signing over his immense library to the college. Bartolom\u00e9 de Las Casas died on 18 July 1566, in Madrid.\nWorks.\n\"Memorial de Remedios para las Indias\".\nThe text, written 1516, starts by describing its purpose: to present \"The remedies that seem necessary in order that the evil and harm that exists in the Indies cease, and that God and our Lord the Prince may draw greater benefits than hitherto, and that the republic may be better preserved and consoled.\"\nLas Casas's first proposed remedy was a complete moratorium on the use of Indian labor in the Indies until such time as better regulations of it were set in place. This was meant simply to halt the decimation of the Indian population and to give the surviving Indians time to reconstitute themselves. Las Casas feared that at the rate the exploitation was proceeding it would be too late to hinder their annihilation unless action were taken rapidly. The second was a change in the labor policy so that instead of a colonist owning the labor of specific Indians, he would have a right to man-hours, to be carried out by no specific persons. This required the establishment of self-governing Indian communities on the land of colonists \u2013 who would themselves organize to provide the labor for their patron. The colonist would only have rights to a certain portion of the total labor, so that a part of the Indians were always resting and taking care of the sick. He proposed 12 other remedies, all having the specific aim of improving the situation for the Indians and limiting the powers that colonists were able to exercise over them.\nThe second part of the \"Memorial\" described suggestions for the social and political organization of Indian communities relative to colonial ones. Las Casas advocated the dismantlement of the city of Asunci\u00f3n and the subsequent gathering of Indians into communities of about 1,000 Indians to be situated as satellites of Spanish towns or mining areas. Here, Las Casas argued, Indians could be better governed, better taught and indoctrinated in the Christian faith, and would be easier to protect from abuse than if they were in scattered settlements. Each town would have a royal hospital built with four wings in the shape of a cross, where up to 200 sick Indians could be cared for at a time. He described in detail social arrangements, distribution of work, how provisions would be divided and even how table manners were to be introduced. Regarding expenses, he argued that \"this should not seem expensive or difficult, because after all, everything comes from them [the Indians] and they work for it and it is theirs.\" He even drew up a budget of each pueblo's expenses to cover wages for administrators, clerics, Bachelors of Latin, doctors, surgeons, pharmacists, advocates, ranchers, miners, muleteers, hospitalers, pig herders, fishermen, etc.\n\"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\".\n\"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\" () is an account written in 1542 (published in Seville in 1552) about the mistreatment of the indigenous peoples of the Americas in colonial times and sent to then-Prince Philip II of Spain.\nOne of the stated purposes for writing the account was Las Casas's fear of Spain coming under divine punishment and his concern for the souls of the native peoples. The account was one of the first attempts by a Spanish writer of the colonial era to depict the unfair treatment that the indigenous people endured during the early stages of the Spanish conquest of the Greater Antilles, particularly the island of Hispaniola. Las Casas's point of view can be described as being heavily against some of the Spanish methods of colonization, which, as he described them, inflicted great losses on the indigenous occupants of the islands. In addition, his critique towards the colonizers served to bring awareness to his audience on the true meaning of Christianity, to dismantle any misconceptions on evangelization. His account was largely responsible for the adoption of the New Laws of 1542, which abolished native slavery for the first time in European colonial history and led to the Valladolid debate.\nThe book became an important element in the creation and propagation of the so-called Black Legend \u2013 the tradition of describing the Spanish empire as exceptionally morally corrupt and violent. It was republished several times by groups that were critical of the Spanish realm for political or religious reasons. The first edition in translation was published in Dutch in 1578, during the religious persecution of Dutch Protestants by the Spanish crown, followed by editions in French (1578), English (1583), and German (1599) \u2013 all countries where religious wars were raging. The first edition published in Spain after Las Casas's death appeared in Barcelona during the Catalan Revolt of 1646. The book was banned by the Aragonese inquisition in 1659.\nThe images described by Las Casas were later depicted by Theodore de Bry in copper plate engravings that served as a medium of the Black Legend against Spain.\n\"Apologetic History of the Indies\".\nThe \"Apologetic Summary History of the People of These Indies\" () was first written as the 68th chapter of the \"General History of the Indies\", but Las Casas changed it into a volume of its own, recognizing that the material was not historical. The material contained in the \"Apologetic History\" is primarily ethnographic accounts of the indigenous cultures of the Indies \u2013 the Ta\u00edno, the Ciboney, and the Guanahatabey, but it also contains descriptions of many of the other indigenous cultures that Las Casas learned about through his travels and readings. The history is apologetic because it is written as a defense of the cultural level of the Indians, arguing throughout that indigenous peoples of the Americas were just as civilized as the Roman, Greek and Egyptian civilizations\u00a0\u2013 and more civilized than some European civilizations. It was in essence a comparative ethnography comparing practices and customs of European and American cultures and evaluating them according to whether they were good or bad, seen from a Christian viewpoint.\nHe wrote: \"I have declared and demonstrated openly and concluded, from chapter 22 to the end of this whole book, that all people of these our Indies are human, so far as is possible by the natural and human way and without the light of faith \u2013 had their republics, places, towns, and cities most abundant and well provided for, and did not lack anything to live politically and socially, and attain and enjoy civil happiness... And they equaled many nations of this world that are renowned and considered civilized, and they surpassed many others, and to none were they inferior. Among those they equaled were the Greeks and the Romans, and they surpassed them by many good and better customs. They surpassed also the English and the French and some of the people of our own Spain; and they were incomparably superior to countless others, in having good customs and lacking many evil ones.\" This work in which Las Casas combined his own ethnographic observations with those of other writers, and compared customs and cultures between different peoples, has been characterized as an early beginning of the discipline of anthropology.\n\"History of the Indies\".\nThe \"History of the Indies\" is a three-volume work begun in 1527 while Las Casas was in the Convent of Puerto de Plata. It found its final form in 1561, when he was working in the Colegio de San Gregorio. Originally planned as a six-volume work, each volume describes a decade of the history of the Indies from the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1492 to 1520, and most of it is an eye-witness account. It was in the \"History of the Indies\" that Las Casas finally regretted his advocacy for African slavery, and included a sincere apology, writing: \"I soon repented and judged myself guilty of ignorance. I came to realize that black slavery was as unjust as Indian slavery... and I was not sure that my ignorance and good faith would secure me in the eyes of God.\" (Vol II, p.\u00a0257)\n\"History of the Indies\" has never been fully translated into English. The only translations into English are the 1971 partial translation by Andr\u00e9e M. Collard, and partial translations by Cynthia L. Chamberlin, Nigel Griffin, Michael Hammer and Blair Sullivan in UCLA's \"Repertorium Columbianum\" (Volumes VI, VII and XI).\n\"Archiving Christopher Columbus' Journal\".\nDe Las Casas copied Columbus' diary from his 1492 voyage to modern-day Bahamas. His copy is notable because Columbus' diary itself was lost.\nLegacy.\nLas Casas's legacy has been highly controversial. In the years following his death, his ideas became taboo in the Spanish realm, and he was seen as a nearly heretical extremist. The accounts written by his enemies Lopez de G\u00f3mara and Oviedo were widely read and published in Europe. As the influence of the Spanish Empire was displaced by that of other European powers, Las Casas's accounts were utilized as political tools to justify incursions into Spanish colonies. This historiographic phenomenon has been referred to by some historians as the \"Black Legend\", a tendency by mostly Protestant authors to portray Spanish Catholicism and colonialism in the worst possible light.\nOpposition to Las Casas reached its climax in historiography with Spanish right-wing, nationalist historians in the late 19th and early 20th centuries constructing a pro-Spanish White Legend, arguing that the Spanish Empire was benevolent and just and denying any adverse consequences of Spanish colonialism. Spanish pro-imperial historians such as Men\u00e9ndez y Pelayo, Men\u00e9ndez Pidal, and J. P\u00e9rez de Barrada depicted Las Casas as a madman, describing him as a \"paranoic\" and a monomaniac given to exaggeration, and as a traitor towards his own nation. Men\u00e9ndez Pelayo also accused Las Casas of having been instrumental in suppressing the publication of Juan Gin\u00e9s de Sep\u00falveda's \"Democrates Alter\" (also called \"Democrates Secundus\") out of spite, but other historians find that to be unlikely since it was rejected by the theologians of both Alcal\u00e1 and Salamanca, who were unlikely to be influenced by Las Casas.\nCriticisms.\nLas Casas has also often been accused of exaggerating the atrocities he described in the Indies, some scholars holding that the initial population figures given by him were too high, which would make the population decline look worse than it actually was, and that epidemics of European disease were the prime cause of the population decline, not violence and exploitation. Demographic studies such as those of colonial Mexico by Sherburne F. Cook in the mid-20th century suggested that the decline in the first years of the conquest was indeed drastic, ranging between 80 and 90%, due to many different causes but all ultimately traceable to the arrival of the Europeans. The overwhelming cause was the disease introduced by the Europeans. Historians have also noted that exaggeration and inflation of numbers were the norm in writing in 16th-century accounts, and both contemporary detractors and supporters of Las Casas were guilty of similar exaggerations.\nThe Dominican friars Antonio de Montesinos and Pedro de C\u00f3rdoba had reported extensive violence already in the first decade of the colonization of the Americas, and throughout the conquest of the Americas, there were reports of abuse of the natives from friars, priests, and ordinary citizens, and many massacres of indigenous people were reported in full by those who perpetrated them. Even some of Las Casas's enemies, such as Toribio de Benavente Motolinia, reported many gruesome atrocities committed against the Indians by the colonizers. All in all, modern historians tend to disregard the numerical figures given by Las Casas, but they maintain that his general picture of a violent and abusive conquest represented reality.\nOne persistent point of criticism has been Las Casas's repeated suggestions of replacing Indian with African slave labor. Even though he regretted that position later in his life and included an apology in his \"History of the Indies\", some later criticism held him responsible for the institution of the transatlantic slave trade. One detractor, the abolitionist David Walker, called Las Casas a \"wretch... stimulated by sordid avarice only,\" holding him responsible for the enslavement of thousands of Africans. Other historians, such as John Fiske writing in 1900, denied that Las Casas's suggestions affected the development of the slave trade. Benjamin Keen likewise did not consider Las Casas to have had any substantial impact on the slave trade, which was well in place before he began writing. That view is contradicted by Sylvia Wynter, who argued that Las Casas's 1516 Memorial was the direct cause of Charles V granting permission in 1518 to transport the first 4,000 African slaves to Jamaica.\nA growing \"corpus\" of scholarship has sought to deconstruct and reassess the role of Las Casas in Spanish colonialism. Daniel Castro, in his \"Another Face of Empire\" (2007), takes on such a task. He argues that he was more of a politician than a humanitarian and that his liberation policies were always combined with schemes to make colonial extraction of resources from the natives more efficient. He also argues that Las Casas failed to realize that by seeking to replace indigenous spirituality with Christianity, he was undertaking a religious colonialism that was more intrusive than the physical one. The responses to his work are varied. Some claim that Castro's portrayal of Las Casas had an air of anachronism. Others have agreed with Castro's deconstruction of Las Casas as a nuanced and contradictory historical figure.\nCultural legacy.\nIn 1848, Ciudad de San Crist\u00f3bal, then the capital of the Mexican state of Chiapas, was renamed San Crist\u00f3bal de Las Casas in honor of its first bishop. His work is a particular inspiration behind the work of the Las Casas Institute at Blackfriars Hall, Oxford. He is also often cited as a predecessor of the liberation theology movement. Bartolom\u00e9 is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 20 July, on 18 July, and at the Evangelical Lutheran Church on 17 July. In the Catholic Church, the Dominicans introduced his cause for canonization in 1976. In 2002 the church began the process for his beatification.\nHe was among the first to develop a view of unity among humankind in the New World, stating that \"All people of the world are humans,\" and that they had a natural right to liberty \u2013 a combination of Thomist rights philosophy with Augustinian political theology. In this capacity, an ecumenical human rights institute located in San Crist\u00f3bal de las Casas, the Centro Fray Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas de Derechos Humanos, was established by Bishop Samuel Ruiz in 1989.\nResidencial Las Casas in Santurce, San Juan, Puerto Rico is named after Las Casas.\nHe is also featured on the Guatemalan quetzal one centavo coin (Q0.01).\nThe small town of Lascassas, Tennessee, in the United States has also been named after him.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69831", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69831", "title": "Monaco/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "69832", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69832", "title": "Saccade", "text": "Eye movement\nIn vision science, a saccade ( ; ; ) is a quick, simultaneous movement of both eyes between two or more phases of focal points in the same direction. In contrast, in smooth-pursuit movements, the eyes move smoothly instead of in jumps. Controlled cortically by the frontal eye fields (FEF), or subcortically by the superior colliculus, saccades serve as a mechanism for focal points, rapid eye movement, and the fast phase of optokinetic nystagmus. The word appears to have been coined in the 1880s by the French ophthalmologist \u00c9mile Javal, who used a mirror on one side of a page to observe eye movement in silent reading and found that it involves a succession of discontinuous individual movements. These movements quickly scan objects of attention and aid the brain in grasping a scene visually.\nFunction.\nHumans and many organisms do not look at a scene in steadiness; instead, the eyes move around, locating interesting parts of the scene and building up a three-dimensional 'map' corresponding to the scene (as opposed to the graphical map of avians, which often relies upon detection of angular movement on the retina).\nWhen scanning immediate surroundings or reading, human eyes make saccadic movements and stop several times, moving very quickly between each stop. The speed of movement during each saccade cannot be controlled; the eyes move as fast as they are able. One reason for the saccadic movement of the human eye is that the central part of the retina\u2014known as the fovea\u2014which provides the high-resolution portion of vision is very small in humans, only about 1\u20132 degrees of vision, but it plays a critical role in resolving objects. Saccades allow the eyes to sense small parts of a scene with greater resolution and the brain thereby to assemble them into a coherent, continuous mental representation.\nTiming and kinematics.\nSaccades are one of the fastest movements produced by the human eye (blinks may reach even higher peak velocities). The peak angular speed of the eye during a saccade reaches up to 700\u00b0/s in humans for great saccades (25\u00b0 of visual angle); in some monkeys, peak speed can reach 1000\u00b0/s. Saccades to an unexpected stimulus normally take about 200 milliseconds (ms) to initiate, and then last from about 20\u2013200 ms, depending on their amplitude (20\u201330 ms is typical in language reading). Under certain laboratory circumstances, the latency of, or reaction time to, saccade production can be cut nearly in half (express saccades). These saccades are generated by a neuronal mechanism that bypasses time-consuming circuits and activates the eye muscles more directly. Specific pre-target oscillatory (alpha rhythms) and transient activities occurring in posterior-lateral parietal cortex and occipital cortex also characterize express saccades.\nTo achieve such high speeds, there are specialized oculomotor burst neurons in the brainstem that wire into the ocular motor neuron. The burst neurons implement bang-bang control: they are either completely inhibited, or firing at its full rate of ~1000\u00a0Hz. Since the motion of the eye is essentially a linear system, bang-bang control minimizes travel time. After a saccade, a constant force is required to hold the position against elastic force, thus resulting in a pulse-step control.\nThe amplitude of a saccade is the angular distance the eye travels during the movement. For amplitudes up to 15 or 20\u00b0, the velocity of a saccade linearly depends on the amplitude (the so-called \"saccadic main sequence\", a term borrowed from astrophysics; see Figure). For amplitudes larger than 20\u00b0, the peak velocity starts to plateau (nonlinearly) toward the maximum velocity attainable by the eye at around 60\u00b0. For instance, a 10\u00b0 amplitude is associated with a velocity of 300\u00b0/s, and 30\u00b0 is associated with 500\u00b0/s. Therefore, for larger amplitude ranges, the main sequence can best be modeled by an inverse power law function.\nThe high peak velocities and the main sequence relationship can also be used to distinguish micro-/saccades from other eye movements (like ocular tremor, ocular drift, and smooth pursuit). Velocity-based algorithms are a common approach for saccade detection in eye tracking. Although, depending on the demands on timing accuracy, acceleration-based methods are more precise.\nSaccades may rotate the eyes in any direction to relocate gaze direction (the direction of sight that corresponds to the fovea), but normally saccades do not rotate the eyes torsionally. (Torsion is clockwise or counterclockwise rotation around the line of sight when the eye is at its central primary position; defined this way, Listing's law says that, when the head is motionless, torsion is kept at zero.)\nHead-fixed saccades can have amplitudes of up to 90\u00b0 (from one edge of the oculomotor range to the other), but in normal conditions saccades are far smaller, and any shift of gaze larger than about 20\u00b0 is accompanied by a head movement. During such gaze saccades, first, the eye produces a saccade to get gaze on target, whereas the head follows more slowly and the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) causes the eyes to roll back in the head to keep gaze on the target. Since the VOR can actually rotate the eyes around the line of sight, combined eye and head movements do not always obey Listing's law.\nThe rotational inertia of the eye is negligible compared to the elastic and viscous force.\nTypes.\nSaccades can be categorized by intended goal in four ways:\nAs referenced to above, it is also useful to categorize saccades by latency (time between go-signal and movement onset). In this case the categorization is binary: Either a given saccade is an \"express saccade\" or it is not. The latency cut-off is approximately ~200\u00a0ms; any longer than this is outside the express saccade range.\nMicrosaccades are a related type of fixational eye movement that are small, jerk-like, involuntary eye movements, similar to miniature versions of voluntary saccades. They typically occur during visual fixation, not only in humans, but also in other animals with foveal vision, such as haplorhine primates in general and hawks. Microsaccade amplitudes vary from 2 to 120 arcminutes.\nIn depth.\nWhen exploring the visual environment with the gaze, humans make two to three fixations a second. Each fixation involves binocularly coordinated movements of the eyes to acquire the new target in three dimensions: horizontal and vertical, but also in-depth. In literature it has been shown how an upward or a vertical saccade is generally accompanied by a divergence of the eyes, while a downward saccade is accompanied by a convergence. The amount of this \"intra-saccadic\" \"vergence\" has a strong functional significance for the effectiveness of binocular vision. When making an upward saccade, the eyes diverged to be aligned with the most probable uncrossed disparity in that part of the visual field. On the other way around, when making a downward saccade, the eyes converged to enable alignment with crossed disparity in that part of the field. The phenomenon can be interpreted as an adaptation of rapid binocular eye movements to the statistics of the 3D environment, in order to minimize the need for corrective vergence movements at the end of saccades.\nPathophysiologic saccades.\nSaccadic oscillations not fitting the normal function are a deviation from a healthy or normal condition. Nystagmus is characterized by the combination of 'slow phases', which usually take the eye off the point of regard, interspersed with saccade-like \"quick phases\" that serve to bring the eye back on target. Pathological slow phases may be due to either an imbalance in the vestibular system or damage to the brainstem \"neural integrator\" that normally holds the eyes in place. On the other hand, opsoclonus or ocular flutter are composed purely of fast-phase saccadic eye movements. Without the use of objective recording techniques, it may be very difficult to distinguish between these conditions.\nEye movement measurements are also used to investigate psychiatric disorders. For example, ADHD is characterized by an increase of antisaccade errors and an increase in delays for visually guided saccade. Various pathological conditions also alter microsaccades and other fixational eye movements.\nParoxysmal eye\u2013head movements, termed aberrant gaze saccades, are an early symptom of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome in infancy.\nSaccade adaptation.\nWhen the brain is led to believe that the saccades it is generating are too large or too small (by an experimental manipulation in which a saccade-target steps backward or forward contingent on the eye movement made to acquire it), saccade amplitude gradually decreases (or increases), an adaptation (also termed \"gain adaptation\") widely seen as a simple form of motor learning, possibly driven by an effort to correct visual error. This effect was first observed in humans with ocular muscle palsy. In these cases, it was noticed that the patients would make hypometric (small) saccades with the affected eye, and that they were able to correct these errors over time. This led to the realization that visual or retinal error (the difference between the post-saccadic point of regard and the target position) played a role in the homeostatic regulation of saccade amplitude. Since then, much scientific research has been devoted to various experiments employing saccade adaptation.\nReading.\nSaccadic eye movement allows the mind to read quickly, but it comes with its disadvantages. It can cause the mind to skip over words because it does not see them as important to the sentence, and the mind completely leaves it from the sentence or it replaces it with the wrong word. This can be seen in \"Paris in the the Spring\". This is a common psychological test, where the mind will often skip the second \"the\", especially when there is a line break in between the two.\nWhen speaking, the mind plans what will be said before it is said. Sometimes the mind is not able to plan in advance and the speech is rushed out. This is why there are errors like mispronunciation, stuttering, and unplanned pauses. The same thing happens when reading. The mind does not always know what will come next. This is another reason that the second \"the\" can be missed.\nVision.\nSaccadic masking.\nIt is a common but false belief that during the saccade, no information is passed through the optic nerve to the brain. Whereas low spatial frequencies (the 'fuzzier' parts) are attenuated, higher spatial frequencies (an image's fine details) that would otherwise be blurred by the eye movement remain unaffected. This phenomenon, known as \"saccadic masking\" or \"saccadic suppression\", is known to begin prior to saccadic eye movements in every primate species studied, implying neurological reasons for the effect rather than simply the image's motion blur. This phenomenon leads to the so-called stopped-clock illusion, or chronostasis.\nA person may observe the saccadic masking effect by standing in front of a mirror and looking from one eye to the next (and vice versa). The subject will not experience any movement of the eyes or any evidence that the optic nerve has momentarily ceased transmitting. Through saccadic masking, the eye/brain system not only hides the eye movements from the individual but also hides the evidence that anything has been hidden. Of course, a second observer watching the experiment will see the subject's eyes moving back and forth. The function's main purpose is to prevent an otherwise significant smearing of the image. (One can experience one\u2019s eye saccade movements by using a cellphone's front-facing camera as a delayed mirror; if the screen is held a couple of inches away as the viewer looks from one eye to the other, the signal-processing delay allows them to see the end of their own saccade movement.)\nSpatial updating.\nWhen a visual stimulus is seen before a saccade, subjects are still able to make another saccade back to that image, even if it is no longer visible. This shows that the brain is somehow able to take into account the intervening eye movement. It is thought that the brain does this by temporarily recording a copy of the command for the eye movement, and comparing this to the remembered image of the target. This is called spatial updating. Neurophysiologists, having recorded from cortical areas for saccades during spatial updating, have found that memory-related signals get remapped during each saccade.\nTrans-saccadic perception.\nIt is also thought that perceptual memory is updated during saccades so that information gathered across fixations can be compared and synthesized. However, the entire visual image is not updated during each saccade. Some scientists believe that this is the same as visual working memory, but as in spatial updating the eye movement has to be accounted for. The process of retaining information across a saccade is called trans-saccadic memory, and the process of integrating information from more than one fixation is called trans-saccadic integration.\nComparative physiology.\nSaccades are a widespread phenomenon across animals with image-forming visual systems. They have been observed in animals across three phyla, including animals that do not have a fovea (most vertebrates do) and animals that cannot move their eyes independently of their head (such as insects). Therefore, while saccades serve in humans and other primates to increase the effective visual resolution of a scene, there must be additional reasons for the behavior. The most frequently suggested of these reasons is to avoid blurring of the image, which would occur if the response time of a photoreceptor cell is longer than the time a given portion of the image is stimulating that photoreceptor as the image drifts across the eye.\nIn birds, saccadic eye movements serve a further function. The avian retina is highly developed. It is thicker than the mammalian retina, has a higher metabolic activity, and has less vasculature obstruction, for greater visual acuity. Because of this, the retinal cells must obtain nutrients via diffusion through the choroid and from the vitreous humor. The pecten is a specialised structure in the avian retina. It is a highly vascular structure that projects into the vitreous humor. Experiments show that, during saccadic eye oscillations (which occupy up to 12% of avian viewing time), the pecten oculi acts as an agitator, propelling perfusate (natural lubricants) toward the retina. Thus, in birds, saccadic eye movements appear to be important in retinal nutrition and cellular respiration.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69833", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69833", "title": "Cuba/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "69834", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69834", "title": "Victor Emmanuel III of Italy", "text": ""}
{"id": "69835", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69835", "title": "Humbert", "text": "Humbert, Umbert or Humberto (Latinized \"Humbertus\") is a Germanic given name, from \"hun\" \"warrior\" and \"beraht\" \"bright\". It also came into use as a surname.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name or the same family name. "}
{"id": "69836", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69836", "title": "Turkey/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "69837", "revid": "36222423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69837", "title": "Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology Integration", "text": "US Climate Change research organization\nThe Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology Integration was created as part of the Clear Skies Initiative in February 2002 by George W. Bush, as a Cabinet-level effort to coordinate climate change science and technology research.\nThe White House says:\n\"The Secretary of Commerce and Secretary of Energy will lead the effort, in close coordination with the President's Science Advisor. The research effort will continue to be coordinated through the National Science and Technology Council in accordance with the Global Change Research Act of 1990.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69838", "revid": "31642291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69838", "title": "William Friese-Greene", "text": "British photographer and inventor (1855\u20131921)\nWilliam Friese-Greene (born William Edward Green, 7 September 1855 \u2013 5 May 1921) was a prolific English inventor and professional photographer. He was known as a pioneer in the field of motion pictures, having devised a series of cameras between 1888\u20131891 and shot moving pictures with them in London. He went on to patent an early two-colour filming process in 1905. Wealth came with inventions in printing, including phototypesetting and a method of printing without ink, and from a chain of photographic studios. However, Friese-Greene spent all his money on inventing, went bankrupt three times, was jailed once, and died in poverty.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Edward Green was born on 7 September 1855, in Bristol. He studied at the Queen Elizabeth's Hospital school. In 1871, he was apprenticed to the Bristol photographer Marcus Guttenberg, but later successfully went to court to be freed early from the indentures of his seven-year apprenticeship. He married the Swiss, Helena Friese (born Victoria Mariana Helena Friese), on 24 March 1874 and, in a remarkable move for the era, decided to add her maiden name to his surname. In 1876, he set up his own studio in Bath and, by 1881, had expanded his business, having more studios in Bath, Bristol and Plymouth.\nCinematic inventor.\nExperiments with magic lanterns.\nIn Bath he came into contact with John Arthur Roebuck Rudge. Rudge was a scientific instrument maker who also worked with electricity and magic lanterns to create popular entertainments. Rudge built what he called the Biophantic Lantern, which could display seven photographic slides in rapid succession, producing the illusion of movement. It showed a sequence in which Rudge (with the invisible help of Friese-Greene) apparently took off his head. Friese-Greene was fascinated by the machine and worked with Rudge on a variety of devices over the 1880s, various of which Rudge called the Biophantascope. Moving his base to London in 1885, Friese-Greene realised that glass plates would never be a practical medium for continuously capturing life as it happens. Hence he began experiments with the new Eastman paper roll film, made transparent with castor oil, before turning his attention to experimenting with celluloid as a medium for motion picture cameras.\nMovie cameras.\nIn 1888, Friese-Greene had some form of moving picture camera constructed, the nature of which is not known. On 21 June 1889, Friese-Greene was issued patent no. 10131 for a motion-picture camera, in collaboration with a civil engineer, Mortimer Evans. It was apparently capable of taking up to ten photographs per second using paper and celluloid film. An illustrated report on the camera appeared in the British \"Photographic News\" on 28 February 1890. On 18 February, Friese-Greene sent details of the camera to Thomas Edison, whose laboratory had begun developing a motion picture system, with a peephole viewer, later christened the Kinetoscope. The \"Photographic News\" report was reprinted in \"Scientific American\" on 19 April. In 1890 he developed a camera with Frederick Varley to shoot stereoscopic moving images. This ran at a slower frame rate, and although the 3D arrangement worked, there are no records of projection. Friese-Greene worked on a series of moving picture cameras into the early 1890s, but although many individuals recount seeing his projected images privately, he never gave a successful public projection of moving pictures. Friese-Greene's experiments with motion pictures were to the detriment of his other business interests and in 1891 he was declared bankrupt. He had sold the rights to the 1889 moving picture camera patent for \u00a3500 to investors in the City of London. The renewal fee was never paid and the patent lapsed.\nColour film.\nFriese-Greene's later exploits were in the field of colour in motion pictures. From 1904 he lived in Brighton where there were a number of experimenters developing still and moving pictures in colour. Initially working with William Norman Lascelles Davidson, Friese-Greene patented a two-colour moving picture system using prisms in 1905. He and Davidson gave public demonstrations of this in January and July 1906 and Friese-Greene held screenings at his photographic studio.\nHe also experimented with a system which produced the illusion of true colour by exposing each alternate frame of ordinary black-and-white film stock through two or three different coloured filters. Each alternate frame of the monochrome print was then stained red or green (and/or blue). Although the projection of prints did provide an impression of colour, it suffered from red and green fringing when the subject was in rapid motion, as did the more popular and famous system, Kinemacolor.\nIn 1911, Charles Urban filed a lawsuit against Harold Speer, who had purchased rights in Friese-Greene's 1905 patent and created a company 'Biocolour', claiming that this process infringed upon the Kinemacolor patent of George Albert Smith, despite the fact that Friese-Greene had both patented and demonstrated his work before Smith. Urban was granted an injunction against Biocolour in 1912, but the Sussex-based, racing driver Selwyn Edge funded an appeal to the High Court. This overturned the original verdict on the grounds that Kinemacolor made claims for itself which it could not deliver. Urban fought back and pushed it up to the House of Lords, which in 1915 upheld the decision of the High Court. The decision benefited nobody. For Urban it was a case of hubris because now he could no longer exercise control over his own system, so it became worthless. For Friese-Greene, the arrival of the war and personal poverty meant there was nothing more to be done with colour for some years.\nHis son Claude Friese-Greene continued to develop the system with his father, after whose death in the early 1920s he called it \"The Friese-Greene Natural Colour Process\" and shot with it the documentary films \"The Open Road\", which offer a rare portrait of 1920s Britain in colour. These were featured in a BBC series \"The Lost World of Friese-Greene\" and then issued in a digitally restored form by the BFI on DVD in 2006.\nDeath.\nOn 5 May 1921, Friese-Greene \u2013 then a largely forgotten figure \u2013 attended a stormy meeting of the cinema trade at the Connaught Rooms in London. The meeting had been called to discuss the current poor state of British film distribution and was chaired by Lord Beaverbrook. Disturbed by the tone of the proceedings, Friese-Greene got to his feet to speak. The chairman asked him to come forward onto the platform to be heard better, which he did, appealing for the two sides to come together. Shortly after returning to his seat, he collapsed. People went to his aid and took him outside, but he died almost immediately of heart failure.\nGiven his dramatic death in poverty (his pockets contained only one shilling and ten pence when he died), surrounded by film industry representatives who had almost entirely forgotten about his role in motion pictures, there was a spasm of collective shock and guilt. A very grand funeral was staged for him, with the streets of London lined by the curious. A two-minute silence was observed in some cinemas, and a fund was raised to commission a memorial for his grave. He was buried in the eastern section of London's Highgate Cemetery, just south of the entrance and visible from the street through the railings. However, his memorial was not designed by Edwin Lutyens, as is often stated. It describes him as \"The Inventor of Kinematography\", a term Friese-Greene never used in talking about his achievements. Indeed, he often spoke generously about other workers in the field of capturing movement.\nHis second wife, Edith Jane, died a few months later of cancer and is buried with him, as are some of his children.\nFamily.\nAfter the death of his first wife, with whom he had one daughter, Friese-Greene married Edith Jane Harrison (1875\u20131921) and they had six sons, one dying in infancy. The eldest, Claude (1898\u20131943), and the youngest, Vincent (1910\u20131943), are buried with their parents. Vincent was killed in action during the Second World War.\nHis great-grandson is the musician Tim Friese-Greene.\nLegacy.\nIn 1951 a biopic was made, starring Robert Donat, based on the biography, \"Friese-Greene, Close-Up of an Inventor\", as part of the Festival of Britain. The film, \"The Magic Box,\" was not shown until the festival was nearly over and only went on full release after it had finished. Despite the all-star cast, positive reviews, and much praise for Robert Donat's performance, it was not a financial success. Nonetheless, Martin Scorsese has many times cited it as one of his favourite films, and one that inspired him.\nThe film did not portray Friese-Greene as the inventor of motion pictures, only a \"pioneer\", but some of the British press represented the film as if it did. The pro-Edison American film historian Terry Ramsaye called the film a \"perversion of history\". In 1955, Kodak employee Brian Coe wrote an article in the \"British Journal of Photography\" called \"The Truth About Friese Greene\" in reaction against the biography and the film, which expressed the view that Friese-Greene had not made any contribution to the development of the motion picture. Although Coe's work was much cited for decades, it has been discredited by more recent research.\nFriese-Greene was from then on more or less banished to obscurity by film historians, but newer research is rehabilitating him, giving a better understanding of his achievements and influence on the technical development of cinema.\nDespite a campaign by Bristol photographer Reece Winstone for the retention of Friese-Greene's birthplace for use as a Museum of Cinematography, among other purposes, it was demolished by Bristol Corporation in 1958 to provide parking space for six cars.\nPremises in Brighton's Middle Street where Friese-Greene had a workshop for several years are often wrongly described as his home. They bear a plaque in a 1924 design by Eric Gill commemorating Friese-Greene's achievements, wrongly stating that it is the place where he invented cinematography. The plaque was unveiled by Michael Redgrave, who had appeared in \"The Magic Box\", in September 1951. A modern office building a few yards away is named Friese-Greene House. Other plaques include the 1930s Odeon Cinema in Kings Road, Chelsea, London, with its iconic fa\u00e7ade, which carries high upon it a large sculpted head-and-shoulders medallion of \"William Friese-Greene\" and his years of birth and death. There are busts of him at Pinewood Studios and Shepperton Studios.\nIn 2006 the BBC ran a series of programmes called \"The Lost World of Friese-Greene\", presented by Dan Cruickshank about Claude Friese-Greene's road trip from Land's End to John o' Groats, entitled \"The Open Road\", which he filmed from 1924 to 1926 using The Friese-Greene Natural Colour Process. The British Film Institute then worked on a new version, using post-production techniques to reduce the problems of flickering and colour fringing around moving objects, which Kinemacolor and this process had when projected. The result was a unique view of Britain in colour in the mid-1920s and extracts of it continue to frequently circulate virally on social media.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69840", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69840", "title": "Victor Emmanuel III", "text": "King of Italy from 1900 to 1946\nVictor Emmanuel III (; 11 November 1869 \u2013 28 December 1947) was King of Italy from 29 July 1900 until his abdication on 9 May 1946. A member of the House of Savoy, he also reigned as Emperor of Ethiopia from 1936 to 1941 and King of the Albanians from 1939 to 1943, following the Italian invasions of Ethiopia and Albania. During his reign of nearly 46 years, which began after the assassination of his father Umberto I, the Kingdom of Italy became involved in two world wars. His reign also encompassed the birth, rise, and fall of the Fascist regime.\nThe first fourteen years of Victor Emmanuel's reign were dominated by prime minister Giovanni Giolitti, who focused on industrialization and passed several democratic reforms, such as the introduction of universal male suffrage. In foreign policy, Giolitti's Italy distanced itself from the fellow members of the Triple Alliance (the German Empire and Austria-Hungary) and colonized Libya following the Italo-Turkish War. Giolitti was succeeded by Antonio Salandra, Paolo Boselli, and Vittorio Emanuele Orlando. The First World War brought about Italian victory over the Habsburg Empire and the annexation of the Italian-speaking provinces of Trento and Trieste, completing the national unity of Italy, and the southern part of German-speaking Tyrol (South Tyrol). For this reason, Victor Emmanuel was labelled the \"King of Victory\". However, a part of Italian nationalists protested against the partial violation of the 1915 Treaty of London and what they defined as a \"mutilated victory\", demanding the annexation of Croatian-speaking territories in Dalmatia and temporarily occupying the town of Fiume without royal assent.\nDuring the early 1920s, several short-serving prime ministers, including the well-respected Giolitti, serving an unprecedented fifth term as prime minister, could not unify the country in the face of the growing Italian fascist movement. Strengthened by the economic downturn facing the country, the National Fascist Party led the March on Rome, and Victor Emmanuel appointed Benito Mussolini as prime minister. He remained silent on the domestic political abuses of Fascist Italy, and he accepted the additional crowns of the Emperor of Ethiopia in 1936 and the King of Albania in 1939 as a result of Italian imperialism under fascism. When the Second World War broke out in 1939, Victor Emmanuel advised Mussolini against entering the war. In June 1940, he relented and granted Mussolini sweeping powers to enter and conduct the war. \nAmidst the Allied invasion of Italy in 1943, Victor Emmanuel discharged Mussolini from the office of Prime Minister and signed the armistice of Cassibile with the Allies in September 1943. In the face of the coming German reprisal (Operation Achse), he and the government fled to Brindisi while the Germans established the Italian Social Republic as a puppet state in Northern Italy. Having signed the armistice with the Allies, he then declared war on Germany in October. He clashed constantly with Allied command. Under pressure from the Allies, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his powers to his son in June 1944, effectively ending his involvement in the war and in the government of Italy. Victor Emmanuel officially abdicated his throne in 1946 in favour of his son, who became King Umberto II. Victor Emmanuel hoped to strengthen support for the monarchy against an ultimately successful referendum to abolish it.\nAfter the 1946 Italian institutional referendum established the Republic, Victor Emmanuel went into exile to Alexandria, where he died and was buried the following year in St. Catherine's Cathedral, Alexandria. In 2017, his remains were returned to rest in Italy following an agreement between presidents Sergio Mattarella and Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. Victor Emmanuel was also called \"Sciaboletta\" (\"little sabre\") by some Italians.\nEarly years.\nVictor Emmanuel III was born in Naples in the Kingdom of Italy to King Umberto I and Margherita of Savoy, the Queen consort. He was named after his grandfather, Victor Emmanuel II, King of Sardinia and later King of Italy. Unlike his paternal first cousin's son, the tall Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta, Victor Emmanuel was short of stature even by 19th-century standards, standing a diminutive tall, probably due to the consanguinity of his parents (Umberto and Margherita were first cousins, as were his paternal grandparents Vittorio Emanuele II and Adelaide of Austria).\nFrom birth until his accession, Victor Emmanuel was known as \"The Prince of Naples\". On 24 October 1896, he married Princess Elena of Montenegro.\nReign.\nAccession to the throne.\nOn 29 July 1900, at the age of 30, Victor Emmanuel acceded to the throne upon his father's assassination. The only advice that his father Umberto ever gave his heir was \"Remember: to be a king, all you need to know is how to sign your name, read a newspaper, and mount a horse.\" His early years showed evidence that, by the standards of the Savoy monarchy, he was a man committed to constitutional government. Even though his father was killed by an anarchist, the new king showed a commitment to constitutional freedoms.\nAlthough parliamentary rule had been firmly established in Italy, the \"Statuto Albertino\", or constitution, granted the king considerable residual powers. For instance, he had the right to appoint the prime minister even if the individual in question did not command majority support in the Chamber of Deputies. A shy and somewhat withdrawn individual, the King hated the day-to-day stresses of Italian politics, though the country's chronic political instability forced him to intervene on no fewer than ten occasions between 1900 and 1922 to solve parliamentary crises.\nWorld War I.\nWhen the First World War began, Italy at first remained neutral, despite being part of the Triple Alliance (albeit it was signed on defensive terms and Italy objected that the Sarajevo assassination did not qualify as aggression). In April 1915, Italy signed the secret Treaty of London committing itself to enter the war on the side of the Triple Entente. Most of the politicians opposed the war, and Italy's Chamber of Deputies forced Prime Minister Antonio Salandra to resign. At this juncture, Victor Emmanuel declined Salandra's resignation and personally made the decision for Italy to enter the war. The king possessed the right to do so under the \"Statuto,\" which stipulated that ultimate authority for declaring war rested with the crown.\nDemonstrations in favour of the war were staged in Rome, with 200,000 gathering on 16 May 1915, in the Piazza del Popolo. The war effort was widely considered corrupt and disorganized, while the unexpected loss of life suffered by the Royal Italian Army, especially at the great defeat of Caporetto, and the post\u2013World War I recession turned the King against what he perceived as an inefficient political bourgeoisie. Nevertheless, the King visited the various areas of Northern Italy suffering repeated strikes and mortar hits from elements of the fighting there, and demonstrated considerable courage and concern in personally visiting many people, while his wife, the queen, took turns with nurses in caring for Italy's wounded. It was at this time, the period of World War I, that the King enjoyed the genuine affection of the majority of his people. Still, during the war he received about 400 threatening letters from people of every social background, mostly members of the working class. On 8 November 1917, he met with the prime ministers of Britain (Lloyd George) and France (Paul Painlev\u00e9) at the Peschiera conference, where he defended Italy's strategic decisions.\nSupport for Mussolini.\nThe economic depression which followed World War I gave rise to much extremism among Italy's sorely tried working classes. This caused the country as a whole to become politically unstable. Benito Mussolini, soon to be Italy's Fascist dictator, took advantage of this instability for his rise to power.\nMarch on Rome.\nIn 1922, Mussolini led a force of his Fascist supporters on a March on Rome. Prime Minister Luigi Facta and his cabinet drafted a decree of martial law. After some hesitation the King refused to sign it, citing doubts about the ability of the army to contain the uprising without setting off a civil war.\nFascist violence had been growing in intensity throughout the summer and autumn of 1922, climaxing in rumours of a possible coup. On 24 October 1922, during the Fascist Congress in Naples, Mussolini announced that the Fascists would march on Rome to \"take by the throat our miserable ruling class\". General Pietro Badoglio told the King that the military would be able without difficulty to rout the rebels, who numbered no more than 10,000 men armed mostly with knives and clubs whereas the \"Regio Esercito\" had 30,000 soldiers in the Rome area armed with heavy weapons, armoured cars, and machine guns. During the \"March on Rome\", the Fascist \"squadristi\" were halted by 400 lightly armed policemen, as the \"squadristi\" had no desire to take on the Italian state.\nThe troops were loyal to the King; even Cesare Maria De Vecchi, commander of the Blackshirts, and one of the organisers of the March on Rome, told Mussolini that he would not act against the wishes of the monarch. De Vecchi went to the Quirinal Palace to meet the king and assured him that the Fascists would never fight against the king. It was at this point that the Fascist leader considered leaving Italy altogether. But then, minutes before midnight, he received a telegram from the King inviting him to Rome. Facta had the decree for martial law prepared after the cabinet had unanimously endorsed it, and was very surprised when he learned about 9\u00a0am on 28 October that the king had refused to sign it. When Facta protested that the king was overruling the entire cabinet, he was told that this was the royal prerogative and the king did not wish to use force against the Fascists. The only politician Victor Emmanuel consulted during the crisis was Antonio Salandra, who advised him to appoint Mussolini prime minister and stated he was willing to serve in a cabinet headed by Mussolini.\nBy midday on 30 October, Mussolini had been appointed President of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister), at the age of 39, with no previous experience of office, and with only 32 Fascist deputies in the Chamber. Though the King claimed in his memoirs that it was the fear of a civil war that motivated his actions, it would seem that he received some 'alternative' advice, possibly from the Salandra as well as General Armando Diaz, that it would be better to do a deal with Mussolini.\nOn 1 November 1922, the king reviewed the \"squadristi\" as they marched past the Quirinal Palace giving the fascist salute. Victor Emmanuel took no responsibility for appointing Mussolini prime minister, saying he learned from studying history that events were \"much more automatic than a result of individual action and influence\". Victor Emmanuel was tired of the recurring crises of parliamentary government and welcomed Mussolini as a \"strong man\" who imposed \"order\" on Italy. Mussolini was always very respectful and deferential when he met him in private, which was exactly the behaviour which the king expected of his prime ministers. Many Fascist \"gerarchi\", most notably Italo Balbo, regarded as the number two-man in Fascism, remained republicans, and the king greatly appreciated Mussolini's conversion to monarchism. In private, Mussolini detested Victor Emmanuel as a tedious and tiresomely boring man, whose only interests were military history and his collections of stamps and coins, a man whom Mussolini sneered was \"too diminutive for an Italy destined to greatness\" (a reference to the king's height). However, Mussolini told the other \"gerarchi\" that he needed the king's support and that one day, another fascist revolution would take place \"without contraceptives\".\nBuilding of the fascist dictatorship.\nThe King failed to move against the Mussolini regime's abuses of power (including, as early as 1924, the assassination of Giacomo Matteotti and other opposition MPs). During the Matteotti affair of 1924, Sir Ronald Graham, the British ambassador, reported: \"His Majesty once told me that he had never had a premier with whom he found it so satisfactory to deal as with Signor Mussolini, and I know from private sources that recent events have not changed his opinion\". The Matteotti affair did much to turn Italian public opinion against Fascism, and Graham reported to London that \"Fascism is more unpopular by the day\" while quoting a high Vatican official as saying to him that Fascism was a \"spent force\". The fact that Matteotti had been tortured by his killers for several hours before he was killed especially shocked Italian public opinion, who were much offended by the gratuitous cruelty of the \"squadristi\" killers. Given the widespread public revulsion against Mussolini generated by the murder of Matteotti, the king could have dismissed Mussolini in 1924 with a minimum of trouble and broad public support. Orlando told the king that the majority of the Italian people were tired of the abuses of the \"squadristi\", of which the murder of Matteotti was only the most notorious example, and were hoping that he would dismiss Mussolini, saying that one word from the king would be enough to bring down his unpopular prime minister. The newspaper \"Corriere della Sera\" in an editorial stated the abuses of the Fascist government such as the murder of Matteotti had now reached such a point that the king had both a legal and moral duty to dismiss Mussolini at once and restore the rule of law. During the Matteotti affair, even pro-Fascist politicians like Salandra started to express some doubts about Mussolini after he took responsibility for all the Fascist violence, saying he did not order Matteotti's murder, but he did authorise the violence of the \"squadristi\", making him responsible for the murder of Matteotti. The king affirmed that \"the Chamber and the Senate were his eyes and ears\", desiring a parliamentary initiative, according to the Statuto Albertino. The knowledge that the king and the Parliament would not dismiss the prime minister led to the Mussolini government winning a vote of no confidence in November 1924 in the chamber of deputies by 314 votes to 6 and in the Senate by 206 votes to 54. The deputies and the senators were unwilling to risk their lives by voting for a no-confidence motion as the king had made it clear that he would not dismiss Mussolini even if the motion did carry the votes of the majority.\nVictor Emmanuel remained silent during the winter of 1925\u201326 when Mussolini dropped all pretence of democracy. During this time, the king signed without protest laws that eliminated freedom of speech and assembly, abolished freedom of the press, and declared the Fascist Party to be the only legal party in Italy. In December 1925, Mussolini passed a law declaring that he was responsible to the King, not Parliament. Under the \"Statuto Albertino\" Italian governments were legally answerable to Parliament, but politically answerable to the monarch. However, it had been a strong constitutional convention since at least the 1860s that they were legally and politically answerable to Parliament. In January 1926, the \"squadristi\" used violence to prevent opposition MPs from entering Parliament and in November 1926, Mussolini arbitrarily declared that all of the opposition MPs had forfeited their seats, which he handed out to Fascists. Despite this blatant violation of the \"Statuto Albertino\", the king remained passive and silent as usual. In 1926, Mussolini had violated the \"Statuto Albertino\" by creating a special judicial tribunal to try political crimes with no possibility of a royal pardon. Even though the right of pardon was part of the royal prerogative, the king gave his assent to the law. However, the king did veto an attempt by Mussolini to change the Italian flag by adding the \"fasces\" symbol to stand beside the coat of arms of the House of Savoy on the Italian tricolour. The king considered this proposal to be disrespectful to his family, and refused to sign the law when Mussolini submitted it to him. By 1928, practically the only check on Mussolini's power was the King's prerogative of dismissing him from office. Even then, this prerogative could only be exercised on the advice of the Fascist Grand Council, a body that only Mussolini could convene.\nWhatever the circumstances, Victor Emmanuel showed weakness from a position of strength, with dire future consequences for Italy and fatal consequences for the monarchy itself. Fascism was a force of opposition to left-wing radicalism. This appealed to many people in Italy at the time, and certainly to the King. In many ways, the events from 1922 to 1943 demonstrated that the monarchy and the moneyed class, for different reasons, felt Mussolini and his regime offered an option that, after years of political chaos, was more appealing than what they perceived as the alternative: socialism and anarchism. Both the spectre of the Russian Revolution and the tragedies of World War I played a large part in these political decisions. Victor Emmanuel always saw the Italian Socialists and Communists as his principal enemies, and felt that Mussolini's dictatorship had saved the existing status quo in Italy. Victor Emmanuel always returned the fascist salute when the Blackshirts marched past the Quirinal Palace and he lit votive lamps at public ceremonies to honour the Fascist \"martyrs\" killed fighting against the Socialists and Communists. At the same time, the Crown became so closely identified with Fascism that by the time Victor Emmanuel was able to shake himself loose from it, it was too late to save the monarchy. In what proved to be a prescient speech, Senator Luigi Albertini called the king a \"traitor\" to Italy by supporting the Fascist regime and warned that the king would one day regret what he had done.\nVictor Emmanuel was disgusted by what he regarded as the superficiality and frivolity of what he called the \"so-called elegant society\" of Rome, and as such, the king preferred to spend his time out in the countryside where he went hunting, fishing and reading military history books outside. A taciturn man who felt deeply uncomfortable expressing himself in conversation, Victor Emmanuel was content to let Mussolini rule Italy as he regarded \"Il Duce\" as a \"strong man\" who saved him the trouble from meeting various politicians as he had done before 1922.\nLateran Treaty.\nVictor Emmanuel was anti-clerical, being greatly embittered by the refusal of the Catholic Church to recognize Rome as the capital of Italy, but he realized that as long as the Catholic Church remained opposed to the Italian state, that many Italians would continue to regard the Italian state as illegitimate and that a treaty with the Vatican was necessary. However, when Orlando attempted to open negotiations with the Vatican in 1919, he was blocked by the king who was furious at the way in which the Catholic Church had maintained pro-Austrian neutrality during World War I. Aside from championing the authenticity of the Shroud of Turin, which belonged to the House of Savoy, the king had little interest in religion. In private Victor Emmanuel regarded the Catholic Church with a jaundiced eye, making remarks about senior clerics as being greedy, cynical and oversexed hypocrites who took advantage of the devout faith of ordinary Italians.\nIn 1926, the king allowed Mussolini to do what he prevented Orlando from doing in 1919, giving permission to open negotiations with the Vatican to end the \"Roman Question\". In 1929, Mussolini, on behalf of the King, signed the Lateran Treaty. The treaty was one of the three agreements made that year between the Kingdom of Italy and the Holy See. On 7 June 1929, the Lateran Treaty was ratified and the \"Roman Question\" was settled.\nPopular support.\nThe Italian monarchy enjoyed popular support for decades. Foreigners noted how even as late as the 1930s newsreel images of King Victor Emmanuel and Queen Elena evoked applause, sometimes cheering, when played in cinemas, in contrast to the hostile silence shown toward images of Fascist leaders.\nOn 30 March 1938, the Italian Parliament established the rank of First Marshal of the Empire for Victor Emmanuel and Mussolini. This new rank was the highest rank in the Italian military. His equivalence with Mussolini was seen by the king as offensive and a clear sign that the ultimate goal of the fascist was to get rid of him.\nAs popular as Victor Emmanuel was, several of his decisions proved fatal to the monarchy. Among these decisions was his assumption of the crowns of Ethiopia and Albania and his public silence when Mussolini's Fascist government issued German-style racial purity laws.\nColonial expansion.\nEmperor of Ethiopia.\nPrior to his government's invasion of Ethiopia, Victor Emmanuel travelled in 1934 to Italian Somaliland, where he celebrated his 65th birthday on 11 November. In 1936, Victor Emmanuel assumed the crown as Emperor of Ethiopia. His decision to do this was not universally accepted. Victor Emmanuel was only able to assume the crown after the Italian Army invaded Ethiopia (Abyssinia) and overthrew Emperor Haile Selassie during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War.\nEthiopia was annexed to the Italian Empire. The League of Nations condemned Italy's participation in this war and the Italian claim by right of conquest to Ethiopia was rejected by some major powers, such as the United States and the Soviet Union, but was accepted by Great Britain and France in 1938. In 1943, Italy's possession of Ethiopia came to an end.\nThe term of the last acting Viceroy of Italian East Africa, including Eritrea and Italian Somaliland, ended on 27 November 1941 with surrender to the allies. In November 1943 Victor Emmanuel renounced his claims to the titles of Emperor of Ethiopia and King of Albania, recognizing the previous holders of those titles as legitimate.\nKing of the Albanians.\nThe crown of the King of the Albanians had been assumed by Victor Emmanuel in 1939 when Italian forces invaded the nearly defenceless monarchy across the Adriatic Sea and caused King Zog I to flee.\nIn 1941, while in Tirana, the King escaped an assassination attempt by the 18-year-old Albanian patriot Vasil La\u00e7i. Later, this attempt was cited by Communist Albania as a sign of the general discontent among the oppressed Albanian population. A second attempt by Dimitri Mikhaliov in Albania gave the Italians an excuse to affirm a possible connection with Greece as a result of the monarch's assent to the Greco-Italian War.\nWorld War II.\nPact with Germany.\nUnder the terms of the Pact of Steel signed on 22 May 1939, which was an offensive and defensive alliance with Germany, Italy would have been obliged to follow Germany into war in 1939. As the Pact of Steel was signed, the German Foreign Minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, told Mussolini that there would be no war until 1942 or 1943, but the Italian ambassador in Berlin, Baron Bernardo Attolico, warned Rome that the information he was hearing from sources in the German government suggested that Hitler was intent on seeing the Danzig crisis escalate into war that year. Between 11 and 13 August 1939, the Italian Foreign Minister, Count Galeazzo Ciano, visited Hitler at the Berghof, and learned for the first time that Germany was definitely going to invade Poland later that same summer. Mussolini at first was prepared to follow Germany into war in 1939, but was blocked by Victor Emmanuel. At a meeting with Count Ciano on 24 August 1939, the king stated that \"we are absolutely in no condition to wage war\"; the state of the \"Regio Esercito\" was \"pitiful\"; and since Italy was not ready for war, it should stay out of the coming conflict, at least until it was clear who was winning. More importantly, Victor Emmanuel stated that as the king of Italy he was the supreme commander-in-chief, and he wanted to be involved in any \"supreme decisions\", which in effect was claiming a right to veto any decision Mussolini might make about going to war. On 25 August, Ciano wrote in his diary that he informed a \"furiously warlike\" Mussolini that the king was against Italy going to war in 1939, forcing \"Il Duce\" to concede that Italy would have to declare neutrality. Unlike in Germany where officers from 1934 onward took an oath of personal loyalty to Hitler, officers of the \"Regio Esercito\", \"Regina Marina\" and the \"Regia Aeronautica\" all took their oaths of loyalty to the king, not Mussolini. The vast majority of the Italian officers in all three services saw Victor Emmanuel as opposed to Mussolini as the principal locus of their loyalty, allowing the king to check decisions by Mussolini that he disapproved of.\nItaly declared neutrality in September 1939, but Mussolini always made it clear that he wanted to intervene on the side of Germany provided that this would not strain Italy's resources too much (the costs of the wars in Ethiopia and Spain had pushed Italy to the verge of bankruptcy by 1939). On 18 March 1940, Mussolini met Hitler at a summit at the Brenner Pass and promised him that Italy would soon enter the war. Victor Emmanuel had powerful doubts about the wisdom of going to war, and at one point in March 1940 hinted to Ciano that he was considering dismissing Mussolini as Ciano wrote in his diary: \"the King feels that it may become necessary for him to intervene at any moment to give things a different direction; he is prepared to do this and to do it quickly\". Victor Emmanuel hoped that a vote against Italy entering the war would be registered in the Fascist Grand Council, as he knew that the \"gerarchi\" Cesare Maria De Vecchi, Italo Balbo and Emilio De Bono were all anti-war, but he refused to insist upon calling the Grand Council as a precondition for giving his consent to declaring war. On 31 March 1940, Mussolini submitted to Victor Emmanuel a long memorandum arguing that Italy to achieve its long-sought \"spazio vitale\" had to enter the war on the Axis side sometime that year. However, the king remained resolutely opposed to Italy entering the war until late May 1940, much to Mussolini's intense frustration. At one point, Mussolini complained to Ciano that there were two men, namely Victor Emmanuel and Pope Pius XII, who were preventing him from doing the things that he wanted to do, leading to state he wanted to \"blow\" the Crown and Catholic Church \"up to the skies\".\nJoining the Axis.\nVictor Emmanuel was a cautious man, and he always consulted all of the available advisors before making a decision, in this case, the senior officers of the armed forces who informed him of Italy's military deficiencies. On 10 May 1940, Germany launched a major offensive into the Low Countries and France, and as the Wehrmacht continued to advance into France, the king's opposition to Italy entering the war started to weaken by the second half of May 1940. Mussolini argued all through May 1940 that since it was evident that Germany was going to win the war that here was an unparalleled chance for Italy to make major gains at the expense of France and Britain that would allow Italy to become the dominant power in the Mediterranean. On 1 June 1940, Victor Emmanuel finally gave Mussolini his permission for Italy to enter the war, though the king retained the supreme command while only giving Mussolini power over political and military questions. The delay between the king's permission to enter the war and the declaration of war was caused by Mussolini's demand that he have the powers of supreme command, an attempt to take away a royal prerogative that Victor Emmanuel rejected, and was finally settled by the compromise of giving Mussolini operational command powers.\nOn 10 June 1940, ignoring advice that the country was unprepared, Mussolini made the fatal decision to have Italy enter World War II on the side of Nazi Germany. Almost from the beginning, disaster followed disaster. The first Italian offensive, an invasion of France launched on 17 June 1940, ended in complete failure, and only the fact that France signed an armistice with Germany on 22 June, followed by another armistice with Italy on 24 June allowed Mussolini to present it as a victory. Victor Emmanuel sharply criticized the terms of the Franco-Italian Armistice, saying he wanted Italy to occupy Tunisia, Corsica, and Nice, though the fact the armistice allowed him to proclaim a victory over France was a source of much pleasure to him. In 1940 and 1941, Italian armies in North Africa and in Greece suffered humiliating defeats. Unlike his opposition over going to war with major powers like France and Britain (who might actually defeat Italy), Victor Emmanuel blessed Mussolini's plans to invade Greece in the fall of 1940, saying he expected the Greeks to collapse as soon as Italy invaded. Through the \"carabinieri\" (para-military police), Victor Emmanuel was kept well informed of the state of public opinion and from the autumn of 1940 onward received reports that the war together with the Fascist regime were becoming extremely unpopular with the Italian people. When Mussolini made Marshal Pietro Badoglio the scapegoat for the failure of the invasion of Greece and sacked him as Chief of the General Staff in December 1940, Badoglio appealed to the king for help. Victor Emmanuel refused to help Badoglio, saying that Mussolini would manage the situation just always as he had in the past. In January 1941, the king admitted to his aide-de-camp, General Paolo Puntoni, that war was not going well and the Fascist regime was becoming very unpopular, but he had decided to keep Mussolini on as a prime minister because there was no replacement for him. Because the king had supported Fascism, he feared that to overthrow the Fascist system would mean the end of the monarchy as the anti-Fascist parties were all republican.\nDuring the invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, Victor Emmanuel moved to a villa owned by the Pirzio Biroli family at Brazzacco in order to be close to the front. In May 1941, Victor Emmanuel gave permission to his unpopular cousin, Prince Aimone, to become King of Croatia under the title Tomislav II, in an attempt to get him out of Rome, but Aimone frustrated this ambition by never going to Croatia to receive his crown. During a tour of the new provinces that were annexed to Italy from Yugoslavia, Victor Emmanuel commented that Fascist policies towards the Croats and Slovenes were driving them towards rebellion, but chose not to intervene to change the said policies. On 22 June 1941, Germany launched Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union. Mussolini had the king issue a declaration of war, and sent an Italian expeditionary force to the Eastern Front, though Victor Emmanuel was later to claim that he wanted only a \"token\" force to go to the Soviet Union, rather than the 10 divisions that Mussolini actually sent.\nIn late 1941, Italian East Africa was lost. The loss of Italian East Africa together with the defeats in North Africa and the Balkans caused an immense loss of confidence in Mussolini's ability to lead, and many Fascist \"gerarchi\" such as Emilio De Bono and Dino Grandi were hoping by the spring of 1941 that the king might sack him in order to save the Fascist regime. In the summer of 1941, the \"carabinieri\" generals told the king that they were prepared to have the \"carabinieri\" serve as a strike force for a coup against Mussolini, saying if the war continued, it was bound to cause a revolution that would sweep away both the Fascist regime and the monarchy. Victor Emmanuel rejected this offer, and in September 1941, when Count Ciano told him the war was lost, blasted him for his \"defeatism\", saying he still believed in Mussolini. On 11 December 1941, Victor Emmanuel rather glibly agreed to Mussolini's request to declare war on the United States. Failing to anticipate the American \"Europe First\" strategy, the king believed that the Americans would follow an \"Asia First\" strategy of focusing all their efforts against Japan in revenge for Pearl Harbor, and that declaring war on the United States was a harmless move. The king was pleased by the news of Japan entering the war, believing that with Britain's Asian colonies in danger that this would force the British to redeploy their forces to Asia and might finally allow for the Axis conquest of Egypt. Marshal Enrico Caviglia wrote in his diary that it was \"criminal\" the way that Victor Emmanuel refused to act against Mussolini despite the fact that he was clearly mismanaging the war. One Italian journalist remembered that by the fall of 1941 he did not know anyone who felt anything other than \"contempt\" for the king who was unwilling to disassociate himself from Fascism.\nThe British historian Denis Mack Smith wrote that Victor Emmanuel tended to procrastinate when faced with very difficult choices, and his unwillingness to dismiss Mussolini despite mounting pressure from within the Italian elite was his way of trying to avoid making a decision. Moreover, Victor Emmanuel had considerable respect for Mussolini, who he saw as his most able prime minister, and appeared to dread taking on a man whose intelligence was greater than his own. In a conversation with the papal nuncio, the king explained that he could not sign an armistice because he hated the United States as a democracy whose leaders were accountable to the American people; because Britain was \"rotten to the core\" and would soon cease to be a great power; and because everything he kept hearing about the massive losses sustained by the Red Army convinced him that Germany would win on the Eastern Front at least. Another excuse used by Victor Emmanuel was that Mussolini was allegedly still popular with the Italian people and that it would offend public opinion if he dismissed Mussolini. The Vatican favoured Italy exiting the war by 1943, but papal diplomats told their American counterparts that the king was \"weak, indecisive and excessively devoted to Mussolini\".\nDisillusionment with Mussolini.\nIn the summer of 1942, Grandi had a private audience with Victor Emmanuel, where he asked him to dismiss Mussolini and sign an armistice with the Allies before the Fascist regime was destroyed only to be told to \"trust your king\" and \"stop speaking like a mere journalist\". Grandi told Ciano that the king must be either \"crazy\" and/or \"senile\" as he was utterly passive, refusing to act against Mussolini. In late 1942, Italian Libya was lost. During Operation Anton on 9 November 1942, the unoccupied part of France was occupied by the Axis forces, which allowed Victor Emmanuel to proclaim in a speech at long last Corsica and Nice had been \"liberated\". Early in 1943, the ten divisions of the \"Italian Army in Russia\" (\"Armata Italiana in Russia\", or Armir) were crushed in a side-action in the Battle of Stalingrad. By the middle of 1943, the last Italian forces in Tunisia had surrendered and Sicily had been taken by the Allies. Hampered by lack of fuel as well as several serious defeats, the Italian Navy spent most of the war confined to port. As a result, the Mediterranean Sea was not in any real sense Italy's \"Mare Nostrum\". While the Air Force generally did better than the Army or the Navy, it was chronically short of modern aircraft.\nEfforts to save the monarchy.\nAs Italy's fortunes worsened, the popularity of the King suffered. One coffee-house ditty went as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBy early 1943, Mussolini was so psychologically shattered by the successive Italian defeats that he was so depressed and drugged as to be almost catatonic at times, staring blankly into space for hours while high on various drugs and mumbling incoherently that the war would soon turn around for the Axis powers because it had to. Even Victor Emmanuel was forced to concede that Mussolini had taken a turn \"for the worse\", which he blamed on \"that woman\" as he called Mussolini's mistress, Clara Petacci. On 15 May 1943, the king sent Mussolini a letter saying Italy should sign an armistice and exit the war. On 4 June 1943, Grandi saw the king and told him that he had to dismiss Mussolini before the Fascist system was destroyed; when the king rejected that course under the grounds that the Fascist Grand Council would never vote against Mussolini, Grandi assured him that it would, saying the majority of the \"gerarchi\" were now against Mussolini. Using the Vatican as an intermediary, Victor Emmanuel contacted the British and American governments in June 1943 to ask if they, the Allies, were willing to see the House of Savoy continue after the war.\nOn 19 July 1943, Rome was bombed for the first time in the war, further cementing the Italian people's disillusionment with their once-popular King. When the King visited the bombed areas of Rome, he was loudly booed by his subjects who blamed him for the war, which caused Victor Emmanuel to become worried about the possibility of a revolution which might bring in a republic. By this time, plans were being discussed within the Italian elite for replacing Mussolini. Victor Emmanuel stated that he wanted to keep the Fascist system going after dismissing Mussolini, and he was seeking to correct merely some of \"its deleterious aspects\". The two replacements that were being mooted for Mussolini were Marshal Pietro Badoglio and his rival, Marshal Enrico Caviglia. As Marshal Caviglia was one of the few officers of the \"Regio Esercito\" who kept his distance from the Fascist regime, he was unacceptable to Victor Emmanuel who wanted an officer who was committed to upholding Fascism, which led him to choose Badoglio who had loyally served Mussolini and committed all sorts of atrocities in Ethiopia, but who had a grudge against \"Il Duce\" for making him the scapegoat for the failed invasion of Greece in 1940. In addition, Badoglio was an opportunist who was well known for his sycophancy towards those in power, which led the king to choose him as Mussolini's successor as he knew that Badoglio would do anything to have power whereas Caviglia had a reputation as a man of principle and honour. The king felt that Badoglio as prime minister would obey any royal orders whereas he was not so certain that Caviglia would do the same. On 15 July 1943, in a secret meeting Victor Emmanuel told Badoglio that he would soon be sworn in as Italy's new prime minister and the king wanted no \"ghosts\" (i.e. liberal politicians from the pre-fascist era) in his cabinet.\nDismissal and arrest of Mussolini.\nOn the night of 25 July 1943, the Grand Council of Fascism voted to adopt an \"Ordine del Giorno\" (order of the day) proposed by Count Dino Grandi to ask Victor Emmanuel to resume his full constitutional powers under Article 5 of the \"Statuto.\" In effect, this was a motion of no confidence in Mussolini.\nThe following afternoon, Mussolini asked for an audience with the king at Villa Savoia. When Mussolini tried to tell Victor Emmanuel about the Grand Council's vote, Victor Emmanuel abruptly cut him off and dismissed him in favour of Badoglio. He then ordered Mussolini's arrest.\nPublicly, Victor Emmanuel and Badoglio claimed that Italy would continue the war as a member of the Axis. Privately, they both began negotiating with the Allies for an armistice. The king was advised by his generals to sign an immediate armistice, since German troops in Italy were still outnumbered by Italian troops. But Victor Emmanuel was unwilling to accept the Allied demand for unconditional surrender, and as a result, the secret armistice talks in Lisbon were dragged out over the summer of 1943. Besides rejecting unconditional surrender as \"truly monstrous\", Victor Emmanuel wanted from the Allies a guarantee that he would keep his throne; a promise that the Italian colonial empire in Libya and the Horn of Africa would be restored; that Italy would keep the part of Yugoslavia that had been annexed by Mussolini; and finally the Allies should promise not to invade the Italian mainland, and instead invade France and the Balkans. Mack Smith wrote that these demands were \"unrealistic\" and caused much time to be wasted in the Lisbon peace talks as the Allies were willing to concede that Victor Emmanuel could keep his throne and rejected all of his other demands. In the meantime, German forces continued to be rushed into Italy.\nArmistice with the Allies.\nOn 8 September 1943, Victor Emmanuel publicly announced an armistice with the Allies. Confusion reigned as Italian forces were left without orders, and the Germans, who had been expecting this move for some time, quickly disarmed and interned Italian troops and took control in the occupied Balkans, France and the Dodecanese, as well as in Italy itself. Many of the units that did not surrender joined forces with the Allies against the Germans.\nFearing a German advance on Rome, Victor Emmanuel and his government fled south to Brindisi. This choice may have been necessary to protect his safety; indeed, Hitler had planned to arrest him shortly after Mussolini's overthrow. Nonetheless, it still came as a surprise to many observers inside and outside Italy. Unfavourable comparisons were drawn with King George VI and Queen Elizabeth, who refused to leave London during the Blitz, and of Pope Pius XII, who mixed with Rome's crowds and prayed with them after Rome's working-class neighbourhood of Quartiere San Lorenzo had been destroyed by bombing.\nDespite the German occupation, Victor Emmanuel III formally declared war against Germany only on 13 October 1943; the matter was a subject of the debate with the Allies and the king initially argued he needed a vote by Parliament first Ultimately, the Badoglio government in Southern Italy raised the Italian Co-Belligerent Army (\"Esercito Cobelligerante del Sud\"), the Italian Co-Belligerent Air Force (\"Aviazione Cobelligerante Italiana\"), and the Italian Co-Belligerent Navy (\"Marina Cobelligerante del Sud\"). All three forces were loyal to the King. Relations with the Allied Control Commission were very strained as the king remained obsessed with protocol, screaming with fury when General Noel Mason-Macfarlane met him wearing shirt sleeves and shorts, a choice of attire he considered very disrespectful. Victor Emmanuel was ultra-critical of the slow progress made by the American 5th Army and the British 8th Army as the Allies fought their way up the Italian peninsula, saying he wanted to return to Rome as soon as possible. Likewise, Victor Emmanuel refused to renounce the usurped Ethiopian and Albanian crowns in favour of the legitimate monarchs of those states, claiming that the Fascist-dominated Parliament had given him these titles and he could only renounce them if parliament voted on the matter.\nOn 12 September, the Germans launched Operation Eiche and rescued Mussolini from captivity. In a short time, he established a new Fascist state in northern Italy, the Italian Social Republic (\"Repubblica Sociale Italiana\"). This was never more than a German-dominated puppet state, but it did compete for the allegiance of the Italian people with Badoglio's government in the south.\nBy this time, it was apparent that Victor Emmanuel was irrevocably tainted by his earlier support of the Fascist regime. At a 10 April meeting, under pressure from ACC officials Robert Murphy and Harold Macmillan, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his constitutional powers to his son, Crown Prince Umberto. Privately, Victor Emmanuel told General Noel Mason-MacFarlane that by forcing him to give power to Umberto, the Allies were effectively giving power to the Communists.\nBy this time, however, events had moved beyond Victor Emmanuel's ability to control. After Rome was liberated on 4 June, he turned over his remaining powers to Umberto and named him Lieutenant General of the Realm, while nominally retaining the title of king.\nPost war and fall of the monarchy.\nAbdication.\nWithin a year of the war's end, public opinion forced a referendum on whether to retain the monarchy or become a republic. In hopes of helping the monarchist cause, Victor Emmanuel formally abdicated in favor of his son, who ascended to the throne as Umberto II on 9 May 1946.\nAbolition of the monarchy.\nThis move failed. In the referendum held a month later, 54 per cent of voters favoured a republic, and the Kingdom of Italy was no more. Some historians such as Sir Charles Petrie have speculated that the result might have been different if Victor Emmanuel had abdicated in favour of Umberto shortly after the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943, or at the latest had abdicated outright in 1944 rather than simply transferring his powers to his son. Umberto had been widely praised for his performance as \"de facto\" head of state beginning in 1944, and his relative popularity might have saved the monarchy. The Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini declared that he would not come back to Italy as a subject of the \"degenerate king\" and more generally as long as the house of Savoy was ruling; Benedetto Croce had previously stated in 1944 that \"as long as the present king remains head of state, we feel that Fascism has not ended, ... that it will be reborn, more or less disguised.\"\nExile and death.\nIn any event, once the referendum's result was certified, Victor Emmanuel and all other male members of the House of Savoy were required to leave the country. Taking refuge in Egypt, where he was welcomed with great honour by King Farouk, Victor Emmanuel died in Alexandria a year later, of pulmonary congestion. He was interred behind the altar of St Catherine's Cathedral. He was the last surviving grandchild of Victor Emmanuel II of Italy. In January 1948, \"Time\" magazine published an article about \"The Little King\".\n2017 repatriation.\nOn 17 December 2017, an Italian air force military plane officially repatriated the remains of Victor Emmanuel III, which were transferred from Alexandria to the Sanctuary of Vicoforte, near Turin, and interred alongside those of Elena, which had been transferred two days earlier from Montpellier, France.\nLegacy.\nThe abdication prior to the referendum probably brought back to the minds of undecided voters the monarchy's role during the Fascist period and the King's own actions (or lack of them), at the very moment monarchists hoped voters would focus on the positive impression created by Umberto and his wife, Maria Jos\u00e9, over the previous two years. The \"May\" King and Queen, Umberto and Maria Jos\u00e9, in Umberto's brief, month-long reign, were unable to shift the burden of recent history and opinion.\nVictor Emmanuel III was one of the most prolific coin collectors of all time, having amassed approximately 100,000 specimens dating from the fall of the Roman Empire up to the Unification of Italy and in 1897 becoming honorary president of the new Italian Numismatic Society, of which he was a founding member. On his abdication, the collection was donated to the Italian people, except for the coins of the House of Savoy which he took with him to Egypt. On the death of Umberto II in 1983, the Savoy coins joined the rest of the collection in the National Museum of Rome. Between 1910 and 1943, Victor Emmanuel wrote the 20-volume \"Corpus Nummorum Italicorum,\" which catalogued each specimen in his collection. He was awarded the medal of the Royal Numismatic Society in 1904.\nAfter World War I, Avenue Victor-Emmanuel III in Paris was named after him in honour of Italy's alliance in that war, but the king's support of the Axis Powers led the road to be renamed Franklin D. Roosevelt Avenue in 1946 following the end of World War II.\nIn Florestano Vancini's film \"The Assassination of Matteotti\" (1973), Victor Emmanuel is played by Giulio Girola.\nFamily.\nOn 21 October 1896, Victor Emmanuel married Princess Elena of Montenegro, daughter of King Nicholas I of Montenegro. Their issue included:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69841", "revid": "50507569", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69841", "title": "London Zoo", "text": "World's oldest scientific zoo, in London, England\nLondon Zoo, previously known as ZSL London Zoo or London Zoological Gardens and sometimes called Regent's Park Zoo, is the world's oldest scientific zoo. It was opened in London on 27 April 1828 and was originally intended to be used as a collection for scientific study. In 1831 or 1832, the Tower of London menagerie animals were transferred to the zoo's collection. It was opened to the public in 1847. As of December 2022, it houses a collection of 14,926 individuals, making it one of the largest collections in the United Kingdom.\nIt is managed under the aegis of the Zoological Society of London (established in 1826) and is situated at the northern edge of Regent's Park, on the boundary line between the City of Westminster and the borough of Camden (the Regent's Canal runs through it). The Society also has a more spacious site at Whipsnade Zoo in Bedfordshire where larger animals, such as elephants and rhinos, have been moved. As well as being the first scientific zoo, London Zoo also opened the first reptile house (1849), the first public aquarium (1853), the first insect house (1881) and the first children's zoo (1938).\nZSL receives no state funding and relies on 'Fellows' and 'Friends' memberships, entrance fees, venue hire, and sponsorship to generate revenue.\nHistory.\n1828\u20131938.\nThe Zoological Society of London (ZSL) was established by Sir Stamford Raffles and Sir Humphry Davy in 1826, who obtained the land for the zoo and saw the plans before Raffles died of apoplexy later that year on 5 July, his birthday. After his death, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne took over the project and supervised the building of the first animal houses. The zoo opened in April 1828 to fellows of the Society, providing access to species such as Arabian oryxes, greater kudus, orangutans and the now extinct quaggas and thylacines. The Society was granted a royal charter in 1829 by King George IV, and in 1847 the zoo opened to the public to aid funding.\nIt was believed that tropical animals could not survive outside in London's cold weather, so they were all kept indoors until 1902, when Peter Chalmers Mitchell was appointed secretary of the Society. He set about a major reorganisation of the buildings and enclosures of the zoo, bringing many of the animals out into the open, where many thrived. This was an idea inspired by the Hamburg Zoo, and led to newer designs for many of the buildings. Mitchell also envisaged a new park to the north of London, and in 1926 Hall Farm, near to Whipsnade, was bought. In 1931, Whipsnade Wild Animal Park, the world's first open zoological park, opened. The first woman to be a curator at London Zoo was Evelyn Cheesman, in 1920.\nSecond World War 1939\u20131945.\nAfter the start of the Second World War, the London Zoo was closed multiple times for over a week, the first time being at 11:00 am on 3 September 1939, when all zoological places were closed by government order. Valuable animals were transferred to Whipsnade Zoo during the war for safety. On 27 September 1940, high explosive bombs damaged the Rodent house, the Civet house, the gardener's office, the propagating sheds, the North Gate and the Zebra house. In January 1941, the Camel House was also hit, and the aquarium could not open until May 1943 due to extensive bombing. No animals were harmed during the incidents, although a zebra, a female ass, and her foal escaped from the zoo during the bombings. For safety reasons, all venomous animals were killed at London Zoo. Throughout the war, members of the armed forces paid half price for entry, and the wounded entered free of charge.\nSince 1946.\nIn 1962, 'Caroline', an Arabian oryx, was lent to Phoenix Zoo, Arizona, US, in the world's first international co-operative breeding programme. Today, the zoo participates in breeding programmes for over 130 species.\nIn the 1980s, London Zoo housed 8,000 animals of more than 900 species, and in the 1990s, the zoo possessed 7,000 animals of 850 species; the next biggest collection in Britain was Chester Zoo, with just under 3,500 animals. Many of the species in London Zoo could not be seen anywhere else in the country, such as the wombat, Tasmanian devil or long-nosed potoroo. Although this vast collection was part of the zoo's appeal, it may also have been one of the main causes of its financial problems. This contributed to the zoo being faced with closure in the 1980s. Due to the public change of attitude to animals kept in captivity and unsuitably cramped space, the zoo also suffered dwindling visitor numbers. However, when it was announced that London Zoo would close in 1991, a swell of public support in visitors and donations allowed the zoo to continue its work, attempt to balance its books and take on the huge task of restoring its buildings and creating environments more suitable for animal behaviour in the late 20th century. The BAFTA winning 1993 documentary series \"The Ark\" by Molly Dineen chronicled this period of time.\nOne benefit of the 'swell of public support' was the development of volunteer staff. Volunteers who give one day a week to assist the running of London Zoo, wearing red pullovers, are employed by both Education and Animal care.\nDuring the COVID epidemic, which started in 2020, the zoo was closed from 21 March to 15 June 2020. This closure resulted in a \"perilous financial position\" for the zoo due to the loss of revenue.\nThe Snowdon Aviary was redeveloped as Monkey Valley, opening in 2022.\nAreas and attractions.\nThe Zoo has many named areas and attractions. Several of them are available for hire outside the zoo's opening hours, including The Terrace, Penguin Beach, Ninos cove, Tiny Giants, Land of the Lions, Tiger Territory, and Attenborough Komodo Dragon House.\nMonkey Valley.\nThe Snowdon Aviary was designed by Cedric Price, Frank Newby and Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon, built between 1962 and 1964, and opened in 1965. It was Britain's first public, walk-through aviary, and primarily housed shorebirds such as gulls and ibis. It is constructed with a pyramidal aluminium framework reaching high. In 2021, the aviary was re-developed into a walkthrough primatarium called \"Monkey Valley\", which opened to the public in August 2022 and houses a troop of eastern black and white colobus monkeys. The structure has been a Grade II* listed building since 1998.\nLand of the Lions.\nLand of the Lions is London Zoo's Asiatic lion enclosure, opened in 2016. It covers 2,500 square metres, and is designed to resemble an Indian town on the edge of the Gir National Park, intended to demonstrate how the lion's natural habitat overlaps with local urban environments. Hanuman langurs, small Indian mongooses, black kites, and R\u00fcppell's vultures are also displayed in this area.\nTiger Territory.\nTiger Territory is London Zoo's Sumatran tiger enclosure, designed by architect Michael Kozdon and officially opened by the Duke of Edinburgh in March 2013. The zoo currently houses four tigers: a male named Asim, which arrived from Denmark, a female named Gaysha, and their two cubs, Zac and Crispin, born in June 2022. The enclosure is in size and features authentic Indonesian plant life, as well as a net canopy of steel cable supported by four metal poles.\nThe Casson Pavilion.\nThe Casson Pavilion is one of the zoo's Grade II listed buildings and was designed by architect Sir Hugh Casson between 1962 and 1965. The building was originally built to house rhinos and elephants. However, after an accident in which a keeper was killed in 2001, the animals were relocated to Whipsnade Zoo, and since then, the building has housed camels and porcupines. At one point, it was also part of Tiger Territory when it housed bearded pigs and Malayan tapirs and Pygmy Hippos. It is now its own exhibit, known as The Cassons, and it houses a family of red river hogs and babirusas.\nGorilla Kingdom.\nOpened by the Duke of Edinburgh in March 2007, Gorilla Kingdom consists of a moated island, home to a group of western lowland gorillas. The zoo currently holds seven gorillas: an adult male named Kiburi, two adult females named Mjukuu and Effie, a juvenile female named Alika (the daughter of Mjukuu and former silverback Kumbuka) born in December 2014, a juvenile male named Gernot (the son of Effie and former silverback Kumbuka) born in November 2015, a female infant named Juno born to mother Mjukuu on 17 January 2024 and a second female infant named Venus was born to mother Effie on 8 February 2024, just three and a half weeks after the first. The Gorilla Kingdom area also features smaller enclosures housing white-naped mangabeys, Sulawesi Crested Macaque, Colobus Guereza, and Diana monkeys. The exhibit also features a walk-through aviary housing African birds.\nInto Africa.\nInto Africa is an Africa-themed area that opened in April 2006. Animals on display in this area include Chapman's zebras, common warthogs, okapis, common ostriches, giraffes, pygmy hippos, and African wild dogs. The Giraffe House at London Zoo, built in 1837, is the world's oldest zoo building still used for its original purpose. The Giraffe House has been designated as a Grade II listed building because of its historical and architectural significance.\nRainforest Life and Night Life.\nRainforest Life is a walk-through indoor exhibit that houses many species of South American rainforest animals. Among the species in the main forest walk-through are Linnaeus's two-toed sloths, golden lion tamarins, red titi monkeys, Lac Alaotra bamboo lemurs, big hairy armadillos, Goeldi's marmosets, southern tamanduas, golden-headed lion tamarins, red-footed tortoises, narrow-striped mongooses and Rodrigues flying foxes. The building also has a darkened area called \"Nightlife\", which houses nocturnal animals, including Mohol bushbabies, Senegal bushbabies, grey slender lorises, West African pottos, Malagasy giant rats, naked mole-rats, pygmy slow lorises, harvest mice, lesser hedgehog tenrecs and northern treeshrews. \nNight Life is located below Rainforest Life, with the bottom of the latter exhibit being viewable from a point in the former.\nThe Outback.\nThe Mappin Terraces opened in 1913, and features an artificial rocky cliff made of concrete blocks for animal enrichment. This was the zoo's first major attempt at recreating natural environments without bars, influenced by European zoos such as Tierpark Hagenbeck, and many different species have been kept in this enclosure during its lifetime, including Himalayan brown bears, polar bears, American black bears, sloth bears, king penguins, Barbary sheep, mouflons, goats, kangaroos, leopards, and wild boar. The Mappin Terraces is currently an Australia-themed exhibit called \"The Outback\", housing emus, red kangaroos and red-necked wallabies.\nThe former Aquarium.\nThere was an aquarium at the zoo from 1853 until 2019. The zoo's first aquarium was also the world's first public aquarium, and was created and stocked by Philip Henry Gosse who coined the word \"aquarium\", as a portmanteau of aquatic vivarium. In 1853 opened a building known as Fish House, while the most recent aquarium was built in 1921 next to and beneath the Mappin Terraces and was officially opened by King George V and his wife Queen Mary in April 1924. The collection in 1853 included 58 fish species and 200 invertebrate species.\nThe aquarium was separated into three halls, each home to different types of fish and other aquatic wildlife. The first hall primarily contained freshwater species such as rudds and European eels, as well as some saltwater species involved in various conservation projects and captive-breeding programmes, such as broad sea fans, uarus and seahorses. The second hall displayed various species of coral reef fish from around the world, such as clownfish, copperband butterflyfish and regal tangs, as well as real coral. The third hall housed species native to the Amazon River, including red-bellied piranhas, angelfish, arapaimas and ocellate river stingrays. In addition to the three halls, the aquarium also featured the \"Big Fish Tank\". This tank housed large fish species that were all former pets. They had to be rescued because their owners did not have the proper equipment or understanding to care for them.\nThe dedicated London Aquarium, unconnected with ZSL, opened in 1997. The Zoo's smaller aquarium closed on 22 October 2019; some of the aquatic creatures were moved to a new aquarium at Whipsnade Zoo, while others were set to be housed in a new corals exhibit in the Tiny Giants building in 2020.\nAnimal Adventure.\nAnimal Adventure, formerly known as the Ambika Paul Children's Zoo, was established in 2009. It is a dedicated area for children, featuring playgrounds and a water fountain. It was built after a child who loved visiting the zoo with her family, Ambika Paul, died from cancer. Her parents donated \u00a31,000,000 to the zoo to build a children's zoo in her honour. Many of the animals in Animal Adventure are domestic animals, such as llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats and rabbits, as well as mangalitsa pigs. Exotic species on display include Cape porcupines, South American coatis, and yellow mongooses.\nAt approximately 6 am on Saturday, 23 December 2017, a large fire broke out at Animal Adventure. The fire was brought under control by 9:30 am after spreading to the cafe and shop on the premises. It is estimated that three-quarters of the cafe/shop suffered severe damage. A nine-year-old aardvark named Misha was pronounced dead, and four meerkats were declared unaccounted for and presumed dead. The zoo reopened on Christmas Eve.\nThe former Reptile House.\nOne of London Zoo's most well-known buildings, the Reptile House opened in 1927 and was designed by Joan Beauchamp Procter and Sir Edward Guy Dawber. It housed several species of reptile, including Jamaican boa, Philippine crocodiles, Annam leaf turtles, Fiji banded iguanas, Northern caiman lizards, puff adders, king cobras and emerald tree boas. In December 2012, a refurbished amphibian section was opened to the public, displaying amphibians such as Chinese giant salamanders, axolotls, African bullfrogs, Lake Oku clawed frogs, White's tree frogs and various types of poison dart frog. A new Reptile House, titled \"The Secret Life of Reptiles and Amphibians\", opened in Easter 2024.\nGiants of the Gal\u00e1pagos.\nGiants of the Gal\u00e1pagos was opened in 2009 to coincide with the 200th birthday of Charles Darwin, and is home to three female Gal\u00e1pagos giant tortoises named Dolly, Polly and Priscilla. It includes a large indoor area with a heated pond and underfloor heating, while the outdoor paddock has been designed to mimic the tortoise's natural environment and features two heated pools, one of which is a naturalistic clay wallow.\nThe Attenborough Komodo Dragon House.\nLondon Zoo's Komodo dragon enclosure was opened by Sir David Attenborough in July 2004. The zoo used to own two Komodo dragons, a female named Rinka and a male named Raja. Raja was filmed in his exhibit for an action sequence in the 2012 James Bond film \"Skyfall\". A new male dragon called Ganas (one of the parthenogenic hatchlings from Chester Zoo) moved to London in 2015 after the previous dragons died. Their enclosure is designed to resemble the dragon's natural habitat of a dry river bed, and sounds of Indonesian birds are regularly played into the enclosure. The house also displays a yellow-headed water monitor in a separate enclosure.\nTiny Giants.\nTiny Giants, formerly called B.U.G.S., is an exhibit featuring invertebrates and fish. It is held in a building called The Millennium Conservation Centre, and the building displays over 160 species, including western honey bees, leafcutter ants, emperor scorpions, golden orb weavers, Madagascar orb weavers, Mexican redknee tarantulas, bird-eating spiders, desert locusts, moon jellyfish, partula snails and many others. \nIt also features a large coral reef aquarium with corals and over 200 reef fish. The Millennium Conservation Centre aims to be environmentally friendly, constructed from materials requiring little energy to produce, and generating its heating from the body heat of both the animals and visitors. In May 2015, an exhibit called \"In With the Spiders\" opened in the exhibit as Europe's first and only spider walkthrough exhibit. It houses many different types of spiders, including one of the United Kingdom's most endangered animals, the fen raft spiders, as well as golden orb weavers.\nPenguin Beach.\nPenguin Beach opened on 26 May 2011 and houses Humboldt penguins. A single male Northern rockhopper penguin named Ricky also lived there until he was moved to Whipsnade Zoo in March 2017. The pool itself is the largest penguin pool containing penguins in an English zoo.\nIn with the Lemurs.\nOpened in March 2015, In with the Lemurs is a walk-through exhibit housing a group of ring-tailed lemurs, narrow-striped mongooses, aye-ayes and grey mouse lemurs, with the latter two species living in a nocturnal section. The exhibit is designed to resemble a shrub forest in Madagascar, featuring plant life such as loquat and Chusan palm trees.\nMeet the Monkeys.\nOpened by comedians Noel Fielding and Julian Barratt of The Mighty Boosh in 2005, Meet the Monkeys is a walk-through enclosure that houses a troop of black-capped squirrel monkeys. The exhibit has no roof, and there are no boundaries between the monkeys and the visitors. It is the southernmost enclosure in the zoo.\nButterfly Paradise.\nOpened in May 2006, Butterfly Paradise houses several species of butterfly and moth from around the world, as well as plant species specially selected to provide nectar and breeding areas for the insects. Species on display include clipper butterflies, blue morpho butterflies, atlas moths, zebra longwings, glasswing butterflies and postman butterflies. The exhibit also features a caterpillar hatchery and a pupa display cabinet, where visitors can witness different types of pupae and the development of new butterflies.\nBird Safari.\nThe Bird Safari opened in 2005 as a redevelopment of the old stork and ostrich house, replacing enclosures that were outdated by modern zoo-keeping standards. It is a walk-through exhibit housing various species of birds including waldrapp ibises, Abdim's storks, great arguses, emerald doves, and scarlet ibises.\nBlackburn Pavilion.\nThe Blackburn Pavilion is a rainforest-themed tropical bird aviary that opened in March 2008 as a refurbishment of the zoo's outdated birdhouse. It rejuvenated the birdhouse by adding a walk-through element. The building was originally constructed in 1883 as a reptile house. The pavilion houses roughly 50 different species of exotic rainforest birds, including blue-crowned laughingthrushes, collared trogons, Socorro doves, red-crested turacos, splendid sunbirds and red-and-yellow barbets. Outside the entrance is one of the pavilion's prominent features, a large elaborate clock designed by Tim Hunkin. It gives a bird-themed display every thirty minutes throughout the day.\nGibbon Habitat.\nThe Gibbon Habitat is a new enclosure for the zoo's two gibbons open in 2017. It has two viewing points: one at ground level near the camel paddock and one at a higher level from Tiger Territory. One male pair is a Northern white-cheeked gibbon, and the other is a hybrid species. They were initially housed in the Gorilla Kingdom.\nMeerkats and Otters.\nThe Meerkats and Otters exhibit, previously known as \"Happy Families\", consists of two enclosures. One enclosure is home to Asian small-clawed otters, while the other enclosure houses meerkats. The meerkats have since moved to another part of the zoo, with them being replaced by dwarf mongooses. There is also a third enclosure, housing Kirk's dik-diks. The exhibit was initially designed to accommodate meerkats, otters, European forest reindeers and Goeldi's monkeys. However, the reindeer (who lived in the dik-dik paddock) were relocated to Whipsnade Zoo, and the monkeys were transferred to the zoo's Rainforest Life building.\nThree Island Pond.\nThree Island Pond was only granted exhibit status in 2021. This artificially shaped pond is named after the three islands within it. It is separated into two enclosures: one houses greater flamingoes, and the other is home to Eastern white pelicans.\nOthers.\nOther notable animals in London Zoo's collection include Bactrian camels, military macaws, hyacinth macaws, blue-throated macaws and Darwin's frogs.\nThe zoo's north bank, north of the canal, formerly housed the bird incubation and rearing unit. The area is currently undeveloped.\nSubsidised entry.\nLondon Zoo established a Community Access Scheme in 2019 to provide 100,000 subsidised tickets to charities and groups assisting low-income families, older individuals, and people with disabilities. The scheme is intended to run until 2023. This started with a grant from the National Lottery Heritage Fund to convert the Snowdon Aviary to a colobus monkey enclosure. The scheme was successful and was later extended to allow anyone who received certain benefits to buy tickets for \u00a33, about a tenth of the full price, leading to visits by thousands of families, and long queues which were controlled by requiring pre-booking and capping numbers. Some visitors who were not receiving benefits complained about the crowds. \nAs of \u00a02023[ [update]] the Zoo was trying to ensure that the \u00a33 tickets were not cannibalising demand for full-price tickets. However, they intended to maintain the \u00a33 scheme if further funding became available. The director general of the Zoological Society of London described the result of the scheme as a \"brilliant development\", despite the queues and challenges.\nNotable past animals.\nThroughout its history, the zoo has had many well-known residents. Those individuals could have been scientifically important or simply beloved by the public. Old Martin was a large grizzly bear, the first in Britain, moved to the zoo with many other animals from the Royal Menagerie, Tower of London when it was closed in 1832. In the late 1830s, the zoo housed a female orangutan named Jenny who was dressed in human clothing and learned to drink tea. The first of her species at the zoo, she is remembered for her meeting with Charles Darwin, who after doing so wrote no man could \"boast of his proud preeminence\".\nThe zoo was home to the only living quagga ever to be photographed before the species became extinct in the wild due to hunting in southern Africa in about 1870. Other now extinct species the zoo once held were the thylacine, the Falkland Islands Wolf, a pair of pink headed ducks, some Passenger pigeons, the Bubal hartebeest, the Syrian wild ass, the Northern Sumatran rhinoceros, the Javan tiger, the Schomburgk's deer, the Pinta Island tortoise, the Caspian tiger, the Glaucous macaw, as well as the endlings of the norfolk kaka, the Partula turgida snail, and the Santa Lucian Pilorie.\nObaysch was the first hippopotamus to be seen in Europe since the Roman Empire and the first in England since prehistoric times. The hippo arrived at the London Zoo in May 1850 as a gift from the Ottoman Viceroy of Egypt in exchange for some greyhounds and deerhounds. Obaysch led to a doubling of the zoo's visitors that year.\nIn 1865, Jumbo, the largest elephant known at the time, was transferred to the zoo from Jardin des Plantes in Paris. His name, possibly from \"Jambo\", Swahili for \"hello\", became an epithet for anything of large size, such as Boeing's 747 Jumbo jet. Jumbo became a crowd favourite due to his size, and would give rides to children on his back, including those of Queen Victoria. The sale of Jumbo sent the citizens of London into a panic, and 100,000 schoolchildren wrote to the Queen begging her to stop the sale. He was sold to Phineas Barnum's circus, the Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, in 1882, where he was later crushed by a locomotive and killed.\nWinnipeg the Bear (or Winnie) was an American black bear given to the zoo in 1914 by a Canadian lieutenant, Harry Colebourn. A. A. Milne visited with his son Christopher Robin, and the boy was so enamoured with the bear Milne wrote the famous series of books for him entitled \"Winnie-the-Pooh\". A 2004 film, \"A Bear Named Winnie\", is based on the story of Winnie the bear, with Michael Fassbender playing Harry Colebourn.\nMo Koundje ('Mok'), a western lowland gorilla, was purchased by the zoo in 1932. A new gorilla house was designed for him by Berthold Lubetkin. Mok died of Bright's disease in 1938. His skeleton and skin were purchased by Leeds Museums and Galleries and are on display in Leeds, UK at Leeds City Museum and Leeds Discovery Centre.\nGuy, a western lowland gorilla, arrived at the zoo on Guy Fawkes Night (hence the name) 1947 from Paris Zoo and lived at the zoo until he died in 1978. Over his 32-year life, he became one of the zoo's best-loved residents. After years of trying to find a mate, in 1969 five-year-old Lomie arrived from Chessington Zoo. They were kept separated for a year to adjust to each other until they were finally united. Although they got on well together, they never produced any offspring. In 1982 Guy was commemorated by a bronze statue in Barclay Court, sculpted by William Timym.\nDumbo (born 1948) was a female Indian elephant who resided at London Zoo during the 1950s and was renowned for her fondness for sweets. Her parents were killed by hunters, and she was flown from India to London, where she spent her adult life giving rides to the children. Dumbo was named after the eponymous Disney character because she was the first elephant to travel by aeroplane. In 1958, she was transferred to Moscow Zoo in return for four endangered snow leopards. At some point between 1962 and 1971, Dumbo was acquired by circus performer Dolly Jacobs, but by 1978 she had been sold to Hollywood circus producer Paul V. Kaye and was living in California with three other elephants.\nOn 27 November 1949, Brumas became the first polar bear to be successfully bred at the zoo, and immediately became a major attraction with the public. This led to the zoo's annual attendance to rise to over 3 million in 1950 - a figure that has yet to be topped. Despite being a female bear, the press mistakenly reported her as a 'he', and this error was not corrected, leading the public to believe the bear was a male. Eighteen years later, on December 1, 1967, the zoo welcomed its second polar bear cub, a male. He was named Pipaluk (a Greenlandic Inuit feminine given name meaning \"little one\" or \"sweet little thing\") but, in 1985, had to leave the zoo when the Mappin Terraces closed.\nOne of the zoo's most famous giant pandas, Chi Chi, arrived in 1958. Although originally destined for an American zoo, Washington, D.C. had ceased all trade with communist China, and so Chi Chi was refused entry to the United States. In the interests of conservation, ZSL had stated they would not encourage the collection of wild pandas. However, when it was pointed out that Chi Chi had already been collected, her purchase was approved, and she immediately became the star attraction at London Zoo. As the only giant panda in the West, she was the inspiration for Sir Peter Scott's design for the World Wildlife Fund logo. In July 1972, Chi Chi died and was publicly mourned. The zoo's last giant panda was Ming Ming. She arrived in 1991 on a breeding loan from China. After unsuccessful breeding attempts with Berlin's Zoo giant panda Bao Bao, it was decided that Ming Ming should return to China. As a result, the London Zoo has been without a giant panda since the end of October 1994. Zoo staff later suggested that Chinese zookeepers knew that she was infertile and lent her in order to hide how much more advanced Western husbandry techniques were compared to theirs.\nOn 31 January 1996, the last known \"Partula turgida\" land snail named \"Turgi\" died in his habitat. For four days in late August 2005, the zoo ran an exhibit entitled the Human zoo, which put eight humans on display in the Mappin Terraces. The exhibit aimed to demonstrate the basic nature of man as an animal and examine our impact on the animal kingdom.\nArchitecture.\nSince its earliest days, the zoo has prided itself on appointing leading architects to design its buildings. Today, it holds two Grade I and eight Grade II listed structures.\nThe initial grounds were laid out in 1828 by Decimus Burton, the zoo's first official architect from 1826 to 1841, made famous for his work on the London Colosseum and Marble Arch. Burton's work began with the Clock Tower in 1828 above what was then the llama house, which today is the first aid kiosk. In 1830, the East Tunnel, which linked the north and south parts of the zoo together for the first time, was completed, which also acted as a bomb shelter during the Second World War. Burton concluded his work in 1837 with the Giraffe House, which, due to its functional design, still remains in use as the zoo's giraffe enclosure in the \"Into Africa\" exhibit.\nThe earliest surviving exhibit is the Ravens' Cage, an ornate ironwork aviary now retained as a monument. It was installed in 1829, soon after the zoo first opened. Its location on the grounds has changed over time, and several refurbishments have been required due to weather damage.\nThe Eastern Aviary, along the eastern boundary, currently holds parrots and birds of prey. It was built in 1863 with a hooped tubular steel frame. In 1989, further renovations were carried out on the exhibit using \"invisible\" wire.\nThe Stork and Ostrich House, built in 1896, can still be seen as holding pens behind the current Bird Safari exhibit. Victorian structures that have been demolished over time included the Lion House, Monkey House, Carnivore Terrace, and Elephant and Rhino House.\nAfter Burton, Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell and John James Joass were appointed to design the Mappin Terraces. Completed in 1914, the Mappin Terraces imitates a mountain landscape to provide a naturalistic habitat for bears and other mountain wildlife. In 1933 the Round House, designed by Berthold Lubetkin's Tecton Architectural Group to house gorillas, was one of the first modernist style buildings to be built in Britain. The following year the Penguin Pool also designed by Tecton, was opened; both now grade I listed. The Modernist dual concrete spiral ramps of the Penguin Pool have made it famous as a piece of modern architecture, but in 2004 the African penguins were moved out of the pool permanently following 'bumblefoot' infections in the birds caused by micro-abrasions from walking on the concrete.\nThe Snowdon Aviary, built-in 1964 by Cedric Price, Lord Snowdon and Frank Newby, made pioneering use of aluminium and tension for support. A year later, the Casson Pavilion, designed by Sir Hugh Casson and Neville Conder, was opened as an elephant and rhinoceros house. The Pavilion was commissioned \"to display these massive animals in the most dramatic way\" and designed to evoke a herd of elephants gathered around a watering hole.\nMany of these buildings are available on a private hire basis for events, as well as a number of the animal houses. The profits from the use of spaces at the zoo are re-invested directly back into the society.\nIn popular culture.\nIn film and television.\nMany films and television programmes have used London Zoo as a location for filming.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69842", "revid": "51059304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69842", "title": "House of Savoy", "text": "Royal dynasty of Southern Europe\nThe House of Savoy (, , Arpitan: \"M\u00eason de Savou\u00e8\") is a royal house (formally a dynasty) of Franco-Italian origin that was established in 1003 in the historical region of Savoy, which was originally part of the Kingdom of Burgundy and now lies mostly within southeastern France. Through gradual expansions, the family grew in power, first ruling the County of Savoy, a small Alpine county northwest of Italy, and later gaining absolute rule of the Kingdom of Sicily. During the years 1713 to 1720, they were handed the Kingdom of Sardinia and would exercise direct rule from then onward as Piedmont\u2013Sardinia, which was the legal predecessor state of the Kingdom of Italy and the Italian Empire, which in turn are the predecessors of the present-day Italian Republic.\nFrom rule of a region on the French\u2013Italian border, by the time of the abolition of monarchy in Italy, the dynasty's realm grew to include nearly all of the Italian peninsula. Through its junior branch of Savoy-Carignano, the House of Savoy led the Italian unification in 1861, and ruled the Kingdom of Italy until 1946. They also briefly ruled the Kingdom of Spain during the 19th century. The Savoyard kings of Italy were Victor Emmanuel II, Umberto I, Victor Emmanuel III, and Umberto II. Umberto II reigned for only a few weeks, as the last king of Italy, before being deposed following the 1946 Italian institutional referendum, after which the Italian Republic was proclaimed.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe name derives from the historical region of Savoy in the Alps between what is now France and Italy. Over time, the House of Savoy expanded its territory and influence through judicious marriages and international diplomacy. The house descended from Humbert I, Count of Sabaudia, also known as Umberto I \"Biancamano\" (1003\u20131047 or 1048). The ancestry of Humbert is uncertain, as contemporary documents make no mention of his father. His family was traditionally believed to have come from Saxony; more recent investigations into the 21st century pointed to the County of Vienne, where both Humbert and his relatives held extensive possessions, as a more plausible origin.\nAlthough Sabaudia was originally a poor county, later counts were diplomatically skilled, and gained control over strategic mountain passes in the Alps. Two of Humbert's sons were commendatory abbots at the Abbey of St. Maurice, Agaunum, on the river Rh\u00f4ne east of Lake Geneva, and Saint Maurice is still the patron of the House of Savoy. Humbert's son, Otto of Savoy, succeeded to the title in 1051 after the death of his elder brother Amadeus I of Savoy. Otto married the Marchioness Adelaide of Turin, bringing the Marquessate of Susa, with the towns of Turin and Pinerolo, into the House of Savoy's possession. They once had claims on the modern canton of Vaud, where they occupied the Ch\u00e2teau of Chillon in Switzerland; their access to it was cut by Geneva during the Protestant Reformation, after which it was conquered by the Canton of Bern. Meanwhile, Piedmont was later joined with Sabaudia, and the name evolved into \"Savoy\" ().\nExpansion, retreat, and prosperity.\nBy the time Amadeus VIII came to power in the late 14th century, the House of Savoy had gone through a series of gradual territorial expansions and he was elevated by Sigismund, the Holy Roman Emperor, to the Duke of Savoy in 1416. In 1494, Charles VIII of France passed through Savoy on his way to Italy and Naples, which initiated the Italian War of 1494\u20131495. During the outbreak of the Italian war of 1521\u20131526, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V stationed imperial troops in Savoy. In 1536, Francis I of France invaded Savoy and Piedmont, taking Turin by April of that year. Charles III Duke of Savoy, fled to Vercelli.\nWhen Emmanuel Philibert came to power in 1553, most of his family's territories were in French hands, so he offered to serve France's leading enemy the House of Habsburg in the hope of recovering his lands. He served Philip II of Spain as Governor of the Netherlands (then part of the Seventeen Provinces) from 1555 to 1559. In this capacity, he led the Spanish invasion of northern France and won a victory in the battle of St. Quentin in 1557. He took advantage of various squabbles in Europe to slowly regain territory from both the French and the Spanish, including the city of Turin. He moved the capital of the duchy from Chamb\u00e9ry to Turin.\nThe 17th century brought about economic development to the Turin area and the House of Savoy took part in and benefitted from that. Charles Emmanuel II developed the port of Nice and built a road through the Alps towards France, and through skillful political manoeuvres the territorial expansion continued. In the early 18th century during the War of the Spanish Succession, future King Victor Amadeus II switched sides to assist the Habsburgs, and via the Treaty of Utrecht they rewarded him with large pieces of land in northeastern Italy and a Crown in Sicily. Savoy rule over Sicily lasted only seven years (1713\u20131720).\nKingdom of Italy.\nThe crown of Sicily, the prestige of being kings at last, and the wealth of Palermo helped strengthen the House of Savoy further. In 1720, they were forced to exchange Sicily for the Kingdom of Sardinia as a result of the War of the Quadruple Alliance. On the mainland, the dynasty continued its expansionist policies as well. Through advantageous alliances during the War of the Polish Succession and War of the Austrian Succession, King Charles Emmanuel III gained new lands at the expense of the Austrian-controlled Duchy of Milan.\nIn 1792, Piedmont\u2013Sardinia joined the First Coalition against the French First Republic. It was beaten in 1796 by Napoleon and forced to conclude the disadvantageous Treaty of Paris, giving the French army free passage through Piedmont. In 1798, Barth\u00e9lemy Catherine Joubert occupied Turin and forced Charles Emmanuel IV to abdicate and leave for the island of Sardinia. In 1814, the kingdom was restored and enlarged with the addition of the former Republic of Genoa by the Congress of Vienna.\nIn the meantime, Italian nationalist figures like Giuseppe Mazzini were influencing popular opinion. Mazzini believed that Italian unification could only be achieved through a popular uprising. After the failure of the Revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states, the nationalists began to look to the Kingdom of Sardinia and its prime minister Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour as leaders of the unification movement. In 1848, King Charles Albert conceded a constitution known as the \"Statuto Albertino\" to Piedmont\u2013Sardinia, which remained the basis of the kingdom's legal system even after Italian unification was achieved and the Kingdom of Sardinia became the Kingdom of Italy in 1861.\nThe Kingdom of Italy was the first Italian state to include the Italian peninsula since the fall of the Roman Empire. When Victor Emmanuel was crowned King of Italy in 1861, his realm did not include the Venetia region (subject to Habsburg governance), Lazio (with Rome), Umbria, Marche, and Romagna (with the Papal town of Bologna). Yet the House of Savoy continued to rule Italy for several decades through the Italian independence wars as Italian unification proceeded and even as the First World War raged on in the early 20th century.\nMassacres.\nIn April 1655, based on perhaps false reports of resistance by the Waldensians, a Protestant religious minority, to a plan to resettle them in remote mountain valleys, Charles Emmanuel II ordered their general massacre, which became known as the Piedmontese Easter. The massacre was so brutal it aroused indignation throughout Europe. Oliver Cromwell, then ruler in England, began petitioning on behalf of the Waldensians, writing letters, raising contributions, calling a general fast in England, and threatening to send military forces to the rescue. The massacre prompted John Milton's famous sonnet, \"On the Late Massacre in Piedmont\".\nIn 1898, the Bava Beccaris massacre in Milan involved the use of cannons against unarmed protesters (including women and the elderly) during riots over the rising price of bread. King Umberto I of the House of Savoy congratulated General Fiorenzo Bava Beccaris for the massacre and decorated him with the medal of Great Official of Savoy Military Order, greatly outraging a large part of the public opinion. As a result, Umberto I was assassinated in July 1900 in Monza by Gaetano Bresci, the brother of one of the women massacred in the crowd, who had traveled back to Italy from the United States for the assassination. The king had previously been the target of failed assassination attempts by anarchists Giovanni Passannante and Pietro Acciarito.\nFascism and end of monarchy.\nWhen the First World War ended, the Treaty of Versailles fell short of what had been promised in the London Pact to Italy. As the economic conditions in Italy worsened after the war, popular resentment and along with it the seeds of Italian fascism began to grow and resulted in the March on Rome by Benito Mussolini. General Pietro Badoglio advised King Victor Emmanuel III that he could easily sweep Mussolini and his rag-tag Blackshirt army to one side but Victor Emmanuel decided to tolerate Mussolini and appointed him as prime minister of Italy on 28 October 1922. The king remained silent as Mussolini engaged in one abuse of power after another from 1924 onward, and did not intervene in 1925\u20131926 when Mussolini dropped all pretense of democracy. By the end of 1928, the king's right to remove Mussolini from office was, at least theoretically, the only check on his power. Later, the king's failure, in the face of mounting evidence, to move against the Mussolini regime's abuses of power led to much criticism and had dire future consequences for Italy and for the monarchy itself.\nAfter their invasion in 1935, Italy conquered Ethiopia in the Second Italo-Ethiopian War and Victor Emmanuel was crowned as Emperor of Ethiopia. He also added the Albanian crown 1939 but lost Ethiopia as part of the East African campaign in 1941; however, as Mussolini and the Axis powers failed in the Second World War in 1943, several members of the Italian court began putting out feelers to the Allies of World War II, who in turn let it be known that Mussolini had to go. After Mussolini received a vote of no confidence from the Fascist Grand Council on 24 July, Victor Emmanuel dismissed him from office, relinquished the Ethiopian and Albanian crowns, and appointed Pietro Badoglio as prime minister. On 8 September, the new government announced it had signed an armistice with the Allies five days earlier; however, Victor Emmanuel made another blunder when he and his government fled south to Brindisi, leaving his army without orders.\nAs the Allies and the Italian Resistance gradually chased the Nazis and fascists off the peninsula, it became apparent that Victor Emmanuel was too tainted by his earlier support of Mussolini to have any postwar role. Accordingly, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his powers to his son, Crown Prince Umberto, in April 1944. Rome was liberated two months later, and Victor Emmanuel transferred his remaining powers to Umberto and named him Lieutenant General of the Realm. Within a year, public opinion pushed for a referendum to decide between retaining the monarchy or becoming a republic. On 9 May 1946, in a last-ditch attempt to save the monarchy, Victor Emmanuel formally abdicated in favour of his son, who became Umberto II. It did not work as the 1946 Italian institutional referendum was won by republicans with 54% of the vote. Victor Emmanuel went into exile in Egypt, dying there a year later.\nOn 12 June 1946, the Kingdom of Italy formally came to an end as Umberto II transferred his powers to the prime minister Alcide de Gasperi and called for the Italian people to support the new republic. He then went into exile in Portugal, never to return; he died in 1983. The Constitution of the Italian Republic includes the entrenched clause that the republican form of government cannot be changed by constitutional amendment, thus forbidding any attempt to restore the monarchy short of adoption of an entirely new constitution. The Constitution of Italy also forbade male descendants of the House of Savoy from entering Italy. This provision was removed in 2002; as part of the deal to be allowed back into Italy, Vittorio Emanuele, the last claimant to the House of Savoy, renounced all claims to the throne. He died in 2024.\nControversies, damage claims against Italy, and internal disputes.\nThe Residences of the Royal House of Savoy in Turin and the neighbourhood are protected as a World Heritage Site. Although the titles and distinctions of the Italian royal family are not legally recognised by the Italian Republic, the remaining members of the House of Savoy, like dynasties of other abolished monarchies, still use some of the various titles they acquired over the millennium of their reign prior to the republic's establishment, including Duke of Savoy; Prince of Naples, previously conferred by Joseph Bonaparte to be hereditary on his children and grandchildren; Prince of Piedmont; and Duke of Aosta. \nPreviously, the leadership of the House of Savoy was contested by two cousins: Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples, who used to claim the title of King of Italy, and Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta, who claimed the title of Duke of Savoy. Supporters of Vittorio Emanuele and his descendents are known as Legitimists while supporters of Amedeo and his descendents are known as Aostaists. Their rivalry was not always peaceful. On 21 May 2004, following a dinner held by King Juan Carlos I of Spain on the eve of the wedding of his son Felipe, Prince of Asturias, Vittorio Emanuele punched Amedeo twice in the face.\nIn 1969, Vittorio Emanuele made his unilateral declaration of kingship, arguing that by agreeing to submit to a referendum on his place as head of state, his father (Umberto II) had thereby abdicated. Vittorio Emanuele took this action after his father allegedly called for Amedeo to visit him in Portugal to name him his heir. Under his self-assumed powers as King of Italy, Vittorio Emanuele conferred the title of Duchess of Sant'Anna di Valdieri on his then-fianc\u00e9e Marina Doria. In 1983, after the death of his father, with the support of the Italian Freemasonry (like many personalities of the Italian ruling class who promoted the repeal of the transitional provisions and the return to Italy, he was registered with Licio Gelli's Masonic lodge Propaganda Due with membership number 1621), as well as scattered pieces of the Italian Monarchist Party, Vittorio Emanuele proclaimed himself King of Italy as Vittorio Emanuele IV and became the historical and political reference of the House of Savoy. In 2002, statements were published in which he accepted the end of the monarchy, and both Vittorio Emanuele and his son Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy swore loyalty to the Italian Republic and its president.\nIn 1997, Vittorio Emanuele said on TG2 that the antisemitic laws passed under Mussolini's regime were \"not so bad\". Vittorio Emanuele reconsidered his words the day after and spoke of a \"grave mistake\", but he did not apologize. In 2002, with a statement issued from Geneva on the same day the Italian racial laws of 1938 had been given royal assent by the king, for the first time in the history of the House of Savoy, Vittorio Emanuele officially distanced himself from the antisemitic laws, and since then had tried to repair the damage by saying that the antisemitic laws had left \"an indelible stain\" and were the \"darkest chapter\" in his family's history. The 2002 statement read: \"The date of 10 November, which until now represented for us the memory of an indelible stain on the history of the family, now constitutes, by a singular twist of fate, a new, fundamental stage towards the long-awaited return to the Homeland.\" When the Savoys returned to Italy in 2003, they were met with complaints that Vittorio Emanuele and his family had made no attempt at reconciliation with the Jewish community, which was not satisfied and continued to demand a \"clear sign that they have rejected that period of history\". In an interview with the \"Corriere della Sera\", the Union of Italian Jewish Communities president Amos Luzzatto stated: \"I'm not saying it was he who signed the racial laws in 1938. But, as a Savoy heir, [Vittorio Emanuele] has never distanced himself from them.\" On 27 January 2005, in a letter published by the \"Corriere della Sera\", Vittorio Emanuele issued an apology to Italy's Jewish population, asking forgiveness from the Italian Jewish community, and declaring that it was an error for the Italian royal family to have signed the racial laws of 1938.\nOn 20 September 2018, during a celebration for the 100th anniversary of the Great War, Emanuele Filiberto stated: \"The racial laws are a disgrace for Italy, for what happened.\" This was seen as a timid admission of guilt and was criticised by the local Jewish community. \"Shalom\", the organ of the Jewish Community of Rome, commented: \"We don't like the words of Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy because they are ambiguous... and they want to water down responsibility. The racial laws are first and foremost a disgrace\u2014not for Italy\u2014but first and foremost for the House of Savoy which allowed without batting an eyelid\u2014just to give an example\u2014that dozens of Jewish officers who had served during the First World War, and who had been awarded Medals of Military Valor and who held positions of great responsibility, were expelled from the Royal Army.\" In January 2021, ahead of Holocaust Memorial Day in Italy, Emanuele Filiberto wrote a letter to Italy's Jewish community in which he said his family's role in rubber-stamping Mussolini's antisemitic laws caused \"a wound still open for the whole of Italy\", that he and his relatives \"dissociate ourselves firmly\" from Victor Emmanuel III who approved Mussolini's rise to power and gave the antisemitic laws royal assent, and asked for forgiveness for the king's actions. The letter was dismissed by historians as \"too little too late\", and was criticised by Jewish groups who condemned the family's lengthy reluctance to acknowledge its role in the Holocaust. In the letter, Emanuele Filiberto stated: \"I condemn the 1938 racial laws, all of whose weight I still feel on my shoulders to this day, and with me the whole royal house ... they are a disgrace for the entire Royal House of Savoy. ... We firmly dissociate ourselves, an unacceptable document, a wound still open for the entire country.\" Emanuele Filiberto told TG5 that he was writing with \"an open heart\" a difficult letter whose contents \"may surprise you and that perhaps you did not expect\", and the time had come \"once and for all\" to \"come to terms with the history and the past\" of the Savoy family.\nSome of the activities, actions, and accusations of members of the House of Savoy, especially those of Vittorio Emanuele and his legal troubles, evoked media coverage disappointing to Italian royalists, including among its family members. Vittorio Emanuele was a business intermediary on behalf of Agusta and thanks to his friendship with Mohammad Reza Pahlavi concluded sales of helicopters between Italy, Iran, and some Arab countries. In the 1970s, he was investigated in Venice and Trento for international arms trafficking to some Middle Eastern countries under embargo. This case was later transferred to Rome but was later closed. Most notably, in November 1991, after thirteen years of legal proceedings, the Paris Assize Court acquitted Vittorio Emanuele of the fatal wounding and unintentional homicide in August 1978 of Dirk Hamer (who was shot and killed while asleep on a yacht off Cavallo), finding him guilty of unauthorised possession of a firearm during the incident; this proved to be his one and only conviction of all his legal troubles.\nOn 16 June 2006, Vittorio Emanuele was arrested in Varenna, as investigators said he had contacts with the Mafia, and imprisoned in Potenza on charges of political corruption and recruitment of prostitutes for clients of the Casin\u00f2 di Campione of Campione d'Italia, from which it emerged the \"Vallettopoli\" scandal. After seven days in jail, Vittorio Emanuele was released and placed under house arrest instead; both Vittorio Emanuele and his family denied any wrongdoings. He was released from house arrest on 20 July but was required to remain within the territory of the Italian Republic; he was eventually acquitted of all charges, including that of criminal association aimed at corruption, gambling, forgery (\"against public administration, public faith, and property\"), exploitation of prostitution, and aiding and abetting, in the Savoiagate trial, and in February 2015 obtained \u20ac40,000 in damages for his time in jail.\nWhen incarcerated in June 2006, Vittorio Emanuele was recorded admitting, with regard to the killing of Hamer, that \"I was in the wrong, but I put one over on those French judges\", leading to a call from Hamer's sister Birgit for Vittorio Emanuele to be retried in Italy for the killing; in response to this and his father's arrest and charges in 2006, Emanuele Filiberto distanced himself from Vittorio Emanuele, saying that he does not share or support everything his father did, while Amedeo of Savoy stated that Vittorio Emanuele's claims to the Headship of House Savoy were \"in presence of facts that can injure the Royal House\". After a long legal fight, Birgit Hamer obtained the full video. The story was broken in the press by \"Il Fatto Quotidiano\" with an article by aristocratic journalist Beatrice Borromeo, who also wrote the preface for a book on the murder \"Delitto senza castigo\" by Birgit Hamer. Vittorio Emanuele sued the newspaper for defamation, claiming the video had been manipulated. In March 2015, a court judgement ruled in favour of \"Il Fatto Quotidiano\". In August 2017, Italy's Supreme Court of Cassation acquitted \"La Repubblica\" journalists Maurizio Crosetti and Ezio Mauro of a defamation lawsuit brought by Vittorio Emanuele, who had been referred to by Crosetti and Mauro as \"the one who used\" with ease the rifle at Cavallo, \"killing a man\". Crosetti and Mauro, who was also sued for omitted control due to being the then editor-in-chief, had been convicted in the first-instance trial but were acquitted on appeal, a sentence that the Supreme Court of Cassation confirmed. In the summer of 2023, \"The Prince\", a docuseries directed by Borromeo and focused on the death of Hamer, was released on Netflix. The docuseries concluded with Vittorio Emanuele declaring that he had no regrets and that he would do everything he had done in his life again \"except Cavallu\", referencing the events at Cavallo.\nIn late 2007, lawyers representing Vittorio Emanuele and his son Emanuele Filiberto wrote a seven-page letter to then Italian president Giorgio Napolitano and Italian prime minister Romano Prodi seeking damages for their years in exile (\u20ac260 million without considering interest) and the return of their seized property after the war. This was confirmed during an interview on the Rai 3 popular affairs programme \"Ballar\u00f2\", where Emanuele Filiberto also stated that the seized property including Roman landmarks, such as the Quirinale palace and Villa Ada, should be returned to the Savoy family. The Italian prime minister's office released a statement stating that the Savoys are not owed any damages and suggesting that Italy may demand damages from the Savoys for their collusion with Mussolini and its wartime conduct. The Italian Constitution contains a clause stripping the Savoys of their wealth on exile. Emanuele Filiberto acknowledged that his fianc\u00e9e, whose pregnancy was revealed at the time of the couple's engagement, belonged to a more leftist milieu than his own, a fact that initially displeased his father. On 17 December 2017, the body of Victor Emmanuel III returned to Italy to be buried at the Sanctuary of Vicoforte in Piedmont.\nJudicially separated since 1976, civilly divorced in 1982, and their marriage religiously annulled in 1987, Amedeo of Aosta's first wife, Princess Claude of Orl\u00e9ans, revealed that she was aware that her husband fathered a child by another woman during their marriage. Aosta acknowledged paternity of another child, born out-of-wedlock in 2006 during his second marriage but agreed to contribute financially to the child's care only after being directed to do so by court order. The patrilineal lineage of the House of Savoy was reduced to four males between 1996 and 2009. In 2008, Aimone of Savoy-Aosta married Princess Olga Isabelle of Greece, his second cousin, and they became the parents of sons Umberto and Amedeo, who were born respectively in 2009 and 2011. In 2019, Vittorio Emanuele issued a formal decree that modified the medieval law restricting succession to male heirs to place his granddaughter, Vittoria Cristina Chiara Adelaide Marie, in the line of succession. Prince Aimone declared the change illegitimate, meaning the title would remain in male succession and transfer to the Savoy-Aosta branch led by Aimone. As of 2022, the House of Savoy was in the process of trying to reclaim family jewels that have been owned by the Italian government since the abolition of the monarchy. Vittorio Emanuele died in February 2024, and the House of Savoy announced: \"Surrounded by his family, he died peacefully in Geneva.\"\nOrders of knighthood.\nThe House of Savoy has held two dynastic orders since 1362, which were brought into the Kingdom of Italy as national orders. Although the kingdom ceased to exist in 1946, King Umberto II did not abdicate his role as \"fons honorum\" over the two dynastic orders over which the family has long held sovereignty and grand mastership. In the 21st century, following the dispute, both Prince Emanuele Filiberto and Prince Aimone claim to be hereditary Sovereign and Grand Master of the following orders of the House of Savoy:\nIn addition to these, Vittorio Emanuele claims sovereignty over two more orders:\nIn February 2006, all three of Vittorio Emanuele's sisters (Princess Maria Pia, Princess Maria Gabriella, and Princess Maria Beatrice) resigned from the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation and the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, alleging that memberships in the orders had been sold to unworthy candidates, a newfound practice they could not abide.\nList of rulers.\nCounts of Savoy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDukes of Savoy.\nSource: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKings of Sardinia.\nSources: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKings of Italy.\nSources: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCyprus, Jerusalem, and Armenia.\nIn 1396, the title and privileges of the final king of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, Levon V, were transferred to James I, his cousin and king of Cyprus. The title of King of Armenia was thus united with the titles of King of Cyprus and King of Jerusalem. The title was held to the modern day by the House of Savoy.\nFamily tree.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Family tree\nMale-line, legitimate, non-morganatic members of the house who either lived to adulthood, or who held a title as a child, are included. Heads of the house are in bold.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTitles of the Crown of Sardinia.\nThe titles of the Crown of Sardinia were the following: \"VITTORIO AMEDEO III, per la grazia di Dio Re di Sardegna, Cipro, Gerusalemme e Armenia; Duca di Savoia, Monferrato, Chablais, Aosta e Genevese; Principe di Piemonte ed Oneglia; Marchese in Italia, di Saluzzo, Susa, Ivrea, Ceva, Maro, Oristano, Sezana; Conte di Moriana, Nizza, Tenda, Asti, Alessandria, Goceano; Barone di Vaud e di Faucigny; Signore di Vercelli, Pinerolo, Tarantasia, Lumellino, Val di Sesia; Principe e Vicario perpetuo del Sacro Romano Impero in Italia.\" The English translation is: \"Victor Amadeus III, by the Grace of God, King of Sardinia, Cyprus, Jerusalem, Armenia, Duke of Savoy, Montferrat, Chablais, Aosta, and Genevois, Prince of Piedmont and Oneglia, Marquis (of the Holy Roman Empire) in Italy, of Saluzzo, Susa, Ivrea, Ceva, Maro, Oristano, Sezana, Count of Maurienne, Nice, Tende, Asti, Alessandria, Goceano, Baron of Vaud and Faucigny, Lord of Vercelli, Pinerolo, Tarentaise, Lumellino, Val di Sesia, [and] Prince and perpetual Vicar of the Holy Roman Empire in Italy.\"\nTitles of the Crown of Italy.\nUp until the dissolution of the monarchy in 1946, the full titles of the Kings of the Kingdom of Italy (1861\u20131946) were:\n[Name], by the Grace of God and the will of the Nation, King of Italy, Emperor of Ethiopia, King of Sardinia, Cyprus, Jerusalem, Armenia, King of Albania, Duke of Savoy, count of Maurienne, Marquis (of the Holy Roman Empire) in Italy; Prince of Piedmont, Carignano, Oneglia, Poirino, Trino; Prince and Perpetual Vicar of the Holy Roman Empire; Prince of Carmagnola, Montm\u00e9lian with Arbin and Francin, Prince bailiff of the Duchy of Aosta, Prince of Chieri, Dronero, Crescentino, Riva di Chieri and Banna, Busca, Bene, Bra, Duke of Genoa, Monferrat, Aosta, Duke of Chablais, Genevois, Duke of Piacenza, Marquis of Saluzzo (Saluces), Ivrea, Susa, of Maro, Oristano, Cesana, Savona, Tarantasia, Borgomanero and Cureggio, Caselle, Rivoli, Pianezza, Govone, Salussola, Racconigi over Tegerone, Migliabruna and Motturone, Cavallermaggiore, Marene, Modane and Lanslebourg, Livorno Ferraris, Santhi\u00e0, Agli\u00e8, Centallo and Demonte, Desana, Ghemme, Vigone, Count of Barge, Villafranca, Ginevra, Nizza, Tenda, Romont, Asti, Alessandria, of Goceano, Novara, Tortona, Bobbio, Soissons, Sant'Antioco, Pollenzo, Roccabruna, Tricerro, Bairo, Ozegna, delle Apertole, Baron of Vaud and of Faucigni, Lord of Vercelli, Pinerolo, of Lomellina, of Valle Sesia, of the Marquisate of Ceva, Overlord of Monaco, Roccabruna and eleven-twelfths of Menton, Noble Patrician of Venice, Patrician of Ferrara. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69844", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69844", "title": "Herbert Dingle", "text": "English physicist and philosopher of science (1890\u20131978)\nHerbert Dingle (2 August 1890 \u2013 4 September 1978) was an English physicist and philosopher of science, who served as president of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1951 to 1953. He is best known for his opposition to Albert Einstein's special theory of relativity and the protracted controversy that this provoked.\nBiography.\nDingle was born in London, but spent his early years in Plymouth, where he was taken following the death of his father, and where he attended Plymouth Science, Art and Technical Schools. Due to lack of money, he left school at the age of 14 and found employment as a clerk, a job which he held for 11 years. At age 25 he won a scholarship to the Imperial College, London, from which he graduated in 1918. In that same year, Dingle married Alice Westacott who later gave birth to a son. As a Quaker, Dingle was exempt from military service during World War I. He took a position as a Demonstrator in the Physics Department, and devoted himself to the study of spectroscopy (following his mentor Alfred Fowler), especially its applications in astronomy. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1922.\nDingle was a member of the British government eclipse expeditions of 1927 (Colwyn Bay) and 1932 (Montreal), both of which failed to make any observations due to overcast skies. He spent most of 1932 at the California Institute of Technology as a Rockefeller Foundation Scholar. There he met the theoretical cosmologist R.\u00a0C. Tolman, and studied relativistic cosmology.\nDingle became a professor of Natural Philosophy at Imperial College in 1938, and was a professor of History and Philosophy of Science at University College London from 1946 until his retirement in 1955. Thereafter he held the customary title of Professor Emeritus from that institution. He was one of the founders of the British Society for the History of Science, and served as President from 1955 to 1957. He founded what later became the British Society for the Philosophy of Science as well as its journal, the \"British Journal for The Philosophy of Science\".\nDingle was the author of \"Modern Astrophysics\" (1924) and \"Practical Applications of Spectrum Analysis\" (1950). He also wrote the essay \"Relativity for All\" (1922) and the monograph \"The Special Theory of Relativity\" (1940). A collection of Dingle's lectures on the history and philosophy of science was published in 1954. He also took an interest in English literature, and published \"Science and Literary Criticism\" in 1949, and \"The Mind of Emily Bront\u00eb\" in 1974.\nControversies.\nDingle participated in two very public scientific controversies. The first of these took place during the 1930s and was triggered by Dingle's criticism of E. A. Milne's cosmological model and the associated theoretical methodology, which Dingle considered overly speculative and not based on empirical data. A. S. Eddington was another target of Dingle's criticism, and the ensuing debate eventually involved nearly every prominent astrophysicist and cosmologist in Britain. Dingle characterized his opponents as \"traitors\" to the scientific method, and called them \"the modern Aristotelians\" because he believed their theorizing was based on rationalism rather than empiricism. Some other scientists, notably Willem de Sitter, while not endorsing Dingle's more extreme rhetoric, nevertheless agreed with Dingle that the cosmological models of Milne, Eddington, and others were overly speculative. However, most modern cosmologists subsequently accepted the validity of the hypothetico-deductive method of Milne.\nThe second dispute began in the late 1950s, following Dingle's retirement and centered on the theory of special relativity.\nInitially Dingle argued that, contrary to the usual understanding of the famous twin paradox, special relativity did not predict unequal aging of twins, one of whom makes a high-speed voyage and returns to Earth. However, Dingle then came to realize and acknowledge that his understanding of the problem had been mistaken. He then began to argue that special relativity was empirically wrong in its predictions, although experimental evidence showed he was mistaken about this. Ultimately, Dingle re-focused his criticism to claim that special relativity was logically inconsistent, declaring that special relativity \"unavoidably requires that A works more slowly than B and B more slowly than A \u2013 which it requires no super-intelligence to see is impossible.\" Hence he asserted that the well-known reciprocity of the Lorentz transformation is self-evidently impossible. As Whitrow explained in his obituary for Dingle, this is not correct, as it rests on Dingle's mistaken assumption that the conflicting ratios of event times used by Dingle are invariants.\nDingle carried on a highly public and contentious campaign to get this conclusion accepted by the scientific community, mostly through letters to the editors of various scientific periodicals, including \"Nature\". Dozens of scientists responded with answers to Dingle's claims, explaining why the reciprocity of the Lorentz transformation does not entail any logical inconsistency, but Dingle rejected all the explanations. This culminated in his 1972 book, \"Science at the Crossroads\" in which Dingle stated that \"a proof that Einstein's special theory of relativity is false has been advanced; and ignored, evaded, suppressed and, indeed, treated in every possible way except that of answering it, by the whole scientific world.\" He also warned: \"Since this theory is basic to practically all physical experiments, the consequences if it is false, modern atomic experiments being what they are, may be immeasurably calamitous.\"\nThe consensus in the physics community is that Dingle's objections to the logical consistency of special relativity were unfounded. According to Max Born, \"Dingle's objections are just a matter of superficial formulation and confusion.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69845", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69845", "title": "William Dobson", "text": "English painter\nWilliam Dobson (4 March 1611 (baptised); 28 October 1646 (buried)) was an English painter who specialised in portrait painting. One of the first significant English painters, he was praised by his contemporary John Aubrey as \"the most excellent painter that England has yet bred\". The art critic Waldemar Januszczak describes him as the first British born painter of genius. Dobson died relatively young and his final years were disrupted by the English Civil War.\nBiography.\nDobson was born in London, the son of a lawyer also called William Dobson. He was baptised at St Andrew's Holborn. He was apprenticed to William Peake and probably later joined the studio of Francis Cleyn. There is a claim that his father was a decorative artist, but this may be a misreading of the single known quote about Dobson Sr, by the antiquarian John Aubrey, which states that William senior assisted Francis Bacon with the designs of Verulam House but \"he spending his estate upon women, necessity forced his son ... to be the most excellent painter that England hath yet bred\".\nDobson is believed to have had access to the Royal Collection and to have copied works by Titian and Anthony van Dyck, the court painter of King Charles I of England. The colour and texture of Dobson's work was influenced by Venetian painting, but van Dyck's style had little apparent influence on Dobson. The story that van Dyck himself discovered Dobson when he noticed one of the young artist's pictures in a London shop window is not supported by any evidence, nor do we know how he gained his introduction to the King, who had Dobson paint himself, his sons and members of the court.\nLittle is known of Dobson's career in the 1630s, but when van Dyck died in 1641, the opportunity arose for him to gain royal commissions from King Charles. He is said to have become serjeant painter to the King and groom of the privy chamber. However, this claim comes from only one old and as yet unverified source. During the English Civil War Dobson was based at the Royalist centre of Oxford and painted many leading Cavaliers. His portrait of the future Charles II as Prince of Wales at the age of around twelve is a notable baroque composition, and perhaps his finest work. He also painted at least the head of Duke of York, as well as portraits of leading Royalists such as Charles Lucas and John Byron, 1st Baron Byron, Prince Rupert of the Rhine and Prince Maurice.\nWorks.\nAround sixty of Dobson's works survive, mostly half-length portraits dating from 1642 or later. The thick impasto of his early work gave way to a mere skim of paint, perhaps reflecting a wartime scarcity of materials. After Oxford fell to the Parliamentarians, in June 1646, Dobson returned to London. Now without patronage, he was briefly imprisoned for debt and died in poverty at the age of thirty-five.\nEllis Waterhouse described Dobson as \"the most distinguished purely British painter before Hogarth\", and in the view of Waldemar Januszczak he was \"the first British born genius, the first truly dazzling English painter\".\nThere are examples of Dobson's work at the National Gallery, the National Gallery of Scotland, Tate Britain, the National Portrait Gallery, the National Maritime Museum, Queen's House in Greenwich, the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool, the Ferens Art Gallery in Hull, the Courtauld Institute of Art, the Dulwich Picture Gallery in London, in several English country houses including notably Alnwick Castle where Dobson's self-portrait with Nicholas Lanier and Charles Cotterell is displayed, at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven, CT, USA, and at the Dunedin Public Art Gallery in New Zealand.\nThe 2011 anniversary of his birth was marked by exhibitions, a 'Dobson Trail' listing his paintings on a website, and a BBC television profile by Januszczak, \"The Lost Genius of British Art: William Dobson\".\nPersonal life.\nHe was married twice, first to Elizabeth, whose surname is unknown, as is the date of their marriage. She was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 26 September 1634. On 18 December 1637 he married Judith Sander, who survived him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69847", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69847", "title": "Umberto II of Italy", "text": "King of Italy in 1946\nUmberto II (; 15 September 1904\u00a0\u2013 18 March 1983) was the last king of Italy. Umberto's reign lasted for 34 days, from 9 May 1946 until his formal deposition on 12 June 1946, although he had been the \"de facto\" head of state since 1944. Due to his short reign, he was nicknamed the May King ().\nUmberto was the third child and only son among the five children of Victor Emmanuel III and Elena of Montenegro. As heir apparent to the throne, he received a customary military education and pursued a military career afterwards. In 1940, he commanded an army group during the brief Italian invasion of France shortly before the French capitulation. In 1942, he was promoted to Marshal of Italy but was otherwise inactive as an army commander during much of World War II. Umberto turned against the war following Italian defeats at Stalingrad and El Alamein, and tacitly supported the ouster of Benito Mussolini.\nIn 1944, Victor Emmanuel, compromised by his association with Italian fascism and desperate to repair the monarchy's image, transferred most of his powers to Umberto. He transferred his remaining powers to Umberto later in 1944 and named him Lieutenant General (\"Luogotenente\") of the Realm; while retaining the title of King. As the country prepared for the 1946 Italian institutional referendum on the continuation of the Italian monarchy, Victor Emmanuel abdicated his throne in favour of Umberto, aspiring to bolster the monarchy with his exit. The June 1946 referendum saw voters voting to abolish the monarchy, and Italy was declared a republic days later. Umberto departed the country; he and other male members of the House of Savoy were barred from returning. He lived out the rest of his life in exile in Cascais, on the Portuguese Riviera. He died in Geneva Cantonal Hospital in 1983.\nEarly life.\nUmberto was born at the Castle of Racconigi in Piedmont. He was the third child and the only son of King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy and his wife, Jelena of Montenegro. As such, he was heir apparent from birth since the Italian throne was limited to male descendants. He was accorded the title Prince of Piedmont, which the Royal Decree formalised on 29 September 1904.\nDuring the crisis of May 1915, when Victor Emmanuel III decided to break the terms of the Triple Alliance by declaring war on the Austro-Hungarian Empire, he found himself in a quandary as the Italian Parliament was against declaring war; several times, the king discussed abdication, with the throne to pass to the 2nd Duke of Aosta instead of Umberto. The British historian Denis Mack Smith wrote that it is not entirely clear why Victor Emmanuel was prepared to sacrifice his 10-year-old son's right to succeed to the throne in favour of the Duke of Aosta.\nUmberto was brought up in an authoritarian and militaristic household and was expected to \"show an exaggerated deference to his father\"; both in private and public, Umberto always had to get down on his knees and kiss his father's hand before being allowed to speak, even as an adult, and he was expected to stand to attention and salute whenever his father entered a room. Umberto was given the formal military education of a Savoyard prince and like the other Savoyard princes before him, Umberto received an education that was notably short on politics; Savoyard monarchs customarily excluded politics from their heirs' education with the expectation that they would learn about the art of politics when they inherited the throne.\nUmberto was the first cousin of King Alexander I of Yugoslavia. In a 1959 interview, Umberto told the Italian newspaper \"La Settimana Incom Illustrata\" that in 1922 his father had felt that appointing Benito Mussolini as prime minister was a \"justifiable risk\".\nCareer as Prince of Piedmont.\nState visit to South America, 1924.\nAs Prince of Piedmont, Umberto visited South America, between July and September 1924. With his preceptor, Bonaldi, he went to Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina and Chile. This trip was part of the political plan of Fascism to link the Italian people living outside of Italy with their mother country and the interests of the regime. In Brazil, visits were scheduled to the national capital Rio de Janeiro and the State of S\u00e3o Paulo, where the largest Italian colony in the country lived. However, a major rebellion broke out on 5 July 1924, when Umberto had already departed from Europe, imposing a change in the Royal tour. The prince had to stop in Salvador, the capital of Bahia, to supply the ships, going directly to the other countries of South America. On his return, Umberto could only be received in Salvador again. Governor G\u00f3is Calmon, the Italian colony and other entities warmly welcomed the heir to the Italian Throne.\nMilitary positions and attempted assassination.\nUmberto was educated for a military career and in time became the commander-in-chief of the Northern Armies, and then the Southern ones. This role was merely formal, the \"de facto\" command belonging to his father, King Victor Emmanuel III, who jealously guarded his power of supreme command from \"Il Duce\", Benito Mussolini. By mutual agreement, Umberto and Mussolini always kept a distance. In 1926, Mussolini passed a law allowing the Fascist Grand Council to decide the succession, though in practice he admitted the prince would succeed his father.\nAn attempted assassination took place in Brussels on 24 October 1929, the day of the announcement of his betrothal to Princess Marie Jos\u00e9. Umberto was about to lay a wreath on the Tomb of the Belgian Unknown Soldier at the foot of the \"Colonne du Congr\u00e8s\" when, with a cry of 'Down with Mussolini!', Fernando de Rosa fired a single shot that missed him.\nDe Rosa was arrested and, under interrogation, claimed to be a member of the Second International who had fled Italy to avoid arrest for his political views. His trial was a major political event, and although he was found guilty of attempted murder, he was given a light sentence of five years in prison. This sentence caused a political uproar in Italy and a brief rift in Belgian-Italian relations, but in March 1932 Umberto asked for a pardon for de Rosa, who was released after having served slightly less than half his sentence and was eventually killed in the Spanish Civil War.\nVisit to Italian Somaliland.\nIn 1928, after the colonial authorities in Italian Somaliland built Mogadishu Cathedral (\"Cattedrale di Mogadiscio\"), Umberto made his first publicised visit to Mogadishu, the territory's capital. The completion and consecration of the cathedral was specifically timed for his arrival in the colony. Umberto made his second publicised visit to Italian Somaliland in October 1934.\nMarriage and issue.\nUmberto was married in the city of Rome on 8 January 1930 to Princess Marie Jos\u00e9 of Belgium (1906\u20132001), the daughter of King Albert I of the Belgians and his wife, Queen Elisabeth (\"n\u00e9e\" Duchess Elisabeth in Bavaria).\nThey had four children:\nUnder the Fascist Regime.\nFollowing the Savoyards' tradition (\"Only one Savoy reigns at a time\"), Umberto was kept apart from active politics until he was named Lieutenant General of the Realm. He made an exception when Adolf Hitler asked for a meeting. This was not considered proper, given the international situation; thereafter, Umberto was more rigorously excluded from political events. In 1935, Umberto supported the war against the Ethiopian Empire, which he called a \"legitimate war\" that even Giovanni Giolitti would have supported had he still been alive. Umberto wanted to serve in the Ethiopian war, but was prevented from doing so by his father, who did, however, allow four royal dukes to serve in East Africa. Umberto conformed to his father's expectations and behaved like an army officer; the prince obediently got down on his knees to kiss his father's hand before speaking. However, Umberto privately resented what he regarded as a deeply humiliating relationship with his cold and emotionally distant father. Umberto's attitude toward the Fascist regime varied: at times, he mocked the more pompous aspects of Fascism and his father for supporting such a regime, while at other times, he praised Mussolini as a great leader.\nItalian expansion during the Second World War.\nUmberto shared his father's fears that Mussolini's policy of alliance with Nazi Germany was reckless and dangerous, but he made no move to oppose Italy becoming one of the Axis powers. When Mussolini decided to enter the Second World War in June 1940, Umberto hinted to his father that he should use the royal veto to block the Italian declarations of war on Britain and France, but was ignored. After the war, Umberto criticised the decision to enter the war, saying that Victor Emmanuel was too much under \"Mussolini's spell\" in June 1940 to oppose it. Following Italy's entry into the war, Umberto ostensibly commanded \"Army Group West\", made up of the First, Fourth and the Seventh Army (kept in reserve), which attacked French forces during the Italian invasion of France. Umberto was appointed to this position by his father, who wanted the expected Italian victory to also be a victory for the House of Savoy, as the King feared Mussolini's ambitions. A few hours after France signed an armistice with Germany on 21 June 1940, the Italians invaded France. The Italian offensive was a complete fiasco, with Umberto's reputation as a general only being saved by the fact that the already defeated French signed an armistice with Italy on 24 June 1940. Thus, he could present the offensive as a victory. The Italian plans called for the \"Regio Esercito\" to reach the Rhone river valley, which the Italians came nowhere close to reaching, having penetrated only a few kilometres into France.\nAfter the capitulation of France, Mussolini kept Umberto inactive as an Army commander. In the summer of 1940, Umberto was to command a planned invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Still, Mussolini subsequently cancelled the invasion of Yugoslavia in favour of invading the Kingdom of Greece. In June 1941, supported by his father, Umberto strongly lobbied to be given command of the Italian expeditionary force sent to the Soviet Union, saying that, as a Catholic, he fully supported Operation Barbarossa and wanted to do battle with the \"godless communists\". Mussolini refused the request, and instead gave Umberto the responsibility of training the Italian forces scheduled to participate in Operation Hercules, the planned Axis invasion of Malta. On 29 October 1942, he was awarded the rank of Marshal of Italy (\"Maresciallo d'Italia\"). During October\u2013November 1942, in the Battle of El Alamein, the Italo-German force was defeated by the British Eighth Army, marking the end of Axis hopes of conquering Egypt. The Axis retreated back into Libya. In November 1942, as part of the Battle of Stalingrad, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, which saw the Soviets annihilate much of the Italian expeditionary force in Russia and encircle the German 6th Army. The disastrous Italian defeats at Stalingrad and El Alamein turned Umberto against the war and led him to conclude that Italy must sign an armistice before it was too late. In late 1942, Umberto had his cousin, the 4th Duke of Aosta, visit Switzerland to contact the British consulate in Geneva, where he passed on a message to London that the King was willing to sign an armistice with the Allies in exchange for a promise that he be allowed to keep his throne.\nAttempts at armistice.\nIn 1943, Marie Jos\u00e9, Princess of Piedmont, involved herself in vain attempts to arrange a separate peace treaty between Italy and the United States. Her interlocutor from the Vatican was Giovanni Battista Monsignor Montini, a senior Papal diplomat who later became Pope Paul VI. Her attempts were not sponsored by her father-in-law, the King, and Umberto was not (directly at least) involved in them. Victor Emmanuel III was anti-clerical, distrusting the Catholic Church, and wanted nothing to do with a peace attempt made through Papal intermediaries. More importantly, Victor Emmanuel was proudly misogynistic, holding women in complete contempt as the King believed it to be a scientific fact that the brains of women were significantly less developed than the brains of men. Victor Emmanuel simply did not believe that Marie Jos\u00e9 was competent to serve as a diplomat. For all these reasons, the King vetoed Marie Jos\u00e9's peace attempt. After her failure\u00a0\u2013 she never met the American agents\u00a0\u2013 she was sent with her children to Sarre, in the Aosta Valley, and isolated from the political life of the Royal House.\nIn the first half of 1943, as the war continued to go badly for Italy, several senior Fascist officials, upon learning that the Allies would never sign an armistice with Mussolini, began to plot his overthrow with the support of the King. Adding to their worries were a number of strikes in Milan starting on 5 March 1943, with the workers openly criticising both the war and the Fascist regime which had led Italy into the war, leading to fears in Rome that Italy was on the brink of revolution. The strike wave in Milan quickly spread to the industrial city of Turin, where the working class likewise denounced the war and Fascism. The fact that during the strikes in Milan and Turin, Italian soldiers fraternised with the striking workers, who used slogans associated with the banned Socialist and Communist parties, deeply worried Italy's conservative establishment. By this point, the successive Italian defeats had so psychologically shattered Mussolini that he become close to being catatonic, staring into space for hours on end and saying the war would soon turn around for the Axis because it had to, leading even his closest admirers to become disillusioned and to begin looking for a new leader. Umberto was seen as supportive of these efforts to depose Mussolini, but as Ciano (who had turned against Mussolini by this point) complained in his diary, the prince was far too passive, refusing to make a move or even state his views unless his father expressed his approval first.\nOn 10 July 1943, in Operation Husky, the Allies invaded Sicily. Just before the invasion of Sicily, Umberto had gone on an inspection tour of the Italian forces in Sicily and reported to his father that the Italians had no hope of holding Sicily. Mussolini had assured the King that the \"Regio Esercito\" could hold Sicily, and the poor performance of the Italian forces defending Sicily helped to persuade the King to finally dismiss Mussolini, as Umberto informed his father that \"Il Duce\" had lied to him. On 16 July 1943, the visiting Papal Assistant Secretary of State told the American diplomats in Madrid that King Victor Emmanuel III and Prince Umberto were now hated by the Italian people even more than Mussolini. By this time, many Fascist \"gerarchi\" had become convinced that it was necessary to depose Mussolini to save the Fascist system, and on the night of 24\u201325 July 1943, at a meeting of the Fascist Grand Council, a motion introduced by the \"gerarca\" Dino Grandi to take away Mussolini's powers was approved by a vote of 19 to 8. The fact that the majority of the Fascist Grand Council voted for the motion showed just how disillusioned the Fascist \"gerarchi\" had become with Mussolini by the summer of 1943. The intransigent and radical group of Fascists led by the \"gerarchi\" Roberto Farinacci, who wanted to continue the war, were only a minority, while the majority of the \"gerarchi\" supported Grandi's call to jettison Mussolini as the best way of saving Fascism.\nOn 25 July 1943, Victor Emmanuel III finally dismissed Mussolini and appointed Marshal Pietro Badoglio, as prime minister with secret orders to negotiate an armistice with the Allies. Baron Raffaele Guariglia, the Italian ambassador to Spain, contacted British diplomats to begin the negotiations. Badoglio went about the negotiations halfheartedly while allowing many German forces to enter Italy. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that Badoglio as prime minister \"...did almost everything as stupidly and slowly as possible\", as he dragged out the secret peace talks going on in Lisbon and Tangier, being unwilling to accept the Allied demand for unconditional surrender. During the secret armistice talks, Badoglio told Count Pietro d'Acquarone that he thought he might get better terms if Victor Emmanuel abdicated in favour of Umberto, complaining that the armistice terms that the King wanted were unacceptable to the Allies. D'Acquarone told Badoglio to keep his views to himself as the King was completely unwilling to abdicate, all the more so as he believed that Umberto was unfit to be monarch.\nPartition of Italy.\nOn 17 August 1943, Sicily was taken and the last Axis forces crossed over to the Italian mainland. On 3 September 1943, the British Eighth Army landed on the Italian mainland at Reggio Calabria while the U.S. 5th Army landed at Salerno on 9 September 1943, a few hours after it was announced that Italy had signed an armistice. Adolf Hitler had other plans for Italy, and in response to the Italian armistice ordered Operation Achse on 8 September 1943, as the Germans turned against their Italian allies and occupied all of the parts of Italy not taken by the Allies. In response to the German occupation of Italy, neither Victor Emmanuel nor Marshal Pietro Badoglio made any effort at organised resistance; they instead issued vague instructions to the Italian military and civil servants to do their best and fled Rome during the night of 8\u20139 September 1943. Not trusting his son, Victor Emmanuel had told Umberto nothing about his attempts to negotiate an armistice nor about his plans to flee Rome if the Germans should occupy it. For the first time in his life, Umberto openly criticised his father, saying the King of Italy should not be fleeing Rome and only reluctantly obeyed his father's orders to go south with him towards the Allied lines. The King and the rest of the Royal Family fled Rome via a car to Ortona to board a corvette, the \"Baionetta\", that took them south. A small riot occurred at the Ortona dock as about 200 senior-ranking Italian military officers, who had abandoned their commands and unexpectedly showed up, begged the King to take them with him. Almost all of them were refused permission to board, making the struggle to get to the head of the queue pointless. With the exceptions of Marshal Enrico Caviglia, General Calvi di Bergolo and General Antonio Sorice, the Italian generals simply abandoned their posts on the night of 8\u20139 September to try to flee south, which greatly facilitated the German take-over, as the \"Regio Esercito\" was left without senior leadership. On the morning of 9 September 1943, Umberto arrived with Victor Emmanuel and Badoglio in Brindisi.\nIn September 1943, Italy was partitioned between the south of Italy, administered by the Italian government with an Allied Control Commission (ACC) having supervisory powers, while Germany occupied northern and central Italy with a puppet Italian Social Republic (popularly called the Sal\u00f2 Republic), headed by Mussolini holding nominal power. By 16 September 1943, a line had formed across Italy with everything to the north held by the Germans and to the south by the Allies. Because of what Weinberg called the \"extraordinary incompetence\" of Badoglio, who, like Victor Emmanuel, had not anticipated Operation Achse until it was far too late, thousands of Italian soldiers with no leadership were taken prisoner by the Germans without resisting in the Balkans, France and Italy itself, to be taken off to work as slave labour in factories in Germany, an experience that many did not survive. How Victor Emmanuel mishandled the armistice was to become almost as controversial in Italy as his support for Fascism. Under the terms of the armistice, the ACC had the ultimate power with the Royal Italian Government in the south, being in many ways a similar position to the Italian Social Republic under the Germans. However, as the British historian James Holland noted, the crucial difference was that: \"In the south, Italy was now moving closer towards democracy\". In the part of Italy under the control of the ACC, which issued orders to the Italian civil servants, freedom of the press, association and expression were restored along with other civil rights and liberties.\nDuring 1943\u201345, the Italian economy collapsed with much of the infrastructure destroyed, inflation rampant, the black market becoming the dominant form of economic activity, and food shortages reducing much of the population to the brink of starvation in both northern and southern Italy. In 1943\u201344, the cost of living in southern Italy skyrocketed by 321%, while it was estimated that people in Naples needed 2,000 calories per day to survive while the average Neapolitan was doing well if they consumed 500 calories a day in 1943\u201344. Naples in 1944 was described as a city without cats or dogs which had all been eaten by the Neapolitans, while much of the female population of Naples turned to prostitution to survive. As dire as the economic situation was in southern Italy, food shortages and inflation were even worse in northern Italy as the Germans carried out a policy of ruthless economic exploitation. Since the war in which Mussolini had involved Italy in 1940 had become such an utter catastrophe for the Italian people by 1943, it had the effect of discrediting all those associated with the Fascist system, including Victor Emmanuel. In late 1943, Victor Emmanuel stated that he felt he bore no responsibility for Italy's plight, for appointing Mussolini as prime minister in 1922 and for entering the war in 1940. This further increased his unpopularity and led to demands that he abdicate at once.\nIn northern Italy, a guerrilla war began against the fascists, both Italian and German, with most of the guerrilla units fighting under the banner of the National Liberation Committee (\"Comitato di Liberazione Nazionale\"-CLN), who were very strongly left-wing and republican. Of the six parties that made up the CLN, the Communists, the Socialists and the Action Party were republican; the Christian Democrats and the Labour Party were ambiguous on the \"institutional question\", and only the Liberal Party was committed to preserving the monarchy, though many individual Liberals were republicans. Only a minority of the partisan bands fighting for the CLN were monarchists, and a prince of the House of Savoy led none. After the war, Umberto claimed that he wanted to join the partisans, and only his wartime duties prevented him from doing so. The Italian Royal Court relocated itself to Brindisi in the south of Italy after fleeing Rome. In the fall of 1943, many Italian monarchists, like Benedetto Croce and Count Carlo Sforza, pressed for Victor Emmanuel III to abdicate and for Umberto to renounce his right to the succession in favour of his 6-year-old son, with a regency council to govern Italy as the best hope of saving the monarchy. Count Sforza tried to interest the British members of the ACC in this plan, calling Victor Emmanuel a \"despicable weakling\" and Umberto \"a pathological case\", saying neither was qualified to rule Italy. However, given the unwillingness of the King to abdicate, nothing came of it.\nAt a meeting of the leading politicians from the six revived political parties on 13 January 1944 in Bari, the demand was made that the ACC should force Victor Emmanuel to abdicate to \"wash away the shame of the past\". Beyond removing Victor Emmanuel, which everyone at the Congress of Bari wanted, the Italian politicians differed, with some calling for a republic to be proclaimed at once, some willing to see Umberto succeed to the throne, others wanting Umberto to renounce his claim to the throne in favour of his son, and finally those who were willing to accept Umberto as \"Luogotenente Generale del Regno\" () to govern in place of his father. Since northern and central Italy were still occupied by Germany, it was finally decided at the Bari conference that the \"institutional question\" should be settled only once all of Italy was liberated, so all of the Italian people could have their say.\nOuting and appointment as regent.\nIn the Sal\u00f2 Republic, Mussolini returned to his original republicanism and, as part of his attack on the House of Savoy, Fascist newspapers in the area under the control of the Italian Social Republic outed Umberto, calling him \"Stellassa\" (\"Ugly Starlet\" in the Piedmontese language). The Fascist newspapers reported in a lurid, sensationalist, and decidedly homophobic way Umberto's various relationships with men as a way of discrediting him. It was after Umberto was outed by the Fascist press in late 1943 that the issue of his homosexuality came to widespread public notice.\nAs the Allies freed more and more of Italy from the Sal\u00f2 Republic, it became apparent that Victor Emmanuel was too tainted by his previous support of Fascism to have any further role. A sign of how unpopular the House of Savoy had become was that on 28 March 1944, when the Italian Communist leader Palmiro Togliatti returned to Italy after a long exile in the Soviet Union, he did not press for an immediate proclamation of a republic. Togliatti wanted the monarchy to continue as the best way of winning the Communists' support after the war. For the same reason, Count Sforza wanted a republic as soon as possible, arguing the House of Savoy was far too closely associated with Fascism to enjoy moral legitimacy, and the only hope of establishing a liberal democracy in Italy after the war was a republic. By this point, the government of Pietro Badoglio was so unpopular with the Italian people that Umberto was willing to accept the support of any party with a mass following, even the Communists. The fact that contrary to expectations, Togliatti and Badoglio got along very well, led to widespread fears amongst liberal-minded Italians that a Togliatti-Badoglio duumvirate might emerge, forming an alliance between what rapidly was becoming Italy's largest mass party and the military. The power and influence of Badoglio's government, based in Salerno, was very limited, but the entry of the Communists, followed by representatives of the other anti-Fascist parties, into the Cabinet of that government in April 1944 marked the moment when, as the British historian David Ellwood noted, \"...anti-Fascism had compromised with the traditional state and the defenders of Fascism, and the Communist Party had engineered this compromise. A quite new phase in Italy's liberation was opening\". Besides the \"institutional question\", the principle responsibility of the Royal Italian Government was the reconstruction of the liberated areas of Italy. As the Allies pushed northwards, aside from the damage caused by the fighting, the retreating Germans systematically destroyed all of the infrastructure, leading to a humanitarian disaster in the liberated parts. Umberto, together with the rest of his father's government, spent time attempting to have humanitarian aid delivered.\nUnder intense pressure from Robert Murphy and Harold Macmillan of the ACC at a meeting on 10 April 1944, Victor Emmanuel transferred most of his powers to Umberto. The King bitterly told Lieutenant General Sir Noel Mason-MacFarlane that Umberto was unqualified to rule, and that handing power over to him was equivalent to letting the Communists come to power. However, events had moved beyond Victor Emmanuel's ability to control. After Rome was liberated in June, Victor Emmanuel transferred his remaining constitutional powers to Umberto, naming his son Lieutenant General of the Realm. However, Victor Emmanuel retained the title and position of King. During his period as Regent, Umberto saw his father only three times, partly out of a bid to distance himself and partly because of tensions between father and son. Mack Smith wrote that Umberto was: \"More attractive and outgoing than his father, he was even more a soldier at heart, and completely inexperienced as a politician...In personality-less astute and intelligent than his father...less obstinate, he was far more open, affable and ready to learn\".\nAs Regent, Umberto initially made a poor impression on almost everyone as he surrounded himself with Fascist-era generals as his advisers, spoke of the military as the basis of his power, frequently threatened to sue for libel anyone who made even the slightest critical remarks about the House of Savoy, and asked the ACC to censor the press to prevent the criticism of himself or his father. The British Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, wrote after meeting Umberto, in a message to London, that he was \"the poorest of poor creatures\", and his only qualification for the throne was that he had more charm than his charmless father. The historian and philosopher Benedetto Croce, a minister in Badoglio's cabinet, called Umberto \"entirely insignificant\" as he found the Prince of Piedmont to be shallow, vain, superficial, and of low intelligence, and alluding to his homosexuality stated his private life was \"tainted by scandal\".\nThe diplomat and politician Count Carlo Sforza wrote in his diary that Umberto was utterly unqualified to be King as he called the prince \"a stupid young man who knew nothing of the real Italy\" and \"he had been as closely associated with fascism as his father. In addition he is weak and dissipated, with a degenerate and even oriental disposition inherited from his Balkan mother\". Sam Reber, an American official with the ACC, who had known Umberto before the war, met the prince in Naples in early 1944 and wrote he found him \"greatly improved. The Balkan playboy period was over. But he has a weak face and, to judge by first meeting, has not, I should say, the personality to inspire confidence and devotion in others\". More damaging, Victor Emmanuel let it be known that he regretted handing over his powers to his son, and made clear that he felt that Umberto was unfit to succeed him as part of a bid to take back his lost powers.\nAfter Togliatti and the Communists entered Badoglio's cabinet, taking the oaths of loyalty to Umberto in the so-called \"Svolta di Salerno\" (\"Salerno turn\"), the leaders of the other anti-Fascist parties felt they had no choice but to join the cabinet as to continue to boycott it might lead Italy to be open to Communist domination. The other parties entered the cabinet on 22 April 1944 to preempt the Communists who joined the cabinet on 24 April. The Christian Democratic leader Alcide De Gasperi believed in 1944 that a popular vote would ensure a republic immediately, and sources from the Vatican suggested to him that only 25% of Italians favoured continuing the monarchy. The Catholic Church was in favour of Umberto, who, unlike his father, was a sincere Catholic who it was believed would keep the Communists out of power. However, De Gasperi admitted that though the monarchy was a conservative institution, \"it was difficult to answer the argument that the monarchy had done little to serve the interests of the country or people during the past thirty years\".\nUmberto's relations with the Allies were strained by his insistence that after the war, Italy should keep all of its colonial empire, including Ethiopia and the parts of Yugoslavia that Mussolini had annexed in 1941. Both the British and Americans told Umberto that Ethiopia had its independence restored in 1941 and would not revert to Italian rule, while the Allies had promised that Yugoslavia would be restored to its pre-war frontiers after the war. Umberto later stated that he would have never signed the peace treaty of 1947 under which Italy renounced its empire. On 15 April 1944, in an interview with \"The Daily Express\", Umberto stated his hope that Italy would become a full Allied power, expressing his wish that the \"Regia Marina\" would fight in the Pacific against the Empire of Japan and the \"Regio Esercito\" would march alongside the other Allied armies in invading Germany. In the same interview, Umberto stated that he wanted post-war Italy to have a government \"patterned on the British monarchy, and at the same time incorporating as much of America's political framework as possible\". Umberto admitted that, in retrospect, his father had made grave mistakes as King and criticised Victor Emmanuel for a suffocating childhood, where he was never permitted to express his personality or hold views of his own. In the same interview, Umberto stated that he hoped to make Italy a democracy by executing \"the vastest education programme Italy has ever seen\" to eliminate illiteracy in Italy once and for all.\nA few days later, on 19 April 1944, Umberto in an interview with \"The Times\" complained that the ACC was too liberal in giving Italians too much freedom, as the commissioners \"seemed to expect the Italian people to run before they could walk\". In the same interview, Umberto demanded the ACC censor the Italian press to end the criticism of the Royal Family, and claimed he had no choice but to support Mussolini because otherwise he would have been disinherited. Finally, Umberto made the controversial statement that Mussolini \"at first had the full support of the nation\" in bringing Italy into the war in June 1940. Victor Emmanuel III had only signed the declarations of war because \"there was no sign that the nation wanted it otherwise. No single voice was raised in protest. No demand was made for summoning parliament\". The interview with \"The Times\" caused a storm of controversy in Italy, with many Italians objecting to Umberto's claim that the responsibility for Italy entering the war rested with ordinary Italians and his apparent ignorance of the difficulties of holding public protests under the Fascist regime in 1940. Sforza wrote in his diary of his belief that Victor Emmanuel, \"that little monster\", had put Umberto up to the interview to discredit his son. Croce wrote:\"The Prince of Piedmont for twenty-two years has never shown any sign of acting independently of his father. Now he is simply repeating his father's arguments. He chooses to do this at the very moment when, having been designated lieutenant of the kingdom, he ought to be overcoming doubt and distrust as I personally hoped he would succeed in doing. To me it seems unworthy to try to unload the blame and errors of royalty on the people. I, an old monarchist, am therefore especially grieved when I see the monarchs themselves working to discredit the monarchy\". Various Italian politicians had attempted to persuade the Allies to revise the armistice of 1943 in Italy's favour because there was a difference between the Fascist regime and the Italian people. Umberto's statement that the House of Savoy bore no responsibility when he asserted that the Italian people had been of one mind with Mussolini in June 1940, was widely seen as weakening the case for revising the armistice.\nLiberation and republicanism.\nMost of the Committee of National Liberation (CLN) leaders operating underground in the north tended to lean in a republican direction. Still, they were willing to accept Umberto temporarily out of the belief that his personality and widespread rumours about his private life would ensure that he would not last long as either Lieutenant General of the Realm or as King, should his father abdicate. After the liberation of Rome on 6 June 1944, the various Italian political parties all applied strong pressure on Umberto to dismiss Pietro Badoglio as prime minister, as the Duke had loyally served the Fascist regime until the Royal coup on 25 July 1943, which resulted in the social democrat Ivanoe Bonomi being appointed prime minister. On 5 June 1944, Victor Emmanuel formally gave up his powers to Umberto, finally recognising his son as Lieutenant General of the Realm. After the liberation of Rome, Umberto received a warm welcome from ordinary people when he returned to the Eternal City. Mack Smith cautioned that the friendly reception that Umberto received in Rome may have been due to him being a symbol of normalcy after the harsh German occupation as opposed to genuine affection for the prince. During the German occupation, much of the Roman population had lived on the brink of starvation, young people had been arrested on the streets to be taken off to work as slave labourers in Germany, while the Fascist \"Milizia\", together with the \"Wehrmacht\" and SS, had committed numerous atrocities. Badoglio, by contrast, was greeted with widespread hostility when he returned to Rome, being blamed by many Italians as the man, together with the King, who was responsible for abandoning Rome to the Germans without a fight in September 1943.\nUmberto had ordered Badoglio to bring members of the Committee of National Liberation (CLN) into his cabinet after the liberation of Rome to broaden his basis of support and ensure national unity by preventing the emergence of a rival government. Umberto moved into the Quirinal Palace, while at The Grand Hotel, the Rome branch of the CLN met with the cabinet. Speaking on behalf of the CLN in general, the Roman leadership of the CLN refused to join the cabinet as long as Badoglio headed it but indicated that Bonomi was an acceptable choice as prime minister for them. Lieutenant General Sir Noel Mason-MacFarlane of the ACC visited the Quirinal Palace and convinced Umberto to accept Bonomi as prime minister because the Crown needed to bring the CLN into the government, which required sacrificing Badoglio. As Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin were willing to see Badoglio continue as prime minister, seeing him as a force for order, Umberto could have held out for him. However, as part of his efforts to distance himself from Fascism, Umberto agreed to appoint Bonomi as prime minister. Reflecting the tense \"institutional question\" of republic vs. monarchy, Umberto, when swearing in the Bonomi cabinet, allowed the ministers to take either their oaths to himself as the Lieutenant General of the Realm or to the Italian state; Bonomi himself chose to take his oath to Umberto while the rest of his cabinet chose to take their oaths only to the Italian state. Churchill especially disapproved of the replacement of Badoglio with Bonomi, complaining that, in his view, Umberto was being used by \"a group of aged and hungry politicians trying to intrigue themselves into an undue share of power\". Through the Allied occupation, the Americans were far more supportive of Italian republicanism than the British, with Churchill in particular believing the Italian monarchy was the only institution that was capable of preventing the Italian Communists from coming to power after the war.\nUnlike the conservative Badoglio, the social democrat Bonomi started to move Italian politics in an increasingly democratic direction as he argued that King Victor Emmanuel III, who had only turned against Mussolini when it was clear that the war was lost, was unfit to continue as monarch. On 25 June 1944, the Bonomi government, which like Badoglio's government, ruled by Royal Decree as there was no parliament in Italy, had a Royal Decree issued in Umberto's name promising a Constituent Assembly for Italy after the war. As Umberto continued as regent, he surprised many, after his rocky start in the spring of 1944, with greater maturity and judgement than was expected. Croce advised him to make a break with his father by choosing his advisers from the democratic parties, and it was due to Croce's influence that Umberto appointed Falcone Lucifero, a socialist lawyer, as Minister of the Royal House. Lucifero suggested reforms, which were implemented, such as reducing the number of aristocrats and generals at the Royal Court, while bringing in people from all the regions of Italy instead of just Piedmont to make the Royal Court more representative of Italy.\nUmberto, in September 1944, vetoed an attempt by the Bonomi government to start an investigation of who was responsible for abandoning Rome in September 1943 as he feared that it would show his father was a coward. The same month, Badoglio, who was kept on as an adviser by Umberto, made an offer to the British and the Americans on behalf of the regent in September 1944 for Italy to be governed by a triumvirate consisting of himself, Bonomi and another former prime minister, Vittorio Orlando, which purged the prefects in the liberated areas who were \"agents of Togliatti and Nenni\" with Fascist-era civil servants. Badoglio also spoke of Umberto's desire not to lose any territory after the war to Greece, Yugoslavia and France. Badoglio's offer was rejected as Admiral Ellery W. Stone of the ACC was opposed to Umberto's plans to have Bonomi share power with Badoglio and Orlando, seeing this as upsetting the delicately achieved political consensus for no other reason than to increase the Crown's power.\nIn October 1944, Umberto, in an interview with \"The New York Times\", stated that he favoured a referendum to decide whether Italy was to be a republic or a monarchy instead of having the \"institutional question\" decided by the national assembly that would write Italy's post-war constitution. Umberto's interview caused controversy as the republican parties widely feared that a referendum would be rigged, especially in the south of Italy. In the same interview, Umberto mentioned his belief that, after the war, monarchies all over the world would move towards the left, and stated that under his leadership Italy would go leftwards \"in an ordered, liberal way\" as he understood \"the weight of the past is the monarchy's greatest handicap\", which he would resolve by a \"radical revision\" of the \"Statuto Albertino\". Umberto spoke favourably of Togliatti as he was \"clever, agreeable, and easy to discuss problems with\". In private, Umberto said he found Togliatti \"to be a very congenial companion whose intelligence he respected, but was afraid that he suited his conversation according to his company\".\nBy late 1944, the question of whether the CLN or the Crown represented the Italian people came to a head. On 25 November 1944, Bonomi resigned as prime minister, saying he could not govern owing to his difficulties with the CLN, and as the politicians could not agree on a successor. Umberto used the impasse to reassert the Crown's powers. The crisis ended on 12 December 1944 with Umberto appointing a new government under Bonomi consisting of ministers from four parties, the most important of which were the Communists and the Christian Democrats. In response to objections from the CLN, Bonomi, in practice, accepted their claim that they represented the Italian people rather than the Crown, while still swearing an oath of loyalty to Umberto as the Lieutenant General of the Realm when he took the prime minister's oath. An attempt by Umberto to have Churchill issue a public statement in favour of the monarchy led Macmillan to warn Umberto to try to be more politically neutral as regent. However, Churchill, during a visit to Rome in January 1945, called Umberto \"a far more impressive figure than the politicians\". As a gesture to promote national unity after the traumas of the war, in June 1945, Umberto appointed as prime minister, a prominent guerrilla leader, Ferruccio Parri.\nIn December 1945, Umberto appointed a new, more conservative government under Alcide De Gasperi. One of the first acts of the new government was to announce the High Commission for Sanctions Against Fascism would cease operating as of 31 March 1946 and to start purging from the liberated areas of northern Italy civil servants appointed by the CLN, restoring the career civil servants who had served the Fascist regime back to their former posts. Over the opposition of the left-wing parties who wanted the \"institutional question\" resolved by the Constituent Assembly, De Gasperi announced that a referendum would be held to decide the \"institutional question\". At the same time, Italian women were given the right to vote and to hold official office for the first time, again over the opposition of the left-wing parties, who viewed Italian women as more conservative than their menfolk, and believed that female suffrage would benefit the monarchist side in the referendum. The monarchists favoured putting off the referendum as long as possible out of the hope that a return to normalcy would cause the Italians to take a more favourable view of their monarchy, while the republicans wanted a referendum as soon as possible, hoping that wartime radicalisation would work in their favour.\nKing of Italy.\nUmberto earned widespread praise for his role in the following three years, with the Italian historian Giuseppe Mammarella calling Umberto a man \"whose Fascist past was less compromising\" than that of Victor Emmanuel and who, as Lieutenant General of the Realm, showed certain \"progressive\" tendencies. In April 1946, a public opinion poll of registered members of the conservative Christian Democratic party showed that 73% were republicans, a poll that caused immense panic in the monarchist camp. The American historian Norman Kogan cautioned the poll was of Christian Democratic members, which was not the same thing as Christian Democratic voters who tended to be \"...rural, female, or generally apolitical\". Nonetheless, the poll led to appeals from Umberto to the ACC to postpone the referendum, leading to the reply that the De Gasperi cabinet had set the date for the referendum, not the ACC. The possibility of losing the referendum also led to the monarchists to appeal to Victor Emmanuel to finally abdicate. De Gasperi and the other Christian Democratic leaders refused to take sides in the referendum, urging Christian Democratic voters to follow their consciences when it came time to vote.\nIn the belated hope of influencing public opinion ahead of a referendum on the continuation of the monarchy, Victor Emmanuel formally abdicated in favour of Umberto on 9 May 1946 and left for Egypt. Before departing for Egypt, Victor Emmanuel saw Umberto for the last time, saying farewell in a cold, emotionless way. The Catholic Church saw the continuation of the monarchy as the best way of keeping the Italian left out of power, and during the referendum campaign, Catholic priests used their pulpits to warn that \"all the pains of hell\" were reserved for those who voted for a republic. The Catholic Church presented the referendum not as a question of republic vs monarchy, but instead as a question of Communism vs Catholicism, warning to vote for a republic would be to vote for the Communists. On the day before the referendum, 1 June 1946, Pope Pius XII, in a sermon on St. Peter's Square, said in what was widely seen as endorsing Umberto: \"What is the problem? The problem is whether one or the other of those nations, of those two Latin sisters [elections were taking place in France on the same day] with several thousands of years of civilisation, will continue to lean against the solid rock of Christianity;... or on the contrary, do they want to hand over the fate of their future to the impossible omnipotence of a secular state without extraterrestrial ideals, without religion, and without God. One of these two alternatives shall occur according to whether the names of the champions or the destroyers of Christian civilization emerge victorious from the urns\". Umberto believed that the support from the Catholic Church would be decisive and that he would win the referendum by a narrow margin. The De Gasperi cabinet accepted Umberto as King, but refused to accept the standard appellation for Italian kings \"by the Grace of God and the will of the people\".\nIn northern Italy, which had been the scene of the guerrilla struggle against the Italian Social Republic and the Germans, much of the population had been radicalised by the struggle, and feelings were very much against the monarchy. Kogan wrote Victor Emmanuel's flight from Rome was \"bitterly remembered\" in the \"Nord\" as an act of cowardice and betrayal by the King who abandoned his people to the German occupation without a fight. The socialist leader Sandro Pertini warned Umberto not to campaign in Milan as otherwise he would be lynched by the Milanese working class if he should appear in that city. Republican cartoonists mercilessly mocked Umberto's physical quirks, as the American historian Anthony Di Renzo wrote that he was: \"Tall, stiff, and balding, he had smooth, clean-shaven blue cheeks, thin lips, and a weak chin. Dressed in military uniform as First Marshal of the Empire, decorated with the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, he seemed more like a majordomo than a king. On the campaign trail, Umberto was received with much more friendliness in the south of Italy than in the north. People in the \"Mezzogiorno\" loved their King, who on the campaign trail in Sicily showed an encyclopedic knowledge of Sicilian villages which greatly endeared him to the Sicilians. Umberto's principal arguments for retaining the monarchy were it was the best way to revive Italy as a great power; it was the only institution capable of holding Italy together by checking regional separatism; and it would uphold Catholicism against anti-clericalism. The republicans charged that Umberto had done nothing to oppose Fascism, with his major interest being his \"glittering social life\" in the high society of Rome and Turin, and that as a general knew that Italy was unready for war in 1940, but did not warn Mussolini against entering the war.\nMack Smith wrote that \"some of the more extreme monarchists\" expressed doubts about the legitimacy of the referendum, claiming that millions of voters, many of them pro-monarchist, were unable to vote because they had not yet been able to return to their local areas to register. Nor had the issue of Italy's borders been settled definitively, so the voting rights of those in disputed areas had not been satisfactorily clarified. Other allegations were made about voter manipulation, and even the issue of how to interpret the votes became controversial, as it appeared that not just a majority of those validly voting but of those votes cast (including spoiled votes), was needed to reach an outcome in the event the monarchy lost by a tight margin.\nOn the 2 June 1946 referendum, which saw the participation of almost 90% of voters, over 54% majority voted to make Italy a republic. The conservative, rural \"Mezzogiorno\" (southern Italy) region voted solidly for the monarchy while the more urbanised and industrialised \"Nord\" (northern Italy) voted equally firmly for a republic. In northern Italy, which had been ruled by the Italian Social Republic, the charges of homosexuality made against Umberto had an impact on the voters, causing at least some conservatives to vote for the republic. From his exile in Egypt, where King Farouk had welcomed him as a guest, Victor Emmanuel expressed no surprise at the result of the referendum as he always viewed Umberto as a failure who was unfit to be King, and claimed that the monarchists would have won the referendum if only he had not abdicated. Umberto himself had expected to win the referendum and was deeply shocked when the majority of his subjects chose a republic.\nThe republic was formally proclaimed four days later, ending Umberto's brief (effective 12 June) 34-day reign as King. Umberto at first refused to accept what he called \"the outrageous illegality\" of the referendum and took his deposition badly. In his last official statement as King, Umberto refused to accept the republic, saying he was the victim of a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" by his ministers and the referendum had been rigged against him. In response, De Gasperi, who became Acting President, replied in a press statement: \"We must strive to understand the tragedy of someone who, after inheriting a military defeat and a disastrous complicity with dictatorship, tried hard in recent months to work with patience and goodwill towards a better future. But this final act of the thousand-year-old House of Savoy must be seen as part of our national catastrophe; it is an expiation, an expiation forced upon all of us, even those who have not shared directly in the guilt of the dynasty\". Some monarchists advocated using force to prevent a republic from being proclaimed, even at the risk of a civil war, but Mack Smith wrote that: \"Common sense and patriotism saved Umberto from accepting such counsel\". Umberto rejected the advice that he should go to Naples, proclaim a rival government to start a civil war in which the Army would presumably side with the House of Savoy, under the grounds that \"My House united Italy. I will not divide it\". The monarchy of the House of Savoy formally ended on 12 June 1946. Prime Minister Alcide de Gasperi assumed office as Italy's interim Head of State. At about 3\u00a0pm on 13 June 1946, Umberto left the Quirinal Palace for the last time with the servants assembled in the courtyard to see him off, and many were in tears. At Ciampino Airport in Rome, as Umberto boarded the aeroplane that was to take him to Lisbon, a \"carabiniere\" grabbed him by the hand and said: \"Your Majesty, we will never forget you!\"\nIn exile.\nUmberto II lived for 37 years in exile, in Cascais, on the Portuguese Riviera. He never set foot in his native land again; the 1948 constitution of the Italian Republic not only forbade amending the constitution to restore the monarchy but, until 2002, barred all male heirs to the defunct Italian throne from returning to Italian soil. Female members of the Savoy family were not barred, except former queens consort. \nTogether with their four children, they took part in the ship tour organized by Queen Frederica and her husband King Paul of Greece in 1954, which became known as the \u201cCruise of the Kings\u201d and was attended by over 100 royals from all over Europe. Since the ship tour began in Naples, the family could only board in Corfu, Greece, as they were not allowed to set foot on Italian soil. On this trip their daughter Princess Maria Pia met her future husband Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia.\nRelations between Umberto and Marie Jos\u00e9 grew more strained during their exile, and in effect, their marriage broke up, with Marie Jos\u00e9 moving to Switzerland. At the same time, Umberto remained in Portugal, though, as Catholics, the couple did not divorce.\nAt the time when Umberto was dying, in 1983, President Sandro Pertini wanted the Italian Parliament to allow Umberto to return to his native country. Umberto II died in Geneva and was interred in Hautecombe Abbey, which for centuries was the burial place of the members of the House of Savoy.\nTitles, styles, honours, and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nUmberto was granted the traditional title of Prince of Piedmont at birth. This was formalised by Royal Decree on 29 September 1904.\nCoats of arms.\n&lt;gallery class=\"thumbcaption\" mode=\"packed\" style=\"display:flex; margin-bottom:0; margin-left:0; padding-bottom:0; padding-left:0; text-align:center;\"&gt;\nGreat coat of arms of the king of italy (1890-1946).svg \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69851", "revid": "45957157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69851", "title": "Dom Tower of Utrecht", "text": "Bell tower in Utrecht, Netherlands\nThe Dom Tower ( 'Cathedral Tower') of Utrecht is the tallest church tower in the Netherlands, at 112.32 metres (368.5\u00a0feet) in height. It is considered the symbol of Utrecht. The tower was part of St. Martin's Cathedral, also known as the Dom Church, and was built between 1321 and 1382, to a design by John of Hainaut. The cathedral was never fully completed due to lack of money. Since the unfinished nave collapsed in 1674, the Dom tower has been a freestanding tower. The tower stands at the spot where the city of Utrecht originated almost 2,000 years ago.\nDesign and construction.\nIts construction led preacher Geert Groote to protest against the vanity of such an immense project, suggesting it was too tall, too expensive and all but aesthetic.\nThe tower consists of two square blocks, topped by a much lighter lantern. One of the most striking features is the absence of visible buttresses. Upon completion in 1382 the tower stood 109 metres tall. However the height was increased during the restorations in 1910, to its present height of 112.5 metres.\nThe Dom tower was a multifunctional building. In addition to being a belfry, it contained a private chapel of the Bishop of Utrecht on the first floor. It also served as a watchtower; the tower guard was housed on the second floor of the lower square block.\nCarillonneurs of the Dom Tower of Utrecht.\nThe Dom tower has a carillon in its building. There were many operators of the Carillon spanning from the 16th century to now.\nHere is a list of all the carillonneurs that played in the Dom tower:\nBells.\nThe Dom Tower has an exceptional peal of fourteen ringing bells, weighing 32 tonnes in total. In 1505 Geert van Wou, then the most famous bell-founder of the Netherlands, made a harmonious peal of thirteen bells. The seven smallest bells, sold in 1664 to finance the new carillon, were replaced in 1982 with new bells by Eijsbouts. The largest bell, the \"Salvator\", has a weight of 8,200\u00a0kg and a diameter of 227\u00a0cm. Together with the fourteenth bell, they form the largest existing homogeneous group of medieval bells. The cathedral's bells are still rung by hand by members of the Utrecht Bellringers Guild.\nIn 1625, Jacob van Eyck became carillon player of the Dom Tower. In 1664, a new carillon was installed by Juriaan Sprakel of Zutphen, with a mechanism consisting of 35 chimes, made by the brothers Pieter and Fran\u00e7ois Hemony. In 1972 the carillon was restored and extended to 50 bells. The current player is Ma\u0142gosia Fiebig\nStorm damage.\nThe cathedral's nave was never completely finished, and on the night of August 1, 1674, a tornado destroyed this part of the cathedral, but the tower was undamaged.\nThe remaining section of the church and the tower were never reconnected, and the Domplein Square now separates the two structures. In the summer of 2004, however, a mock nave was constructed out of scaffolding to commemorate the missing link. The floorplan of the missing section is shown by the multicoloured paving of the square.\nIn 1836 the top floor of the tower was heavily damaged in a storm and demolition of the tower was seriously considered. However, it was subsequently restored, a process which took five years.\nTourism and weddings.\nThe tower has its own visitor centre, RonDom (which refers to both the Dutch word \"rond\" or \"rondom\", meaning around or surrounding and the name of the church - emphasised by the capital D), which is located in the square. As well as stocking a range of souvenirs, they organise a number of activities centred on the tower, including regular guided tours which allow people to climb the 465 steps to the top of the Dom Tower. On a clear day it is possible to see both Amsterdam and Rotterdam. The booking office for guided tours is located in the square at the foot of the tower.\nIt is also possible to get married in the tower.\nRadio DOM (1999).\nRadio DOM was an automatic radio-station located on the Dom tower in Utrecht, which from 3 June 1999 until 3 October 1999 broadcast an audio 'soundscape' based on the sounds of the city of Utrecht. Radio DOM got its inputs from six computer-controlled surveillance microphones installed at a height of 80 metres on the Dom tower, which constantly scanned the central area of the city. The sound signals picked up by these microphones were algorithmically combined into a continuously varying soundscape which was broadcast 24 hours a day by an FM radio transmitter installed on the Dom tower.\nBroadcast on 102.3\u00a0MHz FM, Radio DOM was part of the exhibition Panorama 2000, organised by the Centraal Museum in Utrecht.\nLocal planning restrictions.\nUntil recently, the unwritten rule in evaluating planning applications in the city of Utrecht was that no building could be built that exceeded the Dom Tower in height. This restriction seems to have been dispensed for plans in the developing suburban area in the west of Utrecht (Leidsche Rijn) and a skyscraper of 262 metres in height has been proposed, challenging this long-standing tradition. The plans for this tower, however, were cancelled in 2010 due to the 2008 financial crisis.\nRestorations.\nFrom 2019 to 2024, the tower underwent restoration works. The restoration was only done on the exteriors of the tower.\nReplica.\nA replica of the Dom Tower has been constructed in the Dutch themed amusement park; Huis Ten Bosch (theme park) at Sasebo, Nagasaki, Japan. https://\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69852", "revid": "6702527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69852", "title": "Donatello", "text": "Italian Renaissance sculptor (c. 1386\u20131466)\nDonato di Niccol\u00f2 di Betto Bardi (c.\u20091386 \u2013 13 December 1466), known mononymously as Donatello (; ), was an Italian sculptor of the Renaissance period. Born in Florence, he studied classical sculpture and used his knowledge to develop an Early Renaissance style of sculpture. He spent time in other cities, where he worked on commissions and taught others; his periods in Rome, Padua, and Siena introduced to other parts of Italy the techniques he had developed in the course of a long and productive career. His \"David\" was the first freestanding nude male sculpture since antiquity; like much of his work, it was commissioned by the Medici family.\nHe worked with stone, bronze, wood, clay, stucco, and wax, and used glass in inventive ways. He had several assistants, with four perhaps being a typical number. Although his best-known works are mostly statues executed in the round, he developed a new, very shallow, type of bas-relief for small works, and a good deal of his output was architectural reliefs for pulpits, altars and tombs, as well as \"Madonna and Child\"s for homes.\nBroad, overlapping phases can be seen in his style, beginning with the development of expressiveness and classical monumentality in statues, then developing energy and charm, mostly in smaller works. Early on, he veered away from the International Gothic style he learned from Lorenzo Ghiberti, with classically informed pieces, and further on a number of stark, even brutal pieces. The sensuous eroticism of his most famous work, the bronze \"David\", is very rarely seen in other pieces.\nWorking and personal life.\nAll accounts describe Donatello as amiable and well-liked, but rather poor at the business side of his career. Like (not only) Michelangelo in the next century, he tended to accept more commissions than he could handle, and many works were either completed some years late, handed to other sculptors to finish, or never produced. Again, like Michelangelo, he enjoyed steady support and patronage from the Medici family.\nAll sources agree that he carved stone and modelled clay or wax for bronzes very quickly and confidently, and art historians feel able to distinguish his hand from that of others, even within the same work. Italian Renaissance sculptors nearly always used assistants, with the master often giving parts of a piece over to them, but Donatello, who would perhaps not have been good at managing a large workshop like that of Ghiberti, seems to have had at most times a relatively small number of experienced assistants, some of whom became significant masters in their own right. The technical quality of his work can vary, especially in bronze pieces, where casting faults may occur; even the bronze \"David\" has a hole under his chin, and a patch on his thigh.\nDonatello certainly made drawings, probably especially for reliefs. In the case of his stained glass designs and perhaps other works these were his whole contribution. Vasari claimed to have several in his collection, which he praised highly: \"I have both nude and draped figures, various animals which astound anyone who sees them, and other beautiful things..\". But very few, if any, surviving drawings are now accepted as probably by his own hand, and these are strong and lively sketches with figures, such as the three in its collections that the French government still attributes to Donatello himself.\nA story told both by Vasari and the earlier Pomponio Gaurico says that he kept a bucket containing money hanging on a cord from the ceiling of his workshop, from which those around could take if they needed it. A tax return from 1427, near the peak of his career, shows a much lower income than Ghiberti's for the same year, and he seems to have died in modest circumstances, although this may not have been of concern to him; \"he was very happy in his old age\" according to Vasari.\nEarly life.\nDonatello was born in Florence, probably in 1386, based on his own later statement in his catasto tax declaration; he claimed to be 41 years old in July 1427. He was the son of Niccol\u00f2 di Betto Bardi, who was a \"wool-stretcher\" (\"tiratore di lana\") and member of the Florentine Arte della Lana, the wool workers guild, which probably provided a good income.\nDonatello's actual surname was therefore Bardi, but if he was related to the well-known Bardi family of bankers, it seems to have been rather distantly. The banker Bardis were still wealthy and powerful, despite the default of Edward III of England in 1345 having caused the failure of their bank. After Contessina de' Bardi married Cosimo de' Medici around 1415, any connection he had might still have been useful to Donatello. However, Donatello's father did have a connection with the powerful Buonaccorso Pitti, whose diary records a fight in Pisa in 1380 in which Niccol\u00f2 intervened, giving Pitti's opponent a fatal blow.\nVasari's claim that Donatello was raised and educated in the house of the prominent Martelli family is probably baseless, and given for literary, even political reasons. They were certainly later keen patrons of Donatello, and also commissioned work from Vasari himself.\nEarly career.\nDonatello's first appearance in any documentary records is unpromising; in January 1401, at the age of about 15, he was accused in Pistoia, 25 miles from Florence and then controlled by it, of hitting a German with a stick, drawing blood. He was probably there with his father, who had an official job in Pistoia at the time, while Buonaccorso Pitti was the Captain, or governor. While there Donatello appears to have befriended, and perhaps worked with, Filippo Brunelleschi, who was some ten years older (born in 1377), and although not yet a master goldsmith, working on silver figures for an altar in Pistoia Cathedral. What experience Donatello had to assist him, if that was what he was doing, is unclear. \nBoth Donatello and Brunelleschi returned to Florence in early 1401, in time for Brunelleschi to take part in the famous competition for the Baptistery doors, often seen as the start of Florentine Renaissance sculpture. Seven sculptors were invited to submit trial panels, for which they were paid; Vasari's \"Life\" of Brunelleschi wrongly claims that Donatello was one of them, but they were all more experienced figures. Following Vasari and Brunelleschi's biographer Antonio Manetti, the unexpected result declared by the 34 judges was that the entries by two young Florentines, Lorenzo Ghiberti and Brunelleschi, were the best. An attempt was made to get the two to share the commission, but amid bitter recriminations that lasted for years, this failed, and Ghiberti was given the whole commission. Ghiberti himself, on the other hand (and the only contemporary voice) claimed in his \"Commentarii\" that the vote went unanimously for him, including the competing artists.\nAny part played by the adolescent Donatello, presumably assisting Brunelleschi with his trial piece, is unknown. After the final result in late 1402, or early 1403, they seem to have left for Rome together, staying until at least the next year, to study the artistic and architectural remains left by Ancient Rome, then very abundant, though for the most part still buried. They were very early in this effectively archaeological pursuit, which included measuring remains, and hiring labourers to excavate. The main source for this period is the biography of Brunelleschi by Antonio Manetti (1423\u20131497), who knew both men, but it was written after their deaths in the 1470s. \nVasari just repeats a shorter version of Manetti's account, according to which both men were able to support themselves by jobs for Roman goldsmiths, which probably represented important training for Donatello. Perhaps they were also able to sell excavated sculptures. Brunelleschi subsequently became a highly important architect, while Donatello began his career in sculpture.\nDonatello is recorded as working as an apprentice, and for the last few months on a salary, in the studio of Lorenzo Ghiberti in 1404\u20131407, apparently working on the workshop's main project, the bronze doors of the Florence Baptistery, and from 1406 on he began stone carving at the cathedral for the Porta della Mandorla on its north side, a large project that was still some years from completion. He was paid in November 1406 for a figure of a prophet on the door, most probably the one for the left pinnacle (now in the Museo dell' Opera del Duomo, the cathedral museum). Giovanni d'Ambrogio, whose work, according to Kreytenberg, \"provided a decisive impetus for the emergence of Renaissance sculpture\", has been described by Manfred Wundram as the \"true mentor of Donatello\".\nEarly statues for Florence.\nCathedral.\nBy early 1408, Donatello had acquired sufficient reputation to be given the commission for a life-size prophet for the cathedral, to be paired with another by Nanni di Banco, a brilliant sculptor of Donatello's age, who seems to have been both a rival and friend. In the end, they were not placed as intended, probably because they appeared too small from far below, and the Donatello appears to be lost.\nFrom now on, he received a series of commissions for full-size statues for prominent public locations. These are now among his most famous works, but after about 1425, he produced few sculptures of this type. His marble \"David\" may date from around this time, or slightly later, perhaps 1412. He was commissioned to rework it in 1416, the cathedral surrendering it to the republic, who placed it in the seat of government, the Palazzo Vecchio. It was \"one of the early cases in monumental sculpture where he is portrayed as a youth\", rather than the King of Israel, and \"teeters between the Gothic and Renaissance worlds\". \nIn 1409\u20131411, he executed the colossal seated figure of \"Saint John the Evangelist\", which occupied a niche of the old cathedral fa\u00e7ade until 1588, and is now in the cathedral museum. This was placed with the base about 3 metres from the ground, and Donatello adjusted his composition with this in mind; since 2015, it and other cathedral sculptures have been displayed at their original heights. \nIn 1415, the cathedral authorities decided to revive and complete medieval projects, and add eight lifesize marble figures for the niches of the higher levels of Giotto's Campanile adjoining the cathedral, as well as complete a row on the cathedral facade (in which Donatello was not involved). All the figures for the campanile series were removed in 1940, to be replaced by replicas, with the originals moved to the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo. They were placed very high, and so were seen from a distance, at a sharp angle, factors which needed allowing for in the compositions, and made \"fine detail virtually useless for visual effect\"; Since 2015, the museum's new displays show this and other statues for the cathedral at the intended original heights.\nDonatello was responsible for six of the eight campanile figures, in two cases working with the younger Nanni di Bartolo (\"il Rosso\"). The commissions and starts stretched between 1414 and 1423, and while most were completed by 1421, the last of his statues was not finished until 1435. This was the striking \"Zuccone\" (\"Baldy\", or \"Pumpkin Head\" probably intended as Habakkuk or Jeremiah), the best known of the series, and reportedly Donatello's favourite.\nHis other statues for the campanile are known as: the \"Beardless Prophet\" and \"Bearded Prophet\" (both from 1414 to 1420); the \"Sacrifice of Isaac\" (with Nanni di Batolo, 1421); \"il Populano\", a prophet not finally finished until 1435.\nThe visibility of statues high on the cathedral buildings was to remain a concern for the rest of the century; Michelangelo's \"David\" was intended for such a place, but proved too heavy to raise and support. Donatello, with Brunelleschi, proposed a large but lightweight solution, and made a prophet Joshua with a brick core, then a modelled layer of clay or terracotta, all painted white. This was put in place on the cathedral some time after 1415, and remained until the 18th century; it was known as the \"White Colossus\" or \"homo magnus et albus\" (\"Large White Man\").\nOrsanmichele.\nAnother large-scale sculptural project in the city was the completion of the statues for the niches around the outside of the rectangular Orsanmichele, a building owned by the guilds of Florence, which was in the process of turning itself from a grain market to a church on the ground floor, still with offices above. There were 14 niches around the outside, and each of the main guilds was responsible for one, normally choosing their patron saint. The location had the advantage that the niches were much lower than on the cathedral, with the feet of the statues some three metres above ground level.\nNevertheless, according to a story in Vasari, Donatello had trouble with his first statue for Orsanmichele, a marble \"St. Mark\" (1411\u20131413) for the linen-weavers guild. Viewing the finished statue at ground level, the weavers did not like it. Donatello got them to put it in its niche and cover it up while he worked to improve it. After two weeks under cover, he showed it in position, without having done any work on it, and they happily accepted it. It has a contrapposto pose, with the robe on the leg bearing the weight in straight \"vertical drapery folds resembling the flutes of a Doric column\". Like most of the Orsanmichele statues, this has been moved to the museum inside and replaced by a replica.\nAbout 1415 to 1417, he completed the marble \"Saint George\" for the Confraternity of the Cuirass-makers or armourers; the important relief on the base is discussed below, and was slightly later. Because of a staircase on the other side of the wall, the niche is shallower than the others, but Donatello turns this to his advantage, pushing the figure forward into space, and with the \"anxious look\" on the face suggesting alertness or \"prontezza\", \"the quality above all others singled out for praise in the successive Renaissance eulogies of the work\". Holes and the shape of a hand suggest that the figure was originally fitted with a wreath or helmet on his head, and carried a sword or lance; the client would have been able to supply these pieces in bronze.\nThe gilt-bronze \"Saint Louis of Toulouse\" dates to some years later, 1423\u201325. It is now in the museum of the Basilica di Santa Croce, having been replaced in 1460 by the bronze \"Incredulity of Saint Thomas\" by Verrocchio. It is technically very unusual, as it was built up from a number of sections cast and gilded separately, necessitated by the difficulty of fire-gilding a whole over-life-size figure. The collaboration with Michelozzo may have begun with this piece, and 1423 marks the beginning of Donatello's documented work in bronze, with three recorded commissions that year: the \"Saint Louis\", a reliquary bust of Saint Rossore, and the relief for the Siena Baptistery discussed below. Michelozzo had great experience with bronze, and no doubt helped with the technical aspects, and Donatello took to the medium very quickly.\nElsewhere.\nIn 1418, the Signoria commissioned a large and imposing figure of Florence's heraldic lion, the Marzocco for the entrance to a new apartment at Santa Maria Novella built for a rare visit by the pope; in the event, he did not finish it in time. It was later placed in the Piazza della Signoria, where there is now a replica, with the original in the Bargello Museum.\nBefore about 1410 he made the \"painted wooden crucifix\" now in Santa Croce, which features in a famous story in Vasari. It portrays a very realistic Christ in a moment of agony, eyes, and mouth partially opened, the body contracted in an ungraceful posture. According to the story, Donatello proudly showed it to Brunelleschi, who complained it made Christ look like a peasant, at which Donatello challenged him to do something better; he then produced the Brunelleschi Crucifix. At the time Brunelleschi's more classical figure was probably considered to have won the contest, but modern tastes may dispute this.\n\"Stiacciato\" relief style.\nDonatello became famous for his reliefs, especially his development of a very \"low\" or shallow relief style, called \"stiacciato\" (literally \"flattened-out\"), where all parts of the relief are low. This contrasted with the developing technique of other sculptors who included very high and low relief in the same composition, with Ghiberti's \"Gates of Paradise\" doors (1424-1451) for the Florence Baptistery a leading example.\nDonatello's \"first milestone\" in the technique is his marble \"Saint George Freeing the Princess\" on the base of his \"Saint George\" for Orsanmichele. The figures project slightly forward, but \"by skilful overlaps are brought back into a tightly-stretched unified skin-plane which is scarcely broken in surface relief to suggest a deep, though not limitless, space\". The relief does not provide a \"completely coherent system of perspective\" (nor did any Italian work for some five or six years after), but the arcaded hall on the right represents a partial scheme of perspective.\nHis next major development in this direction was in bronze, still a relatively new medium for him. Ghiberti had been involved from 1417 in a project for the font at the Siena Baptistery; it seems to have been his idea to have six bronze, rather than marble, reliefs, and these were allocated to him, Jacopo della Quercia, and a local father and son team. By 1423 Ghiberti had not even started work, and one relief, \"The Feast of Herod\" was given to Donatello instead (the overall subject was the life of John the Baptist).\nThis is placed low, the bottom at about the level of the viewer's knee, and the relief allows for that. The composition has figures in three receding planes defined by the architecture. At left, Herod recoils in horror as he is presented with John the Baptist's head on a platter; to the right of centre, Salome is still dancing. In a space behind musicians are playing, and beyond them, John's head is presented to two figures, one presumably Herodias. It does not represent a full one-point perspective scheme, as there are two vanishing points, perhaps intended to create subliminal impressions of tension and disharmony in the viewer, reflecting the grisly subject.\nOther \"stiacciato\" reliefs include \"The Assumption of the Virgin\" in the wall-tomb in Sant'Angelo a Nilo, Naples, (1426-1428, see below), the \"Madonna of the Clouds\" and \"Pazzi Madonna\", both c. 1425\u22121430 and domestic pieces respectively with and without a carved background, \"The Ascension with Christ Giving the Keys to Saint Peter\" (1428\u201330), for an unknown location but in the Medici collection by the end of the century, and a small \"Virgin and Child\" (perhaps 1426, probably by his workshop).\nAt all times, Donatello and his workshop made more conventional reliefs, at a variety of depths and sizes, and in different materials.\nPartnership with Michelozzo.\nAround 1425, Donatello entered into a formal partnership with Michelozzo, who is mainly remembered as an architect, but was also a sculptor, especially of smaller-scale works in metal. He had trained with the mint making dies for coins, where he still had a salaried position. Michelozzo was the younger by about ten years, and they had probably known each other for years. Michelozzo wanted to extract himself from an arrangement with Ghiberti, and Donatello had too much work, and was poor at organising a workshop, at which Michelozzo seems to have excelled. Both had very good relations with the Medici family and so their powerful supporters. The partnership was very successful, and was renewed until it had lasted for nine years, when a dispute that was mostly the fault of Donatello ended it.\nThe partnership's combination of skills in monumental sculpture and architecture made it well qualified to take on elaborate wall tombs. From 1425 to 1428, they collaborated on the Tomb of Antipope John XXIII in the Florence Baptistery; the executors were Giovanni de' Medici and Medici supporters. Donatello made the recumbent bronze figure of the deceased, and Michelozzo, with assistants, the several figures in stone. The tomb, elegantly integrating a variety of elements into a narrow vertical space, in a classicising style, made a great impact and \"became the model for the Quattrocento wall-tomb whenever an elaborate or particular impressive expression was wanted\" with variations found well into the next century.\nAfter his death in 1427, the partnership took on the funerary monument of Cardinal Rainaldo Brancacci, a Medici ally, at the church of Sant'Angelo a Nilo in Naples. The work was done at Pisa on the coast, and the pieces were shipped south. A donkey was purchased to help with transport, and in 1426, Donatello had bought a boat to ship marble from Carrara to Pisa. Donatello's personal contribution was probably limited to the \"Assumption\" relief discussed above. Finishing in 1429, for the font at the Baptistery of San Giovanni, Siena, apart from the relief of \"The Feast of Herod\" (discussed above), he made small bronze statues of \"Faith\" and \"Hope\", and three small bronze \"spiritelli\", naked winged putti-like figures, classical in inspiration, and highly influential on later art.\nImages of the \"Virgin and Child\", mostly for homes, had long been a staple for Italian painters, and became increasingly affordable, ever lower down the income scale. Now, sculptors were producing them as reliefs, in a variety of materials, and with the cheaper terracotta or plaster ones often painted The attribution of the large numbers of such images is often difficult, especially as the style of Donatello and contemporaries such as Ghiberti continued to be used for them for a long time.\nAnother type of work for sculptors was coats of arms and other heraldic pieces for the outsides of the \"palazzi\" of the great families of the city, of which Donatello made a number. Donatello also restored antique sculptures for the Palazzo Medici.\nThe breakup of the partnership with Michelozzo seems to have been partly precipitated by Donatello's delays in doing his part in the commission for an exterior pulpit for Prato Cathedral; highlights in the year at Prato, close to and controlled by Florence, were when the city's famous relic, the Girdle of Thomas (\"Sacra Cintola\"), thought to be the belt the Virgin Mary dropped to Thomas the Apostle as she rose in the air during her Assumption, was displayed to the population from a high pulpit. This took place five times every year, one coinciding with a trade fair that was important for the city's economy. The commission began in 1428, but Donatello did not begin work on his allotted areas for years, despite relentless chasing by the Prato authorities, and finally Cosimo de' Medici.\nDonatello's reliefs of dancing children for the pulpit, \"a veritable bacchanalian dance of half-nude putti, pagan in spirit, passionate in its wonderful rhythmic movement\", were finally delivered in 1438, and it seems that though designed by Donatello, perhaps using his first idea for the Florence \"cantoria\" frieze (see below), they are not believed to have actually been carved by him. The Prato authorities were unhappy, and the ten years it had taken to get them finished seem to have strained relations with Michelozzo, and the partnership was not renewed in 1434. The two remained on amicable terms and were to collaborate later. The pulpit reliefs are now replaced by replicas, with the rather weathered originals displayed inside the cathedral.\nA factor in the delay was probably Donatello's travelling, which increased from about 1430, after a long period of steady work and residence in Florence after his return from Rome in about 1404. In 1430, he worked with Brunelleschi at Lucca on the construction of a defensive dyke and wall, and later in the year visited Pisa, Lucca again and finished the year in Rome, where he spent much of his time until 1433. Some of this travel was to see antiquities, and political difficulties had greatly reduced the flow of commissions in Florence.\nMichelozzo was also with Donatello in Rome for some of the time, but the few products of the visits there led art historians to describe the visits as mainly resulting in studying classical works. It is not clear whether anything was actually made there, or executed in Florence and shipped down. There was probably a large papal commission in view, but if so, nothing resulted. The main surviving piece is a tabernacle surround for Saint Peter's in marble relief, 228\u00a0cm (89.7\u00a0in) high, and now in the museum there. The main figurative sections are a \"stiacciato\" panel with the \"Entombment of Christ\", and a total of sixteen child-angels at various points in the classicising architectural framework. This \"first clearly defines the Early Renaissance wall-tabernacle type\" and was very influential.\nThere was also the old-fashioned tomb slab for the cleric Giovanni Crivelli in Santa Maria in Aracoeli, which might well not be attributed to Donatello if he had not signed it. It is not clear whether a workshop was opened in Rome, or if these were carved in Florence and shipped down.\nIt has been speculated that the visits led to meetings between Donatello and Leon Battista Alberti, then in Rome, and perhaps writing his \"De Statua\". There may have been mutual influence, and Donatello seems to have returned from Rome with an interest in a modular system of human proportions. The bronze \"David\" uses proportions very close to those Alberti recommends.\nChildren, putti and \"spiritelli\".\nIn the 1430s and 1440s, Donatello made many sculptures of young children dancing, as well as putti (cherubs) and a variant of these traditionally called \"spiritelli\" (\"imps\" or \"sprites\"). Putti were not new in Italian sculpture, but were given a rather unusual prominence by Donatello.\nSome early examples are three out of a group of six freestanding bronze \"spiritelli\" on the cover for the font of the Siena Baptistery (1429), standing over his earlier relief of the \"Feast of Herod\" discussed above. One dances and two play musical instruments. They have been said to be \"the first true free-standing figurines of the Renaissance\" and were enormously influential, expressing \"what was at the heart of the Renaissance\u2014the classical reborn into the Christian\".\nHis most famous work in this genre is his relief frieze for the \"cantoria\" or singing gallery of Florence Cathedral. There are two of these galleries, rather high on the walls of the nave. Luca della Robbia had been given the commission for the first in 1431, and Donatello for the second in 1433, with his contract promising 20% higher payment if his were more beautiful than della Robbia's.\nThey develop the style of the Prato pulpit reliefs, the figures \"primarily symbols of Dionysiac abandon, and the childish character of their bodies is forgotten in our sense of their liberated animal life. If in a photograph we cover their heads, our first glance reveals a Bacchic sarcophagus more intricate and vigorous than anything in antique art; and only on looking more carefully are we aware of their fat tummies and chubby legs\".\nSix \"spiritelli\" in animated conversation crowd at the top of the large classical frame of his Cavalcanti \"Annunciation\" in Santa Croce, Florence, made for a brother-in-law of the Medici, c. 1436-1438.\nThe remarkable bronze statue called the \"Amore-Attis\", perhaps from the early 1440s, has one foot in the world of the \"spiritelli\" and the other in the sensuous eroticism of the bronze \"David\". The figure has wings and a tail, stands on a snake, and has a variety of classical attributes, too many for a simple identification. He wears leggings that emphasise rather than hide his private parts. In the 17th century, it was taken to be a work of antiquity, despite a clear description of it by Vasari.\nBronze \"David\".\nDonatello's bronze \"David\", now in the Bargello museum, is his most famous work, and the first known free-standing nude statue produced since antiquity. It is conceived fully in the round, independent of any architectural surroundings, and nearly at life-size.\nAlthough the commission is not documented, the statue is first recorded placed on a column in the courtyard of the newly-built Palazzo Medici at a wedding in 1469, but it probably pre-dates the start of that building in 1444. It was most likely commissioned by Cosimo de' Medici for the older Medici palace on the same street, probably between 1434 and 1440, after Donatello returned from Rome and Cosimo from exile. \nDavid was well-established as a symbol of the Republic of Florence, victorious in defence against larger surrounding powers, with at this period the Duchy of Milan the most threatening. Though the statue certainly was intended to convey this meaning, it also has a sensuous and erotic power that was original. The many previous Florentine images of David, like Donatello's stone \"David\" of about 1408\u201309, showed him clothed; here he wears only a hat and boots which, as with the \"Amore-Attys\", serve only to accentuate his nudity. \nDonatello's \"innovation ... is the transformation of the King of Israel into a young Greek god\", in \"a work of almost incredible innovation, which nothing else in the art of the time leads us to anticipate ...during the rest of the century in continues to be far beyond the current of contemporary taste.\" The figure shows \"a real boy whose chest was narrower and flank less rounded than the Greek ideal\", and the \"waist is the centre of plastic interest, from which radiate all the other planes of the body\", which became the norm in Renaissance nude sculpture. \nOne foot rests casually on the severed head of Goliath, giving the figure a \"contrapposto\" pose. The feathers of Goliath's helmet crest brush against the inside of David's thigh, in a further sensuous touch. The \"David\" and the \"Amore-Attis\" supplement various pieces of contemporary gossip to suggest Donatello's sexual interests.\nIt seems likely that Donatello's homosexuality was well known, tolerated and protected by the Medici and so others. The main evidence comes from anecdotes in the \"Detti piacevoli\", a large collection of celebrity gossip probably compiled around 1480 (but not published until 1548), perhaps by the humanist and poet Angelo Poliziano (1454\u20131494), a Medici insider as tutor to Lorenzo's children. These tell of Donatello surrounding himself with \"handsome assistants\" and chasing in search of one that had fled his workshop. \nHe was said to hire especially beautiful boys, and \"stained\" them (probably meaning make-up) so that no one else would find them pleasing; when one assistant left after a quarrel, they made up by \"laughing\" at each other, a slang term for sex. However, no detail is known with certainty about his private life, and unlike many artists (for example Sandro Botticelli) there are no recorded denunciations for sodomy in the Florentine archives, though these are incomplete.\nWooden statues.\nWood was still used for crucifixes for its lightness. It was also cheap and convenient for carrying it on liturgical processions. Donatello's early crucifix for Santa Croce has lowerable arms for this purpose. Wooden sculptures were almost always painted and partly gilded (as terracotta and even marble and bronze often were). \nWhen a Florentine confraternity in Venice commissioned a statue of John the Baptist, patron saint of Florence, still in the Frari Church there, wood was chosen. The statue is probably the only work by Donatello in the city. He usually did not sign his work, except for some commissions destined for outside Florence. The baptist was signed and dated 1438. Before this was revealed in conservation work, it had been dated later, after his stay in Padua, according to the idea that Donatello's works became more and more expressive. \nThe redating of the \"Saint John\" had knock-on consequences for a far more celebrated wooden figure, the \"Penitent Magdalene\" long in the Florence Baptistery (now Museo dell'Opera del Duomo), where the carving style is comparable. This is \"formidably expressive\" in a stark style found in Donatello's last years, and had been dated to around 1456, until the date was found on the other figure; it is now dated generally to the late 1430s, or at any rate before Donatello went to Padua.\nAccording to Kenneth Clark, it shows \"a female fakir whose small sunken eyes, gazing across the desert, have beheld the vision of God. Her body is no longer of the least importance to her\". \nIn 2020, the painted wooden crucifix of the church of Sant'Angelo in Legnaia, a suburb of Florence, was attributed by the diocese to Donatello, and dated to the 1460s. This is in a simpler style.\nThe Old Sacristy.\nThe \"Sagrestia Vecchia\", as it is now called, of San Lorenzo, Florence was Donatello's last major project before his years in Padua, and forms the only large space almost wholly decorated by him. Opinions have varied as to the success of his scheme ever since. The various parts combine experimentation in some places and conservatism in others, and the whole has failed to achieve the iconic status of the rather similar Pazzi Chapel of a few years later, which perhaps learnt the lessons of the sacristy; Luca della Robbia was the sculptor there.\nThe sacristy was newly built, designed by Brunelleschi, and the first part completed of a major reconstruction of the church by the Medicis. It combined the functions of a Medici funerary chapel, containing the tomb of Giovanni and his wife under the vesting table for the vestments to be laid out; both are still in place. The exact dates of Donatello's involvement are unclear, but it is usually placed after the return from exile of the Medicis in 1434, and Donatello's departure for Pisa in 1443/44, probably at the end of the 1430s.\nDonatello's additions were two pairs of bronze doors with relief panels, and elaborate architectural surrounds for them, and two sets of large relief roundels below the main dome. In the pendentives are four scenes from the life of John the Baptist, and at the top of the purely decorative arches in pietra serena are ones of the Four Evangelists, sitting at large desks on which their attributes perch. These are all in painted stucco, the evangelists mostly white on a now rather muddy blue-grey background, with gold highlights for the halos. Three of the scenes from John's life have many small figures and complicated architectural settings and backgrounds, while the fourth, set on Patmos, has a landscape background. All use a colour scheme of white for the figures, different shades of a terracotta brown for the settings, and muddy blue-grey for the sky. There are also two large reliefs of pairs of standing Medici patron saints over the doorways, in the same technique and colours. In different places, the stucco was painted both when wet, in a kind of fresco technique, and when dry.\nThe bronze doors were relatively small and had a stack of five panels on each door, each containing a pair of standing figures on a plain background, a conservative design, possibly influenced by Early Christian art, such as the doors of Santa Sabina in Rome, or consular diptychs. One pair has the Twelve Apostles with other saints making up the numbers, and the other has martyrs, who in most cases cannot be confidently identified. The execution is again uneven, with much probably done by assistants.\nThe scheme received criticism, by now rather unusual for Donatello, from very early on. The modelling and execution of some of the reliefs was crude, especially the scenes from John's life, and it is often thought that the various added elements distract from the simplicity and harmony of the architecture. The level of detail in the higher reliefs makes them simply hard for the viewer to read from below. According to Antonio Manetti, Brunelleschi's biographer, Donatello did not consult the architect about the additions to the doorways at all, such was his \"pride and arrogance\".\nFilarete, perhaps echoing a comment by Alberti, wrote that the paired figures on the doors looked like fencers; he referred to the apostle doors, though the remark is more fairly applied to the martyrs, most of whom hold thin palm fronds. We do not know how Donatello felt about his finished scheme, but he never used painted stucco again; nor did anyone much else, as within a few years the Della Robbia workshop had perfected painted and glazed terracotta in large pieces, as in the Pazzi Chapel, which was clearly the better technique. The reception of the scheme has been suggested as a factor in Donatello's readiness to abandon Florence for a long period.\nIn Padua.\nEquestrian Monument of Gattamelata.\nIn 1443, Donatello was called to Padua by the heirs of the famous condottiere Erasmo da Narni (better known as the , or 'Honey-Cat'), who had died that year. Designing and planning his \"Equestrian Monument of Gattamelata\" probably began that year or the next, with the casting mostly done in 1447 or 1448, and the bronze work finished in 1450, although it was not installed on its high stone pedestal until 1453. \nPadua was a prosperous city with a university, long under the control of Venice, and generally friendly to the Medici and their artists; Cosimo had almost certainly given his blessing to Donatello's stay. The commission is slightly mysterious; Gattamelata's will specified a relatively modest tomb inside the church, where he was indeed buried. It was unexpected that the Venetian government then ordered a grand public monument for a general who had served them for less than a decade, with rather mixed success. The cost, which must have been enormous, was shared by the Venetian government and the family executors, who handled the works, but it is not clear in what proportions. \nA factor may have been a competing commission in nearby Ferrara for an equestrian statue of Niccol\u00f2 III d'Este, Marquis of Ferrara, another condottiere, by two Florentine sculptors, one a pupil of Donatello. This was slightly smaller than life-size, with the marquis in civilian dress rather than armour. He had died at the end of 1441, and the monument was in place by 1451, before being destroyed by the French in 1796 (a replica is now in place). \nThe Gattamelata was placed on the square outside the Basilica of St Anthony, a famous pilgrimage church (locally called \"il Santo\"), on ground then used as a cemetery. As with other works outside Florence, it was signed. It is the first life-size equestrian statue since antiquity. Donatello may have seen the Regisole at Ravenna, a late Roman example which was another victim of the French, and he certainly knew the \"Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius\" (c. 175) in Rome. Donatello's work is strongly classicising, with Roman motifs on the armour and saddle (almost impossible to see \"in situ\"), and the horse perhaps derived from the ancient Horses of Saint Mark in Venice. Andrea del Caldiere, a Paduan metalworker, led the team doing the actual casting for this and his other Paduan bronzes. Other equestrian statues, from the 14th century, had not been executed in bronze and had been placed over tombs rather than erected independently, in a public place. This work became the prototype for other equestrian monuments executed in Italy and Europe in the following centuries.\nOther work in Padua.\nDonatello was based in Padua for ten years, though he returned to Florence soon after the \"Gattamelata\" was finally in place in 1453. He had a studio near the \"Santo\", and several assistants. Decades later, Padua was for some time the leading Italian centre for small \"table bronzes\", which was probably partly a legacy of the stimulus given by Donatello's visit. He did not stay in the city the whole time, and he is documented in Florence at some points, and in 1450 is recorded visiting Mantua and Modena for commissions that never came off; in 1451 he was paid by the Bishop of Ferrara for a work he never finished.\nIn Padua itself, he completed several works for \"il Santo\", including the first life-sized bronze crucifix (with a wooden cross, 1444\u20131449), which originally hung well down the nave. In 1895, it was moved to hang over the high altar, for which Donatello had made a bronze enthroned \"Virgin and Child\" and six flanking saints, constituting a Holy Conversation, and a total of twenty-one bronze reliefs and one in marble, an \"Entombment\". All these were begun in 1446 and were nearly complete by June 1450, though some of the statues seem not quite finished, and other sculptors seem to have done some of the work. The four reliefs of scenes from the \"Life of Saint Anthony\", with highlights in gold, are of a uniform high standard.\nAfter more than one rearrangement, the first in 1582, the original disposition of the statues is uncertain, but they were probably closer together, in one row, than they are now, with two now placed on a railing below and forward of the others.\nThe \"Madonna and Child Enthroned\", between St. Francis and St. Anthony, in bronze (c.\u20091448), portrays the Christ Child being displayed to the faithful by the Madonna, who wears a crown. The Madonna is neither standing nor sitting on the throne but is portrayed in the act of rising. She is flanked by two saints, Anthony of Padua and Francis of Assisi. Shown at the base of her throne, to each side of the Madonna, are sphinxes, allegorical figures of knowledge. On the throne's back is a relief of the \"Fall of Man\", depicting Adam and Eve.\nIn Siena.\nBetween 1457 and 1461, Donatello was active in and for Siena, though he was now ageing, and perhaps mostly contributed designs and \"modelli\" rather than carving much himself, at least in stone. In 1457 he had received three large commissions for the city, of which only one reached Siena. Firstly, there were bronze doors for the cathedral, of which only a possible trial cast of one panel survives (in the Victoria and Albert Museum); the Sienese may have been unable to fund what would have been a very expensive project.\nHis bronze \"Judith and Holofernes\" is an important late work, which ended in a Medici courtyard in Florence, while his bronze \"John the Baptist\" was delivered minus a forearm and is now in Siena Cathedral. Another commission was a large relief \"Madonna and Child\" (\"Madonna delle Grazie\") with blue glass inlays in the surround, completed in 1459, with much of the work done by another, perhaps the local Urbano da Cortona, who had been pushed aside to allow Donatello to have the commission.\nThe signed \"Judith and Holofernes\" is in his late, stark style, showing the killing in progress, with Judith about to strike a second blow. Relief scenes on the triangular base seem to show the drunken feast and revels that preceded the killing, in a final outing for Donatello's sensual mode. However, most of the younger revellers have wings. Donatello used real cloth to give texture in some of the modelling, and perhaps Holofernes' legs were moulded from a live model. It may have been planned as a fountain, as there are spouts at the corners of the base, though there now seems to be no internal plumbing. When the Medici were expelled in 1494 and the bronze \"David\" was moved to the Palazzo della Signoria; the Medici were now intended to be seen as the tyrannical victims rather than the liberating underdogs.\nLast years.\nAfter returning from Siena he remained in Florence until his death in 1466. He was evidently unable to work for a period of uncertain extent before his death; Vasari records this, but without any timing. But, with the help of assistants, he embarked on a major project in these years, reliefs that now form two pulpits for San Lorenzo, Florence, the burial place of the Medicis, though it is possible that this was not the function originally intended. They were only assembled in this way in the following century, and the panel sizes vary.\nAt least the designs of most of these are thought to have been done by Donatello himself, and the modelling of many parts; the precise attribution of the reliefs remains much discussed. Some appear to have been cast from unfinished \"modelli\", and there is considerable stylistic disparity between panels, and sometimes sections of the same panel. The treatment of the spaces in which the scenes are set is especially varied and experimental, part of \"the absolutely uncompromising use of every possible means to express emotion and suffering\" that marks these works.\nWork involving glass.\nDonatello's inventiveness and search for new effects is shown by his various, mostly novel, uses of glass, a material hardly used in European sculpture before. He was commissioned to design stained glass for Florence Cathedral around 1434, a conventional task, but one usually given to a painter rather than a sculptor. He used glass in tesserae form in the backgrounds of reliefs, including the Prato pulpit and \"cantoria\" reliefs, which was an old style, but his background of a network of roundels with glass-covered wax and gold inlays for the terracotta Piot Madonna (Louvre, c. 1440 or later) is original. \nHis Chellini Madonna (c. 1450, Victoria and Albert Museum) is a round bronze relief, 28.5 cm across, which is cast at an even thickness, meaning that the reverse has an intaglio (concave) image matching the convex relief one on the front. This seems to have been intended to be used as a mould for molten glass and perhaps other materials. Donatello gave it to his doctor and friend Giovanni Chellini in 1456, though it was probably not new at that point.\nPortraiture.\nOther than tomb effigies, there is no sculpture by Donatello that is certainly intended to be a portrait. Some of his early statues of prophets for the cathedral were said to use the features of specific individuals. Donatello probably never saw Gattamelata alive, and may not have had any good image to work from; his figure seems to have a generalized \"Caesar-like head\" and is \"no portrait in the usual sense\", but an \"idealized portrait of brute power\". \nDuring Donatello's career, the distinctive Florentine flat-bottomed bust portrait became established and popular among the city's elite, led by the Medici. Donatello is only associated with one example, but this may be the earliest. Niccol\u00f2 da Uzzano was a significant Medici political associate, as well as a banker and humanist, who died in 1431. The painted terracotta bust portrait of him may have been made using a life- or death mask, presumably not very long after his death, at the latest. He is shown wearing an ancient Roman toga, with \"uncompromising realism\", but an expression that \"exudes sagacious strength and nobility\". However, the attribution to Donatello, the dating and foremost the quality of the bust itself are disputed.\nVasari's \"Life\".\nGiorgio Vasari's life of Donatello in his \"Lives of the Artists\" was mostly researched in the 1540s, around a century after the events he recounts, and contains some clear and significant errors of fact. It fully recognises Donatello's stature as an artist and lists many works. His knowledge of those in Padua and Siena appears shaky, and may rely on the accounts of others. In his life of Raphael he praises the \"beautiful fancy\" (\"bel capriccio\") of some figures, which Vasari himself later drew on; but he is evidently unaware that Raphael took them from a Donatello church relief in Padua. He also places Donatello's birth in 1403, some seventeen years after better-informed modern scholars, aware of the record of the assault in 1401, and payments for work going back to 1406.\nVasari, a fierce Florentine patriot, saw Donatello as the start of Florentine dominance in Renaissance sculpture, and traced a line of succession between him and his hero Michelangelo, via the somewhat dubious link of Bertoldo di Giovanni (d. 1491), a pupil of Donatello and in theory Michelangelo's mentor when he ran the informal \"garden academy\" of Lorenzo de' Medici at the end of his life. Vasari stressed the close ties between Donatello and the Medici, which were certainly important in his life, but also mirrored those Michelangelo and Vasari himself enjoyed.\nLegacy.\nDonatello's output was so varied and individual that his influence can be seen in all Florentine sculpture in the 15th century, and well beyond Florence. But he shared important elements of his style, in particular his revival of classical forms and styles, with the other outstanding sculptors of his generation, Ghiberti, Jacopo della Quercia, Luca della Robbia and others. Many younger sculptors assisted him, though his workshop relationships are not very well documented, and recent scholarship has cast doubt on many 19th-century claims (some from Vasari) of other sculptors as \"pupils\" of Donatello. Regular assistants in Donatello's later years included Bartolomeo Bellano (from Padua) and Bertoldo di Giovanni.\nWhen he died, the \"sweet style\" that he had helped to produce decades before, dominated in the work of Florentine sculptors; his \"late style, with its boldness of imagination and execution, probably overawed them and seemed incomprehensible and inaccessible\". Only many years later did Verrocchio and Antonio del Pollaiuolo explore similar expressive effects. His periods in Padua and Siena left behind trained bronze-founders and sculptors who made these cities, especially Padua, significant centres in their own right; indeed, in Padua, his presence had a great effect on local painting also. Bartolomeo Bellano was back in Padua by 1469, and remained the leading sculptor there, handing the role over to his pupil Andrea Riccio (c.\u20091470 \u2013 1532) in due course. \nDesiderio da Settignano may have acted as a younger colleague, and was the main other sculptor who could execute shallow reliefs in a way comparable to Donatello. He died in 1464 at just 34, cutting off a very promising career. The shallow relief style was not much used by other sculptors, though Michelangelo's early \"Madonna of the Stairs\" (c. 1490) is an essay in it. Michelangelo's \"David\" (1501) is both \"an ode and a challenge to Donatello\".\nCollections.\nMost of Donatello's major works for churches remain \"in situ\", or moved inside to the church museum. The Bargello in Florence has the main museum collection, including his most famous portable pieces. Hardly any large pieces are outside Italy, but there are many \"Madonnas\" and other smaller pieces, often with uncertain attributions. The Victoria and Albert Museum has important shallow reliefs, and the Louvre and Berlin State Museums have other pieces; generally, the American museums arrived too late on the scene to make many major acquisitions, though they have many pieces with workshop attributions.\nIn popular culture.\nDonatello is portrayed by Ben Starr in the 2016 television series \"\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69853", "revid": "9267683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69853", "title": "Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples", "text": "Disputed Head of the House of Savoy from 1983 to 2024\nPrince Vittorio Emanuele of Savoy, Prince of Naples (Vittorio Emanuele Alberto Carlo Teodoro Umberto Bonifacio Amedeo Damiano Bernardino Gennaro Maria di Savoia; 12 February 1937 \u2013 3 February 2024), was the only son of Umberto II, the last King of Italy, and Marie-Jos\u00e9 of Belgium. Vittorio Emanuele also used the title Duke of Savoy and claimed the headship of the House of Savoy. These claims were disputed by supporters of his third cousin, Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta, and later by Amedeo's son, Aimone.\nVittorio Emanuele lived for most of his life in exile, following the 1946 Italian constitutional referendum, which affirmed the abolition of the monarchy and the creation of the Italian Republic. On several occasions, he was the centre of controversy in Italy and abroad due to a series of incidents, including remarks that were seen by some as antisemitic. He was revealed to be a member of Propaganda Due (P2), the state within a state responsible for high-level corruption and political manipulation. In France, he was tried on a murder charge, of which he was cleared of unlawful killing but convicted of a firearms offence. Vittorio Emanuele was arrested in 2006 on charges of criminal association, racketeering, conspiracy, corruption, and exploitation of prostitution. He was acquitted of all charges in 2007 and 2010.\nEarly life and family.\nVittorio Emanuele was born on 12 February 1937 in Naples to Umberto, Prince of Piedmont, who would later become the last King of Italy as Umberto II, and Princess Marie-Jos\u00e9 of Belgium. The Italian royal family was exiled from Italy when he was nine years old. He lived in Switzerland from the time he was exiled until the referendum was abolished in 2002. Vittorio Emanuele had three sisters, an older sister Princess Maria Pia and two younger sisters, Princess Maria Gabriella and Princess Maria Beatrice. Princess Maria Pia married Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia in 1955, the son of Prince Paul of Yugoslavia and Princess Olga of Greece and Denmark. In 2003, she remarried Prince Michel of Bourbon-Parma, son of Prince Ren\u00e9 of Bourbon-Parma and Princess Margaret of Denmark and the younger brother of Queen Anne of Romania. Vittorio Emanuele was also a first cousin of the King Baudouin of Belgium, former King Albert II of Belgium, the Grand Duchess Jos\u00e9phine-Charlotte of Luxembourg, Moritz, Landgrave of Hesse and Tsar Simeon II of Bulgaria.\nAfter an eleven-year relationship, Vittorio Emanuele married Swiss biscuit heiress and world-ranked water skier Marina Doria in Tehran, Iran, on 7 October 1971. Their wedding was announced on the occasion of the 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire. Coincidentally, Vittorio Emanuele and his wife Marina share a birthday (12 February) but Vittorio Emanuele was two years younger than Marina (she was born in 1935).\nVittorio Emanuele worked as a banker and an aircraft salesman and then an arms dealer.\nVittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples, had a son, Prince Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy, Prince of Venice, born on 22 June 1972. Emanuele Filiberto married Clotilde Courau in 2003 and they have two daughters together.\nDuke of Savoy.\nOn 7 July 2006, Vittorio Emanuele's kinsman and dynastic rival, Amedeo, 5th Duke of Aosta declared himself to be the head of the House of Savoy and Duke of Savoy, claiming that Vittorio Emanuele had lost his dynastic rights when he married without the permission of Umberto II in 1971. Amedeo received the support of the President of the \"Council of Senators of the Kingdom\" Aldo Alessandro Mola and Vittorio Emanuele's sister, Maria Gabriella.\nVittorio Emanuele and his son applied for a judicial injunction to forbid Amedeo from using the title \"Duke of Savoy\". In February 2010, the court of Arezzo ruled that the Duke of Aosta and his son must pay damages totalling \u20ac50,000 to their cousins and cease using the surname \"Savoy\" instead of \"Savoy-Aosta\". However, the verdict was overturned on appeal, with the court of second resort allowing Amedeo the use of the short surname, in the form of di Savoia, and additionally revoking the financial penalty originally imposed on him.\nExile from and return to Italy.\nReasons for exile.\nIn line with certain other countries that were formerly monarchies (such as France or Romania), the Italian Constitution required all male members of the House of Savoy to leave Italy and barred them from ever returning to Italian soil again. This was enacted as a \"temporary disposition\" enacted when the constitution was promulgated in 1948. The constitution also forbade any amendment that would change the republican form of government, effectively foreclosing any effort to restore the monarchy short of adopting a new constitution.\nRequests for return.\nVittorio Emanuele lobbied the Parliament of Italy over the years in which the law prohibiting his return was in force, to be allowed to return to his homeland after 56 years in exile. In 1999, he filed a case at the European Court of Human Rights, in which the Prince charged that his lengthy exile violated his human rights. In September 2001, the court decided to hold a hearing on the case at a date to be fixed later.\nBefore his return to his homeland, he renounced any claim to Italy's crown jewels, which were stored in a deposit box at the Bank of Italy. He publicly stated that the crown jewels \"are no longer ours\", referring to the House of Savoy. At the time, he hoped that the crown jewels would be publicly displayed. However, the royal family asked for the jewels back in 2021 and sued the Italian government and the Bank of Italy in 2022 when they were not returned.\nIn February 2002, Vittorio Emanuele and his son Emanuele Filiberto wrote a signed letter, published through a law firm, in which they formally expressed their loyalty to the Constitution of Italy.\nReturn to Italy.\nOn 23 October 2002, the provision in the constitution that barred male members of the former royal house from returning to Italy was repealed. As part of a deal with the government, Vittorio Emanuele signed an agreement renouncing all claims to the defunct throne and recognizing the Republic as the only lawful government of Italy. Vittorio Emanuele was permitted to re-enter the country on 10 November 2002. On 23 December 2002, he made his first trip home in over half a century. On the one-day visit he, his wife, and his son had a 20-minute audience with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican.\nUpon their first visit in 2003 to Naples, where Vittorio Emanuele was born, and from where his family sailed into exile in 1946, the reception of the Savoys was mixed; most people were indifferent to them, some hostile, a few supportive. The media reported that many in Naples were not happy to see the return of the family when hundreds of noisy demonstrators chanted negative slogans as they progressed through the city. Demonstrations were staged by two traditionally opposing factions: anti-monarchists on one hand, and supporters of the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, the royal house deposed when Italy was united in 1861 under the House of Savoy.\nDeath.\nVittorio Emanuele died in Geneva Cantonal Hospital, Switzerland on 3 February 2024, aged 86. A statement from the Royal House of Savoy gave the time of his death as 07:05 (CET).\nHis funeral was held on 10 February 2024 in the Turin Cathedral and, afterwards, he was cremated. Attendees at his funeral included his widow Marina, Princess of Naples, his son Prince Emanuele Filiberto, Prince of Venice, his daughter-in-law Princess Clotilde, Princess of Venice, his granddaughter Princess Vittoria, Princess of Carignano, his sister Princess Maria Pia of Bourbon-Parma, his nephew Prince Dimitri of Yugoslavia, Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta, and Princess Olga, Duchess of Aosta, Prince Jean of Luxembourg, the Prince of Monaco, Queen Sof\u00eda of Spain, Leka, Prince of Albania, Boris, Prince of Turnovo, Fuad II of Egypt, Prince Philippos of Greece and Denmark, Afonso, Prince of Beira, Prince Carlo, Duke of Castro, John T. Dunlap, and Daniel McVicar. The ashes were subsequently buried in the Royal Crypt of the Basilica di Superga.\nControversies.\nUnilateral declaration of kingship (1969).\nVittorio Emanuele unilaterally declared himself King of Italy on 15 December 1969. He argued that by agreeing to submit to a referendum on his place as head of state, his father had thereby abdicated. Vittorio Emanuele took this action after his father allegedly called for Amedeo, 5th Duke of Aosta to visit him in Portugal to name him his heir. Under his self-assumed powers as King of Italy, Vittorio Emanuele conferred the title of Duchess of Sant'Anna di Valdieri on his then-fianc\u00e9e, Marina Doria.\nDirk Hamer's death (1978\u20132015).\nOn the night of 17 August or the morning of 18 August 1978, on the island of Cavallo (which lies off the south coast of Corsica), Vittorio Emanuele discovered his yacht's rubber dinghy had been taken and attached to another nearby yacht. Arming himself with a rifle, he attempted to board the vessel. He shot at a passenger he had awakened; the shot missed the passenger but mortally wounded Dirk Hamer (the 19-year-old son of Ryke Geerd Hamer), a passenger sleeping on the deck of another adjacent yacht. The prince was taken into police custody on the morning of 18 August 1978. He admitted civil liability for the accident in a letter dated 28 August 1978 and on 5 September 1978 paid 500,000 French francs to the Hamer family. He was released from custody, under judicial supervision, on 5 October 1978. Dirk Hamer later died of his wounds on 7 December 1978 before he could provide any evidence.\nOn 11 October 1989, Vittorio Emanuele was indicted on charges of inflicting lethal injury and possession of a dangerous weapon. However, on 18 November 1991, after thirteen years of legal proceedings, the Paris Assize Court acquitted him of the fatal wounding and unintentional homicide charges, finding him guilty only of unauthorised possession of an M1 carbine. He received a six-month suspended prison sentence.\nWhen incarcerated in June 2006 on unconnected charges of corruption (see below, Arrest and imprisonment), Vittorio Emanuele was recorded admitting that \"I was in the wrong, [...] but I must say I fooled them [the French judges]\", leading to a call from Dirk Hamer's sister Birgit for Vittorio Emanuele to be retried in Italy for killing her brother.\nBirgit Hamer undertook a long legal fight to obtain the full video. She stated: \"What for us is a confession is a boast for him: he laughs about the fact that he killed a boy.\" The story of the video was broken by aristocratic journalist Beatrice Borromeo, who also wrote the preface for a book on the murder, by Birgit Hamer. Vittorio Emanuele sued the newspaper for defamation, claiming the video had been manipulated. In 2015, a court judgement ruled in favour of the newspaper. On Twitter Borromeo posted: (\"Winning a case is always nice, but against Victor Emmanuel of Savoy the pleasure is double\"), which resulted in a spat on Twitter with his son Emanuele Filiberto.\nAllegations of antisemitism (2003).\nVittorio Emanuele also said in 2003 that the antisemitic laws passed under Mussolini's regime were \"not that terrible\". In response, the president of the Union of Italian Jewish Communities, Amos Luzzatto, stated \"I'm not saying it was he who signed the racial laws in 1938. But, as a Savoy heir, Victor Emmanuel has never distanced himself from them,\" in an interview with newspaper.\nOn 27 January 2005, in a letter published by , Vittorio Emanuele issued an apology to Italy's Jewish population, asking forgiveness from the Italian Jewish community, and declaring that it was an error for the Italian Royal Family to have signed the racial laws of 1938.\nArrest and imprisonment (2006).\nOn 16 June 2006, Vittorio Emanuele was arrested in Varenna and imprisoned in Potenza on charges of corruption and recruitment of prostitutes for clients of the Casin\u00f2 di Campione of Campione d'Italia.\nThe enquiry was conducted by Italian magistrate John Woodcock, of British ancestry, famous for other VIPs' arrests.\nWoodcock described Emanuele as the \"undisputed leader\" of an influence-trafficking network associated with Sicilian organized crime.\nAfter several days, Vittorio Emanuele was released and placed under house arrest. He was released from house arrest on 20 July 2006 but had to stay within the borders of Italy. Vittorio Emanuele was acquitted of all charges in the years 2007 and 2010.\n reported in 2006 that Emanuele Filiberto had distanced himself from his father.\nSeeking compensation from Italy (2007).\nIn 2007, Vittorio Emanuele and his son, Emanuele Filiberto, requested formally that the state pay financial damages of \u20ac260 million, and initiate full restitution of all properties and belongings that had been confiscated from the royal house after the abolition of the monarchy. The financial damages claim is based on having suffered moral injustice during the exile. The Italian government has rejected the request and, in response, indicated that it may seek damages for historic grievances.\nSuccession.\nIn June 2023, his son Emanuele Filiberto, Prince of Venice, announced his intention to renounce his claim to the throne in favour of his daughter, Princess Vittoria of Savoy, when he felt she was ready to succeed.\nHonours.\nNational dynastic honours.\nVittorio Emanuele was the Sovereign of the Dynastic Orders of the House of Savoy which consist of:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69854", "revid": "5666248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69854", "title": "Gambia Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Gambia\nThe Gambia Armed Forces, also known as the Armed Forces of The Gambia, consists of three branches: the Gambia National Army (GNA), the Gambia Navy, and the Republican National Guard (RNG). It formerly included the Gambia National Gendarmerie (GNG) from the 1980s to 1996, when they were moved under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior. The commander-in-chief is the president of the Gambia who is currently Adama Barrow, whereas practical control is exercised by the Chief of the Defence Staff who is currently Lieutenant General Yankuba Drammeh.\nHistory and formation.\nIndependence to the coup d'etat (1965\u20131981).\nAt independence from the United Kingdom in 1965, defence and security in The Gambia was the responsibility of the Field Force. The Field Force was a paramilitary unit of the police, consisting of roughly 140 men at independence and rising to around 500 in 1980. It has been formed in 1958 following the disbandment of the Gambia Regiment, part of the British Army. There was little concern about security in The Gambia due to its small size and the safety provided by being totally surrounded by Senegal, with which it had signed a mutual defence pact in 1965.\nThis lax attitude to defense changed following the 1981 coup d'etat. Executed by members of the Field Force and led by radical leftist politician Kukoi Samba Sanyang, the rebels took advantage of President Dawda Jawara being out of the country to execute a coup d'etat. Having broken into the Field Force armory, the rebels proceeded to release all the prisoners from Mile Two Prison, distributing weapons to those they felt were on their side. The rebels held Jawara's wife and children hostage, one of several acts that undermined public support for the coup. As the remaining members of the Field Force opted to remain neutral, Jawara asked for Senegal to intervene. They sent hundreds of soldiers into The Gambia, including airborne and sea assault units. The rebels were defeated four days after the coup began, having cost the lives of 33 Senegalese soldiers and an estimated 500 Gambians, many of whom were innocent civilians.\nSenegambia Confederation (1981\u20131989).\nA few months following the coup, the Kaur Declaration was signed, which created the Senegambia Confederation. A necessary element of this was the formation of a Gambian military, which came into existence following the Gambia Armed Forces Act 1985. Jawara emphasized that the Gambia Armed Forces (GAF) should be kept \"as small as possible\". Initially, it consisted of the Gambia National Army (GNA) and the Gambia National Gendarmerie (GNG). The GNA was composed of new recruits and remnants of the Field Force and was trained by a British Army Training Team (BATT). The GNG was composed of new recruits trained by the Senegalese Gendarmerie, on French lines. The Kaur Agreement also created the Confederal Army, which was two-thirds Senegalese and one-third Gambian, able to deploy anywhere in the Confederation.\nGambian soldiers that formed part of the Confederal Army were paid significantly more than Gambian soldiers in the GAF, which created a feeling of resentment. There were also accusations of widespread corruption and nepotism in the selection process for Gambian Confederal troops from the ranks of the GAF. Gambian soldiers were considered junior to their Senegalese counterparts, and Senegal also contributed far more resources and soldiers to the confederation. Senegalese soldiers were given the key tasks of guarding Banjul airport, the port, and the Gambian president. The confederation collapsed in 1989 over a dispute regarding the rotation of the Confederal presidency. In August, Senegal suddenly removed 300 Senegalese troops from The Gambia without warning, forcing the GAF to make up the difference.\nIncreasing discontent (1990\u20131994).\nIn 1990, ECOWAS despatched troops to Liberia as part of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). In August, 105 Gambian soldiers deployed to Monrovia, alongside Ghanaian, Nigerian, Guinean, and Sierra Leonean troops. Some in The Gambia questioned the goal of the mission and others doubted the military's readiness to participate. During the first deployment, two Gambian soldiers, Corporal Modou Bojang and Private Sama Jawo were killed. This contingent arrived home on 13 April 1991. Two months later, soldiers from the unit mutinied and went on a protest march to the State House, over claims they were owed money from their deployment. Jawara agreed to meet them, paying them the money and promising to look into their other requests. Immediately following the mutiny, the commanding officer (CO) of the GNA, Colonel Momodou Ndow Njie, was dismissed.\nLess than a month following the incident, the government announced that the Nigerian Army Training Assistance Group (NATAG) would be arriving to help train and equip the Gambian soldiers. Further to this, the head of NATAG, Colonel Abubakar Dada, was to become the new CO of the GNA, which \"shocked\" the Gambian soldiers. In the nine months between this announcement and NATAG arriving, in 1992 Gambia suffered another mutiny that was very similar to the first, perpetrated by the second contingent of peacekeepers returning from Liberia. These two mutinies demonstrated the growing sense of distrust in the ranks, primarily from ECOMOG peacekeepers and junior officers who saw that promotions were based on favoritism, eroding their confidence in the hierarchy. Another concern was the extent to which Nigerians had control over the senior ranks.\nIn 1992, the government disbanded the Gambia National Gendarmerie, which had served to counter the two mutinies in 1991 and 1992. It was merged into a unit in the police called the Tactical Support Group (TSG). This action, according to several former soldiers, caused the 1994 coup d'etat to be \"fait accompli\" because there was no one to counter the army. On the morning of 22 July 1994, when Jawara was at his office in the State House, he received a report that armed soldiers were approaching. They far outnumbered the contingent of presidential guards at the State House that day, and so Jawara quickly fled. The mutinying soldiers briefly exchanged fire with the TSG and after overpowering the police, had no trouble in taking over the state. The whole affair was over by midday, with no bloodshed.\nMilitary rule and the Jammeh era (1994\u20132016).\nLieutenant Yahya Jammeh was announced as head of the new ruling council, the Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council (AFPRC), along with four other junior officers. The initial press release following the coup pointed to \"rampant corruption\" as its cause. While civilians were appointed to the government positions, decisions were regularly made through military decrees, of which 70 were made in the first two years. After 26 months in power, Jammeh retired from the military and was elected President in 1996. He began to replace the image of him as a military leader with one of him as a religious and spiritual leader.\nJammeh awarded promotions and pay rises to armed forces personnel and improvements were made to the Yundum barracks. The Gambia Army Revolving Loan Scheme was set up to provide cheap loans to soldiers, and military personnel were afforded educational opportunities. The NATAG contingent also left The Gambia following the coup. In addition to this, Jammeh expanded the structure of the armed forces. In 1995, he announced his intention to establish a navy, which was formed in 1997. The Gambia Armed Forces Act 2008 established a national guard, which included several specialized units in its structure. Under Jammeh, the GAF included the Gambia National Army, the Gambia Navy, and the Republican National Guard. A Chief of the Defence Staff was appointed to head the military with the President as its commander-in-chief.\nIn May 2011, Gambia appointed its first female general, Ramatoulie DK Sanneh.\nForeign relations.\nThe Gambia's relations with Taiwan, which began following the coup and lasted until 2013, had a number of material benefits for the military. They regularly trained Gambian troops and offered scholarships at Taiwanese military academies to Gambian officers. They also donated uniforms and high-speed boats as well as funding improvements to military facilities. Turkey was another key defense partner for the GAF, with Turkish trainers involved in training 5000 Gambian troops between 1991 and 2005. Around 60 officers and NCOs were also sent to Turkey for training. The agreement ended in 2005, but a Military Advisory Mechanism remained in place. A new bi-lateral defense agreement with Turkey was signed in 2014.\nFrom 2007 to 2009, the Gambia also hosted a team of military advisors from Pakistan, including Brig. Gen Amir Mumtaz, Captain (Navy) Baber Bilal and Gp. Capt Shakir Qazi. The Pakistan Armed Forces Advisory Mission helped establish frameworks and structures to model the Gambian army and navy. \nThe Gambia has also hosted US and British training teams. Since 2006, soldiers of the Royal Gibraltar Regiment of the British Army have deployed bi-annually to the Gambia. In January 2017, they helped train them prior to their deployment to Sudan as part of the peacekeeping operation. It was the site of Exercise African Endeavour in 2011, which was organised by United States Africa Command (US AFRICOM). \nSince 2000, a contingent of Gambian troops have at all times been deployed to peacekeeping activities, first in the ECOWAS Mission in Liberia (ECOMIL) and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), but since 2004 primarily in the African Union United Nations Mission in Darfur (UNAMID). Following the election of Adama Barrow as President of Gambia in 2016, it submitted an application to re-join the Commonwealth of Nations on 22 January 2018 and rejoined on 8 February 2018.\nOrganisation.\nBranches.\nThe Gambia Armed Forces Act 1985 established four branches: the Gambia National Army, the Gambia Navy, the Gambia Air Force, and the Gambia National Gendarmerie. In 1992, the GNG merged to become part of a police unit called the Tactical Support Group. The Air Force was never truly operational. In 2008, a Republican National Guard was founded as an additional branch.\nGambia National Army.\nThe strength of the Gambia National Army (GNA) differs depending on the source. It has been given as 1,900 soldiers, 1,000 soldiers, or 900 soldiers. It is said to comprise two infantry battalions, one engineering squadron, and a Presidential Guard company. The army has barracks in Fajara, Yundum, Kudang, and Farafenni. In terms of vehicles and equipment, the army has eight Ferret armoured cars, and four M8 Greyhound armoured cars. It is also said to possess at least one M101 howitzer. Turkey donated Gambia 2 Otokar Cobra-1 infantry mobility vehicles and 2 Katmerciler H\u0131z\u0131r MRAP vehicles. In addition to two Cobra-1s, many high-frequency radios, mine detectors, uniforms, winter jackets and similar military equipment were donated to Gambia.\nGambia Navy.\nThe strength of the Gambian Navy was most recently estimated at approximately 500 personnel. It exists to enforce fishery legislation and regulation, and assistance has been given in that task by the Senegalese Navy. In February 2008, officers of the US Navy helped to install an automatic identification system in the Gambia called the Maritime Security and Safety Information System (MSSIS). In September 2011, a team from the HSV-2 \"Swift\" docked in Banjul to conduct a two-week intensive training programme for the Navy. In August 2013, Taiwan donated three new patrol vessels to the Gambia to replace the four ageing vessels of the Dvora-class that it donated in 2009.\nGambia Air Force.\nThe government considered creating a Gambian Air Force in 2002 and sent pilots to be trained by Ukraine. It purchased its first aircraft, a Sukhoi Su-25, from Georgia in 2003. However, it did not go ahead with the programme and did not announce the creation of an air force.\nRepublican National Guard.\nAn amendment to the Gambia Armed Forces Bill in April 2008 included the creation of a new branch of the GAF, the Republican National Guard (NRG).\nThe NRG is thought to have a strength of 50 personnel and is made up of a State Guard unit, a Special Forces unit, and a Presidential Guard unit.\nMissions.\nAccording to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), the Gambia has contributed troops to a number of peacekeeping operations:\nInventory.\nAir Force inventory.\nIn 2012 FlightGlobal reported that two Air Tractor AT-802 aircraft were in service in COIN/CAS roles in addition to one Sukhoi Su-25.\nNavy inventory.\nBelow is a current fleet of the Gambian Navy, estimated in 2015.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69855", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69855", "title": "John dos Passos", "text": ""}
{"id": "69856", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69856", "title": "Yugoslavia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "69857", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69857", "title": "Boot process", "text": ""}
{"id": "69858", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69858", "title": "Foreign relations of the Gambia", "text": "The Gambia followed a formal policy of non-alignment throughout most of former President Sir Dawda Jawara's tenure. It maintained close relations with the United Kingdom, Senegal, and other African countries. The July 1994 coup strained The Gambia's relationship with Western powers, particularly the United States. Starting in 1995, President Yahya Jammeh established diplomatic relations with several additional countries, including Libya, the Republic of China (on Taiwan, before 2013), and Cuba. As scholars on Gambia's foreign policy have argued, throughout Jammeh's period, the country's foreign policy was a shifting sand, with little of direction.\nAmat Jeng, a scholar on The Gambia's foreign policy, argues that \"The Gambia under Jammeh was not constrained by the bureaucratic hurly-burly which characterizes the foreign policy terrain of big democracies. In The Gambia, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) had, on several occasions, been left in a vacuum, thereby placing it under the Office of the President. Between 1997 and 2013, the MFA had been occupied by more than 18 different ministers in more than 20 sworn-in occasions. This qualifies the argument that Jammeh had always had the power to fire ministers at will. In North Korea, the MFA has been occupied only by ten different foreign ministers since 1948.\" During Yahya Jammeh's presidency, The Gambia's foreign relations were characterized by a mix of isolationism, confrontational diplomacy, and strategic alliances. Jammeh's regime frequently clashed with Western nations over human rights issues, resulting in strained relations with the European Union and the United States. He often pursued alliances with non-Western countries, such as China, Iran, and Libya, to counterbalance Western influence and gain economic support. His administration also pulled The Gambia out of the Commonwealth in 2013, accusing the organization of neo-colonialism. Jammeh's unpredictable and authoritarian leadership style made Gambia's foreign policy under his rule highly controversial and often isolated the country on the international stage.\nDespite these tensions, Jammeh's government engaged in regional diplomacy within West Africa, maintaining membership in the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), though relations with neighboring Senegal were often tense due to border disputes and differing political stances. Jammeh's erratic foreign policy choices ultimately contributed to The Gambia's diplomatic isolation until his ouster in 2017.\nDuring his last years, the EU grew increasingly intolerant of Jammeh's iron-fist rule. Consequently, Brussels withheld millions of Euros to The Gambia. Jammeh fired back by expelling the EU's top diplomat in the country after he had accused the bloc and human rights activists of conniving to besmirch the image of his government for its stance on homosexuality.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which the Gambia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nThe Gambia and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nThe Gambia was a member of the Commonwealth of Nations from its independence in 1965 until its withdrawal in October 2013.\nAfter presidential elections in 2016, the winning candidate Adama Barrow promised to return The Gambia to the Commonwealth. On 14 February 2017, The Gambia began the process of returning and formally presented its application to re-join to Secretary-General Patricia Scotland on 22 January 2018. Boris Johnson, who became the first British Foreign Secretary to visit The Gambia since the country gained independence in 1965, announced that the British government welcomed The Gambia's return to the Commonwealth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69859", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69859", "title": "Mongolia/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "69861", "revid": "48404955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69861", "title": "Kirk Douglas", "text": "American actor (1916\u20132020)\nKirk Douglas (born Issur Danielovitch; December 9, 1916 \u2013 February 5, 2020) was an American actor and filmmaker. After an impoverished childhood, he made his film debut in \"The Strange Love of Martha Ivers\" (1946) with Barbara Stanwyck. Douglas soon developed into a leading box-office star throughout the 1950s, known for serious dramas, including westerns and war films. During his career, he appeared in more than 90 films and was known for his explosive acting style. He was named by the American Film Institute the 17th-greatest male star of Classic Hollywood cinema.\nDouglas played an unscrupulous boxing hero in \"Champion\" (1949), which brought him his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. His other early films include \"Out of the Past\" (1947); \"Young Man with a Horn\" (1950), playing opposite Lauren Bacall and Doris Day; \"Ace in the Hole\" (1951); and \"Detective Story\" (1951), for which he received a Golden Globe nomination. He received his second Oscar nomination for his dramatic role in \"The Bad and the Beautiful\" (1952), opposite Lana Turner, and earned his third for portraying Vincent van Gogh in \"Lust for Life\" (1956), a role for which he won the Golden Globe for the Best Actor in a Drama. He also starred with James Mason in the adventure \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" (1954), a large box-office hit.\nIn September 1949 at the age of 32, he established Bryna Productions, which began producing films as varied as \"Paths of Glory\" (1957) and \"Spartacus\" (1960). In those two films, he collaborated with the then relatively unknown director Stanley Kubrick, taking lead roles in both films. Douglas arguably helped to break the Hollywood blacklist by having Dalton Trumbo write \"Spartacus\" with an official on-screen credit. He produced and starred in \"Lonely Are the Brave\" (1962) and \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), the latter opposite Burt Lancaster, with whom he made seven films. In 1963, he starred in the Broadway play \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\", a story that he purchased and later gave to his son Michael Douglas, who turned it into an Oscar-winning film. Douglas continued acting into the 1980s, appearing in such films as \"Saturn 3\" (1980), \"The Man from Snowy River\" (1982), \"Tough Guys\" (1986), a reunion with Lancaster, and in the television version of \"Inherit the Wind\" (1988) plus in an episode of \"Touched by an Angel\" in 2000, for which he received his third nomination for an Emmy Award.\nAs an actor and philanthropist, Douglas received an Academy Honorary Award for Lifetime Achievement and the Presidential Medal of Freedom. As an author, he wrote ten novels and memoirs. After barely surviving a helicopter crash in 1991 and then suffering a stroke in 1996, he focused on renewing his spiritual and religious life. He lived with his second wife, producer Anne Buydens, until his death in 2020. A centenarian, Douglas was one of the last surviving stars of the film industry's Golden Age.\nEarly life and education.\nKirk Douglas was born Issur Danielovitch on December 9, 1916, in Amsterdam, New York, the fourth of seven children and the only son of Bryna \"Bertha\" (n\u00e9e Sanglel; 1884\u20131958) and Herschel \"Harry\" Danielovitch (1884\u20131954). His parents were Russian-Jewish immigrants from Chavusy, Mogilev Governorate, in the Russian Empire (present-day Belarus). The family spoke Yiddish at home. His six sisters included Freida \"Fritzi\" Demsky Becker and Ida Sahr. Douglas reconnected to the Jewish religion after a near-fatal helicopter crash at the age of 74.\nDouglas's uncle used the surname Demsky (), and Douglas's family adopted the same surname in the United States. Douglas grew up as Izzy Demsky and legally changed his name to Kirk Douglas before entering the United States Navy during World War II.\nIn his 1988 autobiography, \"The Ragman's Son\", Douglas notes the hardships that he and his family endured during their early years in Amsterdam:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My father, who had been a horse trader in Russia, got himself a horse and a small wagon, and became a ragman, buying old rags, pieces of metal, and junk for pennies, nickels, and dimes\u00a0... Even on Eagle Street, in the poorest section of town, where all the families were struggling, the ragman was on the lowest rung on the ladder. And I was the ragman's son.\nDouglas had an unhappy childhood, living with an alcoholic, physically abusive father. While his father drank up what little money they had, Douglas and his mother and sisters endured \"crippling poverty\".\nDouglas first wanted to be an actor after he recited \"The Red Robin of Spring\", a poem by the English poet John Clare, while in kindergarten and received applause. Growing up, he sold snacks to mill workers to earn enough to buy milk and bread to help his family. He later delivered newspapers, and he had more than forty jobs during his youth before becoming an actor. He found living in a family with six sisters to be stifling: \"I was dying to get out. In a sense, it lit a fire under me.\" After appearing in plays at Amsterdam High School, from which he graduated in 1934, he knew he wanted to become a professional actor. Unable to afford the tuition, Douglas talked his way into the dean's office at St. Lawrence University and showed him a list of his high school honors. He graduated with a bachelor's degree in 1939. He received a loan which he paid back by working part-time as a gardener and a janitor. He was a standout on the school's wrestling team and wrestled one summer in a carnival to make money. \nDouglas's acting talents were noticed at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City, which gave him a special scholarship. One of his classmates was Betty Joan Perske, later known as Lauren Bacall, played an important role in launching his film career. Bacall wrote that she \"had a wild crush on Kirk\", and they dated casually. Another classmate, and a friend of Bacall's, was aspiring actress Diana Dill, who would later become Douglas's first wife.\nDuring their time together, Bacall learned Douglas had no money and that he once spent the night in jail since he had no place to sleep. She once gave him her uncle's old coat to keep warm: \"I thought he must be frozen in the winter ... He was thrilled and grateful.\" Sometimes, just to see him, she would drag a friend or her mother to the restaurant where he worked as a busboy and waiter. He told her his dream was to someday bring his family to New York to see him on stage. During that period she fantasized about someday sharing her personal and stage lives with Douglas, but would later be disappointed: \"Kirk did not really pursue me. He was friendly and sweet\u2014enjoyed my company\u2014but I was clearly too young for him,\" the eight-years-younger Bacall later wrote.\nCareer.\nRise to stardom.\nDouglas joined the United States Navy in 1941, shortly after the United States entered World War II, where he served as a communications officer in anti-submarine warfare aboard USS \"PC-1139\". He was medically discharged in 1944 for injuries sustained from the premature explosion of a depth charge. He rose to the rank of Lieutenant (junior grade).\nAfter the war, Douglas returned to New York City and found work in radio, theater, and commercials. In his radio work, he acted in network soap operas and saw those experiences as being especially valuable, as skill in using one's voice is important for aspiring actors; he regretted that later the same avenues became no longer available. His stage break occurred when he took over the role played by Richard Widmark in \"Kiss and Tell\" (1943), which then led to other offers.\nDouglas had planned to remain a stage actor until his friend Lauren Bacall helped him get his first film role by recommending him to producer Hal B. Wallis, who was looking for a new male talent. Wallis's film \"The Strange Love of Martha Ivers\" (1946) with Barbara Stanwyck became Douglas' debut screen appearance. He played a young, insecure man stung by jealousy, whose life was dominated by his ruthless wife, and who hid his feelings with alcohol. It would be the last time that Douglas portrayed a weakling in a film role. Reviewers of the film noted that Douglas already projected qualities of a \"natural film actor\", with the similarity of this role with later ones explained by biographer Tony Thomas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1947, Douglas appeared in \"Out of the Past\" (UK: \"Build My Gallows High\"), playing a large supporting role in this classic noir thriller starring Robert Mitchum and Jane Greer. Douglas made his Broadway debut in 1949 in \"Three Sisters\", produced by Katharine Cornell. The month after \"Out of the Past\" was released, \"I Walk Alone\", the first film teaming Douglas with Burt Lancaster, presented Douglas playing a supporting part quite similar to his role in \"Out of the Past\" in another classic fast-paced noir thriller.\nDouglas' image as a tough guy was established in his eighth film, \"Champion\" (1949), after producer Stanley Kramer chose him to play a selfish boxer. However, in accepting the role, he took a gamble, since he had to turn down an offer to star in a big-budget MGM film, \"The Great Sinner\", which would have earned him three times the income. Melvyn Douglas played the third-billed (above the title) part Kirk Douglas passed on. \"The Great Sinner\" flopped.\nFilm historian Ray Didinger says Douglas \"saw \"Champion\" as a greater risk, but also a greater opportunity ... Douglas took the part and absolutely nailed it.\" Frederick Romano, another sports film historian, described Douglas's acting as \"alarmingly authentic\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDouglas received his first Academy Award nomination, and the film earned six nominations in all. \"Variety\" called it \"a stark, realistic study of the boxing rackets.\"\nAfter \"Champion\" he decided that, to succeed as a star, he needed to ramp up his intensity, overcome his natural shyness, and choose stronger roles. He later stated, \"I don't think I'd be much of an actor without vanity. And I'm not interested in being a 'modest actor'\". Early in his Hollywood career, Douglas demonstrated his independent streak and broke his studio contracts to gain total control over his projects, forming his own movie company, Bryna Productions (named after his mother) in September 1949.\nPeak years of success.\nThroughout the 1950s and 1960s, Douglas was a major box-office star, playing opposite some of the leading actresses of that era. He portrayed a frontier peace officer in his first western, \"Along the Great Divide\" (1951). He quickly became very comfortable with riding horses and playing gunslingers, and he appeared in many Westerns. He considered \"Lonely Are the Brave\" (1962), in which he plays a cowboy trying to live by his own code, his personal favorite. The film, written by Dalton Trumbo, was respected by critics but did not do well at the box office due to poor marketing and distribution.\nIn 1950, Douglas played Rick Martin in \"Young Man with a Horn\", based on a novel of the same name by Dorothy Baker based on the life of jazz cornetist Bix Beiderbecke. Composer and pianist Hoagy Carmichael, a friend of the real Beiderbecke, played the sidekick, adding realism to the film and giving Douglas insight into the role. Doris Day starred as Jo, a young woman who was infatuated with the struggling jazz musician. This was strikingly opposite of the real-life account in Doris Day's autobiography, which described Douglas as \"civil but self-centered\" and the film as \"utterly joyless\". During filming, bit actress Jean Spangler disappeared, and her case remains unsolved. On October 9, 1949, Spangler's purse was found near the Fern Dell entrance to Griffith Park in Los Angeles. There was an unfinished note in the purse addressed to a \"Kirk,\" which read:\n\"Can't wait any longer, Going to see Dr. Scott. It will work best this way while mother is away\". Douglas, married at the time, called the police and told them he was not the Kirk mentioned in the note. When interviewed via telephone by the head of the investigating team, Douglas stated that he had \"talked and kidded with her a bit\" on set, but that he had never been out with her. Spangler's girlfriends told police that she was three months pregnant when she disappeared, and scholars such as Jon Lewis of Oregon State University have speculated that she may have been considering an illegal abortion.\nIn 1951, Douglas starred as a newspaper reporter anxiously looking for a big story in \"Ace in the Hole\", director Billy Wilder's first effort as both writer and producer. The subject and story were controversial at the time, and U.S. audiences stayed away. Some reviews saw it as \"ruthless and cynical ... a distorted study of corruption, mob psychology and the free press.\" Possibly it \"hit too close to home\", said Douglas. It won a Best Foreign Film award at the Venice Film Festival. The film's stature has increased in recent years, with some surveys placing it in their Top 500 Films list. Woody Allen considers it one of his favorite films. As the film's star and protagonist, Douglas is credited for the intensity of his acting. Film critic Roger Ebert wrote, \"his focus and energy ... is almost scary. There is nothing dated about Douglas' performance. It's as right-now as a sharpened knife.\" Biographer Gene Philips noted that Wilder's story was \"galvanized\" by Douglas's \"astounding performance\" and no doubt was a factor when George Stevens, who presented Douglas with the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1991, said of him: \"No other leading actor was ever more ready to tap the dark, desperate side of the soul and thus to reveal the complexity of human nature.\"\nAlso in 1951, Douglas starred in \"Detective Story\", nominated for four Academy Awards, including one for Lee Grant in her debut film. Grant said Douglas was \"dazzling, both personally and in the part. ... He was a big, big star. Gorgeous. Intense. Amazing.\" To prepare for the role, Douglas spent days with the New York Police Department and sat in on interrogations. Reviewers recognized Douglas's acting qualities, with Bosley Crowther describing Douglas as \"forceful and aggressive as the detective\".\nIn \"The Bad and the Beautiful\" (1952), another of his three Oscar-nominated roles, Douglas played a hard-nosed film producer who manipulates and uses his actors, writers, and directors. In 1954 Douglas starred as the titular character in \"Ulysses\", a film based on Homer's epic poem \"Odyssey\", with Silvana Mangano as Penelope and Circe, and Anthony Quinn as Antinous.\nIn \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" (1954), Douglas showed that in addition to serious, driven characters, he was adept at roles requiring a lighter, comic touch. In this adaptation of the Jules Verne novel, he played a happy-go-lucky sailor who was the opposite in every way to the brooding Captain Nemo (James Mason). The film was one of Walt Disney's most successful live-action movies and a major box-office hit. Douglas managed a similar comic turn in the western \"Man Without a Star\" (1955) and in \"For Love or Money\" (1963). He showed further diversity in one of his earliest television appearances. He was a musical guest (as himself) on \"The Jack Benny Program\" (1954).\nIn 1955, Douglas was finally able to get his film production company, Bryna Productions, off the ground. To do so, he had to break contracts with Hal B. Wallis and Warner Bros., but he began to produce and star in his own films, starting with \"The Indian Fighter\" in 1955. Through Bryna, he produced and starred in the films \"Paths of Glory\" (1957), \"The Vikings\" (1958), \"Spartacus\" (1960), \"Lonely are the Brave\" (1962), and \"Seven Days in May\" (1964). In 1958, Douglas formed the music publishing company Peter Vincent Music Corporation, a Bryna Productions subsidiary. Peter Vincent Music was responsible for publishing the soundtracks of \"The Vikings\" and \"Spartacus\".\nWhile \"Paths of Glory\" did not do well at the box office, it has since become one of the great anti-war films, and it is one of director Stanley Kubrick's early films. Douglas, a fluent French speaker, portrayed a sympathetic French officer during World War I who tries to save three soldiers from facing a firing squad. Biographer Vincent LoBrutto describes Douglas's \"seething but controlled portrayal exploding with the passion of his convictions at the injustice leveled at his men.\" The film was banned in France until 1976. Before production of the film began, however, Douglas and Kubrick had to work out some large problems, one of which was Kubrick's rewriting the screenplay without informing Douglas first. Kubrick and writer Jim Thompson had added a happy ending to the film to make the film more commercial to the general public, where the men's lives are saved from execution at the last minute by the general. However, these changes were reversed back more closely to the original novel at the demand of Kirk Douglas. It led to their first major argument: \"I called Stanley to my room ... I hit the ceiling. I called him every four-letter word I could think of ... 'I got the money, based on \"that\" [original] script. Not this shit!' I threw the script across the room. 'We're going back to the original script, or we're not making the picture.' Stanley never blinked an eye. We shot the original script. I think the movie is a classic, one of the most important pictures\u2014possibly the \"most\" important picture\u2014Stanley Kubrick has ever made.\"\nDouglas played military men in numerous films, with varying nuance, including \"Top Secret Affair\" (1957), \"Town Without Pity\" (1961), \"The Hook\" (1963), \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), \"Heroes of Telemark\" (1965), \"In Harm's Way\" (1965), \"Cast a Giant Shadow\" (1966), \"Is Paris Burning\" (1966), \"The Final Countdown\" (1980), and \"Saturn 3\" (1980). His acting style and delivery made him a favorite with television impersonators such as Frank Gorshin, Rich Little, and David Frye.\nHis role as Vincent van Gogh in \"Lust for Life\" (1956), directed by Vincente Minnelli and based on Irving Stone's bestseller, was filmed mostly on location in France. Douglas was noted not only for the veracity of van Gogh's appearance but for how he conveyed the painter's internal turmoil. Some reviewers consider it the most famous example of the \"tortured artist\" who seeks solace from life's pain through his work. Others see it as a portrayal not only of the \"painter-as-hero\", but a unique presentation of the \"action painter\", with Douglas expressing the physicality and emotion of painting, as he uses the canvas to capture a moment in time.\nDouglas was nominated for an Academy Award for the role, with his co-star Anthony Quinn winning the Oscar for Best Supporting Actor as Paul Gauguin, van Gogh's friend. Douglas won a Golden Globe award, although Minnelli said Douglas should have won an Oscar: \"He achieved a moving and memorable portrait of the artist\u2014a man of massive creative power, triggered by severe emotional stress, the fear and horror of madness.\" Douglas himself called his acting role as Van Gogh a painful experience: \"Not only did I look like Van Gogh, I was the same age he was when he committed suicide.\" His wife said he often remained in character in his personal life: \"When he was doing \"Lust for Life\", he came home in that red beard of Van Gogh's, wearing those big boots, stomping around the house\u2014it was frightening.\"\nIn general, however, Douglas's acting style fit well with Minnelli's preference for \"melodrama and neurotic-artist roles\", writes film historian James Naremore. He adds that Minnelli had his \"richest, most impressive collaborations\" with Douglas, and for Minnelli, no other actor portrayed his level of \"cool\": \"A robust, athletic, sometimes explosive player, Douglas loved stagy rhetoric, and he did everything passionately.\" Douglas had also starred in Minnelli's film \"The Bad and the Beautiful\" four years earlier, for which he received a Best Actor Oscar nomination.\nFinancial troubles.\nFor approximately 15 years and 27 films, Douglas's agent had been Sam Norton, who was compensated with 10% of Douglas's gross earnings. In addition, Norton was partners with Jerome \"Jerry\" B. Rosenthal in the law firm of Rosenthal &amp; Norton which received an additional 10%. On the day of his wedding in 1958 his bride Anne had been quietly pulled aside by Norton and been presented by Norton (without Kirk Douglas's knowledge) with a pre-nuptial agreement. She signed the document, but Douglas, because he held Norton as both his best friend and a father figure, was unwilling to get involved in his wife's subsequent attempts to obtain a copy. Anne Douglas went behind her husband's back, engaging lawyer Greg Bautzer and suing to obtain a copy from Norton successfully. Her distrust of Norton grew, especially as he had been granted power of attorney, and she found that the pre-nuptial agreement meant that she and their children had no claim on Douglas's estate until they had been married for five years. She could also find no documentation to prove Norton's assertion that Douglas was a millionaire. Her suspicions were further aroused when the Broadway play \"A Very Special Baby\" for which Norton had convinced Douglas to guarantee financing, closed after only a week. She shared her concerns first with Greg Bautzer and then Edward Lewis who advised her to hire Price Waterhouse to investigate her husband's finances.\nDouglas returned from filming \"The Devils Disciple\" in England in late 1958, and was presented with the results of Price Waterhouse's audit which detailed that the 18 months he had recently spent overseas on the advice of Norton did not qualify for a tax-free income break, that the investments he had been advised to make in fact had been channeled through dummy companies owned by his agent. As a result, Douglas had no money and owed the IRS $750,000. Douglas engaged a new lawyer and was able to get Rosenthal &amp; Norton to give up their rights to any interest in his latest film \"The Vikings\" and any of his future income. Norton was dismissed as his agent, but as he had put nearly all of his assets in his wife's name, Douglas was only able to recover $200,000 from him.\nThe profits from \"The Vikings\" allowed Douglas to pay off his IRS debt, with his financial future now dependent on the success of \"Spartacus\".\n\"Spartacus\" and mid-career.\nIn 1960, Douglas played the title role in what many consider his career-defining appearance as the Thracian gladiator slave rebel Spartacus with an all-star cast in \"Spartacus\" (1960). He was the executive producer as well, which increased the $12\u00a0million production cost and made \"Spartacus\" one of the most expensive films up to that time. Douglas initially selected Anthony Mann to direct, but replaced him early on with Stanley Kubrick, with whom he had previously collaborated in \"Paths of Glory\".\nHoward Fast, was originally hired to adapt his own 1951 novel \"Spartacus\" as a screenplay, but had difficulty working in the format. He was replaced by Dalton Trumbo, who had been blacklisted as one of the Hollywood 10 and since survived by writing screenplays under assumed names. Douglas insisted on giving Trumbo an official on-screen credit and thereby arguably helped to break the Hollywood blacklist. However, the film's producer, Edward Lewis, and Dalton Trumbo's family disputed Douglas's claim. In the film \"Trumbo\" (2015), Douglas is portrayed by Dean O'Gorman.\nDouglas bought the rights to stage a play of the novel \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" from its author, Ken Kesey. He mounted a play from the material in 1963 in which he starred and that ran on Broadway for five months. Reviews were mixed. Douglas retained the movie rights due to an innovative loophole of basing the rights on the play rather than the novel, despite Kesey's objections, but after a decade of being unable to find a producer he gave the rights to his son, Michael. In 1975, the film version was produced by Michael Douglas and Saul Zaentz, and starred Jack Nicholson, as Douglas was then considered too old to play the character as written. Michael Douglas said in 2025 \"Now I'm old enough to understand that you get maybe four really good parts in your life if you're lucky, and that certainly seemed like one of those parts to my father\". The film won all five major Academy Awards, only the second film to do so (after \"It Happened One Night\" in 1934).\nDouglas made seven films over four decades with actor Burt Lancaster: \"I Walk Alone\" (1947), \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957), \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1959), \"The List of Adrian Messenger\" (1963), \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), \"Victory at Entebbe\" (1976), and \"Tough Guys\" (1986), which fixed the notion of the pair as something of a team in the public imagination. Douglas was always billed under Lancaster in these movies, but, with the exception of \"I Walk Alone\" and, even more so, \"The List of Adrian Messenger\" (where Lancaster's part is just a cameo appearance, while Douglas plays the film's villain), their roles were usually of a similar size. Both actors arrived in Hollywood at about the same time and first appeared together in the fourth film for each, albeit with Douglas in a supporting role. They both became actor-producers who sought out independent Hollywood careers.\nJohn Frankenheimer, who directed the political thriller \"Seven Days in May\" in 1964, had not worked well with Lancaster in the past and originally did not want him in this film. However, Douglas thought Lancaster would fit the part and \"begged me to reconsider,\" said Frankenheimer, and he then gave Lancaster the most colorful role. \"It turns out that Burt Lancaster and I got along magnificently well on the picture,\" he later said.\nIn 1967 Douglas starred with John Wayne in the western film directed by Burt Kennedy titled \"The War Wagon\".\nIn \"The Arrangement\" (1969), a drama directed by Elia Kazan and based upon his novel of the same title, Douglas starred as a tormented advertising executive, with Faye Dunaway as costar. The film did poorly at the box office, receiving mostly negative reviews. Dunaway believed many of the reviews were unfair, writing in her biography, \"I can't understand it when people knock Kirk's performance, because I think he's terrific in the picture,\" adding that \"he's as bright a person as I've met in the acting profession.\" She says that his \"pragmatic approach to acting\" would later be a \"philosophy that ended up rubbing off on me.\"\nLater work.\nIn the 1970s, he starred in films such as \"There Was a Crooked Man...\" (1970), \"A Gunfight\" (1971), \"The Light at the Edge of the World\" (1971). and \"The Fury\" (1978). He made his directorial debut in \"Scalawag.\" (1973), and subsequently also directed \"Posse\" (1975), in which he starred alongside Bruce Dern.\nIn 1980, he starred in \"The Final Countdown\", playing the commanding officer of the aircraft carrier USS \"Nimitz\", which travels through time to the day before the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor. It was produced by his son Peter Douglas. He also played in a dual role in \"The Man from Snowy River\" (1982), an Australian film which received critical acclaim and numerous awards.\nIn 1986, he reunited with his longtime co-star, Burt Lancaster, in a crime comedy, \"Tough Guys\", with a cast including Charles Durning and Eli Wallach. It marked the final collaboration between Douglas and Lancaster, completing a partnership of more than 40 years. That same year, he co-hosted (with Angela Lansbury) the New York Philharmonic's tribute to the 100th anniversary of the Statue of Liberty. The symphony was conducted by Zubin Mehta.\nIn 1988, Douglas starred in a television adaptation of \"Inherit the Wind\", opposite Jason Robards and Jean Simmons. The film won two Emmy Awards. In the 1990s, Douglas continued starring in various features. Among them was \"The Secret\" in 1992, a television movie about a grandfather and his grandson who both struggle with dyslexia. That same year, he played the uncle of Michael J. Fox in a comedy, \"Greedy\". He appeared as the Devil in the video for the Don Henley song \"The Garden of Allah\". In 1996, after suffering a severe stroke at age 79 which impaired his ability to speak, Douglas still wanted to make movies. He underwent years of voice therapy and made \"Diamonds\" in 1999, in which he played an old professional boxer who was recovering from a stroke. It co-starred his longtime friend from his early acting years, Lauren Bacall.\nIn 2003, Michael and Joel Douglas produced \"It Runs in the Family\", which along with Kirk starred various family members, including Michael, Michael's son Cameron, and his wife from 50 years earlier, Diana Dill, playing his wife. His final feature-film appearance was in the 2004 Michael Goorjian film \"Illusion\", in which he depicts a dying film director forced to watch episodes from the life of a son he had refused to acknowledge. His last screen role was the TV movie \"Empire State Building Murders\", which was released in 2008. In March 2009, at the age of 92, Douglas performed an autobiographical one-man show, \"Before I Forget\", at the Center Theatre Group's Kirk Douglas Theatre in Culver City, California. The four performances were filmed and turned into a documentary that was first screened in January 2010.\nOn December 9, 2016, he celebrated his 100th birthday at the Beverly Hills Hotel, joined by several of his friends, including Don Rickles, Jeffrey Katzenberg, and Steven Spielberg, along with Douglas's wife Anne, his son Michael and his daughter-in-law Catherine Zeta-Jones. Douglas was described by his guests as still being in good shape, able to walk with confidence into the Sunset Room for the celebration.\nDouglas appeared at the 2018 Golden Globes with his daughter-in-law Catherine Zeta-Jones, a rare public appearance in the final decade of his life. He received a standing ovation and helped Zeta-Jones present the award for \"Best Screenplay \u2013 Motion Picture\".\nStyle and philosophy of acting.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKirk is one of a kind. He has an overpowering physical presence, which is why on a large movie screen he looms over the audience like a tidal wave in full flood. Globally revered, he is now the last living screen legend of those who vaulted to stardom at the war's end, that special breed of movie idol instantly recognizable anywhere, whose luminous on-screen characters are forever memorable.\n \u2014Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America.\nDouglas stated that the keys to acting success are determination and application: \"You must know how to function and how to maintain yourself, and you must have a love of what you do. But an actor also needs great good luck. I have had that luck.\" Douglas had great vitality and explained that \"it takes a lot out of you to work in this business. Many people fall by the wayside because they don't have the energy to sustain their talent.\"\nThat attitude toward acting became evident with \"Champion\" (1949). From that one role, writes biographer John Parker, he went from stardom and entered the \"superleague\", where his style was in \"marked contrast to Hollywood's other leading men at the time\". His sudden rise to prominence is explained by comparing it to that of Jack Nicholson's:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He virtually ignored interventionist directors. He prepared himself privately for each role he played, so that when the cameras were ready to roll he was suitably, and some would say egotistically and even selfishly, inspired to steal every scene in a manner comparable in modern times to Jack Nicholson's \"modus operandi\".\nAs a producer, Douglas had a reputation of being a compulsively hard worker who expected others to exude the same level of energy. As such, he was typically demanding and direct in his dealing with people who worked on his projects, with his intensity spilling over into all elements of his film-making. This was partly due to his high opinion of actors, movies, and moviemaking: \"To me it is the most important art form\u2014it \"is\" an art, and it includes all the elements of the modern age.\" He also stressed prioritizing the entertainment goal of films over any messages, \"You can make a statement, you can say something, but it must be entertaining.\"\nAs an actor, he dived into every role, dissecting not only his own lines but all the parts in the script to measure the rightness of the role, and he was willing to fight with a director if he felt justified. Melville Shavelson, who produced and directed \"Cast a Giant Shadow\" (1966), said that it didn't take him long to discover what his main problem was going to be in directing Douglas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Kirk Douglas was \"intelligent.\" When discussing a script with actors, I have always found it necessary to remember that they never read the other actors' lines, so their concept of the story is somewhat hazy. Kirk had not only read the lines of everyone in the picture, he had also read the stage directions ... Kirk, I was to discover, always read every word, discussed every word, always argued every scene, until he was convinced of its correctness. ... He listened, so it was necessary to fight every minute.\nFor most of his career, Douglas enjoyed good health and what seemed like an inexhaustible supply of energy. He attributed much of that vitality to his childhood and pre-acting years: \"The drive that got me out of my hometown and through college is part of the makeup that I utilize in my work. It's a constant fight, and it's tough.\" His demands on others, however, were an expression of the demands he placed on himself, rooted in his youth. \"It took me years to concentrate on being a human being\u2014I was too busy scrounging for money and food, and struggling to better myself.\"\nActress Lee Grant, who acted with him and later filmed a documentary about him and his family, notes that even after he achieved worldwide stardom, his father would not acknowledge his success. He said \"nothing. Ever.\" Douglas's wife, Anne, similarly attributes the energy he devotes to acting to his tough childhood:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was reared by his mother and his sisters and as a schoolboy he had to work to help support the family. I think part of Kirk's life has been a monstrous effort to prove himself and gain recognition in the eyes of his father ... Not even four years of psychoanalysis could alter the drives that began as a desire to prove himself.\nDouglas has credited his mother, Bryna, for instilling in him the importance of \"gambling on yourself\", and he kept her advice in mind when making films. Bryna Productions was named in her honor. Douglas realized that his intense style of acting was something of a shield: \"Acting is the most direct way of escaping reality, and in my case it was a means of escaping a drab and dismal background.\"\nPersonal life.\nPersonality.\nIn \"The Ragman's Son\", Douglas described himself as a \"son of a bitch,\" adding, \"I'm probably the most disliked actor in Hollywood. And I feel pretty good about it. Because that's me... . I was born aggressive, and I guess I'll die aggressive.\" Co-workers and associates alike noted similar traits, with Burt Lancaster once remarking, \"Kirk would be the first to tell you that he is a very difficult man. And I would be the second.\" Douglas's brash personality is attributed to his difficult upbringing living in poverty and his aggressive alcoholic father who was neglectful of Kirk as a young child. According to Douglas, \"there was an awful lot of rage churning around inside me, rage that I was afraid to reveal because there was so much more of it, and so much stronger, in my father.\" Douglas' discipline, wit and sense of humor were also often recognized.\nMarriages and children.\nDouglas and his first wife, Diana Dill, married on November 2, 1943. They had two sons, actor Michael Douglas and producer Joel Douglas, before divorcing in 1951.\nAccording to his autobiography \"The Ragman's Son,\" he and Italian actress Pier Angeli were engaged in the early 1950s after meeting on the set of the film \"The Story of Three Loves\" (1953), but they never made it down the aisle. Afterwards, in Paris, he met producer Anne Buydens (born Hannelore Marx; April 23, 1919, Hanover, Germany) while acting on location in \"Act of Love\". She originally fled from Germany to escape Nazism and survived by putting her multilingual skills to work at a film studio, creating translations for subtitles. They married on May 29, 1954. In 2014, they celebrated their 60th wedding anniversary at the Greystone Mansion in Beverly Hills. They had two sons, Peter, a producer, and Eric, an actor who died on July 6, 2004, from an overdose of alcohol and drugs at the age of 46. In 2017, the couple released a book, \"Kirk and Anne: Letters of Love, Laughter and a Lifetime in Hollywood\", that revealed intimate letters they shared through the years. Throughout their marriage, Douglas had affairs with other women, including several Hollywood starlets. He never hid his infidelities from his wife, who was accepting of them and explained, \"as a European, I understood it was unrealistic to expect total fidelity in a marriage.\"\nMike Todd.\nDouglas was good friends with producer Mike Todd who lived across the street from him in Palm Springs. On the morning of March 22, 1958, they were playing tennis when Todd asked him to come with him later that day on his private aircraft to New York, where he was due to receive an award. He suggested that Douglas could make the presentation to him and afterwards on the way back they could stop and visit former president Harry Truman in Independence, Missouri.\nUpon hearing of the plan, Douglas's wife Anne had an uneasy feeling and urged him to take a commercial flight instead. After a heated argument about the matter, Douglas in a temper said that if he could not fly with Todd then he would not go at all.\nThe next morning while driving in the car to Los Angeles, Douglas and his family heard on the radio the news that Todd's aircraft had crashed a few hours after takeoff, killing all on board.\nReligion.\nDouglas was raised Jewish. On February 13, 1991, aged 74, Douglas was in a helicopter and was injured when the aircraft collided with a small plane above Santa Paula Airport. Two other people were also injured, including Noel Blanc, the son of voice actor Mel Blanc who was piloting the helicopter, and two people in the plane were killed. This near-death experience sparked a search for meaning by Douglas, which led him, after much study, to embrace the Judaism in which he had been raised. He documented this spiritual journey in his book, \"Climbing the Mountain: My Search for Meaning\" (1997).\nHe decided to visit Jerusalem again and wanted to see the Western Wall Tunnel during a trip where he would dedicate two playgrounds he donated to the state. His tour guide arranged to end the tour of the tunnel at the bedrock where, according to Jewish tradition, Abraham's binding of Isaac took place.\nIn his earlier autobiography, \"The Ragman's Son\", he recalled, \"years back, I tried to forget that I was a Jew,\" but later in his career he began \"coming to grips with what it means to be a Jew,\" which became a theme in his life. In an interview in 2000, he explained this transition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judaism and I parted ways a long time ago, when I was a poor kid growing up in Amsterdam, N.Y. Back then, I was pretty good in cheder, so the Jews of our community thought they would do a wonderful thing and collect enough money to send me to a yeshiva to become a rabbi. Holy Moses! That scared the hell out of me. I didn't want to be a rabbi. I wanted to be an actor. Believe me, the members of the Sons of Israel were persistent. I had nightmares \u2013 wearing long \"payos\" and a black hat. I had to work very hard to get out of it. But it took me a long time to learn that you don't have to be a rabbi to be a Jew.\nDouglas noted that an underlying theme of some of his films, including \"The Juggler\" (1953), \"Cast a Giant Shadow\" (1966), and \"Remembrance of Love\" (1982), was about \"a Jew who doesn't think of himself as one, and eventually finds his Jewishness.\" \"The Juggler\" was the first Hollywood feature to be filmed in the newly established state of Israel. Douglas recalled that, while there, he saw \"extreme poverty and food being rationed.\" But he found it \"wonderful, finally, to be in the majority.\" The film's producer, Stanley Kramer, tried to portray \"Israel as the Jews' heroic response to Hitler's destruction.\"\nAlthough his children had non-Jewish mothers, Douglas stated that they were \"aware culturally\" of his \"deep convictions\" and he never tried to influence their own religious decisions. Douglas's wife, Anne, converted to Judaism before they renewed their wedding vows in 2004. Douglas celebrated a second Bar-Mitzvah ceremony in 1999.\nPhilanthropy.\nDouglas and his wife donated to various non-profit causes during his career and planned on donating most of their $80 million net worth. Among the donations have been those to his former high school and college. In September 2001, he helped fund his high school's musical, \"Amsterdam Oratorio\", composed by Maria Riccio Bryce, who won the school Thespian Society's Kirk Douglas Award in 1968. In 2012 he donated $5 million to St. Lawrence University, his alma mater. The college used the donation for the scholarship fund he began in 1999.\nHe donated to various schools, medical facilities, and other non-profit organizations in southern California. This included the rebuilding of over 400 Los Angeles Unified School District playgrounds that were aged and in need of restoration. The Douglases established the Anne Douglas Center for Homeless Women at the Los Angeles Mission, which has helped hundreds of women turn their lives around. In Culver City, they opened the Kirk Douglas Theatre in 2004. They supported the Anne Douglas Childhood Center at the Sinai Temple of Westwood. In March 2015, Douglas and his wife donated $2.3 million to the Children's Hospital Los Angeles.\nSince the early 1990s, Kirk and Anne Douglas donated up to $40 million to Harry's Haven, an Alzheimer's treatment facility in Woodland Hills, to care for patients at the Motion Picture Home. To celebrate his 99th birthday on December 9, 2015, they donated another $15 million to help expand the facility with a new two-story Kirk Douglas Care Pavilion.\nDouglas donated a number of playgrounds in Jerusalem and donated the Kirk Douglas Theater at the Aish Center across from the Western Wall.\nPolitics.\nDouglas and his wife traveled to more than 40 countries, at their own expense, to act as goodwill ambassadors for the U.S. Information Agency, speaking to audiences about why democracy works and what freedom means. In 1980, Douglas flew to Cairo to talk with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat. For all his goodwill efforts, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Jimmy Carter in 1981. At the ceremony, Carter said that Douglas had \"done this in a sacrificial way, almost invariably without fanfare and without claiming any personal credit or acclaim for himself\". In subsequent years, Douglas testified before Congress about elder abuse. Douglas was also friends with former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.\nDouglas was a long-time member of the Democratic Party. He wrote letters to politicians who were friends. He noted in his memoir, \"Let's Face It\" (2007), that he felt compelled to write to former president Jimmy Carter in 2006 to stress that \"Israel is the only successful democracy in the Middle East ... [and] has had to endure many wars against overwhelming odds. If Israel loses one war, they lose Israel.\" During the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries he endorsed Michael Bloomberg's campaign.\nRole in breaking Hollywood blacklist.\nKirk Douglas claimed that he broke Hollywood blacklist when he insisted that Dalton Trumbo, who had been blacklisted as one of the Hollywood 10, be given screen credit for his screenplay for \"Spartacus\".\n Trumbo had intended to use the pseudonym \"Sam Jackson\". In his autobiography, Douglas states that this decision was motivated by a meeting that Edward Lewis, Stanley Kubrick, and he had regarding whose names to list for the screenplay in the film credits, given Trumbo's shaky position with Hollywood executives. One idea was to credit Lewis as co-writer or sole writer, but Lewis vetoed both suggestions. The next day, Douglas called the gate at Universal saying, \"I'd like to leave a pass for Dalton Trumbo.\" Douglas writes, \"For the first time in 10 years, Trumbo walked on to a studio lot. He said, 'Thanks, Kirk, for giving me back my name.'\" \nDuring a 2012 interview Douglas said, \"I've made over 85 pictures, but the thing I'm most proud of is breaking the blacklist.\"\nHowever, the film's producer, Edward Lewis, and Dalton Trumbo's family disputed Douglas's claims. Douglas did not publicize Trumbo's credit for \"Spartacus\" until August 1960, seven months after producer-director Otto Preminger's had publicly hired Trumbo to adapt \"Exodus\" for the screen on January 20, 1960. Douglas later successfully denied Trumbo a sought credit on the film \"Town Without Pity\" as he worried that his continued association with the screen writer would hurt his career.\nBlogging.\nDouglas blogged from time to time. Originally hosted on Myspace, his posts were hosted by the \"Huffington Post\" beginning in 2012. As of 2008, he was believed to be the oldest celebrity blogger in the world.\nRape allegation.\nDouglas is alleged to have raped actress Natalie Wood in the summer of 1955, when she was 16 and he 38. Wood's alleged rape was first publicized in Suzanne Finstad's 2001 biography of the actress, though Finstad never named the offender.\nThe allegation received renewed attention in January 2018, after the 75th Golden Globe Awards ceremony paid tribute to Douglas, with several news outlets citing a 2012 anonymous blog post which accused Douglas. In July 2018, Wood's sister Lana said during a 12-part podcast about her sister's life that her sister was sexually assaulted as a teen and that the attack had occurred inside the Chateau Marmont during an audition and went on \"for hours\". In the 2021 memoir \"Little Sister: My Investigation Into the Mysterious Death of Natalie Wood\", Lana Wood alleged Douglas was her sister's assailant. Douglas' son Michael issued a statement, saying \"May they both rest in peace.\"\nHealth problems and death.\nOn January 28, 1996, at age 79, Douglas suffered a severe stroke, which impaired his ability to speak. Doctors told his wife that unless there was rapid improvement, the loss of his ability to speak would probably be permanent. However, after a regimen of daily speech-language therapy that lasted several months, his ability to speak returned, although it was still limited. He was able to accept an honorary Academy Award two months later (in March) and to thank the audience. He wrote about this experience in his 2002 book \"My Stroke of Luck\", which he hoped would be an \"operating manual\" for others on how to handle a stroke victim in their own family.\nDouglas died at his home in Beverly Hills, California, surrounded by his family on February 5, 2020, at age 103. Douglas's funeral was held at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery on February 7, 2020, two days after his death. He was buried in the same plot as his son Eric. On April 29, 2021, his wife Anne died at age 102 and was buried next to him and their son.\nFilmography.\nIn a 2014 article, Douglas cited \"The Strange Love of Martha Ivers\", \"Champion\", \"Ace in the Hole\", \"The Bad and the Beautiful\", \"Act of Love\", \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\", \"The Indian Fighter\", \"Lust for Life\", \"Paths of Glory\", \"Spartacus\", \"Lonely Are the Brave\", and \"Seven Days in May\" as the films he was most proud of throughout his acting career.\nHonors and awards.\nAFI Life Achievement Award\nKennedy Center Honors\nAcademy Awards\nGolden Globes\nEmmy Awards\nScreen Actors Guild Awards\nBAFTA Awards\nBritannia Awards\nBerlin International Film Festival\nCesar Awards\nHollywood Film Festival\nNational Board of Review\nNew York Film Critics Circle Award\nIn 1983, Douglas received the S. Roger Horchow Award for Greatest Public Service by a Private Citizen, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.\nIn 1996, Douglas received an Honorary Academy Award for \"50 years as a moral and creative force in the motion picture community.\" The award was presented by producer/director Steven Spielberg. As a result of Douglas's stroke the previous summer, however, in which he lost most of his speaking ability, his close friends and family were concerned about whether he should try to speak, or what he should say. Both his son Michael, and his long-time friend Jack Valenti, urged him to only say \"Thank you\", and leave the stage. Douglas agreed, but had second thoughts when standing in front of the audience. He later reflected that: \"I intended to just say 'thank you,' but I saw 1,000 people, and felt I had to say something more, and I did.\" Valenti remembers that after Douglas held up the Oscar, addressed his sons, and told his wife how much he loved her, everyone was astonished at his voice's improvement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSince 2006, the Santa Barbara International Film Festival has awarded the Kirk Douglas Award for Excellence in film to acknowledge lifetime contributions to the film industry. Recipients of the award include Robert De Niro, Ed Harris, Harrison Ford, Michael Douglas, Hugh Jackman, and Judi Dench. The award is typically presented to actors, although directors Quentin Tarantino and Martin Scorsese have been presented with it. In 2015, a star was nicknamed after Douglas in the International Star Registry to commemorate his 99th birthday.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69862", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69862", "title": "PowerPC family", "text": ""}
{"id": "69863", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69863", "title": "ARM family", "text": ""}
{"id": "69864", "revid": "6781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69864", "title": "John Baliol of Scotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "69865", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69865", "title": "John Baliol", "text": ""}
{"id": "69866", "revid": "1231289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69866", "title": "John Cantacuzene", "text": ""}
{"id": "69867", "revid": "48601857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69867", "title": "List of museums by country", "text": ""}
{"id": "69868", "revid": "36754862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69868", "title": "A Friend of the Earth", "text": "2000 novel by T. C. Boyle\nA Friend of the Earth is a 2000 novel by T.C. Boyle. The novel is a story of environmental destruction set in 2025; as a result of global warming and the greenhouse effect, the climate has drastically changed, and, accordingly, biodiversity is a thing of the past.\nAmerica in 2025.\nDue to habitat loss, many animal species have become extinct, but the flora has also considerably suffered. Many foods, including beef, eggs, beer, etc., are no longer readily available. Instead, rice is grown everywhere, and sake is the only alcoholic beverage available. Other vegetables are grown in domed fields. El Ni\u00f1o has become an everyday companion of the inhabitants of the United States: strong winds are continuously blowing, and there is heavy rainfall for several months every year. In the dry season, it is unbearably hot. Helpful medicines have been found in the rainforest, including cures for cancer.\nDeforestation has occurred for two reasons: (a) the storms, which have uprooted whole forests; and, (b) the timber industry's limitless destruction of primeval forests all over the world, including the tropical rainforest. On top of it all, modern science has invented many artificial ways to prolong human life (for example, there are TV ads for organ transplants), and longevity among humans is now a fact with life expectancy having climbed to over the 100-year mark. Consequently, the world is massively overpopulated. In the US, what used to be unspoiled nature is now residential areas, with condominiums having sprung up everywhere. Inside these condos, people who do not care about the environment live their lives in front of their computers and televisions.\nAt no point in the novel does Boyle enter into a discussion of the political situation, but there are various hints hidden in the text which tell us that the social security system has crumbled and that many older Americans are left to their own devices, without a regular income, many of them seemingly even without a roof over their heads.\nPlot summary.\n\"A Friend of the Earth\" is the story of Tyrone O'Shaughnessy Tierwater, a U.S. citizen born in 1950, half Irish Catholic and half Jewish (\"I'm a mess and I know it. Jewish guilt, Catholic guilt, enviro-eco-capitalistico guilt: I can't even expel gas in peace.\"), whose personal tragedy fits in with, and adds to, the gloomy atmosphere created in the novel.\nEgged on by Andrea, the woman he loves, he becomes a committed \"Earth Forever!\" activist (an allusion to the radical environmental group Earth First!) in the 1980s, is imprisoned for ecotage, but eventually cannot change anything. On top of that, he suffers the loss of his first wife when their daughter is only three and of his daughter when she is only 25. When the novel opens, Tierwater is a 75-year-old disillusioned ex-con living on the estate of a famous pop star in the Santa Ynez Valley, north of Santa Barbara, in California and looking after the latter's private menagerie.\nMaclovio Pulchris, the singer, has had the idea of preserving some of the last surviving animals of several species in order to initiate a captive breeding program at some later point in time, choosing to preserve the animals no one else would. Tierwater has been working for Pulchris (\"Mac\") for ten years when, in 2025, Andrea, his ex-wife and stepmother to his daughter Sierra, contacts him after more than 20 years. She and a friend of hers, April Wind, move in with Tierwater, officially for April Wind to write a biography, or rather hagiography, of Sierra Tierwater, his daughter, who died in 2001 as a martyr to the environmentalist cause (falling out of a tree in old growth woodland in which she had been living for about three years).\nIn the course of the next few months the situation deteriorates even more. The rain and the wind destroy the animals' cages, and subsequently they have to be kept in Pulchris's basement. One morning one of the lions gets loose and attacks and kills the singer, as well as a number of employees. As a consequence, the other lions are shot\u2014and thus lions as a species become extinct. (There is just one surviving lion in the San Diego Zoo left.)\nJobless and penniless, Tierwater, who has fallen in love all over again with Andrea, is evicted from the estate by Pulchris's heirs. Along with Andrea, Tyrone leaves the compound, heading for a mountain cabin owned by Earth Forever! somewhere in the forest which decades ago served as a hideout. They arrive there with only one of Pulchris's animals in tow: Petunia, the Patagonian fox, which they now keep as their domestic animal, passing it off as their dog.\nIn the final scene of the book, a teenaged girl comes hiking along the trail where the forest surrounding the dilapidated cabin would have been. Tierwater and Andrea, who again call themselves husband and wife now, have a glimmer of hope that life will soon be like life 30 years before, as the novel ends on an optimistic note.\nThemes.\nMajor themes discussed and referred to throughout the book include the effects of climate change and reduction of biodiversity.\nThere are implicit references to Christianity throughout. Maclovio Pulchris' animal menagerie seems to be a direct reference to the story of Noah's Ark. Similarly, the death of Tierwater's daughter, Sierra, seems to be a reference to New Testament sacrifice. Another theme includes the prevalence of a pandemic illness known as mucosa in the year 2025 setting.\nIntertextual references.\nSome of the icons of the environmental movement mentioned in the text:\nAllusions/references to other works.\nAllusions to other novels by T.C. Boyle:"}
{"id": "69870", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69870", "title": "Science museum", "text": "Museum focused on science topics\nA science museum is a museum devoted primarily to science. Older science museums tended to concentrate on static displays of objects related to natural history, paleontology, geology, industry and industrial machinery, etc. Modern trends in museology have broadened the range of subject matter and introduced many interactive exhibits. Modern science museums, increasingly referred to as \"science centres\" or \"discovery centres\", also feature technology.\nWhile the mission statements of science centres and modern museums may vary, they are commonly places that make science accessible and encourage the excitement of discovery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe public museum as understood today is a collection of specimens and other objects of interest to the scholar, the man of science as well as the more casual visitor, arranged and displayed in accordance with the scientific method. In its original sense, the term 'museum' meant a spot dedicated to the muses - 'a place where man's mind could attain a mood of aloofness above everyday affairs'.\nMuseum of Jurassic Technology, Introduction &amp; Background, p.\u00a02.\nHistory.\nAs early as the Renaissance period, aristocrats collected curiosities for display. Universities, and in particular medical schools, also maintained study collections of specimens for their students. Scientists and collectors displayed their finds in private cabinets of curiosities. Such collections were the predecessors of modern natural history museums.\nIn 1683, the first purpose-built museum covering natural philosophy, the original Ashmolean museum (now called the Museum of the History of Science) in Oxford, England, was opened, although its scope was mixed.\nThis was followed in 1752 by the first dedicated science museum, the Museo de Ciencias Naturales, in Madrid, which almost did not survive Francoist Spain. Today, the museum works closely with the Spanish National Research Council (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient\u00edficas).\nThe Utrecht University Museum, established in 1836, and the Netherlands' foremost research museum, displays an extensive collection of 18th-century animal and human \"rarities\" in its original setting.\nMore science museums developed during the Industrial Revolution, when great national exhibitions showcased the triumphs of both science and industry. An example is the Great Exhibition in 1851 at The Crystal Palace, London, England, surplus items from which contributed to the Science Museum, London, founded in 1857.\nIn the United States of America, various natural history Societies established collections in the early 19th century. These later evolved into museums. A notable example is the New England Museum of Natural History (now the Museum of Science) which opened in Boston in 1864. Another was the Academy of Science, St. Louis, founded in 1856, the first scientific organisation west of the Mississippi. Although the organisation managed scientific collections for several decades, a formal museum was not created until the mid-20th century.\nModern science museums.\nThe modern interactive science museum appears to have been pioneered by Munich's Deutsches Museum (German Museum of Masterpieces of Science and Technology) in the early 20th century. This museum had moving exhibits where visitors were encouraged to push buttons and work levers. The concept was taken to the United States by Julius Rosenwald, chairman of Sears, Roebuck and Company, who visited the Deutsches Museum with his young son in 1911. He was so captivated by the experience that he decided to build a similar museum in his home town. The Amp\u00e8re Museum, close to Lyon, was created in 1931 and is the first interactive scientific museum in France. Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry opened in phases between 1933 and 1940.\nIn 1959, the Museum of Science and Natural History (now the Saint Louis Science Center) was formally created by the Academy of Science of Saint Louis, featuring many interactive science and history exhibits, and in August 1969, Frank Oppenheimer dedicated his new Exploratorium in San Francisco almost completely to interactive science exhibits, building on the experience by publishing \"Cookbooks\" that explain how to construct versions of the Exploratorium's exhibits. \nThe Ontario Science Centre, which opened in September 1969, continued the trend of featuring interactive exhibits rather than static displays.\nIn 1973, the first Omnimax cinema opened at the Reuben H. Fleet Space Theater and Science Center in San Diego's Balboa Park. The tilted-dome Space Theater doubled as a planetarium. The Science Centre was an exploratorium-style museum included as a small part of the complex. This combination of interactive science museum, planetarium and Omnimax theater pioneered a configuration that many major science museums now follow.\nAlso in 1973, the Association of Science-Technology Centers (ASTC) was founded as an international organisation to provide a collective voice, professional support, and programming opportunities for science centres, museums and related institutions.\nThe massive Cit\u00e9 des Sciences et de l'Industrie (City of Science and Industry) opened in Paris in 1986, and national centres soon followed in Denmark (Experimentarium), Sweden (Tom Tits Experiment), Finland (Heureka), and Spain (Museu de les Ciencies Principe Felipe). In the United Kingdom, the first interactive centres also opened in 1986 on a modest scale, with further developments more than a decade later, funded by the National Lottery for projects to celebrate the Millennium.\nSince the 1990s, science museums and centres have been created or greatly expanded in Asia. Examples are Thailand's National Science Museum and Japan's Minato Science Museum.\nScience centres.\nMuseums that brand themselves as \"science centres\" emphasise a hands-on approach, featuring interactive exhibits that encourage visitors to experiment and explore.\nRecently, there has been a push for science museums to be more involved in science communication and educating the public about the scientific process. Microbiologist and science communicator Natalia Pasternak Taschner stated, \"I believe that science museums can promote critical thinking, especially in teenagers and young adults, by teaching them about the scientific method and the process of science, and how by using this to develop knowledge and technology, we can be less wrong.\"\nUrania was a science centre founded in Berlin in 1888. Most of its exhibits were destroyed during World War II, as were those of a range of German technical museums. The Academy of Science of Saint Louis (founded in 1856) created the Saint Louis Museum of Science and Natural History in 1959 (Saint Louis Science Center), but generally science centres are a product of the 1960s and later. In the United Kingdom, many were founded as Millennium projects, with funding from the National Lotteries Fund.\nThe first \"science centre\" in the United States was the Science Center of Pinellas County, founded in 1959. The Pacific Science Center (one of the first large organisations to call itself a \"science centre\" rather than a museum), opened in a Seattle World's Fair building in 1962.\nIn 1969, Oppenheimer's Exploratorium opened in San Francisco, California, and the Ontario Science Centre opened near Toronto, Ontario, Canada. By the early 1970s, COSI Columbus, then known as the Center of Science and Industry in Columbus, Ohio, had run its first \"camp-in\".\nIn 1983, the Smithsonian Institution invited visitors to the Discovery Room in the newly opened National Museum of Natural History Museum Support Center in Suitland, Maryland, where they could touch and handle formerly off-limits specimens.\nThe new-style museums banded together for mutual support. In 1971, 16 museum directors gathered to discuss the possibility of starting a new association; one more specifically tailored to their needs than the existing American Association of Museums (now the American Alliance of Museums). As a result of this, the Association of Science-Technology Centers was formally established in 1973, headquartered in Washington DC, but with an international organisational membership.\nThe corresponding European organisation is Ecsite, and in the United Kingdom, the Association of Science and Discovery Centres represents the interests of over 60 major science engagement organisations. The Asia Pacific Network of Science and Technology Centres (ASPAC) is an association initiated in 1997 with over 50 members from 20 countries across Asia and Australia (2022). Their regional sister organisations are the Network for the Popularization of Science and Technology in Latin America and The Caribbean (RedPOP), the North Africa and Middle East science centres (NAMES), and the Southern African Association of Science and Technology Centres (SAASTEC). In India, the National Council of Science Museums runs science centres at several places including Delhi, Bhopal, Nagpur and Ranchi. There are also a number of private Science Centres, including the Birla Science Museum and The Science Garage in Hyderabad."}
{"id": "69871", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69871", "title": "Yugoslavia/Geography", "text": ""}
