{"id": "58476", "revid": "43393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58476", "title": "Paratrooper", "text": "Military parachutists functioning as part of an airborne\nA paratrooper or military parachutist is a soldier trained to conduct military operations by parachuting directly into an area of operations, usually as part of a large airborne forces unit. Traditionally paratroopers fight only as light infantry armed with small arms and light weapons, although some paratroopers can also function as artillerymen or mechanized infantry by utilizing field guns, infantry fighting vehicles and light tanks that are often used in surprise attacks to seize strategic positions behind enemy lines such as airfields, bridges and major roads.\nOverview.\nParatroopers jump out of aircraft and use parachutes to land safely on the ground. This is one of the three types of \"forced entry\" strategic techniques for entering a theater of war; the other two being by land and by water. Their tactical advantage of entering the battlefield from the air is that they can attack areas not directly accessible by other transport. The ability of airborne assault to enter the battlefield from any location allows paratroopers to evade emplaced fortifications that guard from attack from a specific direction. The possible use of paratroopers also forces defenders to spread out to protect other areas which would otherwise be safe. Another common use for paratroopers is to establish an airhead for landing other units, as at the Battle of Crete.\nThis doctrine was first practically applied to warfare by the Imperial German Army in 1916 then the Italians and the Soviets. The first known airborne commando operation in military history was conducted by Maximilian Hermann Richard Paschen von Cossel, then Leutnant of the Royal Prussian Army and his new pilot, then Royal Saxon Vice Sergeant Rudolf Windisch. Windisch flew the Roland Walfisch used for this purpose and set Cossel down in a wooded area behind the Russian front. During the night of October 2/3, 1916, Cossel blew up the Rowno\u2013Brody railway line, 85 kilometers behind the eastern front, in several places. This was acknowledged in the army report of October 4, 1916: Eastern theater of war: ... Oberleutnant v. Cossel, who was set down from the plane southwest of Rowno by Vice Sergeant Windisch and picked up again after 24 hours, interrupted the Rowno-Brody railway line at several points by means of explosives. ... The First Quartermaster General. Ludendorff. According to Russian reports, however, the tracks were only slightly damaged in one place, so that a train just passing them could continue its journey unhindered. The second operational military parachute jump from was logged in the night of August 8\u20149 1918 by Italian assault troops. Arditi Lieutenant Alessandro Tandura jumped from a Savoia-Pomilio SP.4 aircraft of the Gruppo speciale Aviazione I piloted by Canadian Major William George Barker and British Captain William Wedgwood Benn (both Royal Air Force pilots), when Tandura dropped behind Austro-Hungarian lines near Vittorio Veneto on a reconnaissance and sabotage mission, followed on later nights by Lts. Ferruccio Nicoloso and Pier Arrigo Barnaba.\nThe first extensive use of paratroopers () was by the Germans during World War II. Later in the conflict paratroopers were used extensively by the Allied Forces. Cargo aircraft of the period (for example the German Junkers Ju 52 and the American Douglas C-47 Skytrain/Dakota) being small, they rarely, if ever, jumped in groups much larger than 20 from one aircraft. In English, this load of paratroopers is called a \"stick,\" while any load of soldiers gathered for air movement is known as a \"chalk.\" The terms come from the common use of white chalk on the sides of aircraft and vehicles to mark and update numbers of personnel and equipment being emplaned.\nIn World War II, paratroopers most often used parachutes of a circular design. These parachutes could be steered to a small degree by pulling on the risers (four straps connecting the paratrooper's harness to the connectors) and suspension lines which attach to the parachute canopy itself. German paratroopers, whose harnesses had only a single riser attached at the back, could not manipulate their parachutes in such a manner. Today, paratroopers still use round parachutes, or round parachutes modified so as to be more fully controlled with toggles. The parachutes are usually deployed by a static line. Mobility of the parachutes is often deliberately limited to prevent scattering of the troops when a large number parachute together.\nSome military exhibition units and special forces units use \"ram-air\" parachutes, which offer a high degree of maneuverability and are deployed manually (without a static line) from the desired altitude. Some use high-altitude military parachuting, also deploying manually.\nHistorical examples.\nMany countries have one or several paratrooper units, usually associated with the national Army or Air Force, but in some cases the Navy.\nArgentina.\nIn 1944, Argentina became the second country on the continent of South America to use Paratroopers, after Peru. The first paratroopers were issued jump helmets similar to that used by the British at the time, with other equipment based on the . The 4th Parachute Brigade (\"4 Brigada Paracaidista\") is a unit of the Argentine Army specialised in airborne assault operations. It is based in C\u00f3rdoba, C\u00f3rdoba Province. The \"Fuerza de Despliegue R\u00e1pido\" (\"Rapid Deployment Force\") is based on this unit. The members of the unit wear Red berets (\"Boina Rojas\") of the paratroopers with unit badges. As of 2022 it consists of:\nAustralia.\nAirborne forces raised by Australia have included a small number of conventional and special forces units. During the Second World War the Australian Army formed the 1st Parachute Battalion; however, it did not see action. In the post-war period Australia's parachute capability was primarily maintained by special forces units. In the 1970s and 1980s a parachute infantry capability was revived, while a Parachute Battalion Group based on the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment (3 RAR) was established in 1983. However, following a reorganisation 3 RAR relinquished the parachute role in 2011, and this capability is now maintained by units of Special Operations Command.\nFrance.\nConstant \"Marin\" Duclos was the first French soldier to execute a parachute jump on November 17, 1915. He performed 23 test and exhibition parachute drops without problems to publicise the system and overcome the prejudice aviators had for such life-saving equipment.\nIn 1935, Captain Geille of the French Air Force created the Avignon-Pujaut Paratroopers Schools after he trained in Moscow at the Soviet Airborne Academy. From this, the French military created two combat units called \"Groupes d\u2019Infanterie de l\u2019Air\".\nFollowing the Battle of France, General Charles de Gaulle formed the 1re Compagnie d\u2019Infanterie de l\u2019Air in September 1940 from members of the Free French forces who had escaped to Britain. It was transformed into the Compagnie de Chasseurs Parachutistes in October 1941. By June 1942, these units were fighting in Crete and Cyrenaica alongside the British 1st SAS Regiment. As part of the SAS Brigade, two independent French SAS units were also created in addition to the other French Airborne units. They operated until 1945.\nIn May 1943, the \"1er R\u00e9giment de Chasseurs Parachutistes\" was created from the 601e Groupe d'Infanterie de l'Air in Morocco and the 3e and 4e Bataillons d'Infanterie de l'Air (BIA) in England in the Special Air Service. The 2e and 3e R\u00e9giments de Chasseurs Parachutistes followed in July 1944.\nDuring the Invasion of Normandy, French Airborne forces fought in Brittany, (Operation Dingson, Operation Samwest). The first Allied soldier to land in France was Free French SAS Captain Pierre Marienne who jumped into Brittany (Plumelec, Morbihan) on June 5 with 17 Free French paratroopers. The first Allied soldier killed in the liberation of France was Free French SAS Corporal Emile Bou\u00e9tard of the \"4e Bataillon d\u2019Infanterie de l\u2019Air\", also in Brittany in Plumelec: June 6, 0 h 40. Captain Pierre Marienne was killed on July 12 in Plumelec. French SAS paratroopers also fought in the Loire Valley in September 1944, in Belgium on January, and in Netherlands in April 1945. The 1er R\u00e9giment Parachutiste de Choc carried out operations in Provence.\nAfter World War II, the post-war French military of the Fourth Republic created several new airborne units. Among them were the \"Bataillon de Parachutistes Coloniaux\" (BPC) based in Vannes-Meucon, the Metropolitan Paratroopers, and the Colonial Paratroopers and \"Bataillons \u00c9trangers de Parachutistes\" (French Foreign Legion), which coexisted until 1954. During the First Indochina War, a Bataillon Parachutiste Viet Nam was created (BPVN) in southeast Asia. In total, 150 different airborne operations took place in Indochina between 1945 and 1954. These included five major combat missions against the Viet Minh strongholds and areas of concentration.\nWhen the French left Vietnam in 1954, all airborne battalions were upgraded to regiments over the next two years. Only the French Air Force's Commandos de l'Air (Air Force) were excluded. In 1956, the 2e R\u00e9giment de Parachutiste Coloniaux took part in the Suez Crisis.\nNext, the French Army regrouped all its Army Airborne regiments into two parachute divisions in 1956. The 10th parachute division (\"10e Division Parachutiste\", 10e DP) came under the command of General Jacques Massu and General Henri Sauvagnac took over the 25th Parachute Division (\"25e Division Parachutiste\", 25e DP). Again the Commandos de l'Air were kept under command of the Air Force.\nBy the late 1950s, in Algeria, the FLN had launched its War of Independence. French paratroopers were used as counter insurgency units by the French Army. This was the first time in airborne operations troops used helicopters for air assault and fire support.\nBut in the aftermath of the Algiers putsch, the 10e and 25e Parachute divisions were disbanded and their regiments merged into the Light Intervention Division (\"Division L\u00e9g\u00e8re d'Intervention\"). This division became the 11th Parachute Division (\"11e Division Parachutiste\", 11e DP) in 1971.\nIn the aftermath of the Cold War, the French Army reorganised and the 11e DP become the 11th Parachute Brigade in 1999.\nGermany.\nThe first known airborne commando operation in military history was conducted by Maximilian Hermann Richard Paschen von Cossel, then Leutnant of the Royal Prussian Army and his new pilot, then Royal Saxon Vice Sergeant Rudolf Windisch. Windisch flew the Roland Walfisch used for this purpose and set Cossel down in a wooded area behind the Russian front. During the night of October 2/3, 1916, Cossel blew up the Rowno\u2013Brody railway line, 85 kilometers behind the eastern front, in several places. This was acknowledged in the army report of October 4, 1916: Eastern theater of war: ... Oberleutnant v. Cossel, who was set down from the plane southwest of Rowno by Vice Sergeant Windisch and picked up again after 24 hours, interrupted the Rowno-Brody railway line at several points by means of explosives. ... The First Quartermaster General. Ludendorff. According to Russian reports, however, the tracks were only slightly damaged in one place, so that a train just passing them could continue its journey unhindered.\nNazi Germany's \"Luftwaffe\" units made the first airborne invasion when invading Denmark on April 9, 1940, as part of Operation Weser\u00fcbung. In the early morning hours they attacked and took control of the Masned\u00f8 fort and Aalborg Airport. The Masned\u00f8 fort was positioned such as it guarded the Storstr\u00f8m Bridge between the islands of Falster and Masned\u00f8 \u2013 on the main road from the south to Copenhagen. Aalborg Airport played a key role acting as a refueling station for the Luftwaffe in the further invasion into Norway. In the same assault the bridges around Aalborg were taken. were also used in the Low Countries against the Netherlands, although their use against The Hague was unsuccessful. Their most famous drop was the 1941 Battle of Crete, though they suffered large casualties.\nHence later in the war, the 7th Air Division's \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" assets were re-organised and used as the core of a new series of elite Luftwaffe Infantry divisions, numbered in a series beginning with the 1st \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" Division. These formations were organised and equipped as motorised infantry divisions, and often played a \"fire brigade\" role on the western front. Their constituents were often encountered on the battlefield as ad hoc battle groups (\"Kampfgruppen\") detached from a division or organised from miscellaneous available assets. In accord with standard German practice, these were called by their commander's name, such as \"Group Erdmann\" in France and the \"Ramcke\" Parachute Brigade in North Africa.\nAfter mid-1944, \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" were no longer trained as paratroops owing to the realities of the strategic situation, but retained the \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" honorific. Near the end of the war, the series of new \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" divisions extended to over a dozen, with a concomitant reduction in quality in the higher-numbered units of the series. Among these divisions was the 9th \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" Division, which was the final parachute division to be raised by Germany during World War II. The Russian army destroyed the division during the Battle of Berlin in April 1945. The \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" were issued specialist weapons such as the FG 42 and specially designed helmets.\nIn the modern German \"Bundeswehr\", the \"Fallschirmj\u00e4gertruppe\" continue to form the core of special operations units. The division has two brigade equivalents and several independent companies and battalions. All told, about 10,000 troops served in that division in 2010, most of them support or logistics personnel. The Fallschirmj\u00e4gertruppe currently uses the Wiesel Armoured Weapons Carrier (AWC), a light air-transportable armoured fighting vehicle, more specifically a lightly armoured weapons carrier. It is quite similar to historical scouting tankettes in size, form and function, and is the only true modern tankette in use in Western Europe.\nIndia.\nThe Parachute Regiment is the Special Forces/airborne regiment of the Indian Army. The Regiment was formed in 1952\nThe regiment has a total of 14 regular, one Rashtriya Rifles and two Territorial Army (India) battalions; of the regular bns, five are Airborne battalions, while nine are Special Forces battalions. Formerly designated \"Commando\" units, they are now designated Special Forces:\nThree of the Special Forces battalions were originally trained for use in certain environments; 1st Bn [strategic reserve], 9th Bn [mountain] and 10th Bn [desert]. Subsequently, the 21st Bn was raised for jungle warfare. Currently, all Special Forces battalions are cross trained for all environments.\nThe 8th Battalion became 16th Battalion, Mahar Regiment in 1976 before reconverting to the 12th Battalion, Mechanised Infantry Regiment. A sizable part of the battalion was retained in the airborne role for some time, forming the armoured element of the 50th (Independent) Parachute Brigade and equipped with their BMP-2 Infantry Combat Vehicles. But due to administrative and logistic reasons, it was discontinued and their role being taken over by the para battalions themselves, with a platoon strength of each battalion being trained and equipped for the mechanized role within the brigade.\nThe 50th (Independent) Parachute Brigade comprises the following units:\n( 50th (Independent) Parachute Brigade Provost Section.\nThe President's Body Guard also forms part of the brigade as the pathfinders company.\nThree Airborne units in rotation form part of the Parachute Brigade alternatively serving their field tenures in counter-insurgency/high altitude areas. One of the two field regiments (9 Para Fd Regt and 17 Para Fd Regt) also forms part of the brigade while the other serves out its field tenure on rotation.\nThe two Territorial Army battalions, 106th (Bangalore) and 116th (Deolali) form the airborne element of the Terriers (as the Territorial Army is popularly known) and are presently involved in COIN operations.\n31st Battalion (Commando), Rashtriya Rifles, is also affiliated to the Parachute Regiment, for special operations conducted by the counter-insurgency force.\nIsrael.\nIsrael Defense Forces (IDF) paratroopers have a history of carrying out special forces-style missions dating back to the 1950s. Paratrooper Brigade soldiers wear maroon berets with the infantry pin and reddish-brown boots. Distinct from all other soldiers of the IDF, Paratroopers wear a tunic and belt over the shirt. The IDF has one active paratrooper brigade and four reserve brigades consisting of personnel who served their mandatory time in the 35th brigade, and who are mostly relatively recently discharged, aside from officers. The IDF paratrooper brigades include:\nItaly.\nThe first units of Italian parachutists were trained and formed shortly before the Second World War in Castel Benito, near Tripoli (Libya), where the first Military school of Parachuting was located. They were two native battalions of the and two battalions of Italian troops, later joined by the Carabinieri Paratroopers Battalion.\nMoved back to Italy in 1941, the staff of the Castel Benito school was expanded into the Paratroopers School at Tarquinia and became a massive training program. In 1941, a Parachutist division was completed and was designated the 185th Infantry Division \"Folgore\". It was trained for the assault on Malta but was used instead in ground combat operations in the North African Campaign, where it fought with great distinction during the Second battle of El Alamein, effectively stalling the southern part of the Commonwealth attack until the general retreat of the Axis forces, when it was destroyed.\nAnother major paratroopers division was formed during 1942 (the 184th Infantry Division \"Nembo\") and a third had started forming in 1943 (the 184th Parachute Division \"Ciclone\"). After the September 8th 1943 Armistice, elements of the \"Nembo\" division joined the Allies against the germans as part of the Italian Liberation Corps (\"Corpo Italiano di Liberazione\") and later as part of the Combat Group \"Folgore\" (\"Gruppo di Combattimento \"Folgore\"\") of the Italian Co-belligerent Army. Other scattered elements joined the Italian Social Republic, where they formed several Parachute units that continued to operate alongside the Germans against the Allies, fighting with distinction during the Battle of Anzio.\nAfter WW2, the Italian Army conscripted the Paratroopers Brigade \"Folgore\", currently the largest unit of paratroopers of the Italian Army. The Brigade operates as Light Infantry with airborne drop and air transport capability with secondary light mechanized capabilities, as part of the , the on-call divisional HQ controlling the rapid reaction components of the Italian Army.\nIn 1982 the Paratroopers Brigade \"Folgore\" landed in Beirut with the Multinational Force in Lebanon. In 1991, a Parachutist Tactical group was deployed to Kurdistan. Its mission was to provide humanitarian aid. From July 1992, the Brigade supplied personnel to the \"Vespri Siciliani\" and later \"Strade Sicure\" internal security operations. The Folgore participated in Operation Restore Hope in Somalia from 3 December 1992 to September 1993. Parts of the Brigade have been employed many times in the Balkans (IFOR/SFOR in Bosnia and KFOR in Kosovo), with MNF in Albania and INTERFET in East Timor. The Folgore participated from August 2005 to September 2005 in Operation Babylon in Iraq and to December 2014 in Afghanistan. In August 2007, the Folgore took part in United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, under aegis of the United Nations (Resolution 1701), as a result of the war between Israel and Hezbollah of summer 2006. The Paratroopers Brigade \"Folgore\" is still mainly deployed abroad in international stabilization and peacekeeping operation, on rotation with the other elite units of the Italian Army.\nOther paratroopers units operate as part of the Army Special Forces Command and of the other Special Forces components provided by the Navy, Air Force and Carabinieri.\nJapan.\n was a Japanese special forces/airborne unit during World War II. The unit was a division-level force, and was part of the Imperial Japanese Army Air Force (IJAAF).\nIt was commanded by a major general, and was organized as follows:\nNotably, Japanese troopers fought in the Battle of Palembang and in the takeover of Celebes in the Dutch East Indies.\nThe 1st Airborne Brigade (Japanese: \u7b2c1\u7a7a\u633a\u56e3, Dai-Ichi K\u016btei Dan), established in 1958 is the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force\u2019s elite airborne unit meant for anti-guerilla and commando operations. The unit is currently used for homeland defense and international combat operations as part of the JGSDF\u2019s Ground Component Command (Japanese: \u9678\u4e0a\u7dcf\u968a).\nPeru.\nDuring the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War, the Peruvian army had also established its own paratrooper unit and used it to great effect by seizing the Ecuadorian port city of Puerto Bol\u00edvar, on July 27, 1941, marking the first time in the Americas that airborne troops were used in combat.\nIn 1965, a paratrooper unit known as the Sinchis was established under the Civil Guard as a counterinsurgency and anti-narcotics force. With the dissolution of the Civil Guard in 1991, the unit became part of the National Police of Peru.\nPoland.\nThe 1st (Polish) Independent Parachute Brigade was a parachute brigade under the command of Major General Stanis\u0142aw Sosabowski, created during the Second World War in Scotland in September 1941, with the exclusive mission to drop into occupied Poland in order to help liberate the country. The British government, however, pressured the Poles into allowing the unit to be used in the Western theatre of war. Operation Market Garden eventually saw the unit sent into action in support of the British 1st Airborne Division at the Battle of Arnhem in 1944. The Poles were initially landed by glider from 18 September, whilst, due to bad weather over England, the parachute section of the Brigade was held up, and jumped on 21 September at Driel on the South bank of the Rhine. The Poles suffered significant casualties during the next few days of fighting, but still were able, by their presence, to cause around 2,500 German troops to be diverted to deal with them for fear of them supporting the remnants of 1st Airborne trapped over the lower Rhine in Oosterbeek.\nThe Brigade was originally trained close to RAF Ringway and later in Upper Largo in Scotland. It was finally based in Lincolnshire, close to RAF Spitalgate (Grantham) where it continued training until its eventual departure for Europe after D-Day.\nThe Brigade was formed by the Polish High Command in exile with the aim of it being used to support the Polish resistance during the nationwide uprising, a plan that encountered opposition from the British, who argued they would not be able to support it properly. The pressure of the British government eventually caused the Poles to give in and agree to let the Brigade be used on the Western Front. On 6 June 1944 the unit, originally the only Polish unit directly subordinate to the Polish government in exile and thus independent of the British command, was transferred into the same command structure as all other Polish Forces in the West. It was slotted to take part in several operations after the invasion of Normandy, but all of them were cancelled. On 27 July, aware of the imminent Warsaw Uprising, the Polish government in exile asked the British government for air support, including dropping the Brigade in the vicinity of Warsaw. This request was refused on the grounds of \"operational considerations\" and the \"difficulties\" in coordinating with the Soviet forces. Eventually, the Brigade entered combat when it was dropped during Operation Market Garden in September 1944.\nDuring the operation, the Brigade's anti-tank battery went into Arnhem on the third day of the battle (19 September), supporting the British paratroopers at Oosterbeek. This left Sosabowski without any anti-tank capability. The light artillery battery was left behind in England due to a shortage of gliders. Owing to bad weather and a shortage of transport planes, the drop into Driel was delayed by two days, to 21 September. The British units which were supposed to cover the landing zone were in a bad situation and out of radio contact with the main Allied forces. Finally, the 2nd Battalion, and elements of the 3rd Battalion, with support troops from the Brigade's Medical Company, Engineer Company and HQ Company, were dropped under German fire east of Driel. They overran Driel, after it was realised that the Heveadorp ferry had been destroyed. In Driel, the Polish paratroopers set up a defensive \"hedgehog\" position, from which over the next two nights further attempts were made to cross the Rhine.\nThe following day, the Poles were able to produce some makeshift boats and attempt a crossing. With great difficulty and under German fire from the heights of Westerbouwing on the north bank of the river, the 8th Parachute Company and, later, additional troops from 3rd Battalion, managed to cross the Rhine in two attempts. In total, about 200 Polish paratroopers made it across in two days, and were able to cover the subsequent withdrawal of the remnants of the British 1st Airborne Division.\nOn 26 September 1944, the Brigade (now including the 1st Battalion and elements of the 3rd Battalion, who were parachuted near to Grave on 23 September) was ordered to march towards Nijmegen. The Brigade had lost 25% of its fighting strength, amounting to 590 casualties.\nIn 1945, the Brigade was attached to the Polish 1st Armoured Division and undertook occupation duties in Northern Germany until it was disbanded on 30 June 1947. The majority of its soldiers chose to stay in exile rather than hazard returning to the new Communist Poland.\nPortugal.\nThe first Portuguese paratroopers were part of a small commando unit, organized in Australia, during World War II, with the objective to be dropped in the rearguard of the Japanese troops that were occupying Portuguese Timor.\nHowever, the first regular parachute unit was only created in 1955, by the Portuguese Air Force, as the Parachute \"Ca\u00e7adores\" Battalion. This unit adopted the green beret, which has become, since then, the principal emblem of the Portuguese paratroopers. The Battalion was expanded to a Regiment and additional parachute battalions were created in the Portuguese overseas territories of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea. These units were actively engaged in the Portuguese Colonial War, from 1961 to 1975, being involved both in airborne and air assault operations. In addition to the regular units of paratroopers, in Mozambique were also created the Parachute Special Groups, composed of African irregular troops who wore a maroon beret.\nWith the end of the Colonial War, the Portuguese parachute troops were reorganized as the Paratroopers Corps, with the Light Parachute Brigade as its operational unit. In 1993, the Paratroopers Corps was transferred from the Portuguese Air Force to the Portuguese Army and become the Airborne Troops Command, with the Independent Airborne Brigade as its operational unit.\nThe reorganization of the Portuguese Army in 2006 caused the extinction of the Airborne Troops Command. The Independent Airborne Brigade was transformed in the present Rapid Reaction Brigade, which now includes not only parachute troops but also special operations and commando troops.\nRussia.\nSoviet Airborne Forces were first formed in the Soviet Union during the mid-1930s and were the first regular paratrooper units in the world. They were massively expanded during World War II, forming ten Airborne Corps plus numerous Independent Airborne Brigades, with most or all achieving Guards status. The 9th Guards Army was eventually formed with three Guards Rifle Corps (37,38,39) of Airborne divisions. One of the new units was the 100th Airborne Division. At the end of the war they were reconstituted as Guards Rifle Divisions. They were later rebuilt during the Cold War, eventually forming seven Airborne Divisions, an Independent Airborne regiment and sixteen Air Assault Brigades. These divisions were formed into their own VDV commands (Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska) to give the Soviets a rapid strike force to spearhead strategic military operations.\nFollowing the collapse of the Soviet Union, there has been a reduction in airborne divisions. Three VDV divisions have been disbanded, as well as one brigade and a brigade-sized training centre. Nevertheless, Russian Airborne Troops are still the largest in the world.\nVDV troops participated in the rapid deployment of Russian forces in and around Pristina Airport during the Kosovo War. They were also deployed in Chechnya as an active bridgehead for other forces to follow.\nTurkey.\nThe Turkish Paratrooper Commando Battalion (T\u00fcrk Para\u015f\u00fct\u00e7\u00fc Komando Tugay\u0131) are an elite military unit within the Turkish Land Forces, established in 1952 under NATO's influence as part of a broader effort to modernize and professionalize the Turkish military. This highly trained unit specializes in airborne operations, special warfare, and rapid deployment in combat situations. The unit played a significant role in the Cyprus War of 1974, where Turkish forces intervened in response to a Greek-led coup and the subsequent threat to the Turkish Cypriot population. Paratrooper Commandos were among the first to land on the island during the initial stages of Turkey's military intervention, executing strategic airborne assaults that were crucial in securing key areas.\nUkraine.\nThe Ukrainian Air Assault Forces (abbreviated as DShV or AAFU), known until 2017 as the Ukrainian Airmobile Forces are the airborne forces of Ukraine. After the Dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, several Ukraine-based units from the Soviet Airborne Forces were absorbed into the newly created Ukrainian Ground Forces, where they remained until 2016, when they separated to become one of five branches of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. The Air Assault Forces are in constant combat readiness. They are the high-mobility branch of the military, responsible for air assaults and military parachuting operations. Before the Russo-Ukrainian War they were also the main forces sent by Ukraine to peacekeeping missions around the world. They are considered the elite of Ukraine's armed forces.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Parachute Regiment has its origins in the elite force of Commandos set up by the British Army at the request of Winston Churchill, the Prime Minister, during the initial phase of the Second World War. Churchill had been an enthusiast of the concept of airborne warfare since the First World War, when he had proposed the creation of a force that might assault the German flanks deep behind the trenches of the static Western Front. In 1940 and in the aftermath of the Dunkirk evacuation and the Fall of France, Churchill's interest was caught again by the idea of taking the fight back to Europe \u2013 the airborne was now a means \"to be able to storm a series of water obstacles... everywhere from the Channel to the Mediterranean and in the East\"\".\"\nEnthusiasts within the British armed forces were inspired in the creation of airborne forces (including the Parachute Regiment, Air Landing Regiment, and the Glider Pilot Regiment) by the example of the German Luftwaffe's Fallschirmj\u00e4ger, which had a major role in the invasions of Norway, and the Low Countries, particularly the attack on Fort Eben-Emael in Belgium, and a pivotal, but costly role in the invasion of Crete. From the perspective of others, however, the proposed airborne units had a key weakness: they required exactly the same resources as the new strategic bomber capability, another high priority, and would also compete with the badly stretched strategic air lift capability, essential to Churchill's strategy in the Far East. It took the continued reintervention of Churchill to ensure that sufficient aircraft were devoted to the airborne project to make it viable.\nBritain's first airborne assault took place on February 10, 1941, when, what was then known as II Special Air Service (some 37 men of 500 trained in No. 2 Commando plus three Italian interpreters), parachuted into Italy to blow up an aqueduct in a daring raid named Operation Colossus. After the Battle of Crete, it was agreed that Britain would need many more paratroopers for similar operations. No 2 Commando were tasked with specialising in airborne assault and became the nucleus of the Parachute Regiment, becoming the 1st Battalion. The larger scale drops in Sicily by the 1st Airborne Division in 1943 met with mixed success, and some commanders concluded the airborne experiment was a failure. Once again, it took the reintervention of senior British political leaders, looking ahead to the potential needs of the invasion of France, to continue the growth in British airborne resources.\nExtensive successful drops were made during the Normandy landings by the 6th Airborne Division (see Operation Tonga), under the command of Major-General Richard Nelson Gale, but Operation Market Garden to seize a corridor across the Netherlands as far as Arnhem with the 1st Airborne Division under Roy Urquhart were less successful, and proved, in the famous phrase, to be \"A Bridge too far\" and the 1st Airborne was virtually destroyed. Later large scale drops, such as those on the Rhine under Operation Varsity and involving the British 6th and the US 17th, were successful, but less ambitious in their intent to seize ground. After the war, there was fierce debate within the cash-strapped British armed forces as to the value of airborne forces. Many noted the unique contribution they had made within the campaign. Others pointed to the extreme costs involved and the need for strict prioritisation. During the debate, the contribution of British airborne forces in the Far Eastern theatres was perhaps underplayed, to the long term detriment of the argument.\nSeveral parachute squadrons of the Royal Air Force Regiment were formed in World War II in order to secure airfields for the RAF \u2013 this capability is currently operated by II Squadron.\nUnited States.\nIn 1930, the U.S. Army experimented with the concept of parachuting three-man heavy-machine-gun teams. Nothing came of these early experiments.\nThe first U.S. airborne unit began as a test platoon formed from part of the 29th Infantry Regiment, in July 1940. The platoon leader was 1st Lieutenant William T. Ryder, who made the first jump on August 16, 1940, at Lawson Field, Fort Benning, Georgia, from a B-18 bomber. He was immediately followed by Private William N. King, the first enlisted soldier to make a parachute jump.\nAlthough airborne units were not popular with the top U.S. Armed Forces commanders, President Franklin D. Roosevelt sponsored the concept, and Major General William C. Lee organized the first paratroop platoon. This led to the Provisional Parachute Group, and then the United States Army Airborne Command. General Lee was the first commander at the new parachute school at Fort Benning, in west-central Georgia.\nThe U.S. Armed Forces regards Major General William C. Lee as the father of the Airborne.\nThe first U.S. combat jump was near Oran, Algeria, in North Africa on November 8, 1942, conducted by elements of the 2nd Battalion, 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment. For the role of paratroopers in the Normandy Landings see American airborne landings in Normandy.\nU.S. Combat Jumps in WWII\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58477", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58477", "title": "Bacup", "text": "Town in Lancashire, England\nBacup ( , ) is a town in the Rossendale Borough in Lancashire, England, in the South Pennines close to Lancashire's boundaries with West Yorkshire and Greater Manchester. The town is in the Rossendale Valley and the upper Irwell Valley, east of Rawtenstall, north of Rochdale, and south of Burnley. At the 2011 Census, Bacup had a population of 13,323.\nBacup emerged as a settlement following the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain in the Early Middle Ages. For centuries, it was a small and obscure centre of domestic flannel and woollen cloth production, and many of the original weavers' cottages survive today as listed buildings. Following the Industrial Revolution, Bacup became a mill town, growing up around the now covered over bridge crossing the River Irwell and the north\u2013south / east-west crossroad at its centre. During that time its landscape became dominated by distinctive and large rectangular woollen and cotton mills. Bacup received a charter of incorporation in 1882, giving it municipal borough status and its own elected town government, consisting of a mayor, aldermen and councillors to oversee local affairs.\nIn 1974, Bacup became part of the borough of Rossendale. Bacup's historic character, culture and festivities have encouraged the town to be seen as one of the best preserved mill towns in England. English Heritage has proclaimed Bacup town centre as a designated protected area for its special architectural qualities.\nHistory.\nThe name Bacup is derived from the Old English \"f\u016blb\u00e6chop\". The \"Oxford Dictionary of British Place Names\" translates this as \"muddy valley by a ridge\"; the \"f\u016bl-\" element, which meant \"foul\" or \"muddy\" was used in the earliest known reference to the area, in a charter by Robert de Lacey, around the year 1200, as used in the Middle English spelling \"fulebachope\". The prefix \"ful-\" was dropped from the toponym. The \"-b\u00e6chop\" element is less clear, possibly meaning \"ridge valley\", or else \"back valley\" referring to the locale's position at the back part of the Irwell Valley.\nBacup and its hinterland has provided archeological evidence of human activity in the area during the Neolithic. Anglo-Saxons settled in the Early Middle Ages. It has been claimed that in the 10th century the Anglo-Saxons battled against Gaels and Norsemen at Broadclough, a village to the north of Bacup. From the medieval period in this area, the River Irwell separated the ancient parishes of Whalley and Rochdale (in the hundreds of Blackburn and Salford respectively). The settlement developed mainly in the Whalley township of Newchurch but extending into Rochdale's Spotland.\nThe geology and topography of the village lent itself to urbanisation and domestic industries; primitive weavers' cottages, coal pits and stone quarries were propelled by Bacup's natural supply of water power in the Early Modern period. The adoption of the factory system, which developed into the Industrial Revolution, enabled the transformation of Bacup from a small rural village into a mill town, populated by an influx of families attracted by Bacup's cotton mills, civic amenities and regional railway network. Locally sourced coal provided the fuel for industrial-scale quarrying, cotton spinning and shoemaking operations, stimulating the local economy. Bacup received a charter of incorporation in 1882, giving it honorific borough status and its own elected town government, consisting of a mayor, aldermen and councillors to oversee local affairs.\nBacup's boom in textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution resulted in the town developing into a prosperous and thickly populated industrial area by early-20th century. But the Great Depression and the ensuing deindustrialisation of the United Kingdom largely eliminated Bacup's textile processing sector and economic prosperity.\nBacup followed the regional and national trend of deindustrialisation during the early and mid-20th century; a process exacerbated by the closure of Bacup railway station in 1966. Bacup also experienced population decline; from 22,000 at the time of the United Kingdom Census 1911, to 15,000 at the United Kingdom Census 1971. Much of Bacup's infrastructure became derelict owing to urban decay, despite regeneration schemes and government funding. Shops became empty and some deteriorated. The houses along the main roads endured as the original terraces from Bacup's industrial age, but behind these, on the hillsides, are several council estates.\nRecords in 2005 show Bacup to have some of the lowest crime levels in the county, and the relative small change to Bacup's infrastructure and appearance has given the town a \"historic character and distinctive sense of place\". In 2007, the murder of Sophie Lancaster attracted media attention to the town and highlighted its urban blight and lack of amenities and regeneration.\nRegeneration.\nIn 2013 it was announced that Rossendale Borough Council was successful in securing \u00a32m funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund for a 5-year regeneration project, to be delivered by the Bacup Townscape Heritage Initiative (THI). The project focuses on the redevelopment and restoration of Bacup's unique built and cultural heritage whilst providing training in traditional building skills and to facilitate activities and events for local people. The injection of funds has significantly contributed to growing property prices in the area with the investments in the area being cited as one of the major reasons why the area is becoming increasingly attractive to people commuting to larger conurbations such as Greater Manchester.\nDue to the success of the Bacup THI and following public research and consultation, in 2019 the Rossendale Borough Council announced the development of the Bacup 2040 Vision and Masterplan. Bacup 2040 sets out a new vision for Bacup, aiming to capitalise on the gains made through the THI scheme whilst redeveloping aspects of the town to make it fit for a high-street model less reliant on retail and more suited to the needs of visitors and local residents alike. In order to realise the scheme, the council considered multiple bid options and the Bacup 2040 Vision was used as the basis of its bid for a share of the \u00a31b Future High Street Fund. The Bacup 2040 Board was established in 2019 and is made up of representatives from across Bacup, including local residents, business owners, community organisations, charities, councillors, council officers. The board is chaired by a local business owner and has 6 sub-group committees, chaired by representatives of different community organisations, reviewing the various aspects of the vision and plan. The role of the board is to \"inform, challenge and validate the scope and proposals for the redevelopment of Bacup.\"\nThe Bacup 2040 plan for the \u00a311.5m redevelopment of Bacup's core, including the Market Square, was reported on in February 2020 and later announced by the local council in June 2020.\nThe first stages of the commencement of the Bacup 2040 work was announced in June 2020, with the \u00a31m redevelopment of the long-time derelict Regal Building.\nIn the 2023 budget, it was announced that Rossendale would receive a grant of \u00a317.9m, of which \u00a38.3m would be dedicated to the Bacup Market regeneration scheme of which the Chair of the Bacup 2040 Board commented: \"At the heart of Temple Court will be an innovative two-storey, brand-spanking new market hall building, designed to be bustling with life. The ground floor will be a treasure trove of local produce, crafts and a varied array of food and drink \u2013 where market days and events will come to life - and where visitors will be encouraged to relax and enjoy the surroundings, both during the day and into the evening. The upper floor will introduce a cycle hub and makers\u2019 spaces, championing creativity and discovery.\"\nGovernance.\nLying within the historic county boundaries of Lancashire since the High Middle Ages, Bacup was a chapelry linked with the parishes of Whalley and Rochdale, and divided between the townships of Newchurch and Spotland in the hundred of Blackburn.\nBacup's first local authority was a Local board of health established in 1863; Bacup Local Board of Health was a regulatory body responsible for standards of hygiene and sanitation in the Bacup Urban Sanitary District. The area of the sanitary authority was granted a charter of incorporation in 1882, giving it honorific borough status and its own elected town government, consisting of a mayor, aldermen and councillors to oversee local affairs. The Municipal Borough of Bacup became a local government district of the administrative county of Lancashire under the Local Government Act 1894, meaning it shared power with the strategic Lancashire County Council. The council was based at Bacup Town Hall. Under the Local Government Act 1972, the Municipal Borough of Bacup was abolished, and since 1 April 1974 Bacup has formed an unparished area of Rossendale, a local government district of the non-metropolitan county of Lancashire.\nFrom 1992 until 2010, Bacup was represented in the House of Commons as part of the parliamentary constituency of Rossendale and Darwen, by Janet Anderson, a Labour Party Member of Parliament (MP). Bacup had previously formed part of the Rossendale constituency. In the general election of 2010, the seat was taken by Jake Berry of the Conservative Party, and in 2024 it was taken by Andy MacNae of Labour.\nGeography.\nAt (53.704\u00b0, \u22122.199\u00b0), north-northeast of Manchester, southeast of Blackburn and southwest of Bradford. Bacup stands on the western slopes of the South Pennines, amongst the upper-Irwell Valley. The River Irwell, a long tributary of the River Mersey, runs southwesterly through Bacup towards Rawtenstall from its source by the town's upland outskirts at Weir. The Irwell is mostly culverted in central Bacup but it is open in the suburbs. In 2003 there was a proposal to use plate glass for a section of the culvert in the centre of the town however the culvert was eventually replaced with concrete. Bacup is roughly above sea level; the Deerplay area of Weir is above sea level; Bacup town centre is above sea level.\nBacup is surrounded by open moor and grassland on all sides with the exception of Stacksteads at the west which forms a continuous urban area with Waterfoot and Rawtenstall. The towns of Burnley and Accrington are to the north and northwest respectively; Todmorden, Walsden and the county of West Yorkshire are to the east; Rochdale and the county of Greater Manchester are to the south; Rawtenstall, from where Bacup is governed, is to the west. Areas and suburbs of Bacup include Britannia, Broadclough, Deerplay, Dulesgate, Stacksteads and Weir.\nBacup experiences a temperate maritime climate, like much of the British Isles, with relatively cool summers, yet harsh winters. There is regular but generally light precipitation throughout the year.\nEconomy.\nBacup\u2019s economy reflects its industrial heritage and ongoing transition toward a more diversified local base. While traditional textile and footwear manufacturing declined during the late 20th century, the town is now home to a range of small and medium-sized enterprises across sectors such as engineering, plastics, furniture, and e-commerce.\nModern employment sites include Futures Park and New Line Industrial Estate, which support local businesses involved in production, distribution, and services. Companies with operations in Bacup include Orthoplastics, JJO plc, Dale Print, AV.com (a subsidiary of Gear4music), and the Lancashire Sock Manufacturing Company.\nAlthough Bacup forms part of the broader Pennine Lancashire economy, it retains a distinct local employment profile shaped by manufacturing and logistics. The workforce is concentrated in skilled trades, machine operation, and warehousing roles, reflecting the area\u2019s stock of light industrial units and repurposed factory buildings. Business activity in the town also includes niche and specialist manufacturing, supported by regional transport links via the A681 and proximity to the M66 corridor.\nLandmarks.\nThe town's parish church is dedicated to Saint John the Evangelist. Aside from just this church, Bacup has many other churches. The majority of Bacup's culturally significant architecture is in the Victorian period, but there are older buildings of note are Fearns Hall (1696), Forest House (1815) and the 18th-century Stubbylee Hall. The Bacup Natural History Society Museum was formed in 1878.\nBacup is home to the long Elgin Street which held the record as the shortest street in the world until November 2006, when it was surpassed by Ebenezer Place, in the Scottish Highlands.\nMany of the town's historic buildings are set to be renewed in a \u00a32m regeneration scheme.\nTransport.\nBacup railway station was opened in 1852 by the East Lancashire Railway as the terminus of the Rossendale line. \nThe Rochdale and Facit Railway was extended to Bacup in 1883. It rose over a summit of between Britannia and Shawforth. The Rochdale line closed to passenger services in 1947, and the station finally closed in December 1966, with the cessation of all passenger services to and from Manchester Victoria via Rawtenstall and Bury.\nIn June 2014 the police announced they would be monitoring the road between Weir and Bacup (which passes through Broadclough) as it has become an accident blackspot with a high number of accidents which have resulted in serious injury and even deaths.\nA671 Bypass proposals.\nThere have been a large number of road traffic incidents on the A671 as it passes through the small hamlets of Broadclough and Weir near Bacup including fatalities. Currently police are monitoring the road and there have been calls from local residents, led by County Councillor Jimmy Easton, for the creation of a bypass with the suggestion of utilising elements of Bacup Old Road.\nCulture and community.\nThe key date in Bacup's cultural calendar is Easter Saturday, when the Britannia Coconut Dancers beat the bounds of the town via a dance procession. Britannia Coconut Dancers are an English country dance troupe from Bacup whose routines are steeped in local folk tradition. They wear distinctive costumes and have a custom of blackening their faces. The origin of the troupe is claimed to have its roots in Moorish, pagan, medieval, mining and Cornish customs. The Easter Saturday procession begins annually at the Traveller's Rest Public House on the A671 road. The dancers are accompanied by members of Stacksteads Silver Band and proceed to dance their way through the streets.\nBacup Museum is local history hub and exhibition centre in Bacup. The Bacup Natural History Society was formed in 1878. The work of the society is carried out by a group of volunteers who have a base in the Bacup Museum which contains many domestic, military, industrial, natural history, and religious collections.\nBacup has been used as a filming location for the 1980s BBC TV police drama \"Juliet Bravo\", \"Hetty Wainthropp Investigates\", parts of \"The League of Gentlemen\" and much of the film \"Girls' Night\". Elements of the BBC TV drama \"Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit\" were also filmed on location in Bacup. The famous 1961 British film \"Whistle Down the Wind\" starring Hayley Mills also used various parts of Bacup for filming. The comedy drama \"Brassic\" was also largely filmed in Bacup.\nMedia.\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC North West and ITV Granada. Television signals are received from the Winter Hill and local relay TV transmitters.\nLocal radio stations are BBC Radio Lancashire on 95.5 FM, Heart North West on 105.4 FM, Capital Manchester and Lancashire on 107.0 FM, Greatest Hits Radio Lancashire on 96.5 FM, and Rossendale Radio, a community based radio station which broadcast to the town on 104.7 FM.\nThe town's news in print is provided by The Rossendale Free Press - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rossendale_Free_Press - a newspaper sold in most local retail outlets and nearby communities throughout the Rossendale Valley. The paper's Web site closed in 2023 and the publication's online news is now provided on Lancs Live -https://www.lancs.live/all-about/bacup.\nThe less widely available local printed newspaper that includes Bacup coverage and which still does maintain a Web site is the \"Lancashire Telegraph\".\nThe Sky TV comedy \"Brassic\" is partly filmed in Bacup.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58478", "revid": "48801553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58478", "title": "Airborne forces", "text": "Military units set up to be moved by aircraft and \"dropped\" into battle\nAirborne forces are ground combat units carried by aircraft and airdropped into battle zones, typically by parachute drop. Parachute-qualified infantry and support personnel serving in airborne units are also known as paratroopers.\nThe main advantage of airborne forces is their ability to be deployed into combat zones without a land passage, as long as the airspace is accessible. Formations of airborne forces are limited only by the number and size of their transport aircraft; a sizeable force can appear \"out of the sky\" behind enemy lines in merely hours if not minutes, an action known as \"vertical envelopment\".\nAirborne forces typically lack enough supplies for prolonged combat and so they are used for establishing an airhead to bring in larger forces before carrying out other combat objectives. Some infantry fighting vehicles have also been modified for paradropping with infantry to provide heavier firepower.\nProtocol I of the Geneva Conventions protects parachutists in distress, but not airborne troops. Their necessarily-slow descent causes paratroopers to be vulnerable to anti-air fire from ground defenders, but combat jumps are at low altitude (400\u2013500\u00a0ft) and normally carried out a short distance away (or directly on if lightly defended) from the target area at night. Airborne operations are also particularly sensitive to weather conditions, which can be dangerous to both the paratroopers and airlifters, and so extensive planning is critical to the success of an airborne operation.\nAdvances in VTOL technologies (helicopter and tiltrotor) since World War II have brought increased flexibility, and air assaults have largely been the preferred method of insertion for recent conflicts, but airborne insertion is still maintained as a rapid response capability to get troops on the ground anywhere in the world within hours for a variety of missions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly history.\nBenjamin Franklin envisioned the danger of airborne attack in 1784, only a few months after the first manned flight in a hot air balloon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Five Thousand Balloons capable of raising two Men each, would not cost more than Five Ships of the Line: And where is the Prince who can afford so to cover his Country with Troops for its Defense, as that Ten Thousand Men descending from the Clouds, might not in many Places do an infinite deal of Mischief, before a Force could be brought together to repel them?\nAn early modern operation was first envisioned by Winston Churchill who proposed the creation of an airborne force to assault behind the German lines in 1917 during the First World War. Later in late 1918. Major Lewis H. Brereton and his superior Brigadier General Billy Mitchell suggested dropping elements of the U.S. 1st Division behind German lines near Metz. The operation was planned for February 1919 but the war ended before the attack could be seriously planned. Mitchell conceived that US troops could be rapidly trained to utilize parachutes and drop from converted bombers to land behind Metz in synchronisation with a planned infantry offensive.\nFollowing the war, the United States Army Air Service experimented with the concept of carrying troops on the wings of aircraft, with them pulled off by the opening of their parachutes. The first true paratroop drop was by Italy in November 1927. Within a few years, several battalions were raised and eventually formed into two 185th Infantry Division \"Folgore\" and 184th Infantry Division \"Nembo\" divisions. Although they later fought with distinction in World War II, they were never used in a parachute drop. Men drawn from the Italian parachute forces were dropped in a special-forces operation in North Africa in 1943 in an attempt to destroy parked aircraft of the United States Army Air Forces.\nAt about the same time, the Soviet Union was also experimenting with the idea, planning to drop entire units complete with vehicles and light tanks. To help train enough experienced jumpers, parachute clubs were organized with the aim of transferring into the armed forces if needed. Planning progressed to the point that Corps-size drops were demonstrated to foreign observers, including the British Military Attach\u00e9 Archibald Wavell, in the Kiev military district maneuvers of 1935.\nOne of the observing parties, Nazi Germany, was particularly interested. In 1936, Major F. W. Immans was ordered to set up a parachute school at Stendal (Borstel), and was allocated a number of Junkers Ju 52 aircraft to train on. The military had already purchased large numbers of Junkers Ju 52s which were slightly modified for use as paratroop transports in addition to their other duties. The first training class was known as \"Ausbildungskommando Immans\". They commenced the first course on May 3, 1936.\nOther nations, including Argentina, Peru, Japan, France and Poland also organized airborne units around this time. France became the first nation to organize women in an airborne unit, recruiting 200 nurses who during peacetime would parachute into natural disaster zones but also as reservists who would be a uniformed medical unit during wartime.\nWorld War II.\nAxis operations.\nSeveral groups within the German armed forces attempted to raise their own paratroop formations, resulting in confusion. As a result, Luftwaffe General Kurt Student was put in overall command of developing a paratrooper force to be known as the .\nDuring the invasions of Norway and Denmark in Operation Weser\u00fcbung, the Luftwaffe dropped paratroopers on several locations. In Denmark, a small unit dropped on the Masned\u00f8fort on the small island of Masned\u00f8 to seize the Storstr\u00f8m Bridge linking the islands of Falster and Zealand. A paratroop detachment also dropped at the airfield of Aalborg which was crucial for the Luftwaffe for operations over Norway. In Norway, a company of paratroopers dropped at Oslo's undefended airstrip. Over the course of the morning and early afternoon of April 9, 1940, the Germans flew in sufficient reinforcements to move into the capital in the afternoon, but by that time the Norwegian government had fled.\nIn the Battle of France, members of the Brandenburg Regiment landed by Fieseler Fi 156 Storch light reconnaissance planes on the bridges immediately to the south of the 10th Panzer Division's route of march through the southern Ardennes. In Belgium, a small group of German glider-borne troops landed on top of the Belgian fortress of Eben Emael on the morning of May 10, 1940, and disabled the majority of its artillery. The fort held on for another day before surrendering. This opened up Belgium to attack by German Army Group B.\nThe Dutch were exposed to the first large scale airborne attack in history. During the invasion of the Netherlands, the Germans threw into battle almost their entire \"Luftlandekorps\", an airborne assault army corps that consisted of one parachute division and one division of airlanding troops plus the necessary transport capacity. The existence of this formation had been carefully kept secret until then. Two simultaneous airborne operations were launched. German paratroopers landed at three airfields near The Hague, hoping to seize the Dutch government. From one of these airfields, they were driven out after the first wave of reinforcements, brought in by Ju 52s, was annihilated by anti-aircraft fire and fierce resistance by some remaining Dutch defenders. As a result, numerous crashed and burning aircraft blocked the runway, preventing further reinforcements from landing. This was one of the few occasions where an airfield captured by paratroops has been recaptured. The other two airfields were recaptured as well. Simultaneously, the Germans dropped small packets of paratroopers to seize the crucial bridges that led directly across the Netherlands and into the heart of the country. They opened the way for the 9th Panzer Division. Within a day, the Dutch position became hopeless. Nevertheless, Dutch forces inflicted high losses on German transportation aircraft. Moreover, 1200 German elite troops from the \"Luftlandekorps\" taken prisoner around The Hague, were shipped to England just before the capitulation of the Dutch armed forces.\nThe \"Fallschirmj\u00e4gers\"' greatest victory and greatest losses occurred during the Battle of Crete. Signals intelligence, in the form of Ultra, enabled the British to wait on each German drop zone, yet despite compromised secrecy, surviving German paratroops and airlanded mountain troops pushed the Commonwealth forces off the island in part by unexpected fire support from their light 75 mm guns, though seaborne reinforcements were destroyed by the Royal Navy. However, the losses were so great that Adolf Hitler forbade their use in such operations in the future. He felt that the main strength of the paratroopers was novelty, and now that the British had clearly figured out how to defend against them, there was no real point to using them any more.\nOne notable exception was the use of airborne forces in special operations. On September 12, 1943, Otto Skorzeny led a daring glider-based assault on the Gran Sasso Hotel, high in the Apennines mountains, and rescued Benito Mussolini from house arrest with very few shots being fired. On May 25, 1944, paratroopers were dropped as part of a failed attempt to capture Josip Broz Tito, the head of the Yugoslav Partisans and later postwar leader of Yugoslavia.\nBefore the Pacific War began, the Imperial Japanese Army formed \"Teishin Dan\" (\"Raiding Brigades\") and the Imperial Japanese Navy trained marine (\"Rikusentai\") paratroopers. They used paratroops in several battles in the Dutch East Indies campaign of 1941\u20131942.\n\"Rikusentai\" airborne troops were first dropped at the Battle of Manado, Celebes in January 1942, and then near Usua, during the Timor campaign, in February 1942. \"Teishin\" made a jump at the Battle of Palembang, on Sumatra in February 1942. Japanese airborne units suffered heavy casualties during the Dutch East Indies campaign, and were rarely used as parachute troops afterward.\nOn 6 December 1944, a 750-strong detachment from \"Teishin Shudan\" (\"Raiding Division\") and the \"Takachiho\" special forces unit, attacked U.S. airbases in the Burauen area on Leyte, in the Philippines. The force destroyed some planes and inflicted casualties, but was eventually wiped out.\nJapan built a combat strike force of 825 gliders but never committed it to battle.\nAllied operations.\nIronically, the battle that ended Germany's paratrooper operations had the opposite effect on the Allies. Convinced of the effectiveness of airborne assaults after Crete, the Allies hurried to train and organize their own airborne units. The British established No.1 Parachute Training School at RAF Ringway near Manchester, which trained all 60,000 European paratroopers recruited by the Allies during World War II.\nAn Airlanding School was also set up in New Delhi, India, in October/November 1941, at the then-Welllingdon Airport (now the defunct Safdarjang Airport) to train paratroopers for the British Indian Army which had been authorised to raise an airborne-capable formation earlier, resulting in the formation of the 50th Indian Parachute Brigade. The Indian airborne forces expanded during the war to the point that an airborne corps was planned bringing together the 2nd Indian Airborne Division and the British 6th Airborne Division, but the war ended before it could materialize.\nA fundamental decision was whether to create small airborne units to be used in specific coup-de-main type operations, or to organize entire airborne divisions for larger operations. Many of the early successful airborne operations were small, carried out by a few units, such as seizing a bridge. After seeing success of other units and observing smokejumper training methods on how training can be done in June 1940, General William C. Lee of the U.S. Army established the Army's first airborne division. The 101st would be reorganized into the 101st Airborne Division.\nThe Allies eventually formed two British and five American divisions: the British 1st and 6th Airborne Divisions, and the U.S. 11th, 13th, 17th, 82nd, and 101st Airborne Divisions. By 1944, the British divisions were grouped into the 1st Airborne Corps under Lieutenant-General Sir Frederick Browning, while the American divisions in the European Theatre (the 17th, 82nd, and 101st) were organized into the XVIII Airborne Corps under Major General Matthew Ridgway. Both corps fell under the First Allied Airborne Army under U.S. Lieutenant General Lewis H. Brereton.\nThe first U.S. airborne operation was by the 509th Parachute Infantry Battalion in November 1942, as part of Operation Torch in North Africa. The U.S. 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions saw the most action in the European Theater, with the former in Sicily and Italy in 1943, and both in Normandy and the Netherlands in 1944. The 517th Parachute Regimental Combat Team was the principal force in Operation Dragoon in Southern France. The 17th Airborne Division deployed to England in 1944 but did not see combat until the Battle of the Bulge in January 1945 where they, along with the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions were deployed as ground troops.\nThe U.S. 11th and 13th Airborne Divisions were held in reserve in the United States until 1944 when the 11th Airborne Division was deployed to the Pacific, but mostly used as ground troops or for smaller airborne operations. The 13th Airborne Division was deployed to France in January 1945 but never saw combat as a unit.\nSoviet operations.\nThe Soviets mounted only one large-scale airborne operation in World War II, despite their early leadership in the field in the 1930s. Russia also pioneered the development of combat gliders, but used them only for cargo during the war.\nAxis air superiority early in the conflict limited the ability of the Soviets to mount such operations, whilst later in the conflict ongoing shortages of materiel, including silk for parachutes, was also a problem. Nonetheless, the Soviets maintained their doctrinal belief in the effectiveness of airborne forces, as part of their concept of \"deep battle\", throughout the war. The largest drop during the war was corp-sized (the Vyazma airborne Operation, the 4th Airborne Corps). It was unsuccessful. Airborne formations were used as elite infantry units however, and played a critical role in several battles. For example, at the Battle of Kursk, the Guards Airborne defended the eastern shoulder of the southern penetration and was critical to holding back the German penetration.\nThe Soviets sent at least one team of observers to the British and American airborne planning for D-Day, but did not reciprocate the liaison.\nEarly commando raids.\nOperation Colossus: Raid on the Tragino Aqueduct.\nBritain's first airborne assault took place on February 10, 1941, when 'X' Troop, No 11 Special Air Service Battalion (which was formed from No 2 Commando and subsequently became 1st Battalion, The Parachute Regiment) dropped into southern Italy from converted Whitley bombers flying from Malta and demolished a span of the aqueduct near Tragino in a daring night raid named Operation Colossus.\nOperation Squatter: Raid on Axis airfields in Libya.\n54 effectives of 'L' Detachment, Special Air Service Brigade (largely drawn from the disbanded Layforce) mounted a night parachute insertion onto two drop zones in Bir Temrad, North Africa on the night of November 16/17 1941 in preparation for a stealthy attack on the forward airfields of Gambut and Tmimi in order to destroy the Axis fighter force on the ground before the start of Operation Crusader, a major offensive by the British Eighth Army.\nOperation Biting: The Bruneval raid.\nA W\u00fcrzburg radar site on the coast of France was attacked by a company of 120 British paratroopers from 2 Battalion, Parachute Regiment, commanded by Major John Frost, in Operation Biting on February 27, 1942. The key electronic components of the system were dismantled by an English radar mechanic and brought back to Britain for examination so that countermeasures could be devised. The result was a British victory. Of the 120 paratroopers who dropped in the dead of night, there were two killed, six wounded, and six captured.\nMediterranean.\nOperation Mercury: Crete.\nThis was the last large-scale airborne assault by Hitler and the Germans. The German paratroopers had such a high casualty rate that Hitler forbade any further large-scale airborne attacks. The Allies, on the other hand, were very impressed by the potential of paratroopers, and started to build their own airborne divisions.\nOperation Torch: North Africa.\nThe first United States airborne combat mission occurred during Operation Torch in North Africa on 8 November 1942. 531 men of the 2nd Battalion, 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment flew over at night from Britain, over Spain, intending to drop near Oran and capture two airfields. Navigation errors, communications problems, and bad weather scattered the forces. Seven of the 39 C-47s landed far from Oran from Gibraltar to Tunisia, and only ten actually delivered their troops by parachute drop. The remainder off-loaded after 28 C-47 troop carriers, short on fuel, landed on the Sebkra d'Oran dry lake, and marched overland to their objectives.\nOne week later, after repacking their own chutes, 304 men of the battalion conducted a second combat jump on 15 November 1942 to secure the airfield at Youk-les-Bains near the Tunisian border. From this base, the battalion conducted combined operations with various French forces against the German Afrika Korps in Tunisia. A unit of French Algerian infantry, the 3rd Regiment of Zouaves, was present at Youk-les-Bains and awarded the American paratroopers their own regimental crest as a gesture of respect. This badge was awarded to the battalion commander on 15 November 1942 by the 3rd Zouaves' regimental commander, and is worn today by all members of the 509th Infantry.\nOperation Husky: Sicily.\nAs part of Operation Husky, the Allied invasion of the island of Sicily, four airborne operations (two British and two American) were carried out, landing during the nights of July 9 and 10 1943. The American paratroopers were from the 82nd Airborne Division, mainly Colonel James Gavin's 505th Parachute Regimental Combat Team (consisting of the 3rd Battalion of the 504th PIR, Company 'B' of the 307th Airborne Engineer Battalion and the 456th Parachute Field Artillery Battalion, with other supporting units), making their first combat jump. Strong winds encountered en route blew the dropping aircraft off course and scattered them widely. The result was that around half the paratroopers failed to make it to their rallying points. The British airborne troops from the 1st Airborne Division were glider infantry of the 1st Airlanding Brigade, commanded by Brigadier Philip Hicks, and they fared little better. Only 12 out of 137 gliders in Operation Ladbroke landed on target, with more than half landing in the sea. Nevertheless, the scattered airborne troops maximised their opportunities, attacking patrols and creating confusion wherever possible. On the night of 11 July, a reinforcement drop of the 82nd, consisting of the 504th Parachute Regimental Combat Team (composed of the 1st and 2nd Battalions, the 376th Parachute Field Artillery and Company 'A' of the 307th Airborne Engineer Battalion), under Colonel Reuben Tucker, behind American lines at Farello airfield resulted in heavy friendly fire casualties when, despite forewarnings, Allied anti-aircraft fire both ashore and aboard U.S Navy ships shot down 23 of the transports as they flew over the beachhead.\nDespite a catastrophic loss of gliders and troops loads at sea, the British 1st Airlanding Brigade captured the Ponte Grande bridge south of Syracuse. Before the German counterattack, the beach landings took place unopposed and the 1st Airlanding Brigade was relieved by the British 5th Infantry Division as it swept inland towards Catania and Messina.\nOn the evening of July 13, 1943, more than 112 aircraft carrying 1,856 men and 16 gliders with 77 artillerymen and ten 6 pounder guns, took off from North Africa in Operation Fustian. The initial target of the British 1st Parachute Brigade, under Brigadier Gerald Lathbury, was to capture the Primosole bridge and the high ground around it, providing a pathway for the Eighth Army, but heavy anti-aircraft fire shot down many of the Dakotas before they reached their target. Only 295 officers and men were dropped close enough to carry out the assault. They captured the bridge, but the German 4th Parachute Regiment recaptured it. They held the high ground until relieved by the 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division of the Eighth Army, which re-took the bridge at dawn on 16 July.\nThe Allied commanders were forced to reassess the use of airborne forces after the many misdrops and the deadly friendly fire incident.\nSwing Board and the Knollwood Maneuver.\nGeneral Dwight D. Eisenhower reviewed the airborne role in Operation Husky and concluded that large-scale formations were too difficult to control in combat to be practical. Lieutenant General Lesley J. McNair, the overall commander of Army Ground Forces, had similar misgivings: once an airborne supporter, he had been greatly disappointed by the performance of airborne units in North Africa and more recently Sicily. However, other high-ranking officers, including the Army Chief of Staff George Marshall, believed otherwise. Marshall persuaded Eisenhower to set up a review board and to withhold judgement until the outcome of a large-scale maneuver, planned for December 1943, could be assessed.\nMcNair ordered 11th Airborne Division commander Major general Joseph May Swing to form a committee\u2014the Swing Board\u2014composed of air force, parachute, glider infantry and artillery officers, whose arrangements for the maneuver would effectively decide the fate of divisional-sized airborne forces. As the 11th Airborne Division was in reserve in the United States and had not yet been earmarked for combat, the Swing Board selected it as the test formation. The maneuver would additionally provide the 11th Airborne and its individual units with further training, as had occurred several months previously in an earlier large-scale exercise conducted by the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions.\nThe 11th Airborne, as the attacking force, was assigned the objective of capturing Knollwood Army Auxiliary Airfield near Fort Bragg in North Carolina. The force defending the airfield and its environs was a combat team composed of elements of the 17th Airborne Division and a battalion from the 541st Parachute Infantry Regiment. The entire operation was observed by McNair, who would ultimately have a significant say in deciding the fate of the parachute infantry divisions.\nThe Knollwood Maneuver took place on the night of 7 December 1943, with the 11th Airborne Division being airlifted to thirteen separate objectives by 200 C-47 Skytrain transport aircraft and 234 Waco CG-4A gliders. The transport aircraft were divided into four groups, two of which carried paratroopers while the other two towed gliders. Each group took off from a different airfield in the Carolinas. The four groups deployed a total of 4,800 troops in the first wave. Eighty-five percent were delivered to their targets without navigational error, and the airborne troops seized the Knollwood Army Auxiliary Airfield and secured the landing area for the rest of the division before daylight. With its initial objectives taken, the 11th Airborne Division then launched a coordinated ground attack against a reinforced infantry regiment and conducted several aerial resupply and casualty evacuation missions in coordination with United States Army Air Forces transport aircraft. The exercise was judged by observers to be a great success. McNair, pleased by its results, attributed this success to the great improvements in airborne training that had been implemented in the months following Operation Husky. As a result of the Knollwood Maneuver, division-sized airborne forces were deemed to be feasible and Eisenhower permitted their retention.\nItaly.\nItaly agreed to an armistice with the Allies on September 3, 1943, with the stipulation that the Allies would provide military support to Italy in defending Rome from German occupation. Operation Giant II was a planned drop of one regiment of the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division northwest of Rome, to assist four Italian divisions in seizing the Italian capital. An airborne assault plan to seize crossings of the Volturno river during the Allied invasion of Italy, called Operation Giant, was abandoned in favor of the Rome mission. However, doubts about the willingness and capability of Italian forces to cooperate, and the distance of the mission far beyond support by the Allied military, resulted in the 82nd Airborne artillery commander, Brigadier General Maxwell Taylor (future commander of the 101st Airborne Division), being sent on a personal reconnaissance mission to Rome to assess the prospects of success. His report via radio on September 8 caused the operation to be postponed (and canceled the next day) as troop carriers loaded with two battalions of the 504th PIR were warming up for takeoff.\nWith Giant II cancelled, Operation Giant I was reactivated to drop two battalions of the 504th PIR at Capua on September 13. However, significant German counterattacks, beginning on September 12, resulted in a shrinking of the American perimeter and threatened destruction of the Salerno beachhead. As a result, Giant I was cancelled and the 504th PIR instead dropped into the beachhead on the night of September 13 using transponding radar beacons as a guide. The next night the 505th PIR was also dropped into the beachhead as reinforcement. In all, 3,500 paratroopers made the most concentrated mass night drop in history, providing the model for the American airborne landings in Normandy in June 1944. An additional drop on the night of September 14\u201315 of the 509th PIB to destroy a key bridge at Avellino, to disrupt German motorized movements, was badly dispersed and failed to destroy the bridge before the Germans withdrew to the north.\nIn April 1945, Operation Herring, an Italian commando-style airborne drop aimed at disrupting German rear area communications and movement over key areas in Northern Italy, took place. However the Italian troops were not dropped as a unit, but as a series of small (8\u201310 man) groups. Another operation, Operation Potato, was mounted by men drawn from the Folgore and Nembo divisions, operating with British equipment and under British command as No. 1 Italian Special Air Service Regiment. The men dropped in small groups from American C-47s and carried out a successful railway sabotage operation in northern Italy.\nWestern Europe.\nThe Allies had learned better tactics and logistics from their earlier airborne drops, and these lessons were applied for the assaults along the Western Front.\nOperation Neptune.\nOne of the most famous of airborne operations was Operation Neptune, the assault of Normandy, part of Operation Overlord of the Normandy landings on June 6, 1944. The task of the airborne forces was to secure the flanks and approaches of the landing beaches in Normandy. The British glider transported troops and paratroopers of the 6th Airborne Division, which secured the eastern flank during Operation Tonga. This operation included the capture of the Caen canal and Orne river bridges, and the attack on the Merville gun battery. The American glider and parachute infantry of the 82nd (Operation Detroit) and 101st Airborne Divisions (Operation Chicago), though widely scattered by poor weather and poorly marked landing zones in the American airborne landings in Normandy, secured the western flank of U.S. VII Corps with heavy casualties. All together, airborne casualties in Normandy on D-Day totaled around 2,300.\nOperation Dingson (5\u201318 June 1944) was conducted by about 178 Free French paratroops of the 4th Special Air Service (SAS), commanded by Colonel Pierre-Louis Bourgoin, who jumped into German-occupied France near Vannes, Morbihan, southern Brittany, in Plumelec, at 1130 on the night of 5 June and Saint-Marcel (8\u201318 June). At this time, there was approximately 100,000 German troops and artillery preparing to move to the Normandy landing areas. Immediately upon landing, 18 Free French went into action near Plumelec against German troops (Vlassov's army). The Free French established a base at Saint-Marcel and began to arm and equip local resistance fighters, operating with up to 3,000 Maquis. However, their base was heavily attacked by a German paratroop division on 18 June, and the men were forced to disperse. Captain Pierre Marienne with 17 of his companions (six paratroopers, eight resistance fighters and three farmers) died a few weeks later in Kerihuel, Plumelec, at dawn of 12 July. The Dingson team was joined by the men who had just completed Operation Cooney. Dingson was conducted alongside Operation Samwest and Operation Lost as part of Overlord.\nIn Operation Dingson 35A, on 5 August 1944, 10 Waco CG-4A gliders towed by aircraft of 298 Squadron and 644 Squadron transported Free French SAS men and armed jeeps to Brittany near Vannes (Locoal-Mendon), each glider carrying three Free French troopers and a jeep. One glider was lost with the death of the British pilot. The SAS teams remained behind enemy lines until the Allies arrived.\nOperation Dragoon: Southern France.\nOn August 15, 1944, airborne units of the 6th Army Group provisional airborne division, commanded by U.S. Major General Robert T. Frederick, opened Operation Dragoon, the invasion of Southern France, with a dawn assault. Called the \"1st Airborne Task Force\", the force was composed of the 1st Special Services Forces, British 2nd Independent Parachute Brigade, the 517th Parachute Regimental Combat Team, the 509th and 551st Parachute Infantry Battalions, the glider-borne 550th Airborne Infantry Battalion, and supporting units. Nearly 400 aircraft delivered 5,600 paratroopers and 150 guns to three drops zones surrounding Le Muy, between Fr\u00e9jus and Cannes, in phase 1, Operation Albatross. Once they had captured their initial targets, they were reinforced by 2,600 soldiers and critical equipment carried in 408 gliders daylight missions code-named Operation Bluebird, phase 2, simultaneous with the beach landings, and Operation Dove, phase 3. A second daylight parachute drop, Operation Canary, dropped 736 men of the 551st PIB with nearly 100% effectiveness late on the afternoon of August 15. The airborne objective was to capture the area, destroy all enemy positions and hold the ground until the U.S. Seventh Army came ashore.\nOperation Market Garden: \"A Bridge Too Far\".\nOperation Market Garden of September 1944, involved 35,000 airborne troops dropped up to behind German lines in an attempt to capture a series of bridges over the Maas, Waal and Rhine Rivers, in an attempt to outflank German fortifications and penetrate into Germany. The operation was hastily planned and many key planning tasks were inadequately completed. Three complete airborne divisions executed Operation Market, the airborne phase. These were the British 1st Airborne Division, the U.S. 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions, as well as the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade. All units were landed or dropped at various points along Highway 69 (\"Hell's Highway\") in order to create a \"carpet\" over which the British XXX Corps could rapidly advance in Operation Garden, the land phase. It was a daylight assault, with little initial opposition, and most units achieved high accuracy on drop and landing zones. In the end, after strong German counterattacks, the overall plan failed: the British 1st Airborne Division was all but destroyed at Arnhem, and the final Rhine bridge remained in German hands.\nOperation Repulse: re-supply of Bastogne.\nOperation Repulse, which took place in Bastogne on December 23, 24, 26, and 27, 1944, as part of the Battle of the Bulge, glider pilots, although flying directly through enemy fire, were able to land, delivering the badly needed ammunition, gasoline and medical supplies that enabled defenders against the German offensive to persevere and secure the ultimate victory.\nOperation Varsity: The Rhine Crossing.\nOperation Varsity was a daylight assault conducted by two airborne divisions, the British 6th Airborne Division and the U.S. 17th Airborne Division, both of which were part of the U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps. Conducted as a part of Operation Plunder, the operation took place on 24 March 1945 in aid of an attempt by the Anglo-Canadian 21st Army Group to cross the Rhine River. Having learnt from the heavy casualties inflicted upon the airborne formations in Operation Market Garden, the two airborne divisions were dropped several thousand yards forward of friendly positions, and only some thirteen hours after Operation Plunder had begun and Allied ground forces had already crossed the Rhine. There was heavy resistance in some of the areas that the airborne troops landed in, with casualties actually statistically heavier than those incurred during Operation Market Garden. The British military historian Max Hastings has labelled the operation both costly and unnecessary, writing that \"Operation Varsity was a folly for which more than a thousand men paid for with their lives\u00a0...\"\nPacific Theater.\nThe following airborne operations against the Japanese are famous.\nNew Guinea.\nIn September 1943, in New Guinea, the U.S. Army's 503rd Parachute Infantry Regiment and elements of the Australian Army's 2/4th Field Regiment made a highly successful, unopposed landing at Nadzab, during the Salamaua-Lae campaign. This was the first Allied airborne assault in the Pacific Theater.\nIn July 1944, the 503rd jumped again, onto Noemfoor Island, off Dutch New Guinea, in the Battle of Noemfoor.\nPhilippines.\nThe honors for recapturing the Rock went to the 503rd Parachute Regimental Combat Team of Lieutenant Colonel George M. Jones and elements of Major General Roscoe B. Woodruff's 24th Infantry Division, the same units which undertook the capture of Mindoro island. The U.S. 503rd Parachute Infantry Regiment's most famous operation was a landing on Corregidor (\"The Rock\") in February 1945, during the Philippines campaign of 1944\u201345.\nThe U.S. Army's 11th Airborne Division saw a great deal of action in the Philippines as a ground unit. The 511th Parachute Infantry Regiment made the division's first jump near Tagaytay Ridge on 3 February 1945, meeting no resistance at the drop zone. Elements of the division also jumped to liberate 2,000 Allied civilians interned at Los Ba\u00f1os, 23 February 1945. The final operation of the division was conducted on 23 June 1945, in conjunction with an advance by U.S. ground forces in northern Luzon. A task force from the 11th was formed and jumped on Camalaniugan Airfield, south of Aparri.\nBurma.\nA large British force, known as the Chindits, operated behind Japanese lines during 1944. In Operation Thursday, most of the units were flown into landing grounds which had been seized by glider infantry transported by the American First Air Commando Group, commencing on March 5. Aircraft continued to land reinforcements at captured or hastily constructed landing strips until monsoon rains made them unusable. Small detachments were subsequently landed by parachute. The operation eventually wound down in July, with the exhausted Chindits making their way overland to link up with advancing American and Chinese forces.\nFor Operation Dracula, an ad hoc parachute battalion group made up of personnel from the 153 and 154 (Gurkha) Parachute Battalions of the Indian Army secured Japanese coastal defences, which enabled the seaborne assault by the 26th Indian Infantry Division to attain its objectives with a minimum of casualties and time.\nEcuadorian\u2013Peruvian War.\nDuring the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War, the Peruvian army established its own paratrooper unit and used it to great effect by seizing the Ecuadorian port city of Puerto Bol\u00edvar, on July 27, 1941, marking the first time in the Americas that airborne troops were used in combat.\nAfter World War II.\nIndonesian War of Independence.\nThe Dutch Korps Speciale Troepen made two combat jumps during the Indonesian War of Independence. The first jump was as part of Operation Kraai: the capture of Yogyakarta, and the capture of Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta on 19 and 20 December 1948. \nThe second combat jump happened during Operation Ekster: the capture of Jambi and the oilfields surrounding is, on Sumatra from 29 December 1948 to 23 January 1949. From the Indonesian side, the first airborne operation was an airborne-infiltration operation by 14 paratroopers on 17 October 1947, in Kotawaringin, Kalimantan.\nKorean War.\nThe 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team (\"Rakkasans\") made two combat jumps in Korea during the Korean War. The first combat jump was made on October 20, 1950, at Sunchon and Sukchon, North Korea. The missions of the 187th were to cut the road north going to China, preventing North Korean leaders from escaping from Pyongyang; and to rescue American prisoners of war.\nThe second combat jump was made on Wednesday, March 21, 1951, at Munsan-ni, South Korea codenamed Operation Tomahawk. The mission was to get behind Chinese forces and block their movement north. The Indian Army 60th Parachute Field Ambulance provided the medical cover for the operations, dropping an ADS and a surgical team totalling 7 officers and 5 other ranks, treating over 400 battle casualties apart from the civilian casualties that formed the core of their objective as the unit was on a humanitarian mission. The unit was to become the longest-serving military unit in any UN operation till date, serving from October 1950 till May 1953, a total of three and a half years, returning home to a heroes' welcome.\nThe 187th served in six campaigns in Korea. Shortly after the war the 187th ARCT was considered for use in an Airborne drop to relieve the surrounded French garrison at Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam but the United States, at that time, decided not to send its troops into the combat zone.\nThe unit was assigned to the reactivated 101st Airborne Division and subsequently inactivated as a combat team in 1956 as part of the division's reorganization into the Pentomic structure, which featured battle groups in place of regiments and battalions. The 1st and 3rd Battalions, 187th Infantry, bearing the lineages of the former Co A and Co C, 187AIR, are now with the 101st Airborne Division as air assault units.\nFirst Indochina War.\nThe French used paratroopers extensively during their 1946-54 war against the Viet Minh. Troupes de marine, Foreign Legion and colonial Vietnamese units took part in numerous operations such as Operation Lea (1947), One of the first large-scale airborne operations in the conflict, French paratroopers landed at B\u1eafc K\u1ea1n in an attempt to capture General V\u00f5 Nguy\u00ean Gi\u00e1p and disrupt Viet Minh command, While tactically successful in scattering the Viet Minh and capturing equipment, Gi\u00e1p escaped, and the operation failed to deliver a decisive blow, The Battle of N\u00e0 S\u1ea3n (1952), where they were able to secure a key defensive victory using the Hedgehog Defense tactic or (le h\u00e9risson) for the first time in Indochina, Operation Hirondelle (1953) was a focused raid to destroy Viet Minh supply depots near L\u1ea1ng S\u01a1n, Paratroopers successfully disrupted Viet Minh logistics by destroying hidden supply caches, Despite achieving several tactical successes through their elite training and mobility, the paratroopers\u2019 efforts were frequently countered by the Viet Minh\u2019s adaptability and logistical constraints, were to culminate in the disastrous siege of Dien Bien Phu.\nSuez crisis: Operations Machbesh &amp; Musketeer.\nLaunching the 1956 Suez War, on October 29, 1956, Israeli paratroopers led by Ariel Sharon dropped onto the important Mitla Pass to cut off and engage Egyptian forces. \"Operation Machbesh\" (Press) was the IDF's first and largest combat parachute drop.\nA few days later, Operation Musketeer needed the element of total surprise to succeed, and all 660 men had to be on the ground at El Gamil airfield and ready for action within four and a half minutes. At 04.15 hours on November 5, 1956, British 3rd Battalion, Parachute Regiment jumped in and although opposition was heavy, casualties were few. Meanwhile, French paratroopers of the 2nd Marine Infantry Parachute Regiment under the command of Colonel Chateau-Jobert jumped on the water treatment factory South of Port Said.\nThe landings from the sea the next day saw the first large-scale heliborne assault, as 45 Commando, Royal Marines were landed by helicopters in Port Said from ships offshore. Both the British and the French accomplished total military victory against the disorganized Egyptian military and local armed civilians but political events forced total retreat of these forces after 48 hours of fighting.\nIndo-Pakistani War of 1965.\nParatroopers were used in combat in South Asia after the Second World War during the Indo-Pakistan War of 1947, Indian Annexation of Goa in 1961 and Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. The war in 1965 had the largest use of paratrooper forces, and unlike in previous conflicts, they were used in their intended capacity fully (They were not used in the airborne capacity in 1961, and it is unconfirmed in 1947). A covert operation was launched by the Pakistani Army with the intention of infiltrating Indian airbases and sabotaging them. The SSG (Special Service Group) commandos, were parachuted into Indian territory. Of the 180 para-commandos dropped, 138, including all officers but one, were captured and safely taken to prisoner of war (POW) camps. Twenty-two were killed, or rather lynched by joint combing teams of villagers armed with sticks, police and even bands of muleteers released by the Army, from the animal transport battalion of the nearby Corps headquarters.\nOnly 20 para-commandos were unaccounted for and most escaped back to Pakistan under the fog. Most of these were from the Pathankot group, dropped less than 10\u00a0km from the border in an area that had plenty of ravines, riverine tracks to navigate back along.\nThe War also saw the establishment of the first Indian Airborne Special Forces Unit - The Meghdoot Force - which was tasked with operations behind Pakistani Lines. This force is the predecessor to the modern India Para commando (SF) units, and had a major influence on modern Indian Special forces units. \nBangladesh Liberation War of 1971.\nDuring the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971, the Parachute Regiment of the Indian Army fought in numerous contacts in both the Eastern and Western Theatres. On 11 December, India airdropped the 2nd battalion (2 Para) in what is now famous as the Tangail airdrop. The paratroop unit was instrumental in denying the retreat and regrouping of the Pakistani Army and contributed substantially to the early collapse of Dhaka via covert operations. The regiment earned the battle honours of Poongli Bridge, Chachro and Defence of Poonch\u2014during these operations.\nIndonesian Invasion of East Timor.\nThe Indonesian Army used airborne troops in their 1975 invasion of East Timor. Following a naval bombardment of Dili, on December 7, 1975, Indonesian seaborne troops landed in the city while paratroops simultaneously descended on the city. 641 Indonesian paratroopers jumped into Dili, where they engaged in six-hours combat with East Timorese gunmen.\nVietnam War.\nIn 1963, in the Battle of Ap Bac, ARVN forces delivered airborne troops by helicopter and air drop. The use of helicopter-borne airmobile troops by the United States Army in the Vietnam War was widespread, and became an iconic image featuring in newsreels and movies about the conflict.\nIn February 1967 Operation Junction City was launched, it would be the largest operation the Allied forces would assemble. During this operation, 845 members of the 2nd Battalion, 503rd Airmen (Airborne), the 319th Artillery (Airborne), and elements of H&amp;H company of the 173rd Airborne Brigade made the only combat jump in Vietnam.\nRhodesian Bush War.\nThe men of the Rhodesian Light Infantry made more parachute jumps than any other military unit in history. While an Allied paratrooper of the Second World War would be considered a \"veteran\" after one operational jump, an RLI paratrooper could make three operational jumps in a single day, each in a different location, and each preceding a successful contact with the enemy. Between 1976 and 1980, over 14,000 jumps were recorded by the Rhodesian Security Forces as a whole.\nThe world record for operational jumps by an individual soldier is held by Corporal Des Archer of 1 Commando, RLI, who made 73 operational jumps between 1977 and the end of the war.\nFireforce is a variant of the tactic of vertical envelopment of a target by helicopter-borne and small groups of parachute infantry developed by the Rhodesian Security Force.\nFireforce counter-insurgency missions were designed to trap and eliminate insurgents before they could flee. The Rhodesian Security Force could react quickly to insurgent ambushes, farm attacks, Observation Post sightings, and could also be called in as reinforcements by trackers or patrols which made contact with the enemy. It was first deployed in January 1974 and saw its first action a month later on 24 February 1974. By the end of Rhodesian operations with internal peace agreements, Fireforce was a well-developed counterinsurgency tactic.\nFireforce was an operational assault or response usually composed of a first wave of 32 soldiers carried to the scene by three Alouette III helicopters and one Dakota transport aircraft, with another Alouette III helicopter as a command/gunship aircraft and a light attack aircraft in support. One of the advantages of the Fireforce was its flexibility as all that was needed was a reasonable airstrip. It was such a successful tactic that some Rhodesian Light Infantry soldiers reputedly made as many as three parachute combat jumps in one day.\nAngolan Bush War: Cassinga.\nDuring the War in Angola, paratroopers of the South African Army attacked a South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) military base at the former town of Cassinga, Angola on 4 May 1978. Conducted as one of the three major actions of Operation Reindeer during the South African Border War, it was the South African Army's first major airborne assault.\nSoviet and Russian VDV.\nThe Soviet Union maintained the world's largest airborne force during the Cold War, consisting of seven airborne divisions and a training division. The VDV was subordinated directly to the Ministry of Defense of USSR, and was a 'prestige service' in the armed forces of the USSR and Russia to reflect its strategic purpose. Recruits received much more rigorous training and better equipment than ordinary Soviet units. Unlike most airborne forces, which are a light infantry force, VDV has evolved into a \"fully mechanized\" parachute-deployed force thanks to its use of BMD-series light IFVs, BTR-D armoured carriers, 2S9 Nona self-propelled 120\u00a0mm gun-howitzer-mortars and 2S25 Sprut-SD 125\u00a0mm tank destroyers.\nThe VDV have participated in virtually all Soviet and Russian conflicts since the Second World War, including the Soviet\u2013Afghan War. As an elite force, the VDV developed two distinctive items of clothing: the \"telnyashka\", or striped shirt, and the famous blue beret. Airborne assault (\u0434\u0435\u0441\u0430\u043d\u0442\u043d\u043e-\u0448\u0442\u0443\u0440\u043c\u043e\u0432\u044b\u0435 \u0432\u043e\u0439\u0441\u043a\u0430 or DShV) units wore similar striped shirts (as did the naval infantry) but used helicopters, rather than the Military Transport Aviation's An-12s, An-22s, and Il-76s, which carried the airborne troops and their equipment.\nSoviet Glider Infantry.\nThe Soviets maintained three glider infantry regiments until 1965.\nOperation Meghdoot.\nOperation Meghdoot (lit. \"Operation Cloud Messenger\"), launched in the early hours of 13 April 1984, was the codename given to the preemptive strike launched by the Indian Armed Forces' to gain control of the Siachen Glacier in Kashmir, precipitating the Siachen conflict.\nExecuted in the highest battlefield in the world, Meghdoot was the first ever military offensive of its kind. The operation was a success, resulting in Indian forces gaining control of the Siachen Glacier in its entirety.\nRecent history.\nWith the advantages of helicopter use, airborne forces have dwindled in numbers in recent years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58479", "revid": "48314188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58479", "title": "Badagas", "text": "Ethno-linguistic group in Tamil Nadu, India\nThe Badagas are an ethno-linguistic community living in the Nilgiris district in Tamil Nadu, India. Throughout the district the Badugas live in nearly 400 villages, called Hattis. The Badagas speak a language called Badaga.\nHistory.\nThe name Badaga, meaning 'northerner', comes from Old Kannada \"Badagana\", meaning 'north.' According to the Badaga oral tradition, their ancestors were presumed to be Vokkaligas who migrated from the plains of Mysore to avoid Muslim persecution. According to American anthropologist Paul Hockings, whose research on the Badagas spans nearly six decades, \"the (Badaga) tribe despite its sketchy history is as indigenous to the Nilgiris as the English are to Britain.\"\nThey claim to come from seven siblings living in the Thalaimalai Hills. After they fled from a Muslim ruler who tried to rape their sister, they settled in different parts of the Nilgiris. The second brother, Hethappa, was working outside when two Todas raped his wife and took his goods. He sought the aid of two Bayaluru, who agreed to help him if he married his two daughters with them. They killed the Todas, and the inhabitants of the village at the time claimed descent from the Bayalurus and Badaga's daughters.\nCulture.\nThroughout the district the Badagas live in nearly 400 villages, called \"Hattis\".\n\"Thundu\" (a white piece of cloth) and \"Seeley\" forms an integral part of the attire of the Badugu women.\nBadugas marry within their community and follow their own marriage traditions. Their important festival is Devva Habba. Devva Habba provides significant insights into the origin of Badugas. They have certain rules and regulations to be followed in implementing their cultural rituals from the birth of a child and follows through functions like puberty, marriage, naming ceremony, seventh-month pregnancy, housewarming, and finally in death.\nThey worship their seven founding ancestors under the name Hethappa or Hetha.\nDuring time of early 1900s they were known to swear very solemn oaths by the Sri Mariamman temple. For this they bathed, brought coconut and fruit, and killed an animal. The head they put on the step of the shrine, and from seven feet off they would walk to the temple step and put out the light that was shining in front of the idol. Even the Britisher judges, in court, would also abide by this practice and occasionally send witnesses to do this ritual along with a Court official to ensure they were telling the truth. Even today they place great reverence in Sri Mariamman: in April they celebrate a car festival at the Sri Mariamman temple in Ooty when they pull the car with the image of Sri Mariamman to their music and dance.\nLanguage.\nThe Badaga language is spoken by the Badaga community. The language is closely related to Kannada. LACITO in Paris houses numerous varieties of Badaga stories and songs collected over the past two decades.\nEducation.\nSeveral Badaga have become officials in various parts of the Indian Government.\nFormer Lok Sabha MP, the late Akkamma Devi, was the first Badaga woman to graduate from college and represented the Nilgiris Lok Sabha constituency from 1962 to 1967. Belli Lakshmi Ramakrishnan M.A. was the first Badaga woman post graduate in social work, and went on to be the first woman gazetted officer to serve in the Tamil Nadu State Government Department of Health and Family Welfare.\nScheduled Tribe Status.\nThere is a long-standing demand to restore the status of the Badagas in the list of Scheduled Tribes under the Indian Constitution. The Badagas were on the tribes list during the British Raj, as per the 1931 census. After Independence, Badagas were on the Scheduled Tribe list during the 1951 census, but were later removed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58480", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58480", "title": "Badajoz", "text": "Badajoz is the capital of the Province of Badajoz in the autonomous community of Extremadura, Spain. It is situated close to the Portuguese border, on the left bank of the river Guadiana. The population in 2011 was 151,565.\nBadajoz was conquered by the Moors in the 8th century and re-founded as Ba\u1e6dalyaws, and later in the 11th century the city became the seat of a separate Moorish kingdom, the Taifa of Badajoz. After the Reconquista, the area was disputed between Spain and Portugal for several centuries with alternating control resulting in several wars including the Spanish War of Succession (1705), the Peninsular War (1808\u20131811), the Storming of Badajoz (1812), and the Spanish Civil War (1936). Spanish history is largely reflected in the town.\nBadajoz is the see of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of M\u00e9rida-Badajoz. Prior to the merger of the Diocese of M\u00e9rida and the Diocese of Badajoz, Badajoz was the see of the Diocese of Badajoz from the bishopric's inception in 1255. The city has a degree of eminence, crowned as it is by the ruins of the Moorish castle Alcazaba of Badajoz and overlooking the Guadiana river, which flows between the castle-hill and the powerfully armed fort of San Cristobal. The architecture of Badajoz is indicative of its tempestuous history; even the Badajoz Cathedral, built in 1238, resembles a fortress, with its massive walls. It is served by Badajoz Railway Station and Badajoz Airport.\nHistory.\nAncient times.\nArchaeological finds unearthed in the Badajoz area have been dated to the Bronze Age. Megalithic tombs are dated as far back as 4000 BC, while many of the steles found are from the Late Bronze Age. Other finds include weapons such as axes and swords, everyday items of pottery and utensils, and various items of jewellery such as bracelets. Archaeological excavations have revealed remnants from the Lower Paleolithic period. Artifacts have also been found at the Roman town of Colonia Civitas Pacensis in the Badajoz area, although a significant number of larger artifacts were found in M\u00e9rida.\nWith the invasion of the Romans, which started in 218 BC during the Second Punic War, Badajoz and Extremadura became part of the administrative district called Hispania Ulterior (Farther Spain), which was later divided by Emperor Augustus into Hispania Ulterior Baetica and Hispania Ulterior Lusitania; Badajoz became part of Lusitania. Though the settlement is not mentioned in Roman history, Roman villas such as the La Cocosa Villa have been discovered in the area, while Visigothic constructions have also been found in the vicinity.\nFounding to Middle Ages.\nBadajoz attained importance during the reign of Moorish rulers such as the Umayyad caliphs of C\u00f3rdoba, and the Almoravids and Almohads of North Africa. From the 8th century, the Umayyad dynasty controlled the region until the early 11th century. The official foundation of Badajoz was laid by the Muladi nobleman Ibn Marwan, around 875, after he had been expelled from M\u00e9rida. Under Ibn Marwan, the city was the seat of an effective autonomous rebel state which was quenched only in the 10th century. In 1021 (or possibly 1031), it became the capital of a small Muslim kingdom, the Taifa of Badajoz; with some 25,000 inhabitants. Badajoz was known as \"Ba\u1e6dalyaws\" () during Muslim rule, from which its present name gradually evolved. The invasion of Badajoz by Christian rulers in 1086 under Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n, overturned the rule of the Moors. In addition to an invasion by the Almoravids of Morocco in 1092, Badajoz was later invaded by the Almohads in 1147.\nBadajoz was captured by Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n on 19 March 1230. Shortly after its conquest, in the time of Alfonso X the Wise of Castile, a bishopric see was established and work was initiated on the Cathedral of San Juan Bautista. In 1336, during the reign of Alfonso XI of Castile, the troops of King Afonso IV of Portugal besieged the city. However, soon afterwards, the Castilian-Leonese troops, which included Pedro Ponce de Le\u00f3n the Elder and Juan Alonso P\u00e9rez de Guzm\u00e1n y Coronel, second lord of Sanl\u00facar de Barrameda and son of Alonso P\u00e9rez de Guzm\u00e1n, defeated the troops of Afonso IV in the Battle of Villanueva de Barcarrota. Their victory forced the king of Portugal to desert the city and it fell into neglect.\nIn medieval times, the S\u00e1nchez de Badajoz family dominated the area as the lords of Barcarrota, near Badajoz, acquiring the property in 1369 when it was granted to Fern\u00e1n S\u00e1nchez de Badajoz by Enrique II. They temporarily lost Barcarrota to the Portuguese but soon regained control. Fern\u00e1n S\u00e1nchez's grandson of the same name, son of Garci S\u00e1nchez de Badajoz, was both lord of Barcarrota and Mayor of Badajoz in 1434. Garci S\u00e1nchez de Badajoz, probably his son, was a notable writer, and one of his descendants, Diego S\u00e1nchez de Badajoz, was also a notable playwright; his \"Recopilaci\u00f3n en metro\" was published posthumously in 1554.\nFrom the 11th century-1492, a Jewish community existed in Badajoz. During the 1492 expulsion from Spain, the city served as a transit point of Jewish refugees to Portugal and later developed into a smuggling center.\nThe first hospital was founded in the town by Bishop Fray Pedro de Silva in 1485. Those affected by the plague epidemic were treated here in 1506. During the 16th century the city experienced a cultural renaissance thanks to personalities such as the painter Luis de Morales, the composer Juan V\u00e1zquez, the humanist Rodrigo Dosma, the poet Joaquin Romero de Cepeda, the playwright Diego S\u00e1nchez de Badajoz, the Dominican mystic Fray Luis de Granada and architect Gaspar M\u00e9ndez. In 1524, a board meeting between representatives of Spain and Portugal took place in the Old Town Hall in the city to clarify the status of their territorial arrangements, attended by Hernando Col\u00f3n, Juan Vespucio, Sebasti\u00e1n Caboto, Juan Sebasti\u00e1n Elcano, Diego Ribeiro and Esteban G\u00f3mez. \nWith reason to assert their rights to the Portuguese Crown, Philip II of Spain briefly moved his court to Badajoz in August 1580. Queen Anne of Austria died in the city two months later, and on 5 December 1580, Philip moved out of the city. From 1580 until 1640, as a result of the absence of war, the city flourished once again. According to the historian Vicente Navarro del Castillo, some 428 residents of Badajoz contributed to the Spanish conquest of the Americas, including conquistadors https://, Pedro de Alvarado, Luis de Moscoso, and Sebasti\u00e1n Garcilaso de la Vega y Vargas (father of Inca Garcilaso). In 1640, the city was attacked during the Portuguese Restoration War.\n1660\u20131811.\nThe battle for control of the town and its fortress continued with attacks by the Portuguese in 1660. In 1705, during the Spanish War of Succession, Badajoz was controlled by the Allies following the death of the heirless King Charles II. It was taken by Spain, prompting Philip V, grandson of Louis XIV of France, to take over the reins of Spain itself. In 1715 Portugal signed a peace agreement with Spain and surrendered its claims to Badajoz in lieu of Spain's cession of Sacramento territory in the La Plata area in South America. The Peace Treaty of Badajoz was signed between Spain and Portugal on 6 June 1801. The Portuguese, feeling that an attack by French troops stationed in Ciudad Rodrigo was imminent, agreed to cede Olivenza to Spain and declared that it would close its ports to British ships. This agreement was revoked in 1807 as its terms were breached when the Treaty of Fontainbleau was signed between Spain and France on 27 October 1807.\nDuring the Peninsular War, Badajoz was unsuccessfully attacked by the French in 1808 and 1809. However, on 10 March 1811, the Spanish commander, Jos\u00e9 Imaz, was bribed into surrendering to a French force under Marshal Soult. A British and Portuguese army, commanded by Marshal Beresford, endeavoured to retake it and on 16 May 1811 defeated a relieving force at Albuera, but the siege was abandoned the following month.\nThe Storming of Badajoz (1812).\nIn 1812, Arthur Wellesley, Earl of Wellington (and future duke), again attempted to take Badajoz, which had a French garrison of about 5,000 men. Siege operations commenced on 16 March; by early April, there were three practicable breaches in the walls. These were assaulted by two British divisions on 6 April, reputed to be \"Wellington's bloodiest siege\", with a loss of some 5,000 British soldiers out of 15,000. After a five-hour onslaught the storming of the breaches failed. The French also lost some 1,200 of their 5,000 soldiers in the battle. Despite the failure at the breaches, the castle and another section of undamaged wall had been attacked and the town was successfully taken by the British. After the capture of the city, the victorious troops (after getting drunk on stocks of captured alcohol) sacked the city, killing and raping numerous civilians. In the view of British historian Ronald Fraser, this was the worst night of the Peninsular War. It took three days before the men were brought back into order. When order was restored some 200\u2013300 civilians had likely been killed or injured. Wellington wrote to Lord Liverpool, \"The capture of Badajos affords as strong an instance of the gallantry of our troops as has ever been displayed, but I anxiously hope that I shall never again be the instrument of putting them to such a test as that to which they were put last night.\"\nPedro Caro, 3rd Marquis of la Romana, died at Badajoz on 23 January 1811 in a fit of apoplexy, seized at the moment when he was leaving his house to concert a plan of military operations with Lord Wellington. In the Siege of Badajoz, a detachment of the 45th Regiment of Foot (later amalgamated with the 95th to form the Sherwood Foresters Regiment) succeeded in getting into the castle first and the red coatee of Lt. James MacPherson of the 45th regiment was hoisted in place of the French flag to indicate the fall of the castle. This feat is commemorated on 6 April each year, when red jackets are flown on regimental flag staffs and at Nottingham Castle. Volume 23 of the \"Museum of Foreign Literature, Science and Art\", published in 1833, described Badajoz as \"one of the richest and most beautiful towns in the south of Spain, whose inhabitants had witnessed its siege in silent terror for one and twenty days, and who had been shocked by the frightful massacre.\" On 5 August 1883 there was an attempted mutiny by elements of the Spanish Armed Forces when a climate of confusion and chaos prevailed.\nSpanish Civil War.\nThe Spanish Civil War in Badajoz in the 1930s was a gruesome affair. During the war, Badajoz was taken by the Nationalists in the Battle of Badajoz. Infamously, several thousand of the town's inhabitants, both men and women, were taken to the town's bullring after the battle and after machine guns were set up on the barriers around the ring, an indiscriminate slaughter began. On 14 August 1936, hundreds of Republicans were shot at the Plaza de Toros. In the course of the night, another 1,200 were brought in. Overall it is estimated that over 4,000 people were murdered by the Nationalists after the battle. Even those who tried to cross the Portuguese border were captured and sent back to Badajoz. The troops who committed the killings at Badajoz were under the command of general Juan Yag\u00fce, who, after the civil war, was appointed Minister of Aviation by Franco. For the actions of his troops at Badajoz, Yag\u00fce was popularly known as the \"Butcher of Badajoz\".\nModern history.\nAfter the war, the town continued to grow, although since 1960 it has suffered significant migrations to other Spanish regions and other European countries. During the following decades, the predominant economic activity of the city increasingly fell within the tertiary sector, and today Badajoz is a major commercial centre in southwestern Spain and an important bridge between Spain and Portugal for trade and cultural relations. On 6 November 1997, a heavy flood devastated several neighbourhoods of the city, causing the deaths of 21 people and devastating the property of hundreds. The catastrophe was caused by the Atlantic extratropical trough crossing the Iberian Peninsula and inundating the Rivilla and Calamon brooks, which are usually dry. The neighbourhood of Cerro de Reyes, near the confluence of both streams, received the brunt of the damage caused by the flood.\nGeography.\nBadajoz is located in the southwest of the Iberian Peninsula on the bank of the Guadiana River on the border with Portugal. It is the capital city of the province of the same name. It is from M\u00e9rida, from C\u00e1ceres, from Seville, east of Lisbon, and from Madrid. The newer part of the city is on the left bank of the river, with several industrial estates and the university hospital.\nIn geological terms, Badajoz is located in the South Submeseta. It was founded on the banks of the Guadiana River on a Paleozoic limestone hill, carved by the river. On this hill is the Alcazaba, one of the main sights of the city. The municipality of Badajoz contains soils derived from tertiary deposits, dating to the Paleozoic era. Its average altitude is above sea level. The highest points are located in the Cerro del Viento (), at Fuerte San Crist\u00f3bal () and Cerro de la Muela (). The lowest point is the Guadiana River ().\nClimate.\nBadajoz has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\") being very similar to the climates found between the microclimates of the coast and of the central valley of California (e.g. Stockton), with mild winters but with more common temperatures below zero and hot summers being sometimes a year at 40\u00a0\u00b0C or more. At the same time the precipitation is at a threshold close to a semi-arid climate. The climate of Badajoz has drastic changes between the summer and winter as seen in the chart below. Altitude of the measuring station is . The average annual temperature is . The average high temperature in July is around whereas the coldest average low temperatures is around in January. Average annual rainfall is around , with December recording the maximum of and July is the driest month with rainfall of . Humidity level is at an annual average level of 63%. The city receives an average 2,950 hours of sunshine a year.\nDemographics.\nIn 2010, Badajoz had 150,376 inhabitants. According to the 2010 census, Badajoz had 73,074 men and 77,312 women, representing a percentage of 48.6% and a 51.4% respectively. Compared to the statistics for the Extremadura region (49.7% and 50.3%), Badajoz city had a greater relative presence of women.\nAlthough the city is the most populated of Extremadura, it has a relatively low population density (102.30 inhabitants/km2), due to the extension of its municipality, one of the largest in Spain, with an area of 1,470\u00a0km2. In addition to the metropolitan centre the population includes districts, neighborhoods and towns with small populations, the most populous of which is Guadiana, which had 2,524 people in 2012, but gained independence on 17 February 2012.\nAdministration.\nBadajoz was the birthplace of the statesman Manuel de Godoy, the duke of Alcudia (1767\u20131851). Many of the provincial administration buildings are located in Badajoz, as well as the government buildings of the municipal administration. Politically, Badajoz belongs to the Spanish Congress Electoral District of Badajoz, which is the largest electoral district about of 52 districts in the Spanish Congress of Deputies in terms of geographical area and includes a significant part of the Extremadura region. The electoral district was first contested in modern times in the 1977 General Election. At the time of the 2011 election, Badajoz had six deputies representing the district in congress, four from the People's Party-United Extremadura party (PP-EU), and two from the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE).\nNeighborhoods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nHistorically, frequent wars ravaged Badajoz's economy and people were poor. Agricultural land was not fertile with no industry of any major importance in its territory. However, the historic monuments in the town and also in M\u00e9rida were major attractions to visitors, leading to the growth of tourism, and in recent years there has been some industrial development.\nBadajoz primarily is now a commercial city, ranked 25th place in economic importance in Spain according to Spain's Economic Yearbook for 2007, published by Servicio de Estudios de La Caixa. Because of its location, the city shares a considerable transit trade with Portugal. The service sector is dominant in the city. The main shopping street is Menacho, where most national and international chains are located. The Centro Comercial Abierto Menacho is the largest outdoor shopping centre in Extremadura which has had several hundred thousand euros invested into it, and it is visited by thousands of Portuguese a year. Notable industries include manufacturing of linen, woollen and leather goods, hats, pottery, and soap. Trade thrives on customers from the province and Portugal. Because of the importance of such trading relations with the neighboring country, in 2006, a new trade fair venue, Instituci\u00f3n Ferial de Badajoz (IFEBA) was established in the suburbs near the bank of the Caia River. An economic and cultural centre, it has a wide range of markets from fish and various food stalls to health shops,\" The Old Town area has been affected by this trade fair but is slowly recovering, with the opening of new stores.\nThe city's industrial land on the western side of the river is concentrated almost entirely in a large industrial estate, El Nevero, located next to the A-5 (one of the six radial roads in Spain with numbers A-1-A-6), which is continually expanding, with a diversity of companies operating there. There are also other industrial estates in the suburbs and small businesses in neighborhoods like San Roque. In summer 2007, the project to build the new 38\u00a0million euro headquarters of the Caja de Badajoz was made public, which began to be built in October 2008 and is currently in use. The Torre Caja Badajoz is a financial centre that has a building height of with 17 floors, now the tallest building in Extremadura. The city also has an airport, located from the town centre, expanded in 2009 and a conference centre.\nNotable landmarks.\nThe city is studded with Moorish and medieval architecture, although its remnants of Roman and Visigothic architecture are not as prominent as in nearby M\u00e9rida. The Alcazaba fortress is the most notable structure in the city which attests to the Moorish culture in Badajoz. It was the only important fort on the southern Portuguese frontier during the 17th and 18th centuries and controlled the routes of southern Portugal and Andalusia and was a staging point for invasions against Portugal. It was occupied by the dukes of La Roca during the Christian period. It presently serves as the Archeological Museum of Badajoz. Many of Badajoz's historical monuments which were in ruins have been refurbished. Its restaurants, pubs and nightlife are a major attraction for the Portuguese across the border. The 13th-century Badajoz Cathedral (converted from a mosque in 1238) is in the old city and its architecture is indicative of the tempestuous history of Badajoz, resembling a fortress, with its massive walls. Three of the cathedral's windows are unique \u2013 one is in Gothic style, the second is Renaissance style and the third is in Platersque style.\nMunicipal buildings.\nPalacio de Congresos de Badajoz, the congressional palace, is the work of the architects Jos\u00e9 Selgas and Lucia Cano. Palacio Municipal houses the City Hall. The remains of the original City Hall building are in ruins. The current building dates to 1852, and the clock was added in 1889. In 1937, the municipal architect, Rodolfo Martinez, renovated the building, with particular emphasis on stylistic uniformity, expanding its towers and changing its decorative elements. It features a balustrade, a central balcony and columns.\nBadajoz has several municipal libraries serving the city and wider province, including the Biblioteca P\u00fablica Municipal A. Dominguez, Biblioteca P\u00fablica Municipal Bda. de Llera, Biblioteca P\u00fablica Municipal Cerro de Reyes, Biblioteca P\u00fablica Municipal Pardaleras, and the Biblioteca P\u00fablica Municipal San Roque.\nHistorical sites.\nAlcazaba.\nThe Alcazaba, a Moorish citadel built in the 9th century by Ibn Marwan, was fortified by the Almohad caliph Abu Yaqub Yusuf in 1169, although there are traces of earlier work dating back to 913 and 1030. The Alcazaba served as the primary residences for the rulers of the Taifa of Badajoz in the 11th and 12th centuries. The Almohad rulers were expelled in the 13th century at the hands of Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n. The Torre de Espantaperros has a height of and is built of mud and mortar. It has an octagonal plan with a quadrangular structure that once provided scenic views of the countryside. The name is attributed to the sharp ringing of a bell that was one installed in the tower. The building attached to it, built in the 16th century called La Galera, once served as city hall, then a prison and finally it is now the Archaeological Museum. A well-tended garden surrounded this monument where archeological finds from the Visigothic, Roman, and other periods were found.\nVauban fort.\nThe Vauban military fort was built in the 17th century during the war between Spain and Portugal that lasted from 1640 to 1668 as a defense measure to counter-attack forces entering the city from the northwest and southeast. It is made of stone, brick and lime concrete. It has eight bastions built on the northern part of the fort as the Guadiana and Rivilla rivers on the south provided the defense. The bastions are named as the San Pedro, La Trinidad, the Santa Mar\u00eda, the San Roque, the San Juan, the Santiago, the San Jos\u00e9 and the San Vicente.\nLa Giralda.\nLa Giralda, located near Plaza de la Soledad, is a replica of the Giralda in Sevilla. The structure was completed in 1930 by a local businessman for commercial intent. Built in the neo-Arab Andalusian regionalist style, it is decorated with ceramic tiles and metal work and has the symbol of Mercury embossed on it as symbol of commerce. In 1978, Telef\u00f3nica acquired the building and refurbished it, established operating offices. In 1998, Telef\u00f3nica vacated the structure, and four years later, offered the structure to potential buyers for \u20ac4.2\u00a0million. No buyer was uncovered, and Telef\u00f3nica announced plans to reestablish local offices in the Giralda but later abandoned it. Various proposals for the local government to acquire the building have been made, including plans for appropriating an expansion of the Museum of Fine Arts, a regional cultural centre, and an Easter-centric museum, Easter being a major touristic draw for the city.\nPuerta de Palmas.\nThe Puerta de Palmas was built in 1551. It has two cylindrical towers flanking the entrance door. Prince Philip II and Emperor Charles V and date of construction are mentioned on the outer side of the tower. The towers are fortified with battlements and they have two decorative cords at the top and bottom levels. Its entrance is east-facing, and is double-arched and is decorated with medallions of the shield of the Emperor Charles V. It was once used as a prison, but has since undergone many renovations and has been an entrance point to the city.\nReal Monasterio de Santa Ana.\nIt is a Christian monastery in Badajoz, declared a Bien de Inter\u00e9s Cultural site in 1988. It is the headquarters of the Order of St. Clare in the city and lies in the heart of the old city. It was founded in 1518 by Ms. Leonor de Vega i Figueroa, under the blessing of Pope Leo X, and belonged to the jurisdiction of the Franciscan province of San Miguel. According to the tombstone in the grounds, Figueroa was abbess of the monastery for forty years until her death on April 17, 1558. She was buried in the grounds, until moved to the Cripta Real del Monasterio de El Escorial. The monastery underwent a major transformation in the 18th century although the original structure partly remains. Outwardly, part of the building has buttresses and a tower with two bells. On the vault of the chancel stands a lookout tower with a lattice brick convent, topped with pinnacles. The church of the monastery has a single nave which was rebuilt in the late 17th century, and the presbytery is covered by a late Gothic rib vault dated to the first half of the 16th century.\nThe church contains numerous altarpieces, imagery, paintings, and silverware.\nGardens.\nThe Jardines de la Galera date back to the 10th century from the aftasids. They are nestled between the Torre de Espantaperros and the Chemin de ronde, within the Alcazaba. Many Alhambran ruins still exist within the gardens, and have been open to the public since 2007 after the site was restored after being closed for more than thirty years. The etymology of the gardens stems from the fact that the gardens provided a respite for prisoners sentenced to the gallows in Seville. Plant species extant in the gardens include \"cinnamomum camphora\", \"dichondra repens\", \"ceiba speciosa\", and trees of the myrtle, laurel, orange, lemon, and pomegranate. Other parks and gardens include Castelar, which has a central pond and several monuments dedicated to the romanticist writer Carolina Coronado and to Luis Chamizo Trigueros, la Legi\u00f3n, Rivillas y Calam\u00f3n, San Fernando, and La Vi\u00f1a. The city also has a water and leisure park, called the Lusiberia.\nMuseums.\nThe Museo Extreme\u00f1o e Iberoamericano de Arte Contempor\u00e1neo (MEIAC) has collections of Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American artists. The building is located on the site of the old Pretrial Detention and Correctional centre, which had been built in the mid-1950s on the grounds of a former 17th-century military stronghold, known as the Fort of Pardaleras. The Museo Provincial de Bellas Artes (Provincial Museum of Fine Arts), the premier gallery of Extremadura, is set in two palatial 19th-century homes next to the Plaza de la Soledad. It is in size, with more than 1,200 paintings and sculptures from the 16th to the 20th century representing over 350 artists such as Zurbar\u00e1n, Luis de Morales, Caravaggio,\n Flemish painters, Francisco de Goya, Felipe Checa, Torre Isunza, Eugenio Hermoso, Adelard Covars\u00ed, Antonio Juez Nieto, Francisco Pedraja Mu\u00f1oz, Pablo Picasso, and Salvador Dal\u00ed, among others. \nThe Museo de la Ciudad \"Luis de Morales\" (\"Luis de Morales\" City Museum) was built in what may have been the home of the Renaissance painter Luis de Morales and contains many his paintings. The Museo Arqueol\u00f3gico Provincial (Provincial Archaeological Museum) is located within the fortress, containing pieces from all parts of the Province of Badajoz. The building houses the 16th-century palace of the dukes of Feria. The collection is organized into six major areas: prehistory, early history, Roman, Visigoth, Medieval Islam and Christian. The elegant building is built of stone and brick masonry, and has four towers at the corners with a terraced facade. The interior is made up of Mudejar brick arches resting on octagonal columns.\nThe Museo Catedralicio (Cathedral Museum) is situated on the cathedral grounds. It provides a historical journey through the different stages of the building's construction. It also features artifacts from the founding of the archdiocese to the present day. The collections include Filipino ivories, carvings and Flemish tapestries, the tombstone of Alfonso Su\u00e1rez de Figueroa, and the Custodia Procesional del Corpus of 1558. There are also works by Luis de Morales and Zurbar\u00e1n. The Museo Taurino (Bullfighting Museum) is located in the city centre, organized by the Extremadurian Bullfighting Club. It includes posters, photographs and objects from the world of bullfighting. The Museo del Carnaval (Carnival Museum) opened in 2007 in the Menacho centre. Costumes of groups who participated over the years in the city's carnival are exhibited in the museum. In 2008, it joined the Extremadura network of museums.\nPlazas.\nPlaza de Espa\u00f1a is in the centre of the city, the layout was designed by the city architect Rodolfo Martinez in 1917 and completed in 1920. The large cathedral centers the historical area. Plaza de Cervantes is considered place of importance for the history of Badajoz. Parts of the square occupy an area which belonged to St. Andrew's Church and its cemetery. It is decorated in white marble with a concentric mosaic of pointed stars dating to 1888. Plaza Alta, recently restored, was for centuries the center of the city since it exceeded the limits of the Muslim citadel; it was formerly known simply as \"the square\". Spanish flamenco guitarist Paco de Luc\u00eda performed on the Plaza Alta on 10 July 2013. La Giralda is located near Plaza de la Soledad.\nResidential buildings.\nCasa \u00c1lvarez-Buiza, a private house and commercial complex, was built in the San Juan district by Adel Franco Pinna between 1918 and 1912. The building located on the Plaza de La Soledad once housed the offices of the Bank of Spain. Artistic elements include the use of lime, brick and colorful ceramics with an Andalusian influence. Casa del Cord\u00f3n is a private house, built in the late Gothic style of the early 16th century, and has mullioned windows. It currently houses the Archdiocese. Casa Puebla, built in 1921, is one of the other designs of Pinna, who designed numerous buildings around Badajoz. It is one of the best examples of regional architecture in Andalusian style and the property has two facades, the main one featuring neo-Renaissance elements.\nCemeteries.\nDuring the Visigoths period the burials, as noted from the archeological finds, were near the Picuri\u00f1a, Pardaleras, and Cerro de Reyes sites. During the Arab period, burials were along the roads and near the eastern suburb of the Citadel, close to Cerro de la Muela and also in the area of Santiago bastion; these locations were noted during recent excavations. Badajocenses Christians from the earliest centuries towards the end of 19th century buried their dead in or near churches.\nBadajoz's oldest two cemeteries are Cementerio de San Juan and Cementerio de Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Soledad. The cemeteries in active use are the Cementerio de San Juan, Cementerio Virgen de las Nieves de Balboa, Cementerio de la Inmaculada Concepci\u00f3n de G\u00e9vora, Cementerio San Isidro de Novelda, Cementerio Inmaculado Coraz\u00f3n de Mar\u00eda de Valdeb\u00f3toa and Cementerio Santiago Ap\u00f3stol de Villafranco.\nThe Cementerio de San Juan is the oldest of cemeteries still in service and is dated to earlier than1839.\nBridges.\nThe city of Badajoz is home to five bridges, four of which span the Guadiana.\nThe Puente de Palmas, also known as Puente Viejo, is the oldest bridge in Badajoz; the masonry was first laid in 1460, but a sudden rise in the river's waters destroyed the structure in 1545. It was rebuilt under D. Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, Governor of Badajoz, during the reign of Philip II of Spain. In 1603, 16 of its 24 spans were destroyed by floods and were restored between 1609 and 1612. The bridge was once again rebuilt in 1833; Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Otero was the engineer and Valentin Falcato, the architect. Further improvements were made during the early 21st century, when the number of spans was increased to 32 and towers were added at both ends giving a total length of . The bridge reflects the city's history with all the changes made to its spans, arches, pillars and buttresses over the centuries.\nPuente de la Universidad, or Puente Nuevo, is downstream of the old Palmas Bridge. It was built in 1960. Puente de la Autonom\u00eda Extreme\u00f1a was completed in 1990 and is located upstream of Puente de Palmas, connecting to the major roads which lead to Madrid and to Highway N-435 Badajoz-Fregenal de la Sierra. Puente Real is a suspension bridge across the Guadiana, the fourth bridge in the city which was completed in 1994 The foundation stone was laid by the King of Spain in 1992. It has six spans of viaducts of each in a total bridge length of . It has a bicycle lane and links to the Elvas Avenue leading to Portugal and many other city centres.\nCulture and education.\nWhile not a city renowned for its culture and art, many notable artists, musicians, and writers were born in the city. Hailing from the city in the arts are the actors Luis Alcoriza, Manuel de Blas, the writers Arturo Barea, Vicente Barrantes Moreno, Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Prudencio, Emilio Morote Esquivel, Jes\u00fas Garc\u00eda Calder\u00f3n, the singers Antonio Hormigo, Rosa Morena, Federico Cabo, Guadiana Almena, La Caita, Porrina de Badajoz and the pianists Crist\u00f3bal Oudrid and Esteban S\u00e1nchez, and painters such as Luis de Morales, Antonio Vaquero Poblador, Felipe Checa, Adelardo Covars\u00ed Yustas, and many others. The Instituci\u00f3n Ferial de Badajoz (IFEBA), established in 2006, has not only become an important economic centre but has become a prominent regional cultural centre, and aside from trading it also regularly hosts cultural events from horse racing to break dancing to paintballing to Caribbean dancing. The principal theatre in Badajoz is the Teatro L\u00f3pez de Ayala, a grand white-painted theatre with arched windows with a capacity of 800 seats. Performances of theatre, opera, concerts, and exhibitions are put on in the venue.\nLike much of southern Spain, flamenco is very popular, and performances are regularly put on in Badajoz on the Plaza Alta and other venues. Some flamenco palos linked to Badajoz are and Extremaduran tangos. The classical music group Banda Municipal de M\u00fasica, established in 1867, also performs at such venues in Badajoz and the wider province; as of 2013 it had 33 musicians. In 1998 the municipal government established the Municipal School of Music in Badajoz (). As of 2013, classes are held in four venues in the public schools of Enrique Segura Covas\u00ed, Luis de Morales, Santo Tom\u00e1s de Aquino and Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Soledad, teaching some 600 students. The school teaches clarinet, flute, guitar, percussion, piano, saxophone, trumpet, violin, and singing. Crist\u00f3bal Oudrid (1825\u20131877), one of the founding fathers of Spanish musical nationalism, was born in Badajoz, son of the resident military bandmaster. Rosa Morena, a well-known flamenco-pop singer who was popular in the 1970s, was born in the city and still lives there; her most popular song is \"\u00c9chale guindas al pavo\".\nThe festival known as \"Feria de San Juan\" is held every year from 23 June to 1 July at this border town, which is a major attraction not only for people of Spain but also to the Portuguese who cross the border to attend the one-week festival. This festival also includes bull fights.\nBadajoz is influenced by its border with Portugal. Portuguese restaurants and pastries can be found in the city, and residents often travel across the border for meals/excursions.\nBadajoz is home to the Universidad de Extremadura (UNEX) Badajoz campus, situated on the west side of the river. The university was founded on 4 November 1968, when the Faculty of Badajoz belonging to the University of Seville was established. Today, the University of Extremadura has branches in Badajoz, C\u00e1ceres, M\u00e9rida, and Plasencia. In 1971 the Council of Ministers approved the establishment of the College of Arts of C\u00e1ceres under the University of Salamanca. Secondary schools such as the Normal Schools of Education of C\u00e1ceres and Badajoz were integrated into the university in 1972 following the General Law of Education decree of 1970. The Intermediate Technical School of Agricultural Engineering of Badajoz was founded in Badajoz 1968, renamed the College of Agricultural Engineering in 1972.\nReligion.\nBadajoz is the see of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of M\u00e9rida-Badajoz. Prior to the merger of the Diocese of M\u00e9rida and the Diocese of Badajoz, Badajoz was the see of the Diocese of Badajoz from the bishopric's inception in 1255. Christianity thus became the dominant religion in Badajoz and the see of the Diocese of Badajoz is based here at the Badajoz Cathedral (Cathedral of St. John the Baptist), a gothic style building which was built in 1284 in the main plaza called the Plaza de Espa\u00f1a. It underwent extensive refurbishment during the 16th to 18th centuries. The paintings of Luis de Morales, a local artist of the Renaissance period, are exhibited in the cathedral. The tower of the cathedral, in height, was built in the gothic style in 1542 under architect Gaspar M\u00e9ndez. Built with ashlar masonry, the windows are made of stone and carved. On two of its faces clocks were fixed during the renovations carried out in 1715. The tower has a belfry and is fortified with battlements. In 1827, Richard Alfred Davenport wrote a gushing description of the dean of the cathedral of Badajoz, remarking that he was \"more learned than all the doctors of Salamanca, Coimbra, and Alcala, united; he understood all languages, living and dead, and was perfect master of every science divine.\"\nAdoratrices is a small chapel dedicated to St. Joseph to commemorate the arrival of Christians along with King Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n. The Brotherhood of St. Joseph, founded in 1556, functioned from this chapel. During the 19th-century War of Independence the chapel was bombed and its importance declined during subsequent years. However, in 1917 it was refurbished in the neo-Gothic style and now the convent Madres Adoratrices Esclavas del Sant\u00edsimo y de la Caridad functions from here.\nThe San Andres and La Concepcion churches are of the 13th century. Other religious buildings include the Real Monasterio de Santa Ana, Convento de las Clarisas Descalzas, Convento de Carmelitas, Ermita de los Pajaritos, Ermita de la Soledad, Parroquia de la Concepci\u00f3n, Parroquia de San Agust\u00edn, Parroquia de San Andr\u00e9s, Parroquia de San Juan Bautista, and the Parroquia de Santo Domingo. Ermita de la Soledad is a gothic style chapel, which was originally funded by Duke Francisco de Tutavilla y del Rufo of San Germ\u00e1n in 1664 in a different location. It fell into ruin and was rebuilt in its present location from 1931. Parroquia de San Juan Bautista, situated in a large pink and white painted domed building dates to the 18th century, and was originally a Franciscan convent, funded by King Jo\u00e3o V of Portugal.\nSports and recreation.\nFootball.\nThe city formerly hosted CD Badajoz, which dissolved in 2012 after finishing the season in Segunda Divisi\u00f3n B Group 1. Now, the city's main association football club is CD Badajoz 1905, a new club formed in 2012 by disappeared CD Badajoz supporters which is currently playing in the Regional Preferente in Extremadura, the fifth level of competition of the Spanish league football, after promotion in the 2012\u201313 season in the playoffs. Its stadium is Estadio Nuevo Vivero.\nCerro Reyes is currently unaffiliated with any league. Formerly, the club was a member of Segunda Divisi\u00f3n B, having played their 2010\u201311 campaign in the division. The club plays at \"Estadio Jos\u00e9 Pache\".\nAnother football club based in Badajoz is Badajoz CF, a member of Tercera Divisi\u00f3n \u2013 Group 14. UD Badajoz plays its home matches at Estadio Nuevo Vivero.\nBasketball.\nBadajoz's basketball club is AB Pacense, formed in 2005 from the remnants of Badajoz's dissolved basketball clubs, including CajaBadajoz, C\u00edrculo Badajoz, and Habitacle. The club competed in the Liga EBA, and calls Polideportivo La Granadilla its home arena. The club was dissolved in summer 2013.\nGolf.\nBadajoz plays host to two golf courses. One, the Don Tello Golf Course, (), is a 9-hole course constructed in 1994. The course is described as \"gentle and undulating\", set on the banks of the Guadiana River. The second, the Guadiana Golf Course, (), is an 18-hole construct built in 1992. The course is described as challenging, in part due to the 14 lacustrine features and abundance of trees on the course.\nTransport.\nBadajoz railway station, (), (IATA: BQZ), situated in the north of the city, is the only railway station at Badajoz. The station accommodates long-distance and medium-distance trains, both operated by the public company Renfe. It is the last Spanish railway station before the Portuguese railway system. It is expected the station will be replaced by a new facility located at the border with Portugal with high-speed services run by the Southwest\u2013Portuguese corridor and the Madrid\u2013Lisbon line. In August 2017 Comboios de Portugal, the Portuguese national railway company, instituted a daily service from Badajoz to Entroncamento, with connections to Lisbon and Porto.\nBadajoz Airport, () (), is located 13\u00a0km (8\u00a0mi) east of the city centre. The civilian airport shares a runway and control tower with Talavera la Real Air Base () operated by the Spanish Air Force, named after the nearby municipality of Talavera la Real. The two aircraft reception facilities utilize a 2,852-metre (9,257\u00a0ft) asphalt runway. The airport currently caters for two civil routes, one to Barcelona and the other to Madrid, both operated by Air Nostrum.\nHealthcare.\nThe first hospital founded in Badajoz in 1694, was the Hospital de San Sebasti\u00e1n.\nBadajoz falls under the healthcare region of \u00c1rea de Salud de Badajoz, which also includes the municipalities of Alburquerque, Alconchel, Barcarrota, G\u00e9vora, Jerez de los Caballeros, La Roca de la Sierra, Montijo, Oliva de la Frontera, Olivenza, Pueblonuevo del Guadiana, San Vicente de Alc\u00e1ntara, Santa Marta, Talavera la Real and Villanueva del Fresno, divided into 17 zones, seven of which are in Badajoz itself. The hospitals in Badajoz are Hospital Universitario de Badajoz, Hospital Perpetuo Socorro, Hospital Materno Infantil, while clinics include Cl\u00ednica \"Clideba\" de Capio, Cl\u00ednica \"Caser\" de Capio, and Cl\u00ednica Extreme\u00f1a de Salud. Hospital Universitario de Badajoz lies beyond Puente Real on the left side of the river, next to the University of Extremadura.\nTown twinning.\nBadajoz is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58481", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58481", "title": "Badakhshan", "text": "Historical region of Central Asia\nBadakhshan is a historical region comprising the Wakhan Corridor in northeast Afghanistan, eastern Tajikistan, and Taxkorgan Tajik Autonomous County in China. Badakhshan Province is one of the 34 provinces of Afghanistan. Much of historic Badakhshan lies within Tajikistan's Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region in the southeastern part of the country. The music of Badakhshan is an important part of the region's cultural heritage.\nName.\nThe name \"Badakhshan\" (, \"Badax\u0161\u00e2n\"; ; , \"Badakhshon\"; ) is derived from the Sasanian official title \"b\u0113dax\u0161\" or \"badax\u0161\", which may be from an earlier *pati-ax\u0161a; the suffix -\"\u0101n\" indicates that the country belonged, or had been assigned as a fief, to a person holding the rank of a \"badax\u0161\".\nPeople.\nBadakhshan has a diverse ethnolinguistic and religious community of Badakhshanites. Tajiks and Pamiris are in the majority while a very tiny minority of Kyrgyzs, Uzbeks, Hazaras are also found in some villages. There are also groups of speakers of several Pamir languages of the Eastern Iranian language group. During the 20th century within Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region in Tajikistan, the speakers of Pamir languages formed their own separate ethnic identity as Pamiris. The Pamiri people were not officially recognized as a separate ethnic group in Tajikistan, but Tajikistan Pamiri movements and associations have been formed. The main religions of Badakhshan are Ismaili Islam and Sunni Islam; Nasir Khusraw propagated Ismailism there in 11th century. The people of this province have a rich cultural heritage and they have preserved unique ancient forms of music, poetry, and dance.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nBadakhshan was an important trading center during antiquity. The only then-known deposits of lapis lazuli were mined there as early as the second half of the 4th millennium BC. Badakhshan was an important region, crossed by the Silk Road. Its significance was its geo-economic role in the silk trade and ancient commodities transactions between the East and West.\nMarco Polo wrote that Balas ruby could be found under the \"Syghinan\" (Shighnan) mountain in Badashan/Badakshan. \"Balas\" is derived from \"Balascia\", the ancient name for Badakhshan, a region in Central Asia in the upper valley of the Panj River, one of the principal tributaries of the Oxus River. However, \"Balascia\" itself may be derived from the Sanskrit \"b\u0101las\u016bryaka\", which translates as \"crimson-coloured morning sun\". Mines in the Gorno Badakhshan region of Tajikistan constituted for centuries the main source for red and pink spinels.\nThe excavations along the banks of the Amu Darya show evidence of trade with the early civilizations of the Ancient Near East in the 4th\u20133rd millennia BC.\nThrough the Khyber Pass, precious stones and rubies were transported to all corners of the Middle East for sale. Jewelry and clothing decorated with rubies from the 3rd millennium BC have been discovered in Southeast Asia, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Iran, Indo-China, and even in Western countries. At that time, the presence of Badakhshan laurel in India (Mohenjo-Daro), Egypt (Necropolis of Thebes), and other places was proven. There was a special caravan route from Badakhshan to these civilizations, which introduced Badakhshan to the world in ancient times through these precious stones. \nThere is also evidence in Badakhshan from the Stone Age. In the Stone Age, construction of new clay huts in Badakhshan began. Later, in the Neolithic period, the tribes of the Middle East, including the Badakhshans, used wooden gates with their heels running over stone holes. Scientists also attribute the appearance of a window for smoke and light to the Neolithic period. Archaeologists call the Neolithic artifacts in Takharistan (Badakhshan) in the historical literature \"Mountain Neolithic of Hissar culture\". This civilization lasted from the 6th to the 3rd millennium BC.\nThe Bronze Age in Badakhshan, from the 3rd millennium BC to the 9th-8th centuries BC, was the most important historical stage of development and evolution. The development of productive forces and significant changes in the social system took place during this period. People learned the production and use of minerals, learned how to melt metals to make iron stronger, and began to produce weapons and household items. On this basis, handicrafts developed, and new and large camps were built. Other production activities, such as agriculture, animal husbandry, handicrafts, the emergence of horses and carts, road construction, etc., accelerated the division of society into classes. The construction of shields, sickles, axes, pickaxes, and shovels flourished during this period of bronze.\nThe great ruby road appeared on the maps of merchants during this period and became known as the Silk Road, which later became a major trade route and served the peoples of different nations until the 17\u201318th century. Badakhshan was at that time a land called Airyanem Vaejah, and \"Varena\" in the Avesta refers to a part of Badakhshan in the Khatlon conflict. Badakhshan gained its status among the world civilizations with these two types of precious stones, both in the time of the Elamites, in the time of the Maud, and in the time of the Achaemenids when the roads of communication were so long that the \"Road of the King\" was 2400\u00a0km long, and was used to transport rubies from Badakhshan, turquoise from Khorezm, and jade from Lake Baikal. The mineralogist A. E. Fersman wrote that one stone was known throughout the long history of culture \u2013 the bright blue lapis lazuli of Afghanistan (Badakhshan), which was transported by caravan routes to Egypt, China, Rome, and Byzantium. Some scholars claim that the \"mountain valley\" mentioned by the Greeks was Badakhshan.\nEarly modern history.\nThe region was ruled over by the mirs of Badakhshan. Sultan Muhammad of Badakhshan was the last of a series of kings who traced their descent to Alexander the Great. He was killed by Abu Sa'id Mirza, the ruler of Timurid Empire, who took possession of Badakhshan, which after his death fell to his son, Sultan Mahmud Mirza, who had three sons, Baysinghar Mirza, Ali Mirza, and Khan Mirza. When Mahmud died, Amir Khusroe Khan, one of his nobles, blinded Baysinghar Mirza, killed the second prince, and ruled as a usurper. He submitted to the Mughal Emperor Babur in 1504 CE. When Babur took Kandahar in 1506 CE from Shah Beg Arghun, he sent Khan Mirza as governor to Badakhshan. A son was born to Khan Mirza by the name of Mirza Sulaiman in 1514 CE.\nAfter the death of Khan Mirza, Badakhshan was governed for Babur by Prince Humayun, Sultan Wais Khan (Mirza Sulaiman's father-in-law), Prince Hindal Mirza, and Mirza Sulaiman, who held Badakhshan till October 8, 1541, when he had to surrender himself and his son, Mirza Ibrahim, to Prince Kamran Mirza. They were released by Humayun in 1545, and again took possession of Badakhshan. When Humayun had taken Kabul, he made war upon and defeated Mirza Sulaiman who once in possession of his country, had refused to submit; but when the return of Prince Kamran Mirza from Sindh obliged Emperor Humayun to go to Kabul, he reinstated Mirza Sulaiman, who held Badakhshan till 1575. Bent on making conquests, he invaded Balkh in 1560, but had to return. His son, Mirza Ibrahim, was killed in battle.\nWhen Akbar became Mughal Emperor, his stepbrother Mirza Muhammad Hakim's mother had been killed by Shah Abul Ma'ali. Mirza Sulaiman went to Kabul, and had Abul Ma'ali hanged; he then had his own daughter married to Mirza Muhammad Hakim, and appointed Umed Ali, a Badakhshan noble, as Mirza Muhammad Hakim's agent in 1563. But Mirza Muhammad Hakim did not go on well with Mirza Sulaiman, who returned the next year to Kabul with hostile intentions; but Mirza Muhammad Hakim fled Fayzabad and asked Akbar for assistance, so that Mirza Sulaiman, though he had taken Jalalabad, had to return to Badakhshan. He returned to Kabul in 1566, when Akbar's troops had left that country, but retreated on being promised tribute.\nMirza Sulaiman's wife was Khurram Begum, of the Kipchak tribe. She was clever, and had her husband so much in her power that he did nothing without her advice. Her enemy was Muhtarim Khanum, the widow of Prince Kamran Mirza. Mirza Sulaiman wanted to marry her; but Khurram Begum got her married, against her will, to Mirza Ibrahim, by whom she had a son, Mirza Shahrukh. When Mirza Ibrahim fell in the war with Balkh, Khurram Begum wanted to send the Khanum to her father, Shah Muhammad of Kashgar; but she refused to go. As soon as Shahrukh had grown up, his mother and some Badakhshi nobles excited him to rebel against his grandfather Mirza Sulaiman. This he did, alternately rebelling and again making peace. Khurram Begum then died. Shahrukh took away those parts of Badakhshan which his father had held, and found so many adherents, that Mirza Sulaiman, pretending to go on a pilgrimage to Makkah, left Badakhshan for Kabul, and crossing the Indus went to India in 1575 CE. Khan Jahan, governor of the Punjab, received orders from Emperor Akbar to invade Badakhshan, but was suddenly ordered to go to Bengal instead, as Mun'im Khan had died and Mirza Sulaiman did not care for the governorship of Bengal, which Akbar had offered him.\nMirza Sulaiman then went to Ismail II of Safavid Iran. When the death of that monarch deprived him of the assistance which he had just received, he went to Muzaffar Husain Mirza at Kandahar, and then to Mirza Muhammad Hakim at Kabul. Not succeeding in raising disturbances in Kabul, he made for the frontier of Badakhshan, and luckily finding some adherents, he managed to get from his grandson the territory between Taiqan and the Hindu Kush. Soon after, Muhtarim Khanum died. Being again pressed by Shahrukh, Mirza Sulaiman applied for help to Abdullah Khan II, king of Turan, who had long wished to annex Badakhshan. He invaded and took the country in 1584; Shahrukh fled to the Mughal Empire, and Mirza Sulaiman to Kabul. As he could not recover Badakhshan for himself, and was rendered destitute by the death of Mirza Muhammad Hakim, he followed the example of his grandson, and repaired to the court of Akbar who made him a commander of six thousand. He lived out his life at Akbar's court in Lahore where he died in 1589 CE.\nLike neighboring Balkh Subah, Badakshan was shortly conquered in 1641 by Mughal padshah (emperor) Shah Jahan, who turned it also into a short-lived subah (imperial top-level province), only to be lost again in 1647.\nLater emirates and khanates.\nThe old capital of Badakhshan was located in Kishim District. In the 18th century the capital of Badakhshan was the town of Khamchan, located three miles west of Fayzabad and situated on both sides of the Kokcha River. After the conquest of Badakhshan by Ahmad Shah Durrani in the later half of the 18th century, the capital was relocated to Fayzabad, then known as Jauzun. In the 19th century the capital was moved to Jurm, until if finally was relocated back to Fayzabad.\nIn 1750, Mir Sultan Shah, ruler of Badakhshan, rebelled against Khizri Beg, governor of Balkh. After consulting Ahmad Shah Durrani, Khizri Beg marched against Sultan Shah and the \"Wazir\" Shah Wali aided the invading column. The pickets of Badakhshan, chief of Taloqan, fled from their postal approach of enemy. Men of Badakhshan, disgusted with their chief because of his partiality to Kalmak and Kashghar foreigners, waited on \"Wazir\" Shah Wali and hailed him as deliverer. Sultan Shah, finding resistance hopeless, fled to Ailu Basit in the hills between Chiab and Pasakoh. The \"Wazir\" Shah Wali returned with force to Kabul leaving his country in charge of an Afghan governor. Sultan Shah returned, slew the governor and regained his country. He was attacked by another rival, Turrah Baz Khan, who, supported by Khizri Beg, advanced on Faizabad and besieged it. Sultan Shah was taken prisoner. The Kunduz chief, unwilling to lose an opportunity, seized Turrah Baz Khan and sent both captives to Kunduz and annexed Badakhshan.\nIn 1751 Sultan Shah was restored to liberty and his country. He punished marauders of the Saki tribe who had ransacked Chiab, Takhta Band, Khalpan in Badakhshan. He slew a large portion and 700 horses were taken. Place was marked by 200 heads of raiders on Kotal of Khoja Jarghatu and Saki gave no more trouble during Sultan Shah's lifetime. This Chief built a fortress at Mashad in which he settled 600 families. He had a rest house built for travelers at Daryun. In 1756 he made the Chinese recognize \"Akskal\" of Badakhshan at Alti in Xinjiang and levied taxes from Badakhshan families in city.\nIn 1759 another enemy appeared led by Kabad Khan. The Kataghans attacked Fayzabad, and took and put to death Sultan Shah and Turrah Baz Khan. Mir Muhammad Shah, son of Sultan Shah, escaped and retired to Tang i Nau from whence later he attacked Faizabad, put to death his youngest brother Nasarullah Khan Chief of that place under the government of Kabul, and took the Kingdom. His father's old enemy Kabad Khan, whom the patronage of Timur Shah Durrani (successor of Ahmad Shah Durrani) had elevated to the Chiefship of Kunduz, sent a force against Muhammad Shah under Kubadcha. They wintered at Sang i Mohr and were joined by Kabad Khan in person. Muhammad Shah submitted and was detained at Kunduz for two years. After that fortune turned against Kabad Khan. Throwing off his allegiance to Kabul when Timur Shah Durrani was marching against Sindh and Kashmir, Mizrab Bi, grandson of Muhammad Bi (the old Chief of Kunduz) united with the Chief of Kubab to attack Kabad Khan, seized him and gave him to Mir Muhammad Shah, who put him to death to avenge his father Mir Muhammad Shah. He returned to Badakhshan to find throne occupied by Bahadur Shah, son of a former Chief who had taken Faizabad during the captivity of Mir Muhammad Shah in Kunduz. Bahadur Shah was deposed and the rightful owner recovered the throne. Fortune frowned again on Mir Muhammad Shah. Bahadur Shah obtained aid of the Mir of Shighnan and took Fayzabad. Mir Muhammad Shah fled to Chiab. In two years, Bahadur Shah was put to death by an agent of the Shighnan Chief named Bahadur, who took the throne. Muhammad Shah repeatedly attempted to expel him. But aid was refused him by the Shighnan Chief and Kurghan Tappa. He regained the throne on the assassination of Bahadur by his servant. The late usurper's ministers were all killed.\nImmediately Mir Muhammad Shah was engaged in hostilities with Jalal ud din Chief of Shighnan, who rebelled and held out in the fort till Mir Muhammad Shah invested it and he submitted. By clemency of the victor he was reinstated as Chief of Fayzabad. In same year Shah Abul Faiz, son of Shah Shuja of Ragh, rebelled against Mir Muhammad Shah and was vanquished. The territory of Mir Muhammad Shah was divided as follows: Iskashim was given to Mir Khan; Rushan to Shah Wali and Warduj to Mahmud Khan, brother of Mir Ahmad Beg Kataghan. Mir Muhammad Shah also built a new fort named \"Sarai Bahadur\".\nKhodai Nazar Beg Kataghan, brother of Darab Bi, expelled his five nephews from Kunduz and Aliwardi Beg, Chief of Kurghan Tappa on pretence of avenging their wrongs attacked Khodai Nazar Beg and drove him from Kunduz. His avarice caused him to occupy the country himself. Darab Bi's sons wandered to Badakhshan and Balkh Aliwardi Beg did not long enjoy fruits of treachery. In 1795, Emir Haidar of Emirate of Bukhara invaded Balkh and Kunduz annexed them and took Aliwardi Beg to Bukhara as prisoner.\nIn 1812, Mir Sultan Shah II succeeded as mir of Badakhshan after his father Mir Muhammad Shah's death in 1810. He remained friendly with his neighbors and the country prospered. He recovered arrears of taxes from Chinese settlers and levied payment in advance. In 1814 he invaded Chitral and took thousands of prisoners, whom he sold in Balkh, Bukhara, Farghana and Khiva. He died in 1815, leaving five sons of whom Mir Yar Beg succeeded him as ruler.\nMeanwhile, Kunduz was still under Emirate of Bukhara and the wandering sons of Darab Bi Kataghan decided to attack and retake the city, which they did in 1810. The Amir of Kunduz was now Mir Muhammad Murad Beg, one of the brothers. Mir Yar Beg was now worried about the rising popularity and power of Mir Muhammad Murad Beg in the region. Eventually, in 1820, the two would face off at Darah Aim in which Mir Muhammad Murad Beg would be the victor. In 1822 four brothers under the service of Mir Muhammad Murad Beg rebelled, led by Kokan Beg. Mir Muhammad Murad Beg and Kokan Beg often fought with each other over territory inconclusively while battling against rebels in their own respective territories for years. Kokan Beg would be assassinated by his ally in Kashkar (lower Chitral) by being pushed down a precipice. Mir Muhammad Murad Beg, taking advantage of this situation, took Badakhshan by occupying Fayzabad. But despite invading Badakhshan Mir Muhammad Murad Beg had little to no control over it. In fact Badakhshan was now contested by again by Mir Yar Beg, Sikandar Shah, Shahzada Mahmud, Abdul Ghazi Khan and Shah Suliman Beg, who were in exile at Tashqurghan (Kholm) under the protection of Mir Wali. Fayzabad had a small population under spiritual preceptor Mian Fazal Azim, \"Sahibzada\" of Sirhind. Jirm, Zardeo, Mashad, Daraaim and Fayzabad were successively occupied by these chiefs. Fayzabad fell to Mir Yar Beg, who rebuilt his fort and lived in the city. The old dynasty thus was restored.\nBetween Afghanistan, Britain and Russia.\nIn 1839 the occupation of Afghanistan by the British drove Amir Dost Muhammad Khan into exile. He visited Khulam and Kunduz and was well received. They could not aid him against British and Dost Muhammad proceeded to the Emirate of Bukhara, then governed by Amir Nasrullah Khan who was addicted to the society of boys. Sher Ali Khan The son Dost Muhammad Khan was then a beardless youth and Nasrullah Khan coveted him. The Afghan pride of Sher Ali was however inflamed and he informed his father and brothers of the insulting desire of Nasrullah Khan. Dost Muhammad Khan then decided to leave the Emirate of Bukhara but found himself a prisoner, and with difficulty escaped with his sons to Balkh. \nAlso in 1839, Mir Muhammad Murad Beg again attacked Rustak in Badakhshan and appointed an officer of his own in Farkhar. Two months later he also attacked Mashad. But he failed to obtain a footing in Badakhshan, which remained in possession of its hereditary Mirs.\nIn 1844, Mir Yar Beg was poisoned by Mir Ahmad Shah at the instigation of Sulaiman Beg and died on his return to Fayzabad. The instigator of the murder had been fascinated by the extraordinary beauty of the wife of Mir Yar Beg, and was impelled by his passion for the lady to accomplish the death of her husband. On his death Sulaiman Beg took possession of Fayzabad and married his widow. Mir Ahmad Shah discovered that the murder of Yar Beg was instigated by Sulaiman Beg with the object of possessing his wife, and advancing against him, expelled him from Faizabad,A of which he took possession himself. He then wrote to Mir Atalik Beg, Chief of Kunduz, requesting his aid against Yusuf Ali Khan and Mir Shah to drive them out of Rustak. The letter did not reach its destination but fell by some means into hands of Mir Shah who forwarded it to Sulaiman Shah and invited him to a consultation at Rustak. The chiefs then united and marched against Mir Ahmad Shah, who was expelled to Kunduz. A new distribution was made of country. Mir Shah occupied Fayzabad as supreme ruler of Badakhshan. Shah Sulaiman Beg received Dara Aim; Nasrullah Khan got Kashmir and Mashad. Rustak and Chiab were allotted to Yusuf Ali Khan. Jirm to Sikandar Shah, and Zardeo Sarghalan was given to \"Shahzada\" Mahmud.\nFrom 1840 to 1859 CE, Afghanistan and the Emirate of Bukhara struggled for Balkh and Badakhshan, with Afghanistan prevailing. Mir Shah, chief of Badakhshan and his feudatory of Rustak went to wait on Mohammad Azam Khan (son of Dost Muhammad Khan) with presents and an offer of submission. Mir Shah betrothed his niece (daughter of his brother Nizam-ud-din Khan) to Muhammad Azam Khan. A treaty was made with the Muhammad Azam Khan as follows:\nRuler of Badakhshan, children and successors, agree to remain firm in allegiance to Amir of Kabul and officers in Balkh not to join foreign enemy against Amir of Kabul. Ruler of Badakhshan to furnish suitable contingent in difficulty and to aid Amir of Kabul and to give annual presents.\nBut Mir Shah had trouble governing his region. Family quarrels over territory kept him busy till his death in 1862. He was succeeded by his son Mir Jahandar Shah. He too would get involved in various intrigues in the region as well as issues of succession in his neighborhood, taking one side or the other. In 1865, Mir Jahandar Shah sent his ambassador Syed Muhammad to the British Commissioner in Peshawar to establish friendly relations. However, peace did not last long, as Dost Muhammad Khan died and his sons began to fight for the throne. Eventually Mir Jahandar Shah was forced to take the side of Sher Ali Khan and Muhammad Azam Khan (who was now married to Mir Jahandar Shah's daughter as well). But Mohammad Afzal Khan secured Kabul, forcing Sher Ali Khan to retreat to Herat. Mir Jahandar Shah handed over his allies to Mohammad Afzal Khan. This angered Sher Ali Khan and his deputy in Akhcha, Faiz Muhammad Khan, who went into battle at Gulaugan against Mir Jahandar Shah and defeated him. After the flight of Mir Jahandar Shah the country was divided. Mir Jahandar Shah sought refuge in Kabul, where he was restored a year afterwards to his ancestral throne by the influence of Abdur Rahman Khan, son of the Mohammad Afzal Khan, and by his popularity. His rival Mahmud Shah left without a struggle in October 1868. Mir Jahandar Shah of Badakhshan never asked forgiveness for the hostilities to Amir Sher Ali Khan with Azam Khan and failed to wait on Governor of Balkh at Takhtapul. \nSher Ali in October 1869 invited Mizrad Shah, Muhammad Shah and Ibrahim, deposed chiefs of Badakhshan and restored them. Mir Jahandar Shah fled to Kulab. In December 1869, Mir Jahandar Shah left the camp of Emir of Bukhara in Kulab and attacked Badakhshan and burned fort Zang Kila.\nAfter being annexed by Afghanistan, Badakhshan was joined with Qataghan to create the Badakhshan-Qataghan district in Afghan Turkestan Province.\nEventually the Great Game began, with the Russians instigating the Emirate of Bukhara to claim certain territories of Afghanistan and the British recognizing Afghanistan's claim to the disputed territories. Badakhshan's boundaries were decided by the Anglo-Russian agreement of 1873, which expressly acknowledged \"Badakhshan with its dependent district Wakhan\" as \"fully belonging to the Amir of Kabul\", and limited it to the left or southern bank of the Amu Darya (also called the Oxus). On the west, Badakhshan was bounded by a line which crosses the Turkestan plains southwards from the junction of the Kunduz and Amu Darya rivers until it touches the eastern water-divide of the Khulm River (Tashqurghan River), and then runs southeast, crossing Kunduz, until it strikes the Hindu Kush. The southern boundary was carried along the crest of the Hindu Kush as far as the Khawak Pass, leading from Badakhshan into the Panjshir valley. Beyond this it was indefinite.\nIt was known that the Kafirs occupied the crest of the Hindu Kush eastwards of the Khawak, but how far they extended north of the main watershed was not ascertainable. The southern limits of Badakhshan became definite again at the Dorah Pass. The Dorah connects Zebak and Ishkashim at the elbow, or bend, of the Oxus with the Lutku valley leading to Chitral. From the Dorah eastwards the crest of the Hindu Kush again became the boundary until it effects a junction with the Muztagh and Sarikol ranges, which shut off China from Russia and India. Skirting round the head of the Tagdumbash Pamir, it finally merged into the Pamir Mountains boundary, and turned westwards, following the course of the Oxus, to the junction of that river and the Khanabad (Kunduz).\nSo far as the northern boundary followed the Oxus stream, under the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush, it was only separated by the length of these slopes (some 8 or 10 miles) from the southern boundary along the crest. Thus Badakhshan reached out an arm into the Pamirs eastwards - bottle-shaped - narrow at the neck (represented by the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush), and swelling out eastwards so as to include a part of the great and little Pamirs.\nBefore the boundary settlement of 1873 the small states of Rushan and Shugnan extended to the left bank of the Oxus, and the province of Darwaz, on the other hand, extended to the right bank. Then, however, the Darwaz extension northwards was exchanged for the Russian Pamir extension westwards, and the river throughout became the boundary between Russian and Afghan territory; the political boundaries of those provinces and those of Wakhan were no longer coincident with their geographical limits.\nChitral, Yarkand and Ferghana became shelters for refugees in 1887 and 1883 from Badakhshan who fled from the campaigns of Abdul Rahman.\nThe following were the chief provincial subdivisions of Badakhshan, omitting Rushan and Shugnan: on the west Rustak, Kataghan, Ghori, Narin and Anderab; on the north Darwaz, Ragh and Shiwa; on the east Charan, Ishkashim, Zebak and Wakhan; and in the center, Faizabad, Farkhar, Minjan and Kishm. There were others, but nothing certain is known about these minor subdivisions. Consequently, most western part of modern Gorno-Badakhshan became part of Emirate of Bukhara, while most of it became part of Fergana Province of Russian Turkestan. This arrangement was lasted till 1920.\nIn 1890 Qataghan-Badakhshan District was separated from Afghan Turkestan and Qataghan-Badakhshan Province was created. Administration of the province was assigned to the Northern Bureau in Kabul. In 1895, the Panj River was defined as part of the border between Afghan and Russian Badakhshan. This border persisted despite changes in governments.\n20th century.\nIn 1902, the Bukharan (Western) Pamir came under the Russian military administration. In November 1918 the last Czarist Russian troops recognized Bolshevik rule, but in December 1919 the anti-Bolshevik Russian Peasant Army of Fergana took over. From April 1920, the vacuum of power was filled by an attempt to establish Bukharan rule until June 1920, when the Bukharans were expelled by local forces, Bolshevik rule was restored: the Stalinist Soviet Union seized the Bukharan part of Gorno-Badakshan.\nIt was merged with the Russian (since 1895) part in 1924 to become the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous \"oblast\" (province) within the Tajik SSR in 1929. Between April 1992\u20131993, a Pamiri-Badakshoni Autonomous Republic was declared within independent post-Soviet Tajikistan, on 6 November 1994, becoming the Kohistan-Badakhshan Autonomous Province, alias Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province or Mountainous Badakhshon Autonomous Veloyat.\nIn 1963, Badakhshan included the districts of Baghlan, Pul-i-Khumri, Dushi, Dahan-i-Ghori, Kanabad, Andarab, Kunduz, Hazrat-i-Imam, and Taloqan. In 1963 Qataghan-Badakhshan Province was abolished and its territory was divided into four separate provinces: Badakhshan, Baghlan, Kunduz and Takhar.\nTajik Badakhshan witnessed fierce fighting during the Tajikistani Civil War in the 1990s. At the height of Taliban strength during the Afghan Civil War circa 2000, Afghan Badakhashan was a stronghold for the Northern Alliance.\nGeography.\nThe mountain districts comprise all of the southern districts of Badakhshan and the northern hills and valleys of Nuristan (former Kafiristan). Its terrain is analogous to that of the rest of the Hindu Kush to the west. The Hindu Kush represents the southern edge of a great central upheaval or plateau. It breaks up into long spurs southwards, among which are hidden the valleys of Nuristan, almost isolated from each other by the rugged and snow-capped altitudes which divide them. To the north the plateau gradually slopes away towards the Oxus, falling from an average altitude of 15,000 feet to 4,000 feet about Fayzabad, in central Badakhshan, and trailing off to ~100 feet at Kunduz, in Kataghan, where it merges into the flat plains bordering the Oxus river.\nThe Kokcha River traverses Badakhshan from southeast to northwest, and, with the Kunduz River, drains all the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush west of the Dorah Pass. Some of its sources are near Zebak, close to the great bend of the Oxus northwards, so that it cuts off all the mountainous area included within that bend from the rest of Badakhshan. Its chief affluent is the Minjan, which Sir George Robertson found to be a considerable stream where it approaches the Hindu Kush close under the Dorab. Like the Kunduz, it probably drains the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush by deep lateral valleys, more or less parallel to the crest, reaching westwards towards the Khawak Pass. From the Oxus (1,000 feet) to Faizabad (4,000 feet) and Zebak (8,500 feet) the course of the Kokcha offers a high road across Badakhshan; between Zebak and Ishkashim, at the Oxus bend, there is but an insignificant pass of 9,500 feet; and from Ishkashim by the Panj River, through the Pamirs, is the continuation of what must once have been a much-traversed trade route connecting Afghan Turkestan with Kashgar of China. It is undoubtedly one of the great continental high-roads of Asia. North of the Kokcha, within the Oxus bend, is the mountainous district of Darwaz, of which the physiography belongs rather to the Pamir type than to that of the Hindu Kush.\nA very remarkable meridional range extends for 100 miles northwards from the Hindu Kush (it is across this range that the route from Zebak to Ishkashim lies), which determines the great bend of the Oxus river northwards from Ishkashim, and narrows the valley of that river into the formation of a trough as far as the next bend westwards at Kala Wamar. The western slopes of this range drain to the Oxus either northwestwards, by the Kokcha and the Ragh, or else they twist their streams into the Shiwa, which runs due north across Darwaz. Here again the main routes which traverse the country follow the rivers closely. The valleys are narrow, but fertile and populous. The mountains are rugged and difficult; but there is much world-famous beauty of scenery, and almost phenomenal agricultural wealth in the valleys of Bukhara and Ferghana to be found in the recesses of Badakhshan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58482", "revid": "1313353790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58482", "title": "Sisto Badalocchio", "text": "Italian painter\nSisto Badalocchio Rosa (28 June 1585 \u2013 c.\u20091619-1647) was an Italian Baroque painter and engraver of the Bolognese School.\nBiography.\nBorn in Parma, he worked first under Agostino Carracci in Bologna, then Annibale Carracci, in Rome. He worked with Annibale till 1609, then moved back to Parma. His best known work as an engraver was the \"Raphael's Bible\" series, which he created together with his fellow student, Giovanni Lanfranco. The images depict a series of frescoes by Raphael's workshop in the Vatican loggias. \nAs a painter, his most important work are the frescoes in the church of San Giovanni Evangelista, Reggio Emilia, which are based on Correggio's earlier works. In this church, he executed the decoration of the dome and pendentives. The dome fresco represents the parousia, i.e. the second coming of Christ, while the pendentives are adorned by the four cardinal virtues. \nThough he often cooperated in fresco painting with Lanfranco, for example in Annibale-designed series the San Diego Chapel in San Giacomo degli Spagnoli (1602\u20131607) and in Palazzo Costaguti (\"Nessus and Deianeira\"), Badalocchio never received the same recognition as his peer. Nevertheless, he is recognized today as an important figure in bringing the artistic styles of the Italian Baroque to northern Italy. Badalocchio died in Bologna around 1647.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58483", "revid": "42383571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58483", "title": "Badalona", "text": "Badalona (, , , ) is a city and municipality in the Province of Barcelona in the autonomous community of Catalonia in Spain. It is located to the north east of Barcelona, on the left bank of the Bes\u00f2s River and on the Mediterranean Sea, in the Barcelona metropolitan area. With a population of 226,219, it is the 4th-largest city in Catalonia and the 22rd-largest in Spain. It became a city in 1897.\nEtymology.\nThe name Badalona comes from ancient Iberian word \"Baitolo\" according to the legend of several bronze coins of the end of the 2nd century BC found in the city. This word was the origin of the Latin name \"Baetulo\" that was as the Romans named the new city they founded off the coast of present Badalona. The oldest mention of the name Baetulo is from \"De Chorographia\" of Pomponius Mela (43\u201344 AD), who use the same name for the Bes\u00f2s river (named \"Bissaucio\" during the Middle Ages). Following the Roman era, during the High Middle Ages the name \"Baetulo\" evolved to \"Bitulona\", which was the most common name but not the only one, because it is found in the Latin written documents other versions as \"Bedelona\", \"Bitilona\", \"Betulona\", \"Bedalona\" and even \"Vitulona\". The current name is documented already in 997 and by the 14th century was the most used and generalized.\nHistory.\nThe oldest traces of settlement date from the Neolithic (about 3500\u20132500 BC). Archaeological finds consisting of carved stone and flint tools have been discovered in the Seriol hill and Manres\u00e0 areas along with tombs with grave goods in the quarters of Sistrells and Llefi\u00e0. Deposits from the Bronze and Iron Age have been found in old brickyards (dated about 1800\u20131500 BC) and in the \"masies\" of Can Butiny\u00e0 and Can Mora in the Canyet quarter (1500\u20131100 BC).\nBefore the Roman settlement of Hispania, the territory of Badalona was populated by Iberians who lived on the Bosc\u00e0 hill (198 metres above the sea level), from where it is possible to see the coastline. The settlement dates to at least the 4th century BC but was totally abandoned by the 1st century AD due to Romanization. Despite the presence of the Iberians, the city's origins are usually dated to around the year 100 BC, when the Romans founded a city \"ex novo\" on Ros\u00e9s hill (26,8 metres) next to the coast. The Roman town plan was based on their common scheme of the \"cardo\" and \"decumanus\", occupying some 10\u00a0ha, with a line of walls. The Roman city was very dynamic, especially during the reign of Augustus, with a specialised viniculture that produced wine for export all over the empire. From the 3rd century, the city went into decline and was almost depopulated as people fled to rustic \"villae\". However, the few remains from Late antiquity prove that Baetulo was never abandoned.\nThe current city of Badalona was formed in the 10th century when a new urban nucleus was built over the old Roman city and around the old forum and temple, which was turned into a church. At the same time, a rural nucleus emerged outside the town walls. This rural-urban dichotomy would remain until the mid-18th century.\nSant Jeroni de la Murtra Monastery, built in the 14th century, is where the Catholic Monarchs would spend their summers. According to some authors, this is also where they received Christopher Columbus after his first voyage to the Americas.\nDuring the first half of the 19th century, Badalona remained an agricultural and fishing centre. However, this changed in 1848 with the construction of the railway connecting the cities of Matar\u00f3 and Barcelona, which brought a station to the village. This furthered the industrialization and economic development of Badalona and led to the progressive decline of the traditional economic sectors. Due to the arrival of new industries, Badalona also became an important centre of the labour movement. Thanks to this, the village began to attract newcomers, doubling its population from 5,733 (1851) to 10,485 (1857). By the end of the century Badalona had around 19.000 inhabitants. The demographic growth gave rise to urban development with an \"ensanche\" plan covering all along the coast from Sant Adri\u00e0 to Montgat. In 1897, the city received the title of city from the queen regent Maria Christina of Austria.\nThe city's demographic growth continued mostly uncontrolled in the first third of the 20th century. This entailed the construction of new neighbourhoods without urban infrastructure and poor connections to the city centre. During the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera the city council tried to alleviate these problems by developing infrastructure, building a new school, market and slaughterhouse and expanding the sewage network; however, this was not enough. During the Second Republic, Badalona was often in turmoil, as would be the case during the civil war, when the city was bombed due to its importance as an industrial centre. After the end of the war, in 1940, the mayor Frederic Xifr\u00e9 was executed by the Francoists.\nFranco's dictatorship brought about the decline of Badalona's varied pre-war cultural life. The period was also marked by the arrival of immigrants, mainly from the south of Spain, which further accelerated the city's demographic growth, precipitating the emergence of shanty towns with unhealthy conditions. The city's population increased from 92,200 in 1960 to 201,200 only fifteen years later. During the mandate of mayor Felipe Antoja, the city received poor migrants from Barcelona who lived in shanties; with the creation of poor neighbourhoods, Badalona had some of the lowest-quality housing in the country. Urban expansion also disturbed historical buildings and archaeological sites.\nAfter the death of Franco, and especially from 1979, the city found a new social vitality through the organised neighbours' movement, which fought to improve infrastructure in their neighbourhoods, to combat real estate speculation, and to obtain urban improvements. On 29 January 1976, Badalona held the first protest to be tolerated without violence from the Spanish authorities in the post-Franco era. The city has also gone through a transformation from an industrial to a service economy. Badalona was a subsite of the 1992 Olympic Games, hosting the basketball and boxing competitions. Though Badalona is included in the Barcelona conurbation, it maintains its own identity, especially in the central neighbourhoods.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, the population of Badalona is 226,219, of whom 49.2% are male and 50.8% are female, compared to the nationwide average of 49.0% and 51.0% respectively. People under 16 years old make up 15.5% of the population, and people over 65 years old make up 19.9%, compared to the nationwide average of 14.3% and 20.4% respectively.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population is 50,061, equal to 22.1% of the total population. The 5 largest foreign nationalities are Pakistanis (8,105), Moroccans (5,946), Ecuadorians (3,596), Chinese (3,541) and Colombians (2,992).\nAdministrative divisions.\nBadalona has 34 neighbourhoods and 6 districts. Before the 20th century, the municipality was divided in 5 traditional quarters known as la Sagrera, Llefi\u00e0, Sistrells, Canyet and Pomar. However, due to the growth of the population during the 20th century, the city was administratively divided into more neighbourhoods and new districts grouping each one several of them. The current division is dated of 1980, except for a modification in 2011 which reduced the districts from 8 to 6. The districts and their neighbourhoods are as follows:\nTransport.\nBadalona has a Renfe train station R1 from Barcelona to Matar\u00f3 \u2013 Blanes, as well as a harbour. There are also links to Barcelona via the Barcelona Metropolitan Transport (TMB) metro (underground) and bus system, as well as the Trambes\u00f2s line.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Badalona is mainly based on the service sector, although traditionally was an important industrial centre. The primary sector as agriculture and fishing were also remarkable. However, those activities declined throughout the 20th century. In 2017 Badalona's GDP worth 4.122,9\u00a0million Euros, of which 3.020 (79,9%) corresponds to services, 501,8 to industry (13,3%), to construction (6,9%) and a tiny part (less than 1%) to agriculture.\nAbout the primary sector, in the one hand since 2004, agriculture in Badalona basically consists only of the vineyards of the masia of Can Coll, and more recently, since 2019, vineyards haven been planted next to the monastery Sant Jeroni de la Murtra by a cooperative. Both farms are in the neighbourhood of Canyet. Since 2012 Badalona is part of Alella DO. On the other hand, fishing is a residual sector, the lack of a port in the city until 2005 made the fishers going to work to other ports like Barcelona, Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa or Blanes. The port, managed by Marina Badalona, is dedicated mainly to marina, however it also has a fishing part and a fish market, but there are few fishers nowadays.\nIndustry was a key sector in Badalona for many years, since the arrival of the train in 1848. The old village grown and appeared a lot of factories from different sectors (chemical, metallurgical, food and liquors, etc.). All changed the last decades of the 20th century, many industries left the city because the contamination. Since then Badalona developed specific industrial zones as Les Guixeres, where the city council constructed the Badalona International Business Center, with the aim of improving the services, external projection, exchanges and competitiveness in the European and American market of the companies based in Badalona. The main sectors are microelectronics and robotics, followed by packaging and aerosols, textile machinery and industrials molds.\nTourism.\nBadalona is popular stop for tourists. The city has its own touristic route featuring the old town of Dalt de la Vila with stops in the Church of Santa Maria, the Old Tower and some medieval streets, besides some modernist houses. From there and following Costa street, it shows the Baix a Mar or Centre area, which concentrates a wide range of shops, restaurants, bars, and cafes. Key tourist stops include:\nCulture.\nIn May, in occasion of the celebration of Saint Anastasi, the patron saint of Badalona, activities and festivals are organized all around the city. The most important celebration takes place the day before Saint Anastasi Day when, at night, people gather at the maritime promenade to participate in the popular Cremada del Dimoni (Devil-Burning)--similar to the famous Valencian Falles. During these festivities, the Badalona giants are exhibited.\nSport.\nThe city's most important sport complex is the Palau Municipal d'Esports de Badalona (Municipal Sports Palace), which won the Mies Van der Rohe award in 1992. The Palace was the setting for basketball competition during the Olympic Games in 1992. Nowadays, it is home of the basketball team from Badalona, Joventut Badalona, also known as la Penya. This place will also be the centre of the Badalona Capital Europea del B\u00e0squet, which is intended to be a theme park celebrating basketball \u2013 with a basketball museum, shopping center, cinemas, basketball courts, a harbour, indoor karting and more activities.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58484", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58484", "title": "John Badby", "text": "Englishman executed for Eucharist views\nJohn Badby (1380\u20131 March 1410), one of the early Lollard martyrs, was a tailor (or perhaps a blacksmith) in the west Midlands, and was condemned by the Worcester diocesan court for his denial of transubstantiation.\nBadby bluntly maintained that when Christ sat at supper with his disciples he had not his body in his hand to distribute, and that \"if every host consecrated at the altar were the Lord's body, then there be 20,000 Gods in England.\" A further court in St Paul's, London, presided over by Archbishop Thomas Arundel and his brother-in-law William, Baron de Ros, condemned him to be burned at Smithfield, the tournament ground just outside the city walls. The sentence was carried out on March 1.\nIt is said that the prince of Wales (afterwards Henry V) witnessed the execution and offered the sufferer both life and a pension if he would recant; but in Walsingham's words, \"the abandoned villain declined the prince's advice, and chose rather to be burned than to give reverence to the life-giving sacrament. So it befell that this mischievous fellow was burnt to ashes, and died miserably in his sin.\"\nNarration in Foxe's Book of Martyrs:\nAnd then was the tunne put over hym, and fire putte unto hym. And when he felt the fire, he cryed, mercy (calling belike upon the Lorde) and so the Prince immediatlye commaunded to take away the tunne, and quenche the fire. The Prince, his commaundement beyng done, asked him if he would forsake heresie to take him to the fayth of holy churche: which thing if he would doo, he shoulde have goods inough, promising also unto him a yearelye stipende out of the kinges treasury, so muche as shoulde suffice hys contentation.\nBut this valiant champion of Christ, neglectyng the princes fayre wordes, as also contempnyng all mennes devises: refused the offer of worldly promises, no doubt, but beyng more vehemently inflamed with the spirite of God then with any earthly desire.\nWherfore, when as yet he continued unmoveable in hys former minde, the prince commaunded him straight to be put againe into the pype or tunne, &amp; that he should not afterward looke for any grace or favour. But as he could be allured by no rewardes, even so was he nothing at all abashed at their tormentes, but as a valiant champion of Christ, he persevered invincible to the end. \nIn popular culture.\nSouth Korean novelist Kim Seong-han's historical novel \"Babido\" (\"\ubc14\ube44\ub3c4\") illustrates the martyrdom of an eponymous tailor, whose name is a mistranscription of Badby's surname.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58485", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58485", "title": "Robert Baddeley (actor)", "text": "English actor\nRobert Baddeley (1733\u20131794) was an English actor. His parentage is unknown, as is his place of birth, though the latter may have been London. He worked as a cook and valet, and one of his employers was the actor-manager Samuel Foote, who may have inspired him to take to the stage. He spent three years following another employer on a Grand Tour, which helped him to develop the facility with languages and accents which was to be a hallmark of his career.\nIn 1760 Baddeley made his stage debut in one of Foote's productions at the Haymarket Theatre in London. Soon afterwards he trod the boards of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane and the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin. By 1762 he was a full member of the Drury Lane company, and he remained there for the rest of his career, while also playing summer seasons at the Haymarket. He was a great success in low comedy and servants' parts, and often played comic foreigners such as Canton in \"The Clandestine Marriage\". In 1777 he played Moses in \"The School for Scandal\", which came to be the role with which he was most associated.\nBaddeley's wife, Sophia Baddeley, exceeded him in fame. The couple had a troubled relationship. At one point Baddeley insisted that Sophia stop living with one Doctor Hayes, and in the financial negotiations that followed Baddeley ended up fighting a duel with David Garrick's brother and business manager George, who had disputed his version of events. No one was injured and a separation was agreed.\nBaddeley continued acting until just before his death. A sufferer of epilepsy, he was taken ill on 19 November 1794 while preparing to play Moses in \"The School for Scandal\" and he died the following day. He bequeathed \u00a33 per annum to provide wine and cake in the green room of Drury Lane Theatre on Twelfth Night. The ceremony of the \"Baddeley Cake\" has remained a regular institution.\nThe 20th-century actress sisters Angela Baddeley and Hermione Baddeley are no relations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58488", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58488", "title": "Badenoch", "text": "Traditional district in Scotland\nBadenoch (; ) is a district of the Scottish Highlands centred on the upper reaches of the River Spey, above Strathspey. The name Badenoch means the drowned land, with most of the population living close to the River Spey or its tributaries.\nThe area is bounded on the north by the Monadhliath Mountains, on the east by the Cairngorms and Braemar, on the south by Atholl and the Grampians, and on the west by Lochaber. The capital of Badenoch is Kingussie, although historically Ruthven was the market town, and later site of the British Army's Ruthven Barracks.\nGeography.\nThe somewhat undefined area of Badenoch covers from northeast to southwest and from north to south, comprising . Excepting the strath of the Spey and the great glens, it consists almost entirely of wild mountainous country, many mountains exceeding in height (i.e., Munros), and contains in the deer forests of Alder, Drumochter, Gaick and Feshie, some of the best deer country in the Highlands.\nThe principal lochs in Badenoch are Loch Laggan, Loch Insh and Loch Ericht. The River Spey and its numerous tributaries water the district abundantly. South of Loch Insh, the Spey extends into the Insh Marshes. \nThe Highland railway traverses Badenoch from Dalnaspidal to Boat of Garten.\nIn modern times Badenoch comprises the parishes of Alvie, Kingussie and Insh, and Laggan. The former Lordship of Badenoch also included a detached portion in the east, the parish of Kincardine, now part of Abernethy and Kincardine parish. As regards the parish of Duthil and Rothiemurchus, the barony of Glencarnie in Duthil (from Aviemore to Garten) was attached for a time. Rothiemurchus, which lies between Badenoch and its former detached portion, was never a part of Badenoch.\nBadenoch is within the Cairngorms National Park, and is part of the Badenoch and Strathspey ward of Highland Council.\nPopulation.\nThe population of Badenoch at the last census (2011) was as follows:\nThe Picts inhabited Badenoch, as shown by the placenames, which include Pictish prefixes such as \"pet\"- (Pitowrie, Pitchurn, Pitmean) and \"aber\"- (Aberarder), not occurring in Gaelic.\nHowever their language was superseded by Gaelic in the 11th century, and even as late as 1881, 74% of Badenoch was Gaelic-speaking (2,685 out of the population of 3,611).\nHistory.\nFrom 1229 to 1313 Clan Comyn held the lordship of Badenoch. \nBadenoch is also the traditional homeland of the Clan Chattan Confederation, particularly Clan MacPherson, whose traditions state that in 1309 Robert the Bruce offered the lands of Badenoch to them if they destroyed the Bruce's enemies, the Clan Comyn.\nIn 1371 King Robert II granted Badenoch to his son Alexander Stewart, 1st Earl of Buchan (1343\u20131405), who became known as the \"Wolf of Badenoch\". Reverting to the crown, the territory came in 1452 to Alexander Gordon, 1st Earl of Huntly, and still gives the title of \"Lord of Badenoch\" to the Marquess of Huntly. However, in 1829, insupportable debts obliged George Gordon, 5th Duke of Gordon to advertise his remaining estates in Badenoch for sale, and by 1834 all of the Gordon lands had been sold. \nHistorically, the area was subsistence farmed. In the summer, cattle were grazed on high pastures, with people living in shieling huts at up to above sea level. An estimated 4500\u20135000 cattle were in Badenoch in the 1770s.\nIn the mid-1750s, the first flood banks on the River Spey in Badenoch were built at Pitmain, just southwest of the modern day edge of Kingussie.\nHigh timber prices during the Napoleonic Wars led to substantial tree felling in Glenmore, Rothiemurchus, Inshriach and Glen Feshie, with many of the logs being floated down the Spey to the coast. \nFamine struck Badenoch in the early 1770s and 1780s, the later was widespread across Scotland and even Europe. This particularly impacted the peasants of the area and increased the polarisation between rich and poor. Farming tenants suffered hardship again in the years 1836-39 when severe weather resulted in crop failures and substantial losses of livestock. While Badenoch was hit hard by the potato famine of 1847, it escaped the utter devastation experienced in other parts of the Highlands.\nThe 1830s and 1840s saw the creation of deer forests to meet the demand from southern aristocrats and industrialists for Highland sporting estates. The requirement that deer forests be free of sheep and cattle brought the hill farming economy of these areas to an end, resulting in more people leaving the land. George Macpherson Grant of Ballindalloch converted the forest of Gaik into a deer forest for Sir Joseph Radcliffe after purchasing it in 1830. In 1836, Ewen Macpherson of Cluny converted his lands of Benalder and Gallovie (Ardverikie) into one large deer forest for James Hamilton, Marquis of Abercorn. Macpherson Grant converted his sheep range in the Forest of Feshie into a deer forest in 1839. Georgiana Gordon, Duchess of Bedford had Alexander Mackintosh of Mackintosh convert the east side of Glen Feshie into a deer forest in the late 1840s. Rothiemurchus became a deer forest in 1859.\nA significant proportion of the population was dependent on seasonal employment outwith the Highlands, but depopulation as a result of large-scale emigration occurred later in Badenoch than in other areas. Poor market prices, harvest failures, farm amalgamations, rent rises and the creation of sheep walks and deer forests led to a steady exedus of people from the 1830s onwards, mainly to Canada and Australia.\nEconomy.\nThe area has very few industries, and the population is mainly located in Kingussie and in other settlements on or near the Spey.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58489", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58489", "title": "Badenweiler", "text": "Place in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany\nBadenweiler (; High Alemannic: \"Badewiler\") is a health resort and spa in the Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald district of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany, historically in the Markgr\u00e4flerland. It is 28 kilometers by road and rail from Basel, 10 kilometers from the French border, and 20 kilometers from Mulhouse. The nearest big city on the German side of the border is Freiburg, about 30 kilometers away. Badenweiler lies at the western edge of the Black Forest. It is sheltered by the Blauen, , and the climate is excellent. Its parish (Evangelical) church (1897) was built at the foot of an 11th-century castle which belonged to the margraves of Baden and was destroyed by the French during the wars of Louis XV.\nMany visitors come to Badenweiler for the warm mineral springs, with temperatures of , others for its whey cure, and still others on account of its equable climate and picturesque surroundings. There is a \"Kurhaus\" and a park of 15 acres (61,000\u00a0m2) containing a historic arboretum (the Staatliche Baderverwaltung Badenweiler), as well as a grand-ducal castle. In 1784, the well-preserved Roman baths were discovered there.\nMain Roman temple and St. Paul's church.\nThe site where the present Protestant St. Paul's church is standing is a historic site that was a religious place of worship already in Roman times. The Romans built here in the year AD 145 a large podium temple of which very little remains. The temple stood on a \"pile structure\". The temple builders drove sharpened oak piles into the loamy soil to secure the ground for this heavy building. The temple was Gallo-Roman with a classic-Italic main front placed on a monumental podium. On the ruins of the Roman temple a Christian church was built in the twelfth century. The church was in a bad state when it was demolished in 1892 and rebuilt as a Neo-Romanesque building between 1893 and 1898. In the course of the digging Roman walls and wall fragments of preceding church buildings were discovered and included in the construction of the new church. In the previous church's tower six 14th-century frescoes were discovered which are now in the choir of the present church. They show a so-called \"Dance of the Dead\" where living and dead meet. Three skeletons are bearing the inscription: \"We were what you are, what we are you shall be.\" This is addressed to three living (a child, a middle-aged man and an old man) whose garments are corresponding to the fashion of the rich in the 14th century.\nPersonalities.\nThe Russian writer Anton Chekhov died there on 15 July (o.s. 2 July) 1904. From Badenweiler, Chekhov wrote outwardly jovial letters to his sister Masha describing the food and surroundings. Badenweiler became one of Chekhov's hometown Taganrog's sister cities in 2002.\nThe American poet, novelist, and journalist Stephen Crane died there on 15 June 1900 of tuberculosis.&lt;BR&gt; \nEphraim Moses Lilien (1874\u20131925) was an art nouveau illustrator and print-maker particularly noted for his art on Jewish and Zionist themes. He is sometimes called the \"first Zionist artist.\"\nThe musicologist Wolfgang Alexander Thomas-San-Galli was born in Badenweiler in 1875.\nThe wife of the first prime minister of India Jawaharlal Nehru, Kamala Nehru was treated here for tuberculosis. Jawaharlal Nehru spent many days by his wife's side in Badenweiler to attend to her.\nThe Yiddish poet and memoirist Daniel Charney was treated there for tuberculosis. He claims to have stayed in the same room in Badenweiler that Chekhov died in. He also describes being treated by the same doctor there who had treated both Chekhov and the famous Yiddish writer Sholem Aleichem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58491", "revid": "20050314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58491", "title": "Charles Badham", "text": "English classical philologist (1813\u20131884)\nReverend Charles Badham (18 July 1813 \u2013 27 February 1884) was an English classical philologist, textual critic, headmaster, and university professor, active in England and even more so in Australia.\nEarly life.\nBadham was born at Ludlow, Shropshire, the fourth son of Charles Badham senior, a classical scholar and regius professor of physic at Glasgow; and Margaret Campbell, a cousin of Thomas Campbell, the poet. His elder brother, Rev. Dr Charles David Badham, became a physician and popular writer.\nFrom seven years of age, Badham was sent with his three brothers to Switzerland to study under Johann Pestalozzi. Badham afterwards attended Eton College from about 1826, and in 1830 was elected to a scholarship at Wadham College, Oxford, but only obtained a third class in Classics (1836), a failure which may have been due to the methods of study at Oxford. In 1837 Badham went to Italy, where he occupied himself in the study of ancient manuscripts, in particular those of the Vatican library. Badham afterwards spent some time in Germany, and was incorporated M.A. at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1847.\nCareer.\nHaving taken holy orders, Badham was appointed headmaster of Louth grammar school, Lincolnshire (1851\u20131854), and subsequently headmaster of Edgbaston proprietary school, near Birmingham. In the interval he had taken the degree of Doctor of Divinity at Cambridge (1852). In 1860 he received the honorary degree of doctor of letters at the University of Leiden. In 1863 was made one of the examiners in classics at London university. In 1866 he was also appointed classical examiner for the Indian civil service.\nIn 1867 Badham left England to take up the professorship of classics and logic in Sydney University, New South Wales (Australia), arriving in April, which he held until his death. The university had been established some 15 years but had fewer than 40 students. The professor's official duties were not heavy but Badham was not content to laze in a backwater and he even went so far as to write to the leading newspapers in New South Wales offering to correct the exercises of students who might be studying Latin, Greek, French or German, in the country. Some years later he travelled over the country holding meetings and endeavouring to get the people to become interested in the university and to found bursaries for poor students. When the government of New South Wales decided to found a great public library at Sydney, Badham was nominated as a trustee and was elected as the first chairman of trustees. He took the greatest interest in the library, and his wide knowledge was invaluable in its early years. He became the representative man of the university, and his speeches at the annual commencements were eagerly awaited. He always insisted that there must be the same standard of examination for degrees at Sydney as in the leading British universities, and he spared no pains in helping his students to reach that standard.\nLate life and legacy.\nBadham was given a banquet at the town hall, Sydney, in August 1883 to celebrate the completion of his seventieth year, and though his health was then beginning to fail, one of the youngest of those present afterwards recorded that \"Badham's speech was unforgettable\". On 1 September 1883, in a letter to \"The Sydney Morning Herald\", Badham suggested for the first time that evening lectures should be established at the university. He had been ailing all the year and in December became very ill. He died on 27 February 1884, almost his last act being the writing of a farewell letter in Latin to his old friend C. G. Cobet. He was married twice and left a widow, four sons and four daughters. A selection from his \"Speeches and Lectures\" was published at Sydney in 1890, and there is a bursary in his memory at the university. At his funeral the coffin was carried to the grave by former students who had received the bursaries for which he had worked so hard, it was they who subscribed for the monument over his grave, severely simple as he would have desired.\nDr Badham's classical attainments were recognised by the most famous European critics, such as C. G. Cobet, Ludwig Preller, W. Dindorf, F. W. Schneidewin, J. A. F. Meineke, A. Ritschl and Tischendorf; and in Australia, Sir James Martin, William Forster and Sir William Macleay.\nBadham published editions of \"Euripides\", \"Helena\" and \"Iphigenia in Tauris\" (1851), \"Ion\" (1851); Plato's \"Philebus\" (1855, 1878); \"Laches\" and \"Eutzydemus\" (1865), \"Phaedrus\" (1851), \"Symposium\" (1866) and \"De Platonis Epistolis\" (1866). He also contributed to classical periodicals such as \"Mnemosyne\". His \"Adhortatio ad Discipulos Academiae Sydniensis\" (1869) contains a number of emendations of Thucydides and other classical authors. Badham also published some critiques of Shakespeare. A collected edition of his \"Speeches and Lectures delivered in Australia\" (Sydney, 1890) contains a memoir by Thomas Butler.\nHis oldest daughter with his first wife, Julia Matilda (n\u00e9e Smith), Edith Badham, was the founder of the Sydney Church of England Girls Grammar School.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58492", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58492", "title": "Jodocus Badius", "text": "Burgundian-French pioneer of printing (1462\u20131535)\nJodocus Badius (; ; 1462 \u2013 1535), also known as Josse Badius, Jodocus van Asche Badius, and Badius Ascensius, was a Burgundian-French pioneer of the printing industry, a grammarian, and a pedagogue.\nLife.\nJosse Badius was born in the village of Asse (formerly Assche) near Brussels in Flemish Brabant in AD\u00a01462. He was a scholar of considerable repute, studying in Brussels and Ferrara and teaching Greek for several years at Lyon, France. During the years 1492\u20131498, while in Lyon, he began working as a proofreader and editor for the printer Jean Trechsel.\nHe moved to Paris, where he established his own printing house in the year 1503, which eventually took the name '. With 775 editions, it served as one of the most active publishers during the first three decades of the 16th century. He specialized in Roman classical texts in Latin, often with his own ' for the student market. For example, for the 2nd-century BC Roman playwright Terence, Badius printed a \"Praenotamenta\" in 1502. This introduced the subject of Roman comedy through a lengthy treatment of general theories of poetry and thorough discussion of its origins, development, and classifications. He also published work by contemporary humanist writers. He frequently worked with or for Johannes Parvus (Jean Petit), the era's most important bookseller and publisher.\nHe was also the author of numerous pieces, amongst which are a life of Thomas a Kempis and a satire on the follies of women entitled \"Navicula Stultarum Mulierum\".\nBadius died in 1535. His epitaph was written by his grandson Henry Stephanus. His work was continued by his 2nd son, Conrad. After Conrad confessed to being a Huguenot, he was forced to flee to Calvinist Geneva in 1549.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58495", "revid": "48497246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58495", "title": "Western Xia", "text": "Dynasty in northwest China (1038\u20131227)\nThe Western Xia or the Xi Xia (), officially the Great Xia (), also known as the Tangut Empire, and known as to the Tanguts and Tibetans, was a Tangut-led imperial dynasty of China that existed from 1038 to 1227. At its peak, the dynasty ruled over modern-day north-central China, including parts of Ningxia, Gansu, eastern Qinghai, Northern Shaanxi, North Eastern Xinjiang, and Southwest Inner Mongolia, and Southernmost Outer Mongolia, measuring about .\nThe capital of Western Xia was Xingqing (modern Yinchuan); another major Xia city and archaeological site is Khara-Khoto. Western Xia was annihilated by the Mongols in 1227. Most of its written records and architecture were destroyed, so the founders and history of the empire remained obscure until 20th-century research in China and the West. Today the Tangut language and its unique script are extinct, only fragments of Tangut literature remain.\nThe Western Xia occupied the area around the Hexi Corridor, a stretch of the Silk Road, the most important trade route between northern China and Central Asia. They made significant achievements in literature, art, music, and architecture, which was characterized as \"shining and sparkling\". Their extensive stance among the other empires of the Liao, Song, and Jin was attributable to their effective military organizations that integrated cavalry, chariots, archery, shields, artillery (cannons carried on the back of camels), and amphibious troops for combat on land and water.\nName.\nThe full title of the Western Xia as named by their own state is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Tangut/fonts.css\"/&gt;L1572 L1890 L2937 L4456 reconstructed as , which word by word denotes 'white', 'high', 'kingdom', 'great', or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Tangut/fonts.css\"/&gt;\ud81f\udd02\ud81f\ude6d\ud821\udf36\ud81f\udd32\ud81c\udca7, 'white', 'high', 'great', 'summer', 'kingdom'. The corresponding Chinese name, (\"White High Great Xia State\"), was also used. Chinese and Japanese scholars commonly interpret the first two words as \"upper reaches of the White River\", which was possibly referring to the Yellow River. Kepping (1994) proposed the translation \"the Kingdom of the Great Xia of the White and Lofty\", and suggested that the name refers to a peak in the Helan Mountains named the \"White and Lofty Mother\". The region was known to the Tanguts as , and to the Tibetans as Minyak. Another name the Tanguts used for their state was (), which means the \"State of Ten Thousand Secrets\". \"Western Xia\" or \"Xi Xia\" is the state's Chinese name. \"Western\" refers to its location to the west of the Liao (916\u20131125) and Jin (1115\u20131234) dynasties, as well as the Song. \"Xia\" (pointing to the Xia dynasty) is a historical name for the region that originated from the 5th-century Hu Xia dynasty.\nThe name Tangut is derived from a form first found in the Orkhon inscriptions dated to 735, which is transcribed in Chinese as Tangwu or Tangute (\"Tangghut\" (\"Tang\u0263ud\") in Mongolian). Tangut was used a common name for certain tribes in the Amdo-Kokonor-Gansu region until the 19th century. The Tanguts called themselves Minag, transcribed in Chinese as Mianyao or Miyao.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Tanguts originally came from the Qinghai-Sichuan-Tibet region, whose home originally was in the highlands of western Sichuan. According to Chinese records, which called them the Dangxiang, the Tanguts were descended from the Western Qiang people, and occupied the steppes around Qinghai Lake and the mountains to its south.\nIn 608, the Tanguts helped the Sui dynasty defeat the Tuyuhun, however they were betrayed by the Sui forces, who took the chance to loot the Tanguts. In 635, they were requested to serve as guides for Emperor Taizong's campaign against Tuyuhun, but the Tang forces double crossed them in a surprise attack and seized thousands of livestock. In retaliation, the Tanguts attacked the Tang and killed thousands of their soldiers.\nBy the 650s, the Tanguts had left their homeland to escape pressure from the Tibetans and migrated eastward, to what are now parts of Shanxi and Shaanxi. In 584-5 Tuoba Ningzong led the first group of Tanguts to submit to the Sui. In 628-629 another group under the leadership of Xifeng Bulai surrendered to the Tang. After the Tuyuhun were defeated in 635, the Tanguts under Tuoba Chici also surrendered. The 340,000 Tanguts were divided into 32 \"jimi\" prefectures under the control of Tangut chieftains appointed as prefects. Another wave of Tanguts entered Tang territory in 692, adding as many as 200,000 persons to the population in Lingzhou and Xiazhou. In 721\u2013722, Tuoba Sitai, a descendant of Tuoba Chici, aided the Tang in putting down a Sogdian-led revolt in Shuofang. By the time of the An Lushan Rebellion in the 750s, the Tanguts had become the primary local power in the Ordos region in northern Shaanxi. In the 760s, the military commander, Ashina Sijian, harassed six Tangut tribes and took their camels and horses. The Tanguts fled west across the Yellow River and started working for the Tibetans as guides on raiding expeditions. In 764, the Tanguts joined the Tibetans and Uyghurs in supporting the Tang rebel Pugu Huaien. After the Tang reasserted their authority, a descendant of Tuoba Chici, Tuoba Chaoguang, was put in charge of the loyal Tanguts. The Yeli, Bali, and Bozhou clans continued to side with the Tibetans, however the Tanguts also came under Tibetan predation, and frontier settlements continued switching between Tang and Tibetan control for many years. In 806, the Acting Minister of Works, Du You, admitted that they treated the Tanguts badly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In recent years, corrupt frontier generals have repeatedly harassed and mistreated [the Tanguts]. Some profited from [unfair trading in] their fine horses; some seized their sons and daughters. Some accepted their local products as bribes, and some imposed corv\u00e9e on them. Having suffered so much hardship, the Tanguts rebelled and fled. They either sent envoys to contact the Uighurs or cooperated with the Tibetans to raid our borders. These are the consequences of [Tang frontier generals\u2019 wrong] deeds. We must discipline them.\u2014\u200a\nIn 814 the Tang appointed a Commissioner for Pacifying the Tanguts to Youzhou (modern Otog Banner), however this did not resolve the Tangut problem. In 820 the Tanguts were subjected to the tyranny of a local governor, Tian Jin. They retaliated by joining the Tibetans in raids on Tang garrisons. Sporadic conflict with the Tanguts lasted until the 840s when they rose in open revolt against the Tang, but the rebellion was suppressed. Eventually the Tang court was able to mollify the Tanguts by admonishing their frontier generals and replacing them with more disciplined ones. The Tanguts also fought against the Uyghurs after the collapse of the Uyghur Khaganate because they both wanted to monopolize the horse trade which passed through Lingzhou.\nDingnan Jiedushi.\nIn 873, the senior Tangut leader at Xiazhou, Tuoba Sigong, occupied Youzhou and declared himself prefect. When Chang'an fell to Huang Chao in 880, Sigong led a Chinese-Tangut army to assist Tang forces in driving out the rebels. For his service, he was granted in 881 control of Xiazhou, Youzhou, Suizhou, Yinzhou, and later also Jingbian. Together the territory was called Dingnan Jiedushi, also known as Xiasui, centered on modern Yulin, Shaanxi. After the Huang Chao rebellion's defeat in 883, Sigong was granted the dynastic surname Li and enfeoffed as \"Duke of Xia\". In 878, the Shatuo chieftain Li Guochang attacked the Tanguts but was repelled by a Tuyuhun intervention.\nSigong died in 886 and was succeeded by his brother Sijian. In 905 Li Keyong's independent regime allied with the Khitans, which pushed the Tanguts into an alliance with Later Liang, which awarded the Dingnan rulers with honorary titles. Sijian died in 908 and was succeeded by his adopted son Yichang, who was murdered by his officer Gao Zongyi in 909. Gao Zongyi was himself murdered by soldiers of Dingnan and was replaced by Yichang's uncle, Renfu, who was a popular officer in the army. In 910 Dingnan came under a monthlong siege by the forces of Qi and Jin but was able to repel the invasion with the aid of Later Liang. In 922 Renfu sent 500 horses to Luoyang, perhaps to aid the Later Liang in fighting the Shatuo. In 924 Renfu was enfeoffed as \"Prince of Shuofang\" by Later Tang. When Renfu died in 933, Later Tang tried to replace his son, Yichao, with a Sogdian governor, An Congjin. An Congjin besieged Xiazhou with 50,000 soldiers, but the Tanguts mounted a successful defensive by rallying the tribes and stripping the countryside of any resources. The Later Tang army was forced to retreat after three months. Despite Later Tang aggression, Yichao made peace with them by sending 50 horses as an offering.\nYichao died in 935 and was succeeded by his brother Yixing. Yixing discovered a plot by his brother, Yimin, to overthrow him in 943. Yimin fled to Chinese territory, but was returned to Xiazhou for execution. Over 200 clan members were implicated in the plot, resulting in a purge of the core ranks. Yimin's post was taken by a loyal official, Renyu. Not long afterward, Renyu was killed by the Yemu Qiang, who departed for Chinese territory. In 944 Yixing may have attacked the Liao dynasty on behalf of the Later Jin. The sources are not clear on the event. In 948 Yixing requested permission to cross the border and attack the Yemu Qiang but was refused. Instead Yixing attacked a neighboring circuit under encouragement from the rebel Li Shouzhen, but retreated upon encountering an imperial force. In 952 the Yeji people north of Qingzhou rebelled, causing the Tanguts significant difficulty. Honorary titles were given out by the Later Han to appease local commanders, including Yixing. In 960 Dingnan came under attack by Northern Han and successfully repelled invading forces. In 962 Yixing offered horses as tribute to the Song dynasty. Yixing died in 967 and was succeeded by his son, Kerui.\nKerui died in 978 and was succeeded by Jiyun. Jiyun ruled for only a year before dying in 980. His son was still an infant, so Jiyun's brother, Jipeng, assumed leadership. Jipeng did not go through the traditional channel of acquiring consent from the elders, which caused dissent among the Tangut elites. The Tangut prefect of Suizhou challenged Jipeng's succession. In 982 Jipeng fled to the Song court and surrendered control of Dingnan Jiedushi. His brother or cousin, Jiqian, did not agree to this and refused to submit to Song administration. Jiqian led a group of bandit holdouts and resisted Song control. In 984, the Song attacked his camp and captured his mother and wife, but he narrowly escaped. He rebounded from this defeat by capturing Yinzhou the next year. Along with Yinzhou, Jiqian captured large amounts of supply, allowing him to increase his following. In 986, Jiqian submitted to the Khitans and in 989, Jiqian married into Khitan nobility. Jiqian also made symbolic obeisance to the Song, but the Song remained unconvinced of his intentions. Jipeng was sent by the Song to destroy Jiqian, but he was defeated in battle on 6 May 994, and fled back to Xiazhou. Jiqian sent tribute on 9 September as well as his younger brother on 1 October to the Song court. Emperor Taizong of Song was receptive of these gestures, but Jiqian returned to raiding Song territory the next year. In April 996, Taizong sent troops to suppress Jiqian, who raided Lingzhou in May and again in November 997. For a brief period after 998, Jiqian accepted Song suzerainty, until the fall of 1001 when he began raiding again. Jiqian died on 6 January 1004 from an arrow wound. His son and successor, Deming, proved to be more amicable towards the Song than his predecessor.\nJingzong (1038\u20131048).\nDeming sent tribute missions to both the Liao dynasty and the Song dynasty. At the same time he expanded Tangut territory to the west. In 1028, he sent his son Yuanhao to conquer the Ganzhou Uyghur Kingdom. Two years later the Guiyi Circuit surrendered to the Tanguts. Yuanhao invaded the Qinghai region as well but was repelled by the newly risen Tibetan kingdom of Tsongkha. In 1032, Yuanhao annexed the Tibetan confederation of Xiliangfu, and soon after his father died, leaving him ruler of the Tangut state.\nUpon his father's death, Yuanhao adopted the Tangut surname of Weiming (Tangut: Nweimi) for his clan. He levied all able bodied men between 15 and 60 years of age, providing him with a 150,000 strong army. By 1036, he had annexed both the Ganzhou Uyghur Kingdom and the Guiyi Circuit to his west. In the same year, the Tangut script was disseminated for use in the Tangut government and translations of Chinese and Tibetan works began at once. The script's creation is attributed to Yeli Renrong and work on it likely began during the reign of Deming.\nIn 1038, Yuanhao declared himself emperor (\"wu zu\" or Blue Son of Heaven), posthumously Emperor Jingzong of Western Xia, of the Great Xia with his capital at Xingqing in modern Yinchuan. Jingzong expanded the bureaucratic apparatus mirroring Chinese institutional practices. A Secretariat (Zhongshu sheng), Bureau of Military Affairs (Shumi yuan), Finance Office (San si), Censorate (Yushi tai), and 16 bureaus (shiliu si) under the supervision of a chancellor (shangshu ling) were created. Jingzong enacted a head shaving decree that ordered all his countrymen to shave the top of their heads so that if within three days, someone had not followed his order, they were allowed to be killed.\nIn response, the Song dynasty offered to bestow ranks on the Tanguts, which Jingzong rejected. The Song then cut off border trade and put a bounty on his head. The Xia's chief military leader, Weiming Shanyu, also fled to seek asylum with the Song, however he was executed at Youzhou. What ensued was a prolonged war with the Song dynasty which resulted in several victories at great cost to the Xia economy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Beyond establishing a Chinese-style central government for the militarized kingdom (which included sixteen bureaus), he also designated eighteen military control commissions spread among five military zones: (1) 70,000 soldiers to deal with the Liao, (2) 50,000 assigned to deal with Huan, Qing, Zhenrong, and Yuan prefectures, (3) 50,000 opposite Fuyan circuit and Lin and Fu[1] prefectures, (4) 30,000 to deal with the Xifan and Huige to the west, and (5) 50,000 in the eastern skirtlands of Helan Mountains, 50,000 at Ling, and 70,000 spread between Xing prefecture and Xingqing fu, or superior prefecture. Altogether Yuanhao had as many as 370,000 men under arms. These were mounted forces, which had been stretched thin by hard warfare and probably excessive use of non-warrior horsemen impressed to fill the army. He maintained a six-unit bodyguard of 5,000 and his elite cavalry force, Iron Cavalry (\"tieqi\") of 3,000. It was a fearful concentration of military might overlaying a relatively shallow economic base.\u2014\u200a\nIn the winter of 1039\u20131040, Jingzong laid siege to Yanzhou (now Yan'an) with over 100,000 troops. The prefect of Yanzhou, Fan Yong, gave contradictory orders to his military deputy, Liu Ping, making him move his forces (9,000) in random directions until they were defeated by Xia forces (50,000) at Sanchuan Pass. Liu Ping was taken captive. Despite the defenders' mediocre performance, Jingzong was forced to lift the siege and retreat to a ring of forts overlooking Yanzhou, when heavy winter snows set in. A Song army of 30,000 returned later that winter under the command of Ren Fu. They were ambushed at Haoshuichuan and annihilated. Despite such victories, Jingzong failed to make any headway against Song fortifications, garrisoned by 200,000 troops on rotation from the capital, and remained unable to seize any territory. In 1042, Jingzong advanced south and surrounded the fort of Dingchuan. The defending commander Ge Huaimin lost his nerve and decided to run, abandoning his troops to be slaughtered. Again, Jingzong failed to gain significant territory. Half his soldiers had died from attrition and after two years, Xia could no longer support his military endeavors. Tangut forces began suffering small defeats, being turned back by Song forces at Weizhou and Linzhou.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By 1043, there were several hundred thousand trained local archer and crossbow militiamen in Shaanxi, and their archery skills were now generally effective. Crucial to defense (or offense) was the use of local non-Chinese allies to screen Song from the monetary costs and social costs of full-scale war. By mid-1042, the accumulated efforts of men like Fan Zhongyan and others to entice the \"fan\" to settle in the in-between areas were paying off. The fan generally and the Qiang specifically were siding with the Song much more than with the Xia at this point. By now, also, there were enough forts and walled cities to limit Yuanhao\u2019s maneuverability and to improve mutual support against him.\u2014\u200a\nThe Liao dynasty took advantage of the Song's dire predicaments by increasing annual tribute payments by 100,000 units of silk and silver (each). The Song appealed to the Liao for help, and as a result, Emperor Xingzong of Liao invaded Western Xia with a force of 100,000 in 1044. Liao forces enjoyed an initial victory but failed to take the Xia capital and were brutally mauled by Jingzong's defenders. According to Song spies, there was a succession of carts bearing Liao dead across the desert. Having exhausted his resources, Jingzong made peace with the Song, who recognized him as the ruler of Xia lands and agreed to pay an annual tribute of 250,000 units of silk, silver, and tea.\nToward the end of the war, Jingzong took the intended bride of his son, Lady Moyi, as his concubine. Jingzong's designated heir, Ninglingge, was the son of the Yeli empress, whose uncle Yeli Wangrong was concerned about the development. Ninglingge was thus arranged to marry the daughter of Wangrong, who planned to kill the emperor on the eve of the wedding. The plot leaked and Wangrong as well as four other Yeli conspirators were executed. The Yeli empress was demoted and Lady Moyi was installed in her place. Another concubine, Lady Mocang, bore the emperor a male child in 1047, named Liangzuo, who was raised by his uncle, Mocang Epang. The disinherited heir apparent stabbed Jingzong in the nose and fled to Mocang Epang's residence where he was arrested and executed. Jingzong died the next day on 19 January 1048 at the age of 44.\nYizong (1048\u20131068).\nAfter Emperor Jingzong of Western Xia died in 1048, a council of elders selected his cousin as the new ruler. Mocang Epang objected on grounds of primogeniture and put forth his nephew, the son of Jingzong and Lady Mocang, as candidate. No dissent was forthcoming, so the two-year-old Liangzuo became emperor, posthumously known as Emperor Yizong of Western Xia. \nDuring Yizong's childhood, the Mocang empress dowager and her brother, Mocang Epang, ruled as regents. In 1049 and 1050, the Liao dynasty invaded Xia territory, raided Liangzhou, and captured one of the wives of the former emperor, Jingzong. However the Liao Khitans suffered severe losses during the invasion and accepted the empress dowager's offer to normalize relations.\nIn 1050, the empress dowager commemorated the construction of a Buddhist temple named Chengtian Temple (Received from Heaven Temple) for the purpose of enshrining Buddhist relics. The empress dowager took the opportunity to assert her legitimacy as regent by utilizing Chinese modes of rhetoric, suggesting that she had an audience familiar with Chinese culture. According to a Qing dynasty text (\"Xi Xia shushi\"), the empress dowager received the \"Tripitaka\" from the Song dynasty and raised tens of thousands of soldiers to build the temple in Xingqing. Buddhist Uyghur monks were present and gave lectures on the sutras.\nIn 1056 the empress dowager was assassinated by her brother, Epang, for opposing his desire to colonize territory claimed by the Song. The Mocang empress dowager was returning from a hunting expedition in the Helan Mountains when she was ambushed and killed by a group of mounted tribesmen. Subsequently, Epang took over as regent and married his daughter to Yizong, who was at the time nine years old. Under Epang's regency, the Xia started encroaching upon Song lands in 1057. In response, the Song shut down border markets. Yet soon after the Tanguts requested a copy of the \"Tripitaka\" from the Song, which the Song agreed to in early 1058.\nIn 1061, Yizong befriended the wife of Epang's son, Lady Liang, and allied himself to discontent courtiers. They raised a force to murder Mocang Epang and his clan, including the daughter that had been married to Yizong. Yizong then married Lady Liang and appointed her brother, Liang Yimai, as palace minister. This would start two generations of Liang dominance in Xia. During Yizong's reign, he attempted to enact more Chinese forms of governance by replacing Tangut rites with Chinese court ritual and dress, which was opposed by the Liang faction that favored Tangut forms. From 1061-1062, Yizong started communicating with the Song using Chinese courtesy protocols and requested imports of Chinese official clothing and books from the Song. He also requested a Song princess in marriage as well as skilled artisans from the Song, but these requests were denied. At the same time, Song and Xia emissaries regularly exchanged insults.\nThe emperor supported sinification through the import of Chinese books, revived the use of his Chinese surname Li and other Chinese protocols, and pursued accommodation with the Song dynasty in border disputes and opening of trade. However, these diplomatic overtures were squandered by arrogant Song representatives who insulted the Xia envoy. The Liang clan was reportedly of Han Chinese ancestry, albeit assimilated into Tangut culture, but their faction would later lead the opposition to the pro-Chinese policy. The Han Chinese empresses of the Liang clan, Paul Forage notes, were more aggressive in their stance against the Song dynasty than the emperors they were representing. However the Liang name has also been attached to the Dangchang clan, who were ancestors of the Tanguts, so the Liang clan may have been simply Tanguts who were knowledgeable about Chinese culture.\nIn 1064, Yizong raided the Song dynasty. In the fall of 1066, he mounted two more raids and in September, an attack on Qingzhou was launched. The Tangut forces destroyed several fortified settlements. Song forces were surrounded for three days before cavalry reinforcements arrived. Yizong was wounded by a crossbow and forced to retreat. Tangut forces attempted another raid later on but failed, and a night attack by Song forces scattered the Tangut army. Yizong regrouped at Qingtang and launched another attack on Qingzhou in December but withdrew after threats by Emperor Yingzong of Song to escalate the conflict. The next year, the Song commander Chong E attacked and captured Suizhou.\nYizong died in January 1068, presumably from his wounds, at the age of 20.\nHuizong (1068\u20131086).\nThe seven-year-old Bingchang, posthumously Emperor Huizong of Western Xia, succeeded his father, Emperor Yizong of Western Xia. Under the regency of empress dowager Liang, the Xia reverted to Tangut rites in 1069.\nHuizong's reign began with an inconclusive war with the Song dynasty in 1070\u20131071 over Suizhou. In 1072 Huizong's sister was married to Linbuzhi (Rinpoche), the son of the Tsongkha ruler, Dongzhan. These events occurred under the regency of the Empress Dowager Liang and her brother, Liang Yimai. Huizong was married to one of Yimai's daughters to ensure the continued control of the Liang over the imperial Weiming clan. In 1080 Huizong rebelled against his mother's dominance by discarding with Tangut ritual in favor of Chinese ceremonies. A year later a plot by Huizong and his concubine, Li Qing, to turn over the Xia's southern territory to the Song was uncovered. Huizong escaped an ambush by Yimai at a banquet but was eventually captured. Li Qing was executed and Huizong was imprisoned in a dungeon. The emperor's loyalists immediately rallied their forces to oppose Liang rule while Yimai tried to in vain to summon them with the imperial silver paiza.\nSeeing the infighting breaking out in the Xia, the Song decided to go on the offensive. In 1081, the Song dynasty launched a five-pronged attack on the Xia. After initial victories, Song forces failed to take the capital of Xia, Xingqing, and remained on the defensive for the next three years. Xia counterattacks also experienced initial success before failing to take Lanzhou multiple times. In 1085, the war ended with the death of Emperor Shenzong of Song.\nIn the summer of 1081, the five Song armies invaded Western Xia. Chong E defeated a Xia army, killing 8,000. In October, Li Xian took Lanzhou. On 15 October, Liu Changzuo's 50,000-strong army met a Xia force of 30,000 led by the Empress Regent Liang's brother. Liu's commanders advised him to take a defensive position, but he refused, and led a contingent of shield warriors with two ranks of crossbowmen and cavalry behind, with himself leading at the front with two shields. The battle lasted for several hours before the Xia forces retreated, suffering 2,700 casualties. Afterwards, Liu captured a large supply of millet at the town of Mingsha, and headed towards Lingzhou. Liu's vanguard attacked the town's gate before the defenders had a chance to close it, dealing several hundred casualties, and seizing more than 1,000 cattle before retreating. Liu wanted Gao Zunyu to help him take Lingzhou, but Gao refused. Then Liu suggested they take the Xia capital instead, to which Gao also refused, and instead took it as a slight that he could not take Lingzhou. Gao relayed his version of events to the Song court, then had Liu removed from command, merging the two forces.\nBy November, the Xia had abandoned the middle of the Ordos plateau, losing Xiazhou. On 20 November, Wang Zhongzheng took Youzhou and slaughtered its inhabitants. At this point Wang became concerned that he would run out of supplies and quarreled with Chong E over provisions. He also forbade his troops from cooking their meals because he feared it would alert Xia raiders of their position. His troops became ill from their uncooked food, started to starve, and came under attack by enemy cavalry anyway. Wang was ordered to withdraw while Chong E covered his retreat. Wang lost 20,000 men.\nOn 8 December, Gao Zunyu decided to attack Lingzhou, only to realize he had forgotten to bring any siege equipment, and there were not enough trees around for their construction. Gao took out his frustration on Liu Changzuo, who he tried to have executed. Liu's troops were on the verge of mutiny before Fan Chuncui, a Circuit judge, convinced Gao to reconcile with Liu. On 21 December, Xia forces breached the dikes along the Yellow River and flooded the camps of the two besieging Song armies, forcing them to retreat. Xia harassment turned the retreat into a rout.\nBy the end of 1081, only Chong E remained in active command. In September 1082, the Xia counterattacked with a 300,000 strong army, laying siege to Yongle, a fortress town west of Mizhi. The Xia sent out cavalry to prevent Song relief attempts. The defending commander, Xu Xi, deployed his troops outside the town gates but refused to attack the enemy troops while they forded the river. Then he refused to let his troops in when the Tangut Iron Hawk cavalry attacked, decimating the defending army. With the capture of Yongle, the Song lost 17,300 troops.\nIn March 1083, Xia forces attacked Lanzhou. The defending commander, Wang Wenyu, led a small contingent out at night and made a surprise attack on the Xia encampment, forcing them to retreat. The Tanguts made two more attempts to take Lanzhou in April and May but failed on both accounts. Their simultaneous attack on Linzhou also failed. After multiple defeats, the Xia offered peace demands to the Song, which they refused. In January 1084, Xia forces made a last attempt to take Lanzhou. The siege lasted for 10 days before the Tangut army ran out of supplies and was forced to retreat.\nThe war ended in 1085 with the death of Emperor Shenzong in April. In exchange for 100 Chinese prisoners, the Song returned four of the six captured towns. Hostilities between the Song and Xia would flare up again five years later, and conflict would continue sporadically until the Song lost Kaifeng in the Jingkang incident of 1127.\nHuizong was returned to his throne in 1083. Liang Yimai died in 1085 and his son, Liang Qipu, succeeded his position as chief minister. The Empress Dowager Liang also died later that year. In 1086 Huizong died at the age of 26.\nChongzong (1086\u20131139).\nThe three-year-old Qianshun succeeded his father, Emperor Huizong of Western Xia, as emperor, posthumously Emperor Chongzong of Western Xia. His mother, the new Empress Dowager Liang, the younger sister of Liang Qipu, ruled as regent. The Song dynasty continued to campaign against the Xia in 1091 and 1093. In 1094, Rende Baozhuang and Weiming Awu slew Liang Qipu and exterminated his clan. In 1096 the Song stopped paying tribute to the Xia and the next year, launched an \"advance and fortify\" campaign centered on guarding key locations along river valleys and mountains to erode the Xia position. From 1097 to 1099, the Song army constructed 40 fortifications across the Ordos plateau. In 1098, the Empress Regent Liang sent a 100,000 strong army to recapture Pingxia. The Tangut army was completely defeated in their attempt to dislodge the Song from their high ground position, and their generals Weiming Amai and Meiledubu were both captured. Empress Dowager Liang died in 1099, apparently poisoned by assassins from the Liao dynasty. At the same time, the Tanguts were also involved in a war with the Zubu to their north.\nIn 1103, the Song annexed Tsongkha and spent the following year weeding out native resistance. The expansion of Song territory threatened the Xia's southern border, resulting in Tangut incursions in 1104 and 1105. Eventually the Xia launched an all out attack on Lanzhou and Qingtang. However, after the Advance and Fortify campaign of 1097\u20131099, Xia forces were no longer able to defeat Song positions. Failing to take major cities, the Tangut forces went on a rampage, killing tens of thousands of local civilians. The next year, Chongzong made peace with the Song, but was unable to clearly demarcate their borders, leading to another war in 1113.\nIn 1113, the Xia started building fortifications in disputed territory with the Song, and took the Qingtang region. Incensed at this provocation, Emperor Huizong of Song dispatched Tong Guan to evict the Tanguts. In 1115, 150,000 troops under the command of Liu Fa penetrated deep into Xia territory and slaughtered the Tangut garrison at Gugulong. Meanwhile, Wang Hou and Liu Chongwu attacked the newly built Tangut fortress of Zangdihe. The siege ended in failure and the death of half the invasion force. Wang bribed Tong to keep the number of casualties a secret from the emperor. The next year, Liu Fa and Liu Chongwu took a walled Tangut city called Rendequan. Another 100,000 troops were sent against Zangdihe and succeeded in taking the fortress. The Xia made a successful counterattack in the winter of 1116\u20131117. Despite piling casualties on the Song side, Tong was adamant about eradicating the Xia once and for all. He gave orders for Liu Fa to lead 200,000 into the heart of the Xia empire, aiming straight at the capital region. It quickly became apparent that this was a suicide mission. The Song army was met outside the city by an even larger Tangut army led by the Xia prince, Chage. The Tangut army surrounded the Song forces, killing half of them, with the remaining falling back during the night. The Tanguts pursued the Song and defeated them again the next day. Liu was beheaded. A ceasefire was called in 1119 and Huizong issued an apology to Xia.\nIn 1122, the J\u00fcrchen Jin dynasty took the Southern Capital of the Liao dynasty, and the remaining Khitans fled in two groups to the west. One group led by Xiao Gan fled to Xia where they set up a short lived Xi dynasty that lasted only five months before Gan died at the hands of his own troops. The other group, led by Yel\u00fc Dashi, joined Emperor Tianzuo of Liao at the Xia border. In the early summer of 1123, Dashi was captured by the Jin and forced to lead them to Tianzuo's camp, where the entire imperial family except for Tianzuo and one son were captured. Tianzuo sought refuge with Chongzong, who while initially receptive, changed his mind after warnings from the Jurchens and declared himself a vassal of Jin in 1124.\nDomestically the reign of Chongzong saw a formal consolidation of the relationship between the imperial court and the great clans, whose positions were assured in legal documents. After his mother's death in 1099, Chongzong stripped the Rende clan of its military power. Rende Baozhuang was demoted. Chongzong's brother, Chage, was given command of the Tangut army, which he led to many victories against the Song. A state school was established with 300 students supported by government stipends. A \"civilian\" faction arose under the leadership of the imperial Prince Weiming Renzhong, who often denounced Chage for corruption and abuse of power. Chongzong shuffled appointments to play the two factions against each other. In 1105, Chongzong married a Liao princess, who along with her son, apparently died of heartbreak in 1125 when the Khitan emperor was captured by the Jurchens. In 1138, the penultimate year of his reign, Chongzong took the daughter of Ren Dejing as his empress.\nChongzong died at the age of 56 in the summer of 1139.\nRenzong (1139\u20131193).\nThe 16-year-old Renxiao succeeded his father, Emperor Chongzong of Western Xia, as emperor, posthumously Emperor Renzong of Western Xia. His mother was the Chinese concubine, Lady Cao.\nIn 1140 a group of Khitan exiles led by Xiao Heda rebelled. The Xia forces under Ren Dejing crushed them. Renzong wanted to reward Ren with a palace appointment but his councilor, Weiming Renzhong, convinced him to keep him as a field commander.\nIn 1142-3 famine and earthquake caused unrest in Xiazhou. Renzong responded with tax remissions and relief measures.\nIn 1144 Renzong decreed the establishment of schools throughout the country and a secondary school opened for imperial scions aged seven to fifteen. A Superior School of Chinese Learning was opened the following year and Confucian temples were built throughout the land. In 1147 imperial examinations were instituted for the selection of candidates to office, however the Tangut law code do not mention these exams as an official method for official recruitment. While other sources do confirm that examination degrees were awarded, the Tangut law code only discusses inheritance of office and rank. In 1148 an Inner Academy was established and staffed with renowned scholars. Renzong also greatly patronized Buddhist learning. The majority of the Tangut Tripitaka was completed during his reign. In 1189, the 50th anniversary of Renzong's accession, 100,000 copies of the \"Sutra on the visualization of the Maitreya Bodhisattva's ascent and rebirth in Tushita Heaven\" (Guan Mile pusa shang sheng Toushuai tian jing) was printed and distributed in both Chinese and Tangut, and 50,000 copies of other sutras were also printed.\nAfter the deaths of Renzhong and Chage in 1156, Ren Dejing rose through the ranks and became very powerful. In 1160 he obtained the noble title of Chu, the first Chinese to do so in the Tangut state. Ren tried to have the schools shut down and called them useless Chinese institutions wasting resources on parasitic scholars. It is unknown how the emperor responded but the schools were not closed. In 1161 the emperor opened a Hanlin Academy to compile the Xia historical records.\nIn 1161-2 the Tanguts briefly occupied territory of both the Jurchen Jin dynasty and Song dynasty during the Jin\u2013Song Wars.\nFrom 1165 to 1170, Ren Dejing tried to establish his own semi-autonomous realm, and in the process meddled in the affairs of the Zhuanglang tribes, who lived in the border region of the Tao River valley. He also tried to enlist the help of the Jurchens, but they refused his overtures. Ren started construction of fortifications along the Jin border. In 1170 Ren pressured Renzong to grant him the eastern half of the realm as well as for Emperor Shizong of Jin to grant him investiture. In the summer of that year, Renzong's men secretly rounded up Ren Dejing and his adherents, executing them.\nWo Daochong succeeded Ren Dejing as chief minister. A Confucian scholar, he translated the \"Analects\" and provided commentary to it in the Tangut language. Upon his death, Renzong honored him by having his portrait displayed in all the Confucian temples and schools.\nThe Jurchens closed down border markets in Lanzhou and Baoan in 1172 and would not reopen them until 1197. They accused the Tanguts of trading worthless gems and jades for their silk. Tangut border raids increased during this period until the Jurchens reopened one market in 1181. In 1191 some Tangut herdsmen strayed into Jurchen territory and was chased away by a Jin patrol. They them ambushed and killed the pursuing patrol officer. Renzong refused to extradite the herdsmen and assured the Jurchens that they would be punished.\nRenzong died in 1193 at the age of 70.\nHuanzong (1193\u20131206).\nThe 17-year-old Chunyou succeeded his father, Emperor Renzong of Western Xia, as emperor, posthumously Emperor Huanzong of Western Xia. Little besides the rise of Tem\u00fcjin and his conflict with Western Xia is known about Huanzong's reign. In 1203, Toghrul was defeated by Tem\u00fcjin. Toghrul's son, Nilqa Senggum, fled through Tangut territory and although the Tanguts refused to provide him with refuge, and he raided their territory, Tem\u00fcjin used this as pretext to raid Western Xia. The resulting attack in 1205 caused one local Tangut noble to defect to the Mongols, the plundering of several fortified settlements, and loss of livestock.\nIn 1206, Tem\u00fcjin was formally proclaimed Genghis Khan, ruler of all Mongols, marking the official start of the Mongol Empire. In the same year, Huanzong was deposed in a coup by his cousin Anquan, who installed himself as Emperor Xiangzong of Western Xia. Huanzong died much later in captivity.\nXiangzong (1206\u20131211).\nIn 1207, Genghis led another raid into Western Xia, invading the Ordos Loop and sacking Wulahai, the main garrison along the Yellow River, before withdrawing in the spring of 1208. The Tanguts tried to form a united front with the Jurchen Jin dynasty against the Mongols, but the usurper monarch, Wanyan Yongji, refused to cooperate and declared that it was to their advantage that enemies attack one another.\nIn the autumn of 1209, Genghis received the submission of the Uyghurs to the west and invaded Western Xia. After defeating an army led by Gao Lianghui outside Wulahai, Genghis captured the city and pushed up along the Yellow River, capturing several garrisons and defeating another imperial army. The Mongols besieged the capital, Zhongxing, which held a well-fortified garrison of 150,000, and attempted to flood the city by diverting the Yellow River. The dike they built broke and flooded the Mongol camp, forcing them to withdraw. In 1210, Xiangzong agreed to submit to Mongol rule, and demonstrated his loyalty by giving a daughter, Chaka, in marriage to Genghis and paying a tribute of camels, falcons, and textiles.\nAfter their defeat in 1210, Western Xia attacked the Jin dynasty in response to their refusal to aid them against the Mongols. The following year, the Mongols joined Western Xia and began a 23-year-long campaign against Jin. In the same year Xiangzong's nephew Zunxu seized power in a coup and became Emperor Shenzong of Western Xia. Xiangzong died a month later.\nShenzong (1211\u20131223).\nEmperor Shenzong of Western Xia was the first person in the imperial family to pass the palace examinations and receive a jinshi degree.\nShenzong appeased the Mongols by attacking the Jurchens and in 1214, supported a rebellion against the Jurchens. In 1216, Western Xia provided auxiliary troops to the Mongols for an attack on Jin territory. The Tanguts also invited the Song dynasty to join them in attacking the Jin, but nothing came of this except an aborted joint action in 1220. The antagonistic policy towards the Jurchen Jin was unpopular at court, as was cooperating with the Mongols. A certain Asha Gambu emerged as an outspoken proponent of anti-Mongol policy. In the winter of 1217\u20131218, the Mongols called on Western Xia to provide them troops for campaigns further west, but they refused to comply. No immediate retaliation occurred since Genghis left for the west in 1219 and left Muqali in charge of North China. In 1223, Muqali died. At the same time, Shenzong abdicated to his son, Dewang, posthumously Emperor Xianzong of Western Xia.\nXianzong (1223\u20131226).\nEmperor Xianzong of Western Xia began peace talks with the Jurchen Jin in 1224 and the peace agreement was finalized in the fall of 1225. The Tanguts continued to defy the Mongols by refusing to send a hostage prince to the Mongol court.\nAfter defeating Khwarazm in 1221, Genghis prepared his armies to punish Western Xia. In 1225, Genghis attacked with a force of approximately 180,000. According to the \"Secret History of the Mongols\", Genghis was injured in 1225 during a horse hunt when his horse bolted from under him. Genghis then tried to offer Western Xia the chance to willingly submit, but Asha Gambhu mocked the Mongols and challenged them to battle. Genghis pledged to avenge this insult. Genghis ordered his generals to systematically destroy cities and garrisons as they went.\nGenghis divided his army and sent general Subutai to take care of the westernmost cities, while the main force under Genghis moved east into the heart of the Western Xia and took Suzhou and Ganzhou, which was spared destruction upon its capture due to it being the hometown of Genghis's commander Chagaan. After taking Khara-Khoto in early 1226, the Mongols began a steady advance southward. Asha, commander of the Western Xia troops, could not afford to meet the Mongols as it would involve an exhausting westward march from the capital through 500 kilometers of desert, so the Mongols steadily advanced from city to city.\nIn August 1226, Mongol troops approached Liangzhou, the second-largest city in Western Xia, which surrendered without resistance. In autumn 1226, Genghis crossed the Helan Mountains, and in November laid siege to Lingwu, a mere 30 kilometers from the capital. At this point, Xianzong died, leaving his relative, Xian, posthumously Emperor Mozhu of Western Xia, to deal with the Mongol invasion.\nMo (1226\u20131227).\nEmperor Mo of Western Xia led a 300,000 strong army against the Mongols and was defeated. The Mongols sacked Lingzhou.\nGenghis reached the Western Xia capital in 1227, laid siege to the city, and launched several offensives against the Jin to prevent them from sending reinforcements to Western Xia, with one force reaching as a far as Kaifeng, the Jin capital. The siege lasted for six months before Genghis offered terms of surrender. During the peace negotiations, Genghis continued his military operations around the Liupan mountains near Guyuan, rejected a peace offer from the Jin, and prepared to invade them near their border with the Song.\nIn August 1227, Genghis died of uncertain causes, and, in order not to jeopardize the ongoing campaign, his death was kept a secret. In September 1227, Emperor Mo surrendered to the Mongols and was promptly executed. The Mongols then pillaged the capital, slaughtered the city's population, plundered the imperial tombs to the west, and completed the annihilation of the Western Xia state.\nDestruction.\nThe destruction of Western Xia during the second campaign was nearly total. According to John Man, Western Xia is little known to anyone other than experts in the field due to Genghis Khan's policy calling for their complete eradication. He states that \"There is a case to be made that this was the first ever recorded example of attempted genocide. It was certainly very successful \"ethnocide\".\" However, some members of the Western Xia royal clan emigrated to western Sichuan, northern Tibet, and even possibly Northeast India, in some instances becoming local rulers. A small Western Xia state was established in Tibet along the upper reaches of the Yalong River while other Western Xia populations settled in what are now the modern provinces of Henan and Hebei. In China, remnants of the Western Xia persisted into the middle of the Ming dynasty.\nMilitary.\nThe Western Xia had two elite military units, the Iron Hawks (tie yaozi), a 3,000 strong heavy cavalry unit, and Trekker infantry (bubazi), mountain infantry. The brother of Emperor Chongzong of Western Xia, Chage, mentioned that Trekker infantry had difficulty fighting Mighty-Arm bows, a type of Song dynasty crossbow:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Since ancient times we have fought using both infantry and cavalry. Although we have the Iron Hawks that can charge on the plains and the Trekker infantry that can fight in the hills, if we happen to encounter some new tactic our cavalry will have difficulty deploying. If we encounter [Mighty- Arm bows], then our infantry will be scattered. The problem is our troops can only fight according to convention and are unable to adapt to changes during battle.\u2014\u200a\nIn 1980, the Wuwei Bronze Cannon was discovered in a cellar dating to the Western Xia period. Dating to the early 13th century, it is one of the earliest cannons ever discovered. It weighs 108\u00a0kg and was discovered with an iron ball about 9cm in diameter inside its barrel.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nThe kingdom developed a Tangut script to write its own Tangut language, a now extinct Tibeto-Burman language probably related to the Horpa taxon.\nTibetans, Uyghurs, Han, and Tanguts served as officials in Western Xia. It is unclear how distinct the different ethnic groups were in the Xia state as intermarriage was never prohibited. Tangut, Chinese and Tibetan were all official languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A system of writing its language, based on Chinese and Khitan, was created in 1036, and many Chinese books were translated and then printed in this script. Gifts and exchanges of books were arranged with the Sung court from time\nto time; Buddhist \"sutras\" were donated no fewer than six times and some of them were translated and printed. After the Mongol conquest of Tangut and China, a Tangut edition of the Tripitaka in the Hsi-hsia script, in more than 3620 \"ch\u00fcan\", was printed in Hangchow and completed in 1302, and about a hundred copies were distributed to monasteries in the former Tangut region. Many fragments of books in Tangut and Chinese were discovered at the beginning of this century, including two editions of the Diamond sutra printed in 1016 and 1189, and two bilingual glossaries, the \"Hsi-Hsia Tzu Shu Yun Thung\" (+ 1132), and the \"Fan Han Ho Shih Chang Chung Chu\" (+ 1190). Apparently many books in their native tongue were also printed under the Tangut rulers.\u2014\u200a\nWestern Xia pioneered the use of movable type printing, using both ceramic and wooden movable type to print texts. After the death of Bi Sheng (972\u20131051), who invented movable type, the technology next appeared in Western Xia. A Buddhist text known as the \"Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra\" was found in modern Wuwei, Gansu, dating to the reign of Emperor Renzong of Western Xia (r. 1125-1193). The text features traits that have been identified as hallmarks of clay movable type such as the hollowness of the character strokes and deformed and broken strokes. The Tanguts printed the \"Auspicious Tantra of All-Reaching Union\", a 449-page text considered to be the earliest extant example of a text printed using the wooden movable type. The \"Auspicious Tantra\" texts were found in the ruins of the Baisigou Square Pagoda in the Helan Mountains, Ningxia. They feature traits of movable type texts such as identical length bar lines, some characters printed upside down, different shades of ink, and interlaced lines. Another Tangut text known as the \"Avatamsaka Sutra\" contains descriptions of the merits of wooden movable type such as a \"vow to carve individual characters\", \"those engaged in typesetting are virtuous\", and \"those engaged in carving characters and printing are intelligent and can expect to have their wishes fulfilled\". The text shows traits of movable type such as correcting mistakes by directly overlaying incorrect characters with the correct ones. Twelve Tangut titles printed in movable type survive to this day.\nDress.\nIn 1034 Li Yuanhao (Emperor Jingzong) introduced and decreed a new custom for Western Xia subjects to shave their heads, leaving a fringe covering the forehead and temples, ostensibly to distinguish them from neighbouring countries. Clothing was regulated for different classes of official and commoners. Dress seemed to be influenced by Tibetan and Uighur clothing.\nIn 1061, Emperor Yizong of Western Xia decreed that the court would adopt Chinese court rituals and dress.\nReligion.\nThe government-sponsored state religion was a blend of Tibetan Tantric Buddhism and Chinese Mahayana Buddhism with a Sino-Nepalese artistic style. The scholar-official class engaged in the study of Confucian classics, Taoist texts, and Buddhist sermons, while the Emperor portrayed himself as a Buddhist king and patron of Lamas.\nEarly in the kingdom's history, Chinese Buddhism was the most widespread form of Buddhism practiced. However, around the mid-twelfth century Tibetan Buddhism gained prominence as rulers invited Tibetan monks to hold the distinctive office of state preceptor. The practice of Tantric Buddhism in Western Xia led to the spread of some sexually related customs. Before they could marry men of their own ethnicity when they reached 30 years old, Uighur women in Shaanxi in the 12th century had children after having relations with multiple ethnic Han men, with her desirability as a wife enhancing if she had been with a large number of men.\nDuring the Song invasion of 1081, an officer remarked that Liangzhou was full of Buddhist monks as well as Taoist priests.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of the empire mainly consisted of agriculture, pastoralism, and trade (especially with Central Asia).\nRulers.\nEach Western Xia emperor established one or more era name in Chinese and Tangut, although not all the Tangut versions of era names are known.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58497", "revid": "30645640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58497", "title": "Charente-Maritime", "text": "Department of France\nCharente-Maritime (; Poitevin-Saintongeais: \"Ch\u00e9rente-Marine\"; ) is a department in the French region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine, on the country's west coast. Named after the river Charente, its prefecture is La Rochelle. As of 2019, it had a population of 651,358 with an area of 6,864 square kilometres (2,650 sq mi).\nHistory.\nThe history of the department begins with a decree from the Constituent Assembly on 22 December 1789, which took effect on 4 March 1790, creating it as one of the 83 original departments during the French Revolution. Named \"Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure\" after the lower course of the Charente, it was renamed Charente-Maritime on 4 September 1941, during World War II, reflecting its Atlantic coast identity. The department encompasses most of the former province of Saintonge (excluding Cogna\u00e7ais and Barbezilien, part of Charente, and the duchy-pairie of Frontenay-Rohan-Rohan, in Deux-S\u00e8vres), nearly all of Aunis, and the Pays d'Aulnay from Poitou.\nEvidence of human settlement dates back to the Paleolithic era, with the Celtic Santon tribe settling during the La T\u00e8ne period, fostering trade and crafts. Romanization after the Gallic War led to the rise of Mediolanum Santonum (Saintes), the capital of Augustan Aquitaine. Initially designated the prefecture in 1790 (having been Saintonge\u2019s capital), Saintes lost this status in 1810 when Napoleon decreed its transfer to La Rochelle. The region, under Merovingian and Carolingian rule, oscillated between kingdom and duchy status until Carolingian decline spurred instability, shaping Aunis\u2019 distinct identity.In the 12th century, Eleanor of Aquitaine\u2019s remarriage tied the region to the Plantagenet domain, boosting trade with England despite revolts. The Hundred Years' War brought devastation, ending with the French recapture of Montguyon in 1451. The 16th century saw the Reformation and Wars of Religion divide Aunis and Saintonge. The French Revolution raised hopes but faltered with events like the Rochefort pontoons, amid tensions between the Vend\u00e9e and Girondine uprisings. The 19th century brought prosperity under the Second Empire, driven by cognac, until the phylloxera crisis struck.\nDuring World War II, the German Army occupied the department, integrating it into occupied France. The Organisation Todt built sea defences, including pillboxes along the presqu'\u00eele d'Arvert and Ol\u00e9ron island, to counter Allied landings. The war\u2019s end saw German resistance pockets at La Rochelle and Royan; Royan was nearly destroyed by an RAF raid on 5 January 1945, and liberated by the French Forces of the Interior in April, while La Rochelle was freed on 9 May 1945.\nPrehistory.\nPaleolithic.\nHuman occupation in present-day Charente-Maritime dates to the Lower Paleolithic (Acheulean), evidenced by bifaces found near G\u00e9mozac and Pons along the Seugne and Soute rivers, and an Acheulean lithic industry at \"Les Thibauderies\" near Saint-Genis-de-Saintonge. The Middle Paleolithic saw Mousterian civilizations flourish, with artifacts unearthed in the Charente valley (e.g., Gros-Roc cave at Douhet and sites at Port-d'Envaux and Saint-Sever-de-Saintonge). In 1979, a Neanderthal skeleton found at Roche \u00e0 Pierrot in Saint-C\u00e9saire (dated to ~36,300 years ago) confirmed overlap with Cro-Magnons, leading to the Pal\u00e9osite center\u2019s opening in 2005. Notable Aurignacian and Magdalenian finds include three engraved stones from Saint-Porchaire\u2019s caves, the oldest (1924) depicting mammoths. Solutrean flint points were also discovered at Saint-Germain-du-Seudre and Bois.\nNeolithic Revolution.\nThe Neolithic \"revolution\" arrived in the Charente region around the 6th millennium BC, marked by settled agriculture, animal husbandry, and crafts like ceramics. The Middle Neolithic introduced the Chassean culture and megalithic monuments, including dolmens and menhirs, such as the Pierre-Lev\u00e9e dolmen at La Vall\u00e9e, Pierre-Folle alley at Montguyon, and the largest menhir at Chives (Viviers-Jusseau). In the 4th\u20133rd millennia BC, the Matignons (e.g., Ile d'Ol\u00e9ron, Soubise) and Peu-Richard (Th\u00e9nac, Barzan) civilizations built fortified camps. By the early 3rd millennium BC, the Artenac civilization emerged, introducing copper metallurgy.\nAntiquity.\nThe Santoni.\nFrom the Bronze Age, Saintonge inhabitants maintained trade with the Atlantic arc, evidenced by bronze objects in the Meschers deposit. In the early Iron Age, a tomb at Courcoury with Mediterranean imports (Etruscan basin, Greek bowl) highlights broader connections. During the La T\u00e8ne period, the Santoni established the Pons oppidum as their political and trading hub, a key example of oppida civilization. This rural, hierarchical society featured self-sufficient villages and necropolises. Along the coast, they produced sea salt, while at Novioregum (Barzan), an emporium facilitated trade with the Romans via the Gironde estuary.\nHigh Roman Empire and Gallo-Roman Period.\nThe Gallic War (58\u201351 BC), sparked by Julius Caesar\u2019s intervention against the Helvetians, saw mixed Santon involvement: their fleet aided the Romans against the Venetians (56 BC), yet some joined Vercingetorix at Gergovia and Alesia. Post-conquest, under Augustus, the Santons\u2019 territory became part of the province of Aquitaine, with Mediolanum Santonum (Saintes) as its first capital, boasting monuments like the votive arch and amphitheater. Novioregum (Barzan) emerged as a major port, exporting goods like wine (reallowed by Probus in 276) and \"santonine\" absinthe. Roman infrastructure, including roads to Burdigala (Bordeaux) and Limonum (Poitiers), and structures like the Pirelonge tower at Saint-Romain-de-Benet, enriched the region.\nLate Roman Empire and First Barbarian Invasions.\nFrom the late 3rd century, barbarian invasions disrupted Santonia: \"Novioregum\" was destroyed in 256, and \"Mediolanum Santonum\" and Pons were burned in 276 by the Alamanni. Saintes retreated behind ramparts, shrinking significantly. In 285, Diocletian reorganized it into Aquitaine Seconde, diminishing Saintes\u2019 role. Christianity emerged, led by Eutrope, the first bishop, though its spread was slow until the 5th century. After the Western Roman Empire\u2019s fall in 476, Vandals and Alans plundered the region, ending its Gallo-Roman prosperity.\nEarly modern period.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nIn 418, a \"f\u0153dus\" between Visigoth king Wallia and Roman emperor Flavius Honorius allowed Visigoths to settle in Aquitaine II, including Saintonge, forming the Visigothic kingdom with Toulouse as its capital. They occupied the region until 507, leaving toponymic traces like Goutrolles and Aumagne. Frankish king Clovis ousted them after defeating Alaric at Vouill\u00e9. In 584, Gondovald briefly ruled a Merovingian kingdom of Aquitaine, supported by Bishop Palladius of Saintes. A second kingdom under Caribert II became a duchy after his death, with Eudes resisting Saracen incursions in 732, halted by Charles Martel near Poitiers. Charlemagne established a new kingdom of Aquitaine in 781 for his son Louis. Viking raids began in 843, devastating Royan, Saujon, Saintes (845, 863), and Saint-Jean-d\u2019Ang\u00e9ly (865), weakening Carolingian control and fostering feudalism. By the 10th century, Aunis split from Saintonge, with castles like Broue built for defense.\nLate Middle Ages.\nLa Rochelle grew in the 12th century under the Dukes of Aquitaine, gaining a communal charter from Henry II in 1175 and boosting trade with the Hanseatic League. Saintonge and Aunis prospered from salt, wine, and stone exports. The Via Turonensis pilgrimage route spurred religious growth, with a hospice in Pons and a basilica for Eutropius in Saintes. In 1137, Eleanor of Aquitaine inherited the region, marrying Louis VII, then Henry Plantagenet in 1152, tying Aquitaine to England. Her Roles of Ol\u00e9ron maritime code emerged in 1169. Rebellions in 1174 and sieges like Saintes strained Plantagenet rule. After John\u2019s contested reign, Philippe Auguste seized most of Saintonge and Aunis by 1204, though La Rochelle resisted until 1224 under Louis VIII. The Battle of Taillebourg (1242) saw Louis IX defeat Henry III, solidified by the Treaty of Paris (1259).\nHundred Years' War.\nThe Hundred Years' War began when Edward III claimed the French throne in 1337, sparking the \"Saintonge Wars.\" In 1345, Henry of Lancaster raided Saintonge, capturing key towns. The Black Death (1347) paused fighting, but in 1351, John II retook Saint-Jean-d\u2019Ang\u00e9ly. The Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny (1360) ceded Saintonge and Aunis to Edward of Woodstock, but Charles V\u2019s forces, led by Du Guesclin, reversed this. The Battle of La Rochelle (1372) and subsequent sieges secured French control by 1374. After truces, Charles VII\u2019s reconquest ended with the siege of Montguyon (1451) and the Battle of Castillon (1453), leaving the region devastated.\nEarly modern period.\nRenaissance.\nPost-war recovery in Saintonge and Aunis was rapid, with lords granting land to peasants, spurring population growth and agricultural revival. Louis XI confirmed communal charters, and towns like Marennes (1452) and Jonzac (1473) gained fair rights. La Rochelle\u2019s trade flourished, welcoming foreign ships despite plagues (1500\u20131515) and a 1518 hurricane. In 1542, Fran\u00e7ois I\u2019s attempt to impose the \"gabelle\" tax on salt sparked revolt, initially subdued by Gaspard de Saulx, but he granted amnesty after arriving in La Rochelle. The \"Jacquerie des Pitauds\" erupted in 1548, spreading regionally; rebels seized Pons, Saintes, and Royan, but Anne de Montmorency\u2019s harsh repression crushed it, though Henri II later restored the old tax system in 1555. Cod fishing grew from ports like La Tremblade and Royan by 1546, and Jacopolis-sur-Brouage was founded in 1555 as a salt trade hub.\nThe Reformation.\nThe Reformation gained traction in Aunis and Saintonge after Martin Luther\u2019s 1517 \"95 Theses\", fueled by clerical abuses and trade with Protestant Northern Europe. John Calvin briefly preached in Saintonge in 1534 as Charles d\u2019Espeville. Coastal areas like Marennes and Ol\u00e9ron became Reformed strongholds. Repression began in 1548, with public penance in La Rochelle and executions in 1552. Protestant churches emerged, including La Rochelle (1557) and Saint-Jean-d\u2019Ang\u00e9ly (1558), though leaders like Philibert Hamelin faced execution. Tensions escalated with the 1562 Massacre of Vassy, igniting the Wars of Religion.\nWars of Religion.\nLa Rochelle\u2019s growing Calvinist population led to the 1562 Edict of Toleration by Charles IX, but the Massacre of Vassy sparked uprisings led by Louis de Cond\u00e9. Iconoclastic attacks hit Saint-Jean-d\u2019Ang\u00e9ly\u2019s abbey in 1562. The Edict of Amboise (1563) ended the first war. In 1565, Charles IX visited Saintes and La Rochelle, noting Protestant resistance. By 1567, La Rochelle became a Protestant stronghold under mayor Fran\u00e7ois Pontard, aligning with Cond\u00e9. The Battle of Jarnac (1569) killed Cond\u00e9, but the Edict of Saint-Germain (1570) made La Rochelle a Protestant safe haven. The St. Bartholomew\u2019s Day massacre (1572) led to the Siege of La Rochelle, which ended in 1573. Later wars saw Henri de Navarre lead Protestants, culminating in the Edict of Nantes (1598), designating La Rochelle and others as security strongholds.\n17th century.\nFrom the Edict of Nantes to the Assassination of Henri IV.\nUnder Henri IV, the Edict of Nantes (1598) brought civil peace, though tensions persisted between Catholics and Protestants. Tax increases, like the 1602 \"pancarte\" extension, sparked revolts in Aunis and Saintonge, with La Rochelle\u2019s privileges causing regional envy. Henri IV ordered land reclamation in Marans\u2019 marshes, led by Flemish and Brabantine experts. Explorers Pierre Dugua de Mons and Samuel de Champlain from Saintonge founded Qu\u00e9bec in 1608, boosting New France migration. Henri IV\u2019s assassination in 1610 raised Protestant fears under regent Marie de M\u00e9dicis, who favored Catholics, prompting leaders like Henri II de Rohan to emerge.\nAunis and Saintonge Under the Reign of Louis XIII.\nFrom 1615\u20131620, Aunis and Saintonge saw skirmishes due to Louis XIII\u2019s pro-Spanish policies and Catholic restoration in Navarre, inciting Protestant unrest. In 1621, Louis XIII besieged Saint-Jean-d\u2019Ang\u00e9ly, defended by Benjamin de Soubise, capturing it after a month, abolishing privileges, and razing defenses. Pons surrendered, but Royan\u2019s 1622 siege ended with its destruction. La Rochelle resisted longer, facing a year-long blockade.\nSiege of La Rochelle (1627-1628).\nLa Rochelle, dubbed the \"metropolis of heresy\" by Cardinal Richelieu, defied Louis XIII, leading to the 1622 Treaty of Montpellier, which faltered over Fort-Louis\u2019 demolition. Renewed conflict in 1625 saw Jean Guiton\u2019s fleet lose to Henri II de Montmorency, and Saint-Martin-de-R\u00e9 fell. In 1627, England\u2019s Duke of Buckingham blockaded \u00cele de R\u00e9, while Richelieu\u2019s siege of La Rochelle, with a dike blocking sea access, began. Famine and disease reduced the population from 28,000 to 5,000, forcing surrender on 28 October 1628.\nThe Peace of Al\u00e8s and the Counter-Reformation.\nThe Peace of Al\u00e8s (1629) stripped Protestants of safe havens but allowed worship, though the Counter-Reformation pushed Catholic resurgence with Jesuit colleges and church restorations. In 1648, the diocese of La Rochelle was created, converting its grand temple into a cathedral. By 1660, 80,000 Protestants remained in Saintonge and Aunis.\nThe Reign of Louis XIV and the 1685 Revocation of the Edict of Nantes.\nLouis XIV intensified Protestant persecution with dragonnades, taxes, and temple destruction, culminating in the 1685 Edict of Fontainebleau, revoking the Edict of Nantes. Clandestine \"desert church\" gatherings persisted, and many Protestants emigrated from Marennes and Arvert to England, Holland, and North America.\n1666: Creation of Rochefort.\nIn 1666, Jean-Baptiste Colbert established Rochefort as a naval arsenal on the Charente, designed on a grid plan with key facilities like the Corderie Royale. Fortifications by Vauban bolstered coastal defenses. Michel B\u00e9gon, Intendant from 1688, modernized it with social and cultural initiatives.\n1694: Creation of the G\u00e9n\u00e9ralit\u00e9 de La Rochelle.\nIn 1694, Michel B\u00e9gon became Intendant of the new \"G\u00e9n\u00e9ralit\u00e9 de La Rochelle\", unifying five elections from Poitiers, Limoges, and Bordeaux jurisdictions.\n18th century.\nReturn to Prosperity in the Age of Enlightenment.\nThe 18th century brought agricultural growth in Aunis and Saintonge with the introduction of corn from the New World, complementing wheat, rye, and barley. Cognac production began, with eau-de-vie shipped via La Rochelle to Northern Europe. The \"Little Ice Age\" caused harsh winters, notably in 1708, 1739, and 1788/1789, freezing rivers and triggering famines. Textile and leather industries thrived in Saintes and Jonzac. La Rochelle prospered through the triangular trade, importing sugar and engaging in the slave trade, while Rochefort trained soldiers for New France. Enlightenment advances included La Rochelle\u2019s Acad\u00e9mie (1732) and Rochefort\u2019s Naval Medicine School (1722). During the Seven Years' War, British raids in 1757 failed to take Rochefort. In 1780, Marquis de La Fayette sailed from Rochefort on \"L'Hermione\" to aid the American Revolution. Economic decline in the 1780s, worsened by the 1788/1789 winter, led to riots in Rochefort by 1789. The Estates-General convened in 1789, with representatives from La Rochelle, Saintes, and Saint-Jean-d\u2019Ang\u00e9ly drafting reform-focused \"cahiers de dol\u00e9ances\".\nRevolution.\nThe Estates-General led to the Constituent Assembly, which, on 22 December 1789, created the department of Saintonge-et-Aunis, renamed Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure by 26 February 1790, centered on the Charente River. Ratified on 4 March 1790, it merged Aunis and Saintonge, incorporating some Poitevin areas, and was divided into seven districts, later six arrondissements, with Saintes chosen as the capital after debate. The new order was widely accepted, with a federative oath taken on 14 July 1790, though rural discontent over lingering feudal rights sparked unrest, including uprisings in Saint-Thomas-de-Conac and Varaize, where a mayor was killed. The Civil Constitution of the Clergy divided the clergy, with many, including Bishop Pierre-Louis de La Rochefoucauld of Saintes, refusing the oath; he was arrested in 1792 and killed in the September Massacres. From 1791\u20131793, Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure raised eight battalions for war against Austria and Prussia. The Republic was proclaimed on 22 September 1792.\nThe Terror.\nThe Execution of Louis XVI on 21 January 1793, radicalized the Revolution under the Montagne faction, establishing the \"Comit\u00e9 de salut public\" and \"Tribunal r\u00e9volutionnaire\". Rochefort gained strategic importance as the Republic\u2019s key arsenal after Toulon\u2019s fall. The Rochefort Revolutionary Court, created 3 November 1793, by Joseph Lequinio and Joseph Fran\u00e7ois Laignelot, became a tool of repression, with the guillotine set up at Place Colbert. A de-Christianization campaign targeted priests, forcing renunciations and transforming churches into \"temples of Reason.\" On 25 January 1794, refractory priests were rounded up for deportation to French Guiana, but British blockades confined them to ships like the \"Deux-Associ\u00e9s\" off \u00cele Madame, where typhus killed many. Survivors were released in 1795 or later under the 1802 Concordat. Rural brigandage, including \"chauffeurs,\" surged amid administrative chaos.\nContemporary times.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure During the First Empire.\nAfter Napoleon\u2019s coup, Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure overwhelmingly supported the Empire in 1804, with local leaders attending the coronation. Michel Regnaud rose as a key imperial figure. Napoleon visited in 1804, initiating Fort Boyard\u2019s construction, halted by British threats. The 1809 Battle of Aix Island saw British forces under Thomas Cochrane destroy much of the French fleet. Napoleon reinforced coastal defenses with forts like \u00c9net. In 1810, La Rochelle became the prefecture. After defeats in 1814, Napoleon was exiled from \u00cele d\u2019Aix to Saint Helena.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure During the Restoration.\nThe Restoration saw indifference in Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure, though peace spurred rural growth. Marsh reclamation in Brouage began under sub-prefect Charles-Esprit Le Terme. Cultural societies emerged, and the 1833 Guizot law reduced illiteracy from 53.7% (1832) to 2.4% (1901). The 1822 four sergeants\u2019 plot against Louis XVIII gained national attention.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure During the July Monarchy.\nThe July Revolution and Louis-Philippe I\u2019s reign brought economic crises, sparking 1839 riots in La Rochelle and Marans. Deputies Jules Dufaure and Tanneguy Duch\u00e2tel rose to ministerial roles.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure During the Second Republic.\nThe 1848 revolution was welcomed, with Napoleon becoming President, and then Emperor after the 1851 coup.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure During the Second Empire.\nThe Second Empire boosted agriculture and Cognac production, with vineyards growing from 111,000 hectares (1839) to 164,651 (1876), aided by an 1860 trade treaty. Railroads developed, starting with the Rochefort-La Rochelle-Poitiers line in 1857. Prosper de Chasseloup-Laubat became Minister of Marine in 1860.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure during the Third Republic (1870-1940).\nThe Slow Establishment of the Republican Idea.\nCharente-Inf\u00e9rieure remained Bonapartist post-1870, with Baron Eug\u00e8ne Eschass\u00e9riaux leading conservatives until 1893. Republican gains came in 1876 with Jules Dufaure as President of the Council (1876-1879). Phylloxera devastated vineyards from 1872, dropping production from 7 million to 70,000 hectoliters by 1880; Saintonge rebuilt vineyards, while Aunis shifted to dairy, led by Eug\u00e8ne Biraud\u2019s 1888 cooperative. Coastal resorts like Royan boomed with rail access by 1875, hosting figures like \u00c9mile Zola during the Belle \u00c9poque. In 1895, Alfred Dreyfus was held in Saint-Martin-de-R\u00e9 before deportation.\nThe Belle \u00c9poque: Radical Domination.\nRadicals dominated post-1898, with \u00c9mile Combes of Pons as President of the Council (1902-1905), pushing the 1905 Church-State separation law. In 1910, a rail crash at Saujon killed 38 and injured 80.\nA Great War Is Seen from Afar.\nWorld War I mobilization began on 1 August 1914; Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure supported the war effort with converted factories and U.S. bases like Saint-Trojan-les-Bains (1917). The unfinished Talmont port project halted with the 1918 armistice.\nBetween the Wars.\nPost-war population dropped from 451,044 (1911) to 418,310 (1921), worsened by a 1920 oyster epizootic. The Rochefort arsenal closed in 1927, but La Pallice port expanded by 1930. The Great Depression hit in 1931, ending the Roaring Twenties. Radicals held strong in 1936 (42%), with strikes following the Front Populaire victory.\nWorld War II.\nGerman occupation began 23 June 1940, after the armistice; Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure hosted Alsace-Lorraine refugees from 1939. The Atlantic Wall fortified the coast, and La Pallice gained a Kriegsmarine submarine base by 1941. Resistance faced harsh repression, with deportations to camps like Drancy. The name changed to Charente-Maritime in 1941. Liberation began in August 1944, with Royan bombed by the RAF in 1945 (442 civilian deaths) and freed in April via Operation Venerable. Ol\u00e9ron was liberated on 30 April, and La Rochelle surrendered on 9 May 1945.\nPost-war.\n1945-1960: The Feverish Years of Reconstruction.\nRoyan, 85% destroyed, was rebuilt as a modernist \"urban laboratory\" under Claude Ferret in the 1950s. Saintes launched the \"Castors Saintais\" housing cooperative in 1950. Rail lines closed, replaced by roads like Rochefort-Aigrefeuille-d\u2019Aunis by 1950.\n1960-1975: Modernization Underway.\nThe Trente Glorieuses brought industrial growth, with SIMCA in P\u00e9rigny (1965) and CIT-Alcatel in La Rochelle (1970). Agriculture modernized, but rural exodus hit hard, with commune mergers like Montendre in 1972. Urbanization grew, with La Rochelle\u2019s agglomeration exceeding 100,000 by 1975; tourism surged with the Ol\u00e9ron viaduct (1966) and La Palmyre Zoo (1967).\n1975-1990: Continued Modernization Against a Backdrop of Economic Crisis.\nA 1976 drought and 1982 floods hit hard. Agriculture shifted to cereals and oilseeds like sunflower. De-industrialization cut 10,000 jobs by 1985, with unemployment peaking above 15%. Peri-urbanization emerged, and infrastructure grew with the A10 freeway (1981) and \u00cele de R\u00e9 bridge (1988). Royan became a tourist hub, hosting 400,000 visitors seasonally.\nCharente-Maritime Today.\nSince the 1990s, Charente-Maritime has transformed economically and socially, modernizing infrastructure with projects like the Martrou viaduct (1991), A837 freeway (1997), and Paris-La Rochelle TGV electrification (1993). La Rochelle University, founded in 1993, bolstered education and research. Tourism drives the economy, making it France\u2019s second most popular destination, with attractions like Royan, La Palmyre Zoo, and La Rochelle Aquarium. Industry includes rail, aircraft, and yachting, alongside La Pallice port activities. Agriculture focuses on cereals, cognac, and pineau, while shellfish farming leads nationally in oysters and mussels. With over 605,000 residents, it\u2019s the most populous and fastest-growing department in Poitou-Charentes. Natural disasters struck with Cyclone Martin (1999, 13 deaths, 197\u00a0km/h winds) and Cyclone Xynthia (2010, 12 deaths, coastal flooding), prompting a natural disaster declaration. After the 2015 Charlie Hebdo shooting, 30,000 marched in La Rochelle, with thousands more in Rochefort, Saintes, and Royan, supporting \"\"Je suis Charlie\".\"\nGeography.\nCharente-Maritime is part of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine administrative region. It is bordered by the departments of Gironde, Charente, Deux-S\u00e8vres, Dordogne and Vend\u00e9e. It has a land area of 6864\u00a0km2 and 651,358 inhabitants as of 2019.\nMajor rivers are the Charente and its tributaries, the Boutonne and the Seugne, along with the S\u00e8vre Niortaise, the Seudre and the Garonne, in its downstream part, which is the estuary of the Gironde.\nThe d\u00e9partment includes the islands of \u00cele de R\u00e9, \u00cele d'Aix, Ile d'Ol\u00e9ron and \u00cele Madame.\nThe department forms the northern part of the Aquitaine Basin. It is separated from the Massif Armoricain by the Marais Poitevin to the north-west and from the Parisian basin by the Seuil du Poitou to the north-east. The highest point in the department is in the forest of Chantemerli\u00e8re, near the commune of Contr\u00e9 in the north-east, and rises to 173\u00a0m.\nPrincipal towns.\nThe most populous commune is La Rochelle, the prefecture. As of 2019, there are 7 communes with more than 8,000 inhabitants:\nClimate.\nThe climate is mild and sunny, with less than 900\u00a0mm of precipitation per year and with insolation being remarkably high, in fact, the highest in Western France including southernmost sea resorts such as Biarritz. Average extreme temperatures vary from in summer to in winter (as of 2022).\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Charente-Maritime is based on three major sectors: tourism, maritime industry, and manufacturing. Cognac and pineau are two of the major agricultural products with maize and sunflowers being the others.\nCharente-Maritime is the headquarters of the major oyster producer Marennes-Ol\u00e9ron. Oysters cultivated here are shipped across Europe.\nRochefort is a shipbuilding site and has been a major French naval base since 1665.\nLa Rochelle is a seat of major French industry. Just outside the city, in Aytr\u00e9, is a factory for the French engineering giant Alstom, where the TGV, the cars for the Paris and other metros are manufactured (see ). It is a popular venue for tourism, with its picturesque medieval harbour and city walls.\nDemographics.\nThe inhabitants of the department are called \"Charentais-Maritimes\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nDepartmental Council of Charente-Maritime.\nThe President of the Departmental Council has been Dominique Bussereau (LR) since 2008. He was replaced by Sylvie Marcilly after the departmental elections of June 2021. \nNational representation.\nIn the 2022 legislative election, Charente-Maritime elected the following members of the National Assembly:\nIn the Senate, Charente-Maritime is represented by three members: Daniel Laurent (since 2008), Corinne Imbert (since 2014) and Micka\u00ebl Vallet (since 2020).\nTourism.\nPopular destinations include La Rochelle, Royan, Saintes, Saint-Jean-d'Ang\u00e9ly, Rochefort, the \u00cele d'Aix, \u00cele de R\u00e9 and \u00cele d'Ol\u00e9ron.\nThe department is served by the TGV at Surg\u00e8res and La Rochelle. It can also be reached by motorway by the A10 (E5, Paris-Bordeaux) and A837 (E602, Saintes-Rochefort).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58498", "revid": "50960051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58498", "title": "Grover's algorithm", "text": "Quantum search algorithm\nIn quantum computing, Grover's algorithm, also known as the quantum search algorithm, is a quantum algorithm for unstructured search that finds with high probability the unique input to a black box function that produces a particular output value, using just formula_1 evaluations of the function, where formula_2 is the size of the function's domain. It was devised by Lov Grover in 1996.\nThe analogous problem in classical computation would have a query complexity formula_3 (i.e., the function would have to be evaluated formula_3 times: there is no better approach than trying out all input values one after the other, which, on average, takes formula_5 steps).\nCharles H. Bennett, Ethan Bernstein, Gilles Brassard, and Umesh Vazirani proved that any quantum solution to the problem needs to evaluate the function formula_6 times, so Grover's algorithm is asymptotically optimal. Since classical algorithms for NP-complete problems require exponentially many steps, and Grover's algorithm provides at most a quadratic speedup over the classical solution for unstructured search, this suggests that Grover's algorithm by itself will not provide polynomial-time solutions for NP-complete problems (as the square root of an exponential function is still an exponential, not a polynomial function).\nUnlike other quantum algorithms, which may provide exponential speedup over their classical counterparts, Grover's algorithm provides only a quadratic speedup. However, even quadratic speedup is considerable when formula_2 is large, and Grover's algorithm can be applied to speed up broad classes of algorithms. Grover's algorithm could brute-force a 128-bit symmetric cryptographic key in roughly 264 iterations, or a 256-bit key in roughly 2128 iterations. It may not be the case that Grover's algorithm poses a significantly increased risk to encryption over existing classical algorithms, however.\nApplications and limitations.\nGrover's algorithm, along with variants like amplitude amplification, can be used to speed up a broad range of algorithms. In particular, algorithms for NP-complete problems which contain exhaustive search as a subroutine can be sped up by Grover's algorithm. The current theoretical best algorithm, in terms of worst-case complexity, for 3SAT is one such example. Generic constraint satisfaction problems also see quadratic speedups with Grover. These algorithms do not require that the input be given in the form of an oracle, since Grover's algorithm is being applied with an explicit function, e.g. the function checking that a set of bits satisfies a 3SAT instance. However, it is unclear whether Grover's algorithm could speed up best practical algorithms for these problems.\nGrover's algorithm can also give provable speedups for black-box problems in quantum query complexity, including element distinctness and the collision problem (solved with the Brassard\u2013H\u00f8yer\u2013Tapp algorithm). In these types of problems, one treats the oracle function \"f\" as a database, and the goal is to use the quantum query to this function as few times as possible.\nCryptography.\nGrover's algorithm essentially solves the task of \"function inversion\". Roughly speaking, if we have a function formula_8 that can be evaluated on a quantum computer, Grover's algorithm allows us to calculate formula_9 when given formula_10. Consequently, Grover's algorithm gives broad asymptotic speed-ups to many kinds of brute-force attacks on symmetric-key cryptography, including collision attacks and pre-image attacks. However, this may not necessarily be the most efficient algorithm since, for example, the Pollard's rho algorithm is able to find a collision in SHA-2 more efficiently than Grover's algorithm.\nLimitations.\nGrover's original paper described the algorithm as a database search algorithm, and this description is still common. The database in this analogy is a table of all of the function's outputs, indexed by the corresponding input. However, this database is not represented explicitly. Instead, an oracle is invoked to evaluate an item by its index. Reading a full database item by item and converting it into such a representation may take a lot longer than Grover's search. To account for such effects, Grover's algorithm can be viewed as solving an equation or satisfying a constraint. In such applications, the oracle is a way to check the constraint and is not related to the search algorithm. This separation usually prevents algorithmic optimizations, whereas conventional search algorithms often rely on such optimizations and avoid exhaustive search. Fortunately, fast Grover's oracle implementation is possible for many constraint satisfaction and optimization problems.\nThe major barrier to instantiating a speedup from Grover's algorithm is that the quadratic speedup achieved is too modest to overcome the large overhead of near-term quantum computers. However, later generations of fault-tolerant quantum computers with better hardware performance may be able to realize these speedups for practical instances of data.\nProblem description.\nAs input for Grover's algorithm, suppose we have a function formula_11. In the \"unstructured database\" analogy, the domain represent indices to a database, and formula_12 iff the data that formula_9 points to satisfies the search criterion. We additionally assume that only one index satisfies formula_12, and we call this index formula_15. Our goal is to identify formula_15.\nWe can access formula_17 with a subroutine (sometimes called an oracle) in the form of a unitary operator formula_18 that acts as follows:\nformula_19\nThis uses the formula_2-dimensional state space formula_21, which is supplied by a register with formula_22 qubits.\nThis is often written as\nformula_23\nGrover's algorithm outputs formula_15 with probability at least formula_25 using formula_1 applications of formula_18. This probability can be made arbitrarily large by running Grover's algorithm multiple times. If one runs Grover's algorithm until formula_15 is found, the expected number of applications is still formula_1, since it will only be run twice on average.\nAlternative oracle definition.\nThis section compares the above oracle formula_18 with an oracle formula_31.\nformula_18 is different from the standard quantum oracle for a function formula_17. This standard oracle, denoted here as formula_31, uses an ancillary qubit system. The operation then represents an inversion (NOT gate) on the main system conditioned by the value of \"f\"(\"x\") from the ancillary system:\nformula_35\nor briefly,\nformula_36\nThese oracles are typically realized using uncomputation.\nIf we are given formula_31 as our oracle, then we can also implement formula_18, since formula_18 is formula_31 when the ancillary qubit is in the state formula_41:\nformula_42\nSo, Grover's algorithm can be run regardless of which oracle is given. If formula_31 is given, then we must maintain an additional qubit in the state formula_44 and apply formula_31 in place of formula_18.\nAlgorithm.\nThe steps of Grover's algorithm are given as follows:\nFor the correctly chosen value of formula_51, the output will be formula_52 with probability approaching 1 for \"N\" \u226b 1. Analysis shows that this eventual value for formula_48 satisfies formula_54.\nImplementing the steps for this algorithm can be done using a number of gates linear in the number of qubits. Thus, the gate complexity of this algorithm is formula_55, or formula_56 per iteration.\nGeometric proof.\nThere is a geometric interpretation of Grover's algorithm, following from the observation that the quantum state of Grover's algorithm stays in a two-dimensional subspace after each step. Consider the plane spanned by formula_57 and formula_52; equivalently, the plane spanned by formula_52 and the perpendicular ket formula_60.\nGrover's algorithm begins with the initial ket formula_57, which lies in the subspace. The operator formula_62 is a reflection at the hyperplane orthogonal to formula_52 for vectors in the plane spanned by formula_64 and formula_52, i.e. it acts as a reflection across formula_64. This can be seen by writing formula_18 in the form of a Householder reflection:\nformula_68\nThe operator formula_69 is a reflection through formula_57. Both operators formula_71 and formula_62 take states in the plane spanned by formula_64 and formula_52 to states in the plane. Therefore, Grover's algorithm stays in this plane for the entire algorithm.\nIt is straightforward to check that the operator formula_75 of each Grover iteration step rotates the state vector by an angle of formula_76. So, with enough iterations, one can rotate from the initial state formula_57 to the desired output state formula_52. The initial ket is close to the state orthogonal to formula_52:\nformula_80\nIn geometric terms, the angle formula_81 between formula_57 and formula_64 is given by\nformula_84\nWe need to stop when the state vector passes close to formula_52; after this, subsequent iterations rotate the state vector \"away\" from formula_52, reducing the probability of obtaining the correct answer. The exact probability of measuring the correct answer is\nformula_87\nwhere \"r\" is the (integer) number of Grover iterations. The earliest time that we get a near-optimal measurement is therefore formula_88.\nAlgebraic proof.\nTo complete the algebraic analysis, we need to find out what happens when we repeatedly apply formula_89. A natural way to do this is by eigenvalue analysis of a matrix. Notice that during the entire computation, the state of the algorithm is a linear combination of formula_90 and formula_15. We can write the action of formula_71 and formula_18 in the space spanned by formula_94 as:\nformula_95\nSo in the basis formula_96 (which is neither orthogonal nor a basis of the whole space) the action formula_97 of applying formula_18 followed by formula_71 is given by the matrix\nformula_100\nThis matrix happens to have a very convenient Jordan form. If we define formula_101, it is\nformula_102\nwhere formula_103\nIt follows that \"r\"-th power of the matrix (corresponding to \"r\" iterations) is \nformula_104\nUsing this form, we can use trigonometric identities to compute the probability of observing \"\u03c9\" after \"r\" iterations mentioned in the previous section, \nformula_105\nAlternatively, one might reasonably imagine that a near-optimal time to distinguish would be when the angles 2\"rt\" and \u22122\"rt\" are as far apart as possible, which corresponds to formula_106, or formula_107. Then the system is in state\nformula_108\nA short calculation now shows that the observation yields the correct answer \"\u03c9\" with error formula_109.\nExtensions and variants.\nMultiple matching entries.\nIf, instead of 1 matching entry, there are \"k\" matching entries, the same algorithm works, but the number of iterations must be formula_110instead of formula_111\nThere are several ways to handle the case if \"k\" is unknown. A simple solution performs optimally up to a constant factor: run Grover's algorithm repeatedly for increasingly small values of \"k\", e.g., taking \"k\" = \"N\", \"N\"/2, \"N\"/4, ..., and so on, taking formula_112 for iteration \"t\" until a matching entry is found.\nWith sufficiently high probability, a marked entry will be found by iteration formula_113 for some constant \"c\". Thus, the total number of iterations taken is at most\nformula_114\nAnother approach if \"k\" is unknown is to derive it via the quantum counting algorithm prior. \nIf formula_115 (or the traditional one marked state Grover's Algorithm if run with formula_116), the algorithm will provide no amplification. If formula_117, increasing \"k\" will begin to increase the number of iterations necessary to obtain a solution. On the other hand, if formula_118, a classical running of the checking oracle on a single random choice of input will more likely than not give a correct solution.\nA version of this algorithm is used in order to solve the collision problem.\nQuantum partial search.\nA modification of Grover's algorithm called quantum partial search was described by Grover and Radhakrishnan in 2004. In partial search, one is not interested in finding the exact address of the target item, only the first few digits of the address. Equivalently, we can think of \"chunking\" the search space into blocks, and then asking \"in which block is the target item?\". In many applications, such a search yields enough information if the target address contains the information wanted. For instance, to use the example given by L. K. Grover, if one has a list of students organized by class rank, we may only be interested in whether a student is in the lower 25%, 25\u201350%, 50\u201375% or 75\u2013100% percentile.\nTo describe partial search, we consider a database separated into formula_119 blocks, each of size formula_120. The partial search problem is easier. Consider the approach we would take classically \u2013 we pick one block at random, and then perform a normal search through the rest of the blocks (in set theory language, the complement). If we do not find the target, then we know it is in the block we did not search. The average number of iterations drops from formula_5 to formula_122.\nGrover's algorithm requires formula_123 iterations. Partial search will be faster by a numerical factor that depends on the number of blocks formula_119. Partial search uses formula_125 global iterations and formula_126 local iterations. The global Grover operator is designated formula_127 and the local Grover operator is designated formula_128.\nThe global Grover operator acts on the blocks. Essentially, it is given as follows:\nThe optimal values of formula_129 and formula_130 are discussed in the paper by Grover and Radhakrishnan. One might also wonder what happens if one applies successive partial searches at different levels of \"resolution\". This idea was studied in detail by Vladimir Korepin and Xu, who called it binary quantum search. They proved that it is not in fact any faster than performing a single partial search.\nOptimality.\nGrover's algorithm is optimal up to sub-constant factors. That is, any algorithm that accesses the database only by using the operator \"U\u03c9\" must apply \"U\u03c9\" at least a formula_133 fraction as many times as Grover's algorithm. The extension of Grover's algorithm to \"k\" matching entries, \u03c0(\"N\"/\"k\")1/2/4, is also optimal. This result is important in understanding the limits of quantum computation.\nIf the Grover's search problem was solvable with logc \"N\" applications of \"U\u03c9\", that would imply that NP is contained in BQP, by transforming problems in NP into Grover-type search problems. The optimality of Grover's algorithm suggests that quantum computers cannot solve NP-Complete problems in polynomial time, and thus NP is not contained in BQP.\nIt has been shown that a class of non-local hidden variable quantum computers could implement a search of an formula_2-item database in at most formula_135 steps. This is faster than the formula_1 steps taken by Grover's algorithm."}
{"id": "58499", "revid": "36929586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58499", "title": "Medicare (Australia)", "text": "Australian universal health insurance scheme\nMedicare is the publicly-funded universal health insurance scheme in Australia. The program is managed by the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing, while Services Australia is responsible for claims processing and registration. The scheme either partially or fully covers the cost of most health care and medical treatments, with services being delivered by state and territory governments or private enterprises. All Australian citizens and permanent residents are eligible to enrol in Medicare, as well as international visitors from 11 countries that have reciprocal agreements for medically necessary treatment.\nThe Medicare Benefits Schedule lists a standard operating fees for eligible services, called the \"schedule fee\", and the percentage-portion of that fee that Medicare will pay for. When a health service charges only how much Medicare will pay, this is called a \"bulk billed\" service. Providers can charge more than the schedule fee for services, with patients responsible for the \"gap payment\". Most health care services are covered by Medicare, including medical imaging and pathology, with the notable exception of dentistry. Allied health services are typically covered depending on meeting certain criteria, such as being related to a chronic disease, and some private hospital costs may be partially covered. Public hospital costs are primarily funded through a different arrangement.\nThe scheme was created in 1975 by the Whitlam government under the name \"Medibank\". The Fraser government made significant changes to it from 1976, including its abolition in late 1981. The Hawke government reinstated universal health care in 1984 under the name \"Medicare\". Medibank continued to exist as a government-owned private health insurer until it was privatised by the Abbott government in 2014.\nHistory.\nHealth insurance prior to Medibank.\nFrom early in the European history of Australia, friendly societies provided most health insurance which was widely adopted. The states and territories operated hospitals, asylums and other institutions for sick and disabled people not long after their establishment, replicating the predominant model of treatment in the United Kingdom. These institutions were often large and residential. Many individuals and groups ran private hospitals, both for profit and not-for-profit. These were particularly active in providing maternity care.\nA royal commission into friendly societies was held in NSW in 1870\u201374, which was followed by new legislation in 1875.\nAn 1876 British Empire royal commission into friendly societies considered the establishment of Victorian colony-run health insurance, and decided against it.\nAnother NSW friendly society royal commission was held in 1882. It found that the welfare of 175,000 people in the colony was insured by the societies.\nIf a worker was injured at work, there was no statutory requirement for the employer to pay compensation to the injured person. Compensation was only paid if the worker successfully sued their employer for negligence. They were rarely successful. The UK's \"Employment Liability Act 1880\" aimed to improve the workers' success in court, and was enacted in the Australian colonies between 1882 and 1895. The injured workers remained largely unsuccessful.\nThe South Australian government passed the \"Workmens\u2019 Compensation Act 1900\", and over the next 20 years, the other states and territories followed. These laws required businesses to pay men who were injured while working for them.\nThe \"Invalid and Old-Age Pensions Act 1908 (Cth)\" provided a pension to people \"permanently incapacitated for work\" and unable to be supported by their families, providing they also met race and other requirements. This provided money that recipients could spend on their care and assistance.\nIn 1913, 46% of Australians were covered by friendly societies, with the figure rising to 50% in Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. These societies employed many pharmacists and early-career doctors.\nThe federal government's Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme was established in 1919 for Australian servicemen and women who had served in the Boer War and World War I. This allowed them to receive certain pharmaceuticals for free. In 1926, the Royal Commission on Health found that a national health insurance scheme should be established. Legislation to do so was tabled in parliament in 1928, 1938 and 1946, but did not pass each time. It was strongly opposed by the friendly societies and medical practitioners.\nNSW introduced a requirement for businesses to have worker injury insurance in 1926, which made it more likely injured workers would receive compensation from their employer. The other states and territories followed.\nFrom 1935 to the 1970s, paid sick leave was gradually introduced into federal employment awards until 10 days sick leave per year (with unused days rolling over into future years) became standard.\nIn 1941 the Curtin government passed the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act, however it was struck down as unconstitutional by the High Court in 1945.\nAnother Curtin government action in 1941 was the beginning of the \"Vocational Training Scheme for Invalid Pensioners\". This provided occupational therapy and allied services to people who were not permanently incapacitated, to help them gain employment. In 1948, this body became the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, and its work continued.\nUnder the Chifley government Hospital Benefits Act 1945, participating states and territories provided public hospital ward treatment free of charge. Non-public ward treatment for people with health insurance was subsidised by the Commonwealth. This led to an increase in the number of Australians covered by private health insurance plans.\nThen from 1946, Queensland's Cooper government introduced free public hospital treatment in that state. This was retained by future Queensland governments.\nA 1946 referendum changed the constitution so that the federal government could more clearly fund a range of social services including \"pharmaceutical, sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental services.\"\nAnd so in 1948, the establishment of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) expanded the earlier ex-soldier only scheme to all Australians. The Labor government who introduced this had hoped to introduce further national healthcare measures like those of Britain's National Health Service; however, they were voted out of office in 1949, before they had sufficient Senate support to pass the legislation. The incoming Menzies government wound back the PBS, with it continuing in a more limited form than originally planned.\nIn 1950, the Menzies government established the \"Pensioner Medical Service\", providing free GP services and medicines for pensioners (including widows) and their dependants. (This was enabled by the Social Services Consolidation Act (No 2) 1948).\nThe National Health Act 1953 reformed the health insurance industry and the way hospitals received federal funding. Health Minister, Dr Earle Page, said that these changes would \"provide an effective bulwark against the socialisation of medicine.\" The federal government began to offer some subsidy for all private health insurance funded services. The very poor received free health care. In 1953, private health insurance covered all but 17% of Australians. By 1969, 30% of all private health insurance costs were being paid by the federal government. While the creators of the 1953 scheme had intended that the subsidised private health insurance would fund 90% of health costs, it only covered between 65 and 70% between 1953 and 1969.\nIn 1969, the Commonwealth Committee of Inquiry into Health Insurance (the \"Nimmo Enquiry\") recommended a new national health scheme. The Gorton government under Health Minister, Dr Jim Forbes, provided free private health insurance for the unemployed, seriously ill workers (on sickness benefit), the severely disabled (on special benefit), new migrants, and households on a single minimum wage. In September 1969 the National Health Act was amended, and the scheme came into effect on 1 January 1970.\nIn 1972, 17% of Australians outside of Queensland had no health insurance, most of whom were on low incomes.\nMedibank (1975\u20131976).\nThe Whitlam government, elected in 1972, sought to put an end to the three-tier system by extending healthcare coverage to the entire population. Before the Labor Party came to office, Bill Hayden, the Minister for Social Security, took the main responsibility for developing the preliminary plans to establish a universal health scheme.\nAccording to a speech to Parliament on 29 November 1973 by Mr Hayden, the purpose of Medibank was to establish the \"most equitable and efficient means of providing health insurance coverage for all Australians.\"\nThe Medibank legislation was one of the bills which led to a double dissolution on 11 April 1974, and was later passed by a joint sitting on 7 August 1974. Parliamentarians planned for Medicare to be funded by a 1.35% income tax (exempting people on a low income). However, this was rejected by the Senate, so it was instead funded from consolidated revenue.\nMedibank started on 1 July 1975. In nine months, the Health Insurance Commission (HIC) had increased its staff from 22 to 3500, opened 81 offices, installed 31 minicomputers, 633 terminals and 10 medium-sized computers linked by land-lines to the central computer, and issued registered health insurance cards to 90% of the Australian population.\nMedibank Mark II (1976\u20131981).\nAfter a change of government at the December 1975 election, the Fraser government established the Medibank Review Committee in January 1976. This led to legislative changes, and the launch of 'Medibank Mark II' on 1 October 1976. It included a 2.5% income levy, with taxpayers having an option of instead taking out private health insurance. Other changes included reducing rebates to doctors and hospitals. Over the following years, universal free hospital access ceased in almost all hospitals, with only the poor receiving free access.\nAlso that year, the Fraser government passed the Medibank Private bill, which allowed the HIC to enter the private health insurance business. It was to become the dominant player in that market.\nIn 1978, bulk billing was restricted to pensioners and the socially disadvantaged. Rebates were reduced to 75% of the schedule fee. The health insurance levy was also scrapped that year. The next year, Medibank rebates were cut further. In 1981, access to Medibank was restricted further, and an income tax rebate was introduced for holders of private health insurance to encourage its uptake. Finally, the original Medibank was dissolved entirely in late 1981, leaving behind Medibank Private as a government-operated private health insurer.\nMedicare (1984\u2013current).\nOn 1 February 1984, the original Medibank model was reinstated by the Hawke government, but renamed Medicare to distinguish it from Medibank Private which continued to exist. Bill Hayden, the Minister for Social Security, opens the first Medicare office in Ipswich, Queensland, on 20 January 1984.\nCoordinated Care Trials.\nIn 1995, the Keating government initiated experiments to find more economically efficient ways of delivering health services. This took the form of Coordinated Care Trials held from 1997 to 1999. They funded a care coordinator for around 16,000 individuals with complex health needs. The trials found that few cohorts benefited from this form of care.\nFurther trials were held in 2002 to 2005. They found that people with particularly complex needs could be more effectively treated with coordinated care.\nMedibank Private privatisation.\nIn 1997, Medibank Private was separated from the Health Insurance Commission and became its own government-owned enterprise. In 2014, it was then fully privatised by the Abbott Government.\nMedicare Access Points.\nExtending the Medicare office network, from 2004 many of its services became available through Medicare Access Points in small towns at some community resource centres, state government agencies, pharmacies, post offices and other locations. These were closed in 2011, as HICAPS handled most transitions, and telephone and online services could provide additional service from the home.\nEasyclaim and successors.\nEasyclaim was launched in 2006, under which a patient would pay the medical practitioner the consultation fee and the receptionist would send a message to Medicare to release the amount of rebate due to the patient's designated bank account. The rebate amount would take into account the patient's concession status and thresholds. In effect, the patient only pays the gap. In recent years, this has largely been replaced with the National Australia Bank service HICAPS (Health Insurance Claim at Point of Sale). For providers not using HICAPS, patients can make claims on-the-spot (where Medicare will pay the patient at a later date), online, through the Medicare mobile apps, or at Service Australia service centres.\nDiabetes Care Project.\nFrom 2011 to 2014, the Diabetes Care Project trailed a coordinated care model that was similar to those used in the earlier Coordinated Care Trials. It was found that this model provided health benefits to those involved; however, the cost of care was not significantly different.\nmyGov and Express Plus Medicare app.\nmyGov, an online platform for accessing and supplying personal information with the Australian Government was launched in May 2013. It became an important way for people to access their Medicare payment details. The connected Express Plus Medicare app was released in July 2013.\nFrom March 2023, Medicare Card holders gained the option of being able to add a digital Medicare Card to their myGov app, removing the need to carry a physical card.\nNational Disability Insurance Scheme.\nA long-standing criticism of the Medicare schedule was its limited coverage of services to improve the lives of people with disability. This was addressed when the 2013 Labor federal budget established the National Disability Insurance Scheme, which was progressively rolled out across the country between 2013 and 2020. It provides funding for disability supports which are not covered under Medicare, and is administered by the National Disability Insurance Agency and the private and non-government sector.\n\"Mediscare\".\nTowards the end of the campaign for the 2016 Australian federal election in July of that year, a text claiming to be from \"Medicare\" was sent to certain electorates around the nation, saying \"Mr Turnbull's plans to privatise Medicare will take us down the road of no return. Time is running out to Save Medicare.\" The leader of the Liberal Party, Malcolm Turnbull, had not announced such plans, and the Department of Human Services denied sending the message. It had instead been sent by the Queensland branch of the Australian Labor Party. The furore over the text brought attention to the value of Medicare to Australians. The affair was widely dubbed \"Mediscare,\" which in turn was used to describe fears of the Liberal National Party's alleged devolution of Medicare.\nThe claims were subsequently given some substance when the Liberal Party voted against a motion including a \"guarantee to keep Medicare in public hands as a universal health insurance scheme for all Australians\" (and six other Medicare related clauses) in October that year.\nHealth Care Homes and MyMedicare.\n9000 patients were involved in the \"Health Care Homes\" trial held from 2017 to 2021, where patients could opt in to register to a 'home' general practice or Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Service which would be funded to deliver chronic disease care under a fee-for-performance basis instead of fee-for-service. The trial ended in 2021 and was not renewed.\nEvaluation of the trial found that patients had greater engagement with general practice and improved influenza vaccination rates, but did not result in improved blood pressure or blood sugar control. There was little impact on the financial burden of health care on patients, however some general practices had greater financial outcomes compared to fee-for-service arrangements. The cost of the scheme to the federal government increased compared to baseline; however, the evaluation report theorised that long-term models had potential to reduce overall costs to both the government and individuals. The model of care was generally well received by general practice staff, however GPs and practice administrators felt that the burden of administration of the scheme, as well as funding caps imposed on the trials, impaired its success.\nThe 2023 Australian federal budget (ALP) established \"MyMedicare\". Similar to the Health Care Homes trial, MyMedicare aims to create a stronger relationship between patients and their main primary health provider, initiated by voluntary registration by patients with a single general practitioner of their choice. Patients taking up the scheme are eligible for additional Medicare benefits for longer telehealth sessions with GPs, and have access to expanded bulk-billed telehealth services if they are in certain targeted groups. MyMedicare participants are also eligible for more Medicare funded services if they frequently attend hospitals or reside in aged care facilities.\nMedicare Urgent Care Clinics.\nThe 2023 Australian federal budget delivered by the Albanese Government funded the creation of \"Medicare Urgent Care Clinics\". The clinics are designed to provide care for emergent but non-life-threatening presentations, reducing the burden on local emergency departments. Their operation has been contracted to various bodies, mainly for-profit primary health companies. Several state and territories have opened similar clinics, such as the \"Priority Primary Care Centres\" in Victoria and \"Minor Injury and Illness Clinics\" located within satellite health clinics in Queensland.\nMedicare card.\nServices Australia issues each patient enrolled with the scheme a unique Medicare card and number which is required for a benefit to be made. More than one person can be listed on a given card and an individual can be listed on more than one card. The Medicare card or a digital alternative is used to make a claim at the time of paying for a service in Australia, or used to prove eligibility for medically necessary care in other countries that hold a reciprocal agreement with Australia. Medicare cards can also be used as part of identity verification processes with government agencies and financial institutions.\nThe card or the Medicare number is required to be provided to enable the cardholder to receive a rebate of medical expenses under Australia's Medicare system, as well as subsidised medications under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). The card is usually green in colour, although interim cards are light blue and cards for Reciprocal Health Care Agreement visitors are light yellow. The cards are issued by a government agency called Services Australia.\nAll permanent residents of Australia are entitled to a Medicare card, except for those who are deemed to be not residing in Australia. Citizenship is not necessary to be eligible for a Medicare card. The card lists an individual as well as any members of his or her family he or she chooses to add who are also permanent residents and meet the Medicare definition of dependent. The card must be produced or the Medicare number provided if the Medicare rebate is paid directly to the doctor under the bulk billing system. The doctor can retain the Medicare number for use when the patient returns for another consultation. It is also necessary to provide a Medicare number (although not necessarily show the card) to gain access to the public hospital system to be treated at no cost as a public patient. For non-elective treatment (e.g. emergency), public hospitals will admit patients without a number or card and resolve Medicare eligibility issues after treatment.\nThe use of the card is relevant only to consultations with medical practitioners who have been issued with a Medicare provider number. Such access has been made subject to increasing requirements since the mid-1990s. The Medicare card is used for health care purposes only and cannot be used to track in a database a number of activities. It contains a name and number, and no visible photograph. Individuals are not legally required to have a Medicare card, to carry it with them, or to produce it on request.\nMedicare cards are issued by Services Australia (until late 2005 known as the Health Insurance Commission or HIC) to individuals and their families. A maximum of five names can be included on a card. Families with more than five members will have additional names listed on additional cards, while retaining the same card number. Children are listed on their parent's card \u2013 a family may be all on one card, or a child may be listed on one parent's card, or both parents' cards, or even in some cases, alone on their own card if their name exceeds a specific number of letters. Children who are wards of the state will be listed on a card with the Department of Children's Services as cardholder. Medicare cards may be used to show a relationship when parents have different surnames to their children.\nIndividual Medicare cards are generally only issued to people over 15. This is a Medicare Australia policy (not legislation) and there are exceptions for people at boarding schools or away from home. Significantly, this policy may detract from the right of a mature minor to gain confidential medical care. Using their family's Medicare card (and presenting the card) could potentially notify their parents of the consultation, but only if the parents request information about their child's medical claims and for a person to request information about medical claims for people 14 years and over they must have the permission of that person they are requesting the information for.\nSeveral unsuccessful proposals have been made to expand the scope of use of the Medicare card, such as the Australia Card proposal. In 2005, plans to expand the functions of the Medicare card were announced by then Howard government Human Services Minister Joe Hockey. The new card, to be called the Access Card, was intended to replace both the Medicare and up to 17 other similar cards (such as Centrelink benefit and concession cards), and to commence operation in 2008. However, the scheme was criticised by some sectors of the public and relevant interest groups as a step in the same direction of an Australia Card. The Howard government was unable to implement the scheme before the government's electoral defeat in 2007. The incoming Labor government announced on 7 December 2007 that the Access Card scheme would be abandoned. The same aims were later achieved with \"myGov\" from 2013.\nPayments for health services.\nThe Department of Health, Disability and Ageing sets a schedule of fees for services that Medicare will contribute to the costs of, called the Medicare Benefits Schedule or MBS. The minister for health and aged care determines the items on the MBS, based on the recommendation of the Medicare Services Advisory Committee. The MBS lists what the government considers a standard cost of that service (the \"schedule fee\") and a percentage of that standard fee that Medicare will cover. The dollar value of the percentage of the schedule fee that Medicare will pay is called the \"Medicare benefit\". For example:\nThe percentage of the schedule fee will be either 100%, 85%, or 75% depending on the circumstances of the \"episode of care\":\nBulk billing and gap payments.\nService providers can choose how much to charge patients for services, including above or below how much Medicare will pay, with patients responsible for the difference. A 2012 study of the OECD found that Australia was the only country out of the 29 surveyed that gave service providers the right to charge more or less than the rebate amount.\nWhen a provider chooses to only charge the patient as much as the Medicare rebate for an eligible service, and directly charges Medicare instead of the patient, this is called a \"bulk billed\" service. As Medicare covers the entire cost of the service, the individual patient does not have to pay anything. Most providers will only bulk bill concessional patients (people with concession cards, or aged 16 years or under), although some will bulk bill all eligible services for all eligible patients. The government pays an additional subsidy, called the \"Bulk Billing Incentive Payment\", to providers when they bulk bill services for concessional patients.\nIf a provider chooses to charge above the Medicare rebate amount (whether that be above the schedule fee, or if Medicare does not pay 100% of the schedule fee), the individual patient is charged a \"gap payment\". For most services, the patient is responsible for paying the gap.\nMany industry and professional groups, such as the Australian Medical Association (AMA), maintain their own list of recommended fees that their members can use to base their charges off. For example, the AMA's \"List of Medical Services and Fees\" recommends that general practitioners charge $102 for appointments lasting less than 20 minutes. The Medicare schedule fee for the corresponding item code is $41.40, with Medicare paying 100% of the schedule fee for GP services. A doctor that elects to charge the AMA fee will result in the patient being charged the difference of $60.60 as an out-of-pocket cost for the appointment. If a doctor charges less than the AMA recommended fee, the gap payment will decrease, and vice versa.\nFee indexation.\nSince the introduction of the MBS, the items listed have been subject to annual indexation aimed at keeping the Medicare benefit in-line with the costs of delivering care. At the inception of the Medicare system, the MBS schedule fees were the same as the AMA List of Fees. Since then, the difference between MBS schedule fees and actual service fees, particularly AMA fees, has grown significantly with increasing costs to patients.\nIn 2012, the Gillard Government introduced a two-year freeze on indexation as a temporary budget measure. This freeze was however repeatedly extended by the Turnbull and Morrison governments until July 2020. It is estimated that the prevented indexations saved the scheme a total of $3.9 billion. While the rate of bulk billed services remained steady during this period, the gap payment for providers already charging above the MBS amount increased. On 25 March 2018, the Labor Party announced that, if elected, it would remove all remaining indexation freezes, noting how the Morrison government's continued indexation freezes were leaving \"families paying higher out-of-pocket costs to visit the doctor.\"\nIn the 2017\u201318 federal budget, the Turnbull government began to re-fund indexation after reaching agreements with the AMA and Royal Australian College of General Practitioners for their continued support of government projects such as the My Health Record system. Indexation resumed by providing $1 billion to index GP items from July 2017, specialist consultation items from July 2018, specialist procedures and allied health from July 2019, and diagnostic imaging from July 2020.\nThe 2024 indexation rate is 3.5% and is applied to most general practitioner, allied health and medical imaging services from 1 July 2024.\nThe AMA continues to petitions yearly for increases to MBS payments for services provided by its members, taking the stance that the MBS payments are decreasing in real terms due to annual inflation and that MBS indexation has not kept up. Their annual \"Gaps Poster\" calculates that despite average Consumer Price Index growth of around 3% each year, the MBS has only increased between 1.2% and 2.5% for most items between 1995 and 2012 (with no increase to medical imaging or pathology services).\nPrivate hospital and allied health services.\nAll patients that are eligible for Medicare are also eligible for state and territory public hospital services, which are typically free for most patients and funded under an agreement between the federal government and state and territory governments called the National Health Reform Agreement.\nPatients in public hospitals that elect to be treated as private patients and patients in private hospitals will have some costs charged by doctors covered at the admitted patient rate (currently 75% of the schedule fee). Hospital costs not listed on the MBS, or where the cost is greater than the Medicare benefit, can be paid by private health insurance or by the patient. For MBS listed services provided to hospital inpatients, where the patient also holds private health insurance for that service, the private health insurer must contribute at least the remaining 25% of the schedule free. If a doctor chooses to charge more than the schedule fee, the private health insurer may contribute towards the gap depending on the insurance policy.\nSome allied health rebates are limited to patients with a chronic disease where the GP has initiated a General Practitioner Management Plan, Team Care Arrangements, a Mental Health Case Conference, or is related to a specific disease or diagnosis. Referrals made for conditions covered by one of these may attract Medicare benefits where the service would otherwise not be eligible. These include services such as physiotherapy, podiatry and audiology. Optometry services can be provided without referral, while dentistry is not covered at all. Where the service is not covered by Medicare, private health insurance policies may provide an \"extras\" or ancillary benefit (typically up to an annual cap) towards these costs.\nFor patients receiving mental health care, Medicare provides up to 10 fully covered individual and group counselling sessions per year as part of the Better Access Scheme. To access these, a general practitioner, in collaboration with the patient, needs to issue a \"mental health care plan\" outlining the diagnosed mental health condition, treatment and support options, and goals of care. The Better Access Scheme also covers the cost of other mental health supports, including care from related professions such as occupational therapists, social workers, general practitioners and psychiatrists.\nMedicare Safety Net.\nThe first Medicare Safety Net, setting a maximum amount per year someone could pay for MBS-listed out-of-hospital services, was added in 1991. (It is now known as the Original Medicare Safety Net). The Extended Medicare Safety Net was added in 2004, providing similar assistance for heavy users of scheduled medical services.\nTo provide additional relief to those who incur higher than usual medical costs, Medicare safety nets have been set up. These provide singles and families with an additional rebate when an annual threshold is reached for out-of-hospital Medicare services. A basic safety net exists for all Australians, with an extended safety net for some families.\nThe thresholds for both safety nets are indexed on 1 January each year to the Consumer Price Index.\nGeneral safety net.\nUnder the original Medicare safety net, once an annual threshold in gap costs has been reached, the Medicare rebate for out-of-hospital services is increased to 100% of the schedule fee (up from 85%). Gap costs refer to the difference between the standard Medicare rebate (85% of the schedule fee) and the actual fee paid, but limited to 100% of the schedule fee. The threshold applies for all Medicare cardholders and is $576.00 for 2025.\nExtended safety net.\nThe extended Medicare safety net was first introduced in March 2004. Once an annual threshold in out-of-pocket costs for out-of-hospital Medicare services is reached, the Medicare rebate will increase to 80% of any future out-of-pocket costs (now subject to the extended safety net fee cap) for out-of-hospital Medicare services for the remainder of the calendar year. Out-of-pocket costs are the difference between the fee actually paid to the practitioner (subject to the fee cap) and the standard Medicare rebate.\nWhen introduced, the general threshold for singles and families was $700, or $300 for singles and families that hold a concession card and families that received Family Tax Benefit Part A. On 1 January 2006, the thresholds were increased to $1,000 and $500 respectively. From then the extended safety net was indexed by the Consumer Price Index on 1 January each year.\nSince 1 January 2010, some medical fees have been subject to a safety net fee cap, so that the out-of-pocket costs used in determining whether the threshold has been reached are limited to that cap. The extended safety net fee cap also applies for any rebate that is paid once the EMSN threshold is reached. The items subject to a cap has expanded since 2010, the latest being in November 2012.\nFunding of the scheme.\nMedicare levy.\nMedicare is presently nominally funded by an income tax surcharge, known as the \"Medicare levy\", which is currently 2% of a resident taxpayer's taxable income. However, revenue raised by the levy falls far short of funding the entirety of Medicare expenditure, and any shortfall is paid out of general government expenditure.\nThe 2013 budget increased the Medicare levy from 1.5% to 2% from 1 July 2014, ostensibly to fund the National Disability Insurance Scheme. The 2017 budget proposed to increase the Medicare levy from 2% to 2.5%, from 1 July 2018, but this proposal was scrapped on 25 April 2018.\nWhen the levy is payable, it is calculated on an individual's entire taxable income, and not just the amount above the low-income threshold.\nPrivate Health Insurance Levy and Lifetime Health Cover (LHC).\nIn 1997, the Howard government implemented a higher level of Medicare levy for high income earners where they did not have a private health insurance policy. The purpose being to relieve strain on Medicare and the public health system by encouraging those that could afford it to receive care in the private system.\nFrom the start of 1999, a 30 per cent rebate on the cost of private health insurance became available to further encourage people to take out private health insurance.\nFrom 2000, the Lifetime Health Cover (LHC) initiative came into effect to encourage people to take out private health insurance with hospital coverage earlier in life. Individuals 31-year or older, and not exempted, are charged an additional 2% on any private hospital insurance policy they purchase for each year after their 30th birthday that they do not have coverage. They are required to pay this additional loading, up to a maximum of 70%, for 10 years, and the federal government rebate does not include the cost of LHC. After 10-years of continuous coverage, the loading is then removed.\nLow income exemptions.\nLow income earners are exempt from the Medicare levy, with different exemption thresholds applying to singles, families, seniors and pensioners, with a phasing-in range. Since 2015\u201316, the exemptions have applied to taxable incomes below $21,335, or $33,738 for seniors and pensioners. The phasing-in range is for taxable incomes between $21,335 and $26,668, or $33,738 and $42,172 for seniors and pensioners.\nEligibility.\nThe following groups of people have access to fully-covered health care in public hospitals via the Medicare system:\nReciprocal agreements.\nInternational visitors from 11 countries have subsidised access to medically necessary treatment under reciprocal agreements. Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) are in place with the United Kingdom, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, Finland, Norway, Slovenia, Malta, Italy, Republic of Ireland, and New Zealand, which entitles visitors from these countries limited access to public health care in Australia (often only for emergencies and critical care), and entitles eligible Australians to reciprocal rights while in one of these countries.\nExclusions.\nAsylum seekers in Australia who have applied for a protection visa and whose bridging visa had expired have no access to services like Medicare, and no Centrelink payments or other social services, and are not allowed to work. It was estimated in July 2022 that there were around 2000 people in this situation.\nPrisoners, including children in juvenile detention, are not eligible for Medicare while imprisoned. Incarcerated patients are instead entitled to health services, which are funded and/or provided by the state or territory corrections or health department. The level of care available, however, is far below the level given to people with Medicare, and many health services and medications are inaccessible to incarcerated patients as they are considered too expensive to pay for them without Medicare funding.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58500", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58500", "title": "Turk", "text": "Turk or Turks may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58501", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58501", "title": "Turkey (nation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "58502", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58502", "title": "Turkey (country)", "text": ""}
{"id": "58503", "revid": "50657680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58503", "title": "Otto of Bamberg", "text": "German Christian missionary\nOtto of Bamberg (1060 or 1061 \u2013 30 June 1139) was a German missionary and papal legate who converted much of medieval Pomerania to Christianity. He was the bishop of Bamberg from 1102 until his death. He was canonized in 1189.\nEarly life.\nThree biographies of Otto were written in the decades after his death. Wolfger of Pr\u00fcfening wrote his between 1140 and 1146 at Pr\u00fcfening Abbey; Ebo of Michelsberg wrote between 1151 and 1159); and Herbord of Michelsberg wrote in 1159.\nAccording to contemporary sources, Otto was born into a noble (\"edelfrei\") family which held estates in the Swabian Jura. He was related to the Staufers through his mother. A possible descent from the Franconian noble house of Mistelbach has not been conclusively established. As his elder brother inherited their father's property, Otto prepared for an ecclesiastical career and was sent to school, probably in Hirsau Abbey or one of its filial monasteries.\nWhen in 1082 the Salian princess Judith of Swabia, sister of Emperor Henry IV, married the Piast duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw I Herman, he followed her as a chaplain to the Polish court. In 1091 he entered the service of emperor Henry IV; he was appointed the emperor's chancellor in 1101 and supervised the construction of Speyer Cathedral.\nBishop.\nIn 1102, the emperor appointed and invested him as Bishop of Bamberg in Franconia (now in the state of Bavaria), and Otto became one of the leading princes of medieval Germany. He consolidated his widely scattered territories and during his tenure as bishop, Bamberg rose to great prominence. Otto established more than 30 monasteries and hospitals between Carinthia and Saxony and had castles built. He helped the population out of his own pocket when they were in need.\nIn 1106 Otto received the pallium from Pope Paschal II. It was Bishop Otto, substituting for the imprisoned archbishop Adalbert of Mainz, who clothed Hildegard of Bingen as a Benedictine nun at Disibodenberg Abbey about 1112. He remained loyal to the Imperial court and, as a consequence, was suspended by a papal party led by Cuno of Praeneste at the Synod of Fritzlar in 1118. He achieved fame as diplomat and politician, notably during the Investiture Controversy between the emperor and the papacy. At the Congress of W\u00fcrzburg in 1121, Otto successfully negotiated the peace treaty, the Concordat of Worms, which was signed in 1122. For his contribution, Otto I received gifts from Emperor Heinrich V for the benefit of the cathedral. In the 1130s, he continued to arbitrate between Emperor Lothair of Supplinburg and the rising Hohenstaufens.\nAs bishop, Otto led a simple and frugal life, but did much to improve his ecclesiastical and temporal realms. He restored and completed Bamberg Cathedral after it had been damaged by fire in 1081, improved the cathedral school, established numerous monasteries and built a number of churches throughout his territory. He greatly expanded the town of Bamberg, rebuilding the Monastery of St. Michael, which had been destroyed by an earthquake around 1117.\nMissionary.\nAmong his great accomplishments was his peaceful and successful missionary work among the Pomeranians, after several previous forcible attempts by the Polish rulers and the Spanish bishop Bernard to convert Pomerania to Christianity had failed. Otto was sent on his first mission by the Polish duke Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth in 1124.\nOtto's approach was decidedly different from Bernard's. Bernard traveled alone and as a poor and unknown priest, whereas Otto, a wealthy and famous man, was accompanied by 20 clergy of his own diocese, numerous servants, 60 warriors supplied to him by Boleslaw, and carried with him numerous supplies and gifts. The fact that he was already wealthy assured the Pomeranians that his aim was only to convert them to Christianity, not to become wealthy at their expense. As the official papal legate, he converted a large number of Pomeranians, notably in the towns of Pyrzyce, Kamie\u0144, Szczecin, and Jomsborg, and became known as the \"Apostle of Pomerania.\" The Bamberg bishop is said to have baptized over 22,000 people in Pomerania and founded eleven churches.\nAfter he returned to Bamberg in 1125, some pagan customs began to reassert themselves, and Otto journeyed once more to Pomerania in 1128. In this he had the support of Wartislaw I, Duke of Pomerania. He also sent priests from Bamberg to serve in Pomerania. His intent to consecrate a bishop for Pomerania was thwarted by the bishops of Magdeburg and Gniezno who claimed metropolitan rights over Pomerania. Only after his death in 1139 was his former companion, Adalbert of Pomerania, consecrated as Bishop of Wolin, in 1140.\nThe area of eastern Pomerania around Gda\u0144sk was Christianized via Pomerania as well, and the monastery of Oliwa was established at that time, while Prussia was Christianized later via Riga by the Teutonic Knights.\nVeneration.\nOtto died on 30 June 1139, and was buried in Michaelsberg Abbey, Bamberg. He was canonised in 1189 by Pope Clement III. Although he died on 30 June, his name is recorded in the Roman martyrology on 2 July. The high festival of the saint is still celebrated in the Archdiocese of Bamberg on September 30.\nOtto is the patron saint of the Archdiocese of Bamberg, co-patron of the Archdiocese of Berlin, of the Diocese of Stettin-Kammin, and invoked for help against fever and rabies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "58504", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58504", "title": "26th of December", "text": ""}
{"id": "58505", "revid": "25530780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58505", "title": "1911 Encyclopedia", "text": ""}
{"id": "58508", "revid": "48456760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58508", "title": "Contango", "text": "Situation when futures prices are above the expected spot price at maturity\nContango is a situation in which the futures price (or forward price) of a commodity is higher than the spot price. In a contango situation, arbitrageurs or speculators are \"willing to pay more for a commodity [to be received] at some point in the future than to purchase the commodity immediately. This may be due to people's desire to pay a premium to have the commodity in the future rather than paying the costs of storage and carry costs of buying the commodity today.\" On the other side of the trade, hedgers (commodity producers and commodity holders) are happy to sell futures contracts and accept the higher-than-expected returns. A contango market is also known as a \"normal market\" or \"carrying-cost market\".\nThe opposite market condition to contango is known as backwardation. \"A market is 'in backwardation' when the futures price is below the spot price for a particular commodity. This is favorable for investors who have long positions since they want the futures price to rise to the level of the current spot price\".\nIn industry parlance, contango may refer to the situation when futures prices (or forward prices) are above the \"current\" spot price, or a far-dated futures price is above a near-dated futures price, and the expectation is for the spot price to rise to the futures price at maturity, or the near-dated futures price to rise to the far-dated futures price.\nThe futures or forward curve would \"typically\" be upward sloping (i.e., \"normal\"), since contracts for further dates would typically trade at even higher prices. The curves in question plot market prices for various contracts at different maturities (cf. term structure of interest rates). \"In broad terms, backwardation reflects the majority market view that spot prices will move down, and contango that they will move up. Both situations allow speculators (non-commercial traders) to earn a profit.\"\nContango is normal for a nonperishable commodity that has a cost of carry. Such costs include warehousing fees and interest forgone on money tied up (or the time value of money, etc.), less income from leasing out the commodity if possible (\"e.g.\", gold). For perishable commodities, price differences between near and far delivery are not a contango. Different delivery dates are in effect entirely different commodities in this case, since fresh eggs today will not still be fresh in six months' time, ninety-day treasury bills will have matured, etc.\nDescription.\nThe Commission of the European Communities, in a report on agricultural commodity speculation, defined backwardation and contango in relation to spot prices: \"The futures price may be either higher or lower than the spot price. When the spot price is higher than the futures price, the market is said to be in backwardation. It is often called 'normal backwardation' as the futures buyer is rewarded for risk he takes off the producer. If the spot price is lower than the futures price, the market is in contango\".\nA normal forward curve depicting the prices of multiple contracts, all for the same good, but of different maturities, slopes upward. For example, a forward oil contract for twelve months in the future is selling for $100 today, while today's spot price is $75. The expected spot price twelve months in the future may actually still be $75. To purchase a contract at more than $75 supposes a loss (the \"loss\" would be $25 if the contract were purchased for $100) to the agent who \"bought forward\" as opposed to waiting a year to buy at the spot price when oil is actually needed. But even so, there is utility for the forward buyer in the deal.\nExperience tells major end users of commodities (such as gasoline refiners, or cereal companies that use great quantities of grain) that spot prices are unpredictable. Locking in a future price puts the purchaser \"first in line\" for delivery even though the contract will, as it matures, converge on the spot price as shown in the graph. In uncertain markets where end users must constantly have a certain input of a stock of goods, a combination of forward (future) and spot buying reduces uncertainty. An oil refiner might purchase 50% spot and 50% forward, getting an averaged price of $87.50 for the one barrel spot ($75) and the one barrel bought forward ($100).\nThis strategy can result in unanticipated, or \"windfall\" profits: If the contract is purchased forward twelve months at $100 and the actual price is $150, the refiner will take delivery of one barrel of oil at $100 and the other at the spot price of $150, or $125 averaged for two barrels: a saving (gain) of $25 per barrel relative to the spot price.\nSellers like to \"sell forward\" because it locks in an income stream. Farmers are the classic example: by selling their crop forward when it is still in the ground they can lock in a price, and therefore an income, which helps them qualify, in the present, for credit.\nThe graph of the \"life of a single futures contract\" (as shown above on the right) will show it converging towards the spot price. The contango contract for future delivery, selling today, is at a price premium relative to buying the commodity today and taking delivery. The backwardation contract selling today is lower than the spot price, and its trajectory will take it upward to the spot price when the contract closes. Paper assets are no different: for example, an insurance company has a constant stream of income from premiums and a constant stream of payments for claims. Income must be invested in new assets and existing assets must be sold to pay off claims. By investing in the purchase and sale of some bonds \"forward\" in addition to buying spot, an insurance company can smooth out changes in its portfolio and anticipated income.\nThe Oil Storage contango was introduced to the market in early 1990 by the Swedish-based oil storage company Scandinavian Tank Storage AB and its founder Lars Valentin Jacobsson by using huge military storage installations to bring down the \"calculation\" cost of storage to create a contango situation out of a \"flat\" market.\nContango is a potential trap for unwary investors. Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) provide an opportunity for small investors to participate in commodity futures markets, which is tempting in periods of low interest rates. Between 2005 and 2010 the number of futures-based commodity ETFs rose from 2 to 95, and total assets rose from $3.9 billion to nearly $98 billion in the same period. Because the normal course of a futures contract in a market in contango is to decline in price, a fund composed of such contracts buys the contracts at the high price (going forward) and closes them out later at the usually lower spot price. The money raised from the low priced, closed out contracts will not buy the same number of new contracts going forward.\nFunds can and have lost money even in fairly stable markets. There are strategies to mitigate this problem, including allowing the ETF to create a stock of precious metals for the purpose of allowing investors to speculate on fluctuations in its value. But storage costs will be quite variable, an example being that copper ingots require considerably more storage space, and thus carrying cost, than gold, and command lower prices in world markets: it is unclear how well a model that works for gold will work with other commodities.\nIndustrial scale buyers of major commodities, particularly when compared to small retail investors, retain an advantage in futures markets. The raw material cost of the commodity is only one of many factors that influence their final costs and prices. Contango pricing strategies that catch small investors by surprise are more familiar to the managers of a large firm, who must decide whether to take delivery of a product today, at today's spot price, and store it themselves, or pay more for a forward contract, and let someone else do the storage for them.\nThe contango should not exceed the cost of carry, because producers and consumers can compare the futures contract price against the spot price plus storage, and choose the better one. Arbitrageurs can sell one and buy the other for a theoretically risk-free profit (see rational pricing\u2014futures). The EU describes the two groups of players in the commodity futures market, hedgers (commodity producers and commodity users) or arbitrageurs/speculators (non-commercial investors).\nIf there is a near-term shortage, the price comparison breaks down and contango may be reduced or perhaps even be reversed altogether into a state called backwardation. In that state, near prices become higher than far (i.e., future) prices because consumers prefer to have the product sooner rather than later (see convenience yield), and\nbecause there are few holders who can make an arbitrage profit by selling the spot and buying back the future. A market that has steep backwardation\u2014\"i.e.\", one where there is a very steep premium for material available for immediate delivery\u2014often indicates a perception of a current \"shortage\" in the underlying commodity. By the same token, a market that is deeply in contango may indicate a perception of a current supply \"surplus\" in the commodity.\nIn 2005 and 2006 a perception of an impending supply shortage allowed traders to take advantages of the contango in the crude oil market. Traders simultaneously bought oil and sold futures forward. This led to large numbers of tankers loaded with oil sitting idle in ports acting as floating warehouses. (see: Oil-storage trade) It was estimated that perhaps a $10\u201320 per barrel premium was added to spot price of oil as a result of this.\nIf such was the case, the premium may have ended when global oil storage capacity became exhausted; the contango would have deepened as the lack of storage supply to soak up excess oil supply would have put further pressure on spot prices. However, as crude and gasoline prices continued to rise between 2007 and 2008 this practice became so contentious that in June 2008 the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Reserve, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) decided to create task forces to investigate whether this took place.\nA crude oil contango occurred again in January 2009, with arbitrageurs storing millions of barrels in tankers to profit from the contango (see oil-storage trade). But by the summer, that price curve had flattened considerably. The contango exhibited in crude oil in 2009 explained the discrepancy between the headline spot price increase (bottoming at $35 and topping $80 in the year) and the various tradeable instruments for crude oil (such as rolled contracts or longer-dated futures contracts) showing a much lower price increase. The USO ETF also failed to replicate crude oil's spot price performance.\nInterest rates.\nIf short-term interest rates were expected to fall in a contango market, this would narrow the spread between a futures contract and an underlying asset in good supply. This is because the cost of carry will fall due to the lower interest rate, which in turn results in the difference between the price of the future and the underlying growing smaller (i.e. narrowing). An investor would be advised to buy the spread in these circumstances: this is a calendar spread trade where the trader buys the near-dated instrument and simultaneously sells the far-dated instrument (i.e. the future).\nIf, on the other hand, the spread between a future traded on an underlying asset and the spot price of the underlying asset was set to widen, possibly due to a rise in short-term interest rates, then an investor would be advised to sell the spread (i.e. a calendar spread where the trader sells the near-dated instrument and simultaneously buys the future on the underlying).\n2007\u20132008 world food price crisis.\nIn a 2010 article in \"Harper's Magazine\", Frederick Kaufman argued the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index caused a demand shock in wheat and a contango market on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, contributing to the 2007\u20132008 world food price crisis.\nIn a June 2010 article in \"The Economist\", the argument is made that index-tracking funds (to which Goldman Sachs Commodity Index was linked) did not cause the bubble. It describes a report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development that used data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to make the case.\nOrigin of term.\nThe term originated in 19th century England and is believed to be a corruption of \"continuation\", \"continue\" or \"contingent\". In the past on the London Stock Exchange, contango was a fee paid by a buyer to a seller when the buyer wished to defer settlement of the trade they had agreed. The charge was based on the interest forgone by the seller not being paid.\nThe purpose was normally speculative. Settlement days were on a fixed schedule (such as fortnightly) and a speculative buyer did not have to take delivery and pay for stock until the following settlement day, and on that day could \"carry over\" their position to the next by paying the contango fee. This practice was common before 1930, but came to be used less and less, particularly after options were reintroduced in 1958.\nThis fee was similar in character to the present meaning of contango, \"i.e.\", future delivery costing more than immediate delivery, and the charge representing cost of carry to the holder.\nEconomic theory.\nEconomic theory regarding backwardation and contango is associated with John Maynard Keynes and John Hicks.\nKeynes in \"A Treatise on Money\" assumed there are two types of participants in futures markets: speculators and hedgers. Keynes argued that if hedgers are net short, speculators must be net long. Speculators will not go net long unless the futures price is expected to rise. Keynes called the situation where the futures price is less than the expected spot price at delivery (and hence the futures price is expected to rise) normal backwardation. Industrial hedgers' preference for long rather than short forward positions results in a situation of normal backwardation. Speculators fill the gap by taking profitable short positions, with the risk offset by higher current spot prices.\nHicks \"reversed Keynes's theory by pointing out that there are situations where hedgers are net long. In this situation, called contango, speculators must be net short. Speculators will not go net short unless futures prices are expected to fall. When markets are in contango, futures prices are expected to decline.\" In 1972 Hicks won the Nobel Prize for economics on the basis of Value and Capital, on the economic equilibrium theory, in particular the issue of the stability of equilibrium in an economic system exposed to external shocks.\nBouchouev argued that traditionally there was always more producer hedging than consumer hedging in oil markets. The oil market now attracts investor money which currently far exceeds the gap between producer and consumer. Contango used to be the 'normal' for the oil market. Since c. 2008\u20139, investors are hedging against \"inflation, US dollar weakness and possible geopolitical events,\" instead of investing in the front end of the oil market. Bouchouev applied the changes in investor behaviour to \"the classical Keynes-Hicks theory of normal backwardation, and the Kaldor-Working-Brennan theory of storage, and looked at how calendar spread options (CSOs) became an increasingly popular risk management tool.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58509", "revid": "318807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58509", "title": "American Declaration of Independence", "text": ""}
{"id": "58511", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58511", "title": "Fundamental units", "text": ""}
{"id": "58513", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58513", "title": "Middle-Earth", "text": ""}
{"id": "58515", "revid": "15952624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58515", "title": "Unitarian-Universalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "58520", "revid": "42536815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58520", "title": "Free improvisation", "text": "Genre of music\nFree improvisation (also known as free form music or free music) is improvised music that rejects formal music theory and tonality, instead following the intuition of its performers. The term can refer to both a technique\u2014employed by any musician in any genre\u2014and as a recognizable genre of experimental music in its own right.\nFree improvisation, as a genre of music, developed primarily in the U.K. as well as the U.S. and Europe in the mid to late 1960s, largely as an outgrowth of free jazz and contemporary classical music. Exponents of free improvised music include saxophonists Evan Parker, Anthony Braxton, Peter Br\u00f6tzmann, and John Zorn, composer Pauline Oliveros, trombonist George E. Lewis, guitarists Derek Bailey, Henry Kaiser and Fred Frith, bassists Damon Smith and Jair-Rohm Parker Wells and the improvising groups Spontaneous Music Ensemble and AMM.\nCharacteristics.\nIn the context of music theory, free improvisation denotes the shift from a focus on harmony and structure to other dimensions of music, such as timbre, texture, melodic intervals, rhythm and spontaneous musical interactions between performers. This can give free improvised music abstract and nondescript qualities. Although individual performers may choose to play in a certain style or key, or at certain tempos, conventions such as song structures are highly uncommon; more emphasis is generally placed on the mood of the music, or on performative gestures, than on preset forms of melody, harmony or rhythm. These elements are improvised at will as the music progresses, and performers will often intuitively react to each other based on the elements of their performance.\nEnglish guitarist Derek Bailey described free improvisation as \"playing without memory\". In his book \"Improvisation\", Bailey wrote that free improvisation \"has no stylistic or idiomatic commitment. It has no prescribed idiomatic sound. The characteristics of freely improvised music are established only by the sonic musical identity of the person or persons playing it.\"\nFree music performers from disparate backgrounds often engage musically with other genres. For example, Italian composer Ennio Morricone was a member of the free improvisation group Nuova Consonanza. Anthony Braxton has written opera, and John Zorn has written acclaimed orchestral pieces.\nHistory.\nThough there are many important precedents and developments, free improvisation developed gradually, making it difficult to pinpoint a single moment when the style was born. Free improvisation primarily descends from the Indeterminacy movement and free jazz. \nGuitarist Derek Bailey contends that free improvisation must have been the earliest musical style, because \"mankind's first musical performance couldn't have been anything other than a free improvisation.\" Similarly, Keith Rowe stated, \"Other players got into playing freely, way before AMM, way before Derek [Bailey]! Who knows when free playing started? You can imagine lute players in the 1500s getting drunk and doing improvisations for people in front of a log fire.. the noise, the clatter must have been enormous. You read absolutely incredible descriptions of that. I cannot believe that musicians back then didn't float off into free playing. The melisma in Monteverdi [\"sic\"] must derive from that. But it was all in the context of a repertoire.\"\nClassical precedents.\nBy the middle decades of the 20th century, composers such as Henry Cowell, Earle Brown, David Tudor, La Monte Young, Jackson Mac Low, Morton Feldman, Sylvano Bussotti, Karlheinz Stockhausen, and George Crumb, re-introduced improvisation to European art music, with compositions that allowed or even required musicians to improvise. One notable example of this is Cornelius Cardew's \"Treatise\": a graphic score with no conventional notation whatsoever, which musicians were invited to interpret.\nImprovisation is still commonly practised by some organists at concerts or church services, and courses in improvisation (including free improvisation) are part of many higher education programmes for church musicians.\nInternational free improvisation.\nSince 2002 New Zealand collective Vitamin S has hosted weekly improvisations based around randomly drawn trios. Vitamin S takes the form beyond music and includes improvisers from other forms such as dance, theatre and puppetry.\nSince 2006, improvisational music in many forms has been supported and promoted by ISIM, the International Society for Improvised Music. ISIM comprises some 300 performing artists and scholars worldwide, including Pauline Oliveros, Robert Dick, Jane Ira Bloom, Roman Stolyar, Mark Dresser, and many others.\nFounded in Manchester, England, in 2007, \"the Noise Upstairs\" has been an institution dedicated to the practice of improvised music, hosting regular concerts and creative workshops where they have promoted international and UK-based artists such as Ken Vandermark, L\u00ea Quan Ninh, Ingrid Laubrock, and Yuri Landman. On top of these events, the Noise Upstairs runs monthly jam nights.\nIn Berlin, Germany, from the 1990s onwards, a school of free improvisation emerged known as \"echtzeitmusik\" (\u2018real-time music\u2019 or \u2018immediate music\u2019). This has been sustained by supportive venues such as ausland, Anorak Club, Labor Sonor, and others.\nThe downtown scene.\nIn late 1970s New York a group of musicians came together who shared an interest in free improvisation as well as rock, jazz, contemporary classical, world music and pop. They performed at lofts, apartments, basements and venues located predominantly in downtown New York (8BC, Pyramid Club, Environ, Roulette, The Knitting Factory and Tonic) and held regular concerts of free improvisation which featured many of the prominent figures in the scene, including John Zorn, Bill Laswell, George E. Lewis, Fred Frith, Tom Cora, Toshinori Kondo, Wayne Horvitz, Eugene Chadbourne, Zeena Parkins, Anthony Coleman, Polly Bradfield, Ikue Mori, Robert Dick, Ned Rothenberg, Bob Ostertag, Christian Marclay, David Moss, Kramer and many others. They worked with each other, independently and with many of the leading European improvisers of the time, including Derek Bailey, Evan Parker, Han Bennink, Misha Mengelberg, Peter Br\u00f6tzmann and others. Many of these musicians continue to use improvisation in one form or another in their work.\nElectronic free improvisation.\nElectronic devices such as oscillators, echoes, filters and alarm clocks were an integral part of free improvisation performances by groups such as Kluster at the underground scene at Zodiac Club in Berlin in the late 1960s. For the 1975 jazz-rock concert recording \"Agharta\", Miles Davis and his band employed free improvisation and electronics, particularly guitarist Pete Cosey who improvised sounds by running his guitar through a ring modulator and an EMS Synthi A.\nBut it was only later that traditional instruments were disbanded altogether in favour of pure electronic free improvisation. In 1984, the Swiss improvisation duo Voice Crack started making use of strictly \"cracked everyday electronics\".\nElectroacoustic improvisation.\nA recent branch of improvised music is characterized by quiet, slow moving, minimalistic textures and often utilizing laptop computers or unorthodox forms of electronics.\nDeveloping worldwide in the mid-to-late 1990s, with centers in New York, Tokyo and Austria, this style has been called \"lowercase music\" or EAI (electroacoustic improvisation), and is represented, for instance, by the American record label Erstwhile Records and the Austrian label Mego.\nEAI is often radically different even from established free improvisation. Eyles writes, \"One of the problems of describing this music is that it requires a new vocabulary and ways of conveying its sound and impact; such vocabulary does not yet exist \u2013 how do you describe the subtle differences between different types of controlled feedback? I've yet to see anyone do it convincingly \u2013 hence the use of words like 'shape' and 'texture'!\"\nFree improvisation on the radio.\nThe London-based independent radio station Resonance 104.4FM, founded by the London Musicians Collective, frequently broadcasts experimental and free improvised performance works. WNUR 89.3 FM (\"Chicago's Sound Experiment\") is another source for free improvised music on the radio. Taran's Free Jazz Hour broadcast on Radio-G 101.5 FM, Angers and Euradio 101.3 FM, Nantes is entirely dedicated to free jazz and other freely improvised music. A l'improviste.\nPopular music.\nDuring the mid-to late 1960s, Beatles member Paul McCartney sat quietly through an early AMM session. When asked how he liked the music he said \"they went on too long\". Additionally, Syd Barrett of Pink Floyd also sat in at early AMM performances, with Barrett later drawing influences from Keith Rowe's prepared guitar technique in his own psychedelic free-form playing on \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn\" through the use of a zippo lighter as a guitar slide."}
{"id": "58521", "revid": "47248563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58521", "title": "Eadred", "text": "King of the English from 946 to 955\nEadred (also Edred, c.\u2009923 \u2013 23 November 955) was King of the English from 26 May 946 until his death in 955. He was the younger son of Edward the Elder and his third wife Eadgifu, and a grandson of Alfred the Great. His elder brother, Edmund, was killed trying to protect his seneschal from an attack by a violent thief. Edmund's two sons, Eadwig and Edgar, were then young children, so Eadred became king. He suffered from ill health in the last years of his life and he died at the age of a little over thirty, having never married. He was succeeded successively by his nephews, Eadwig and Edgar.\nEadred's elder half-brother \u00c6thelstan inherited the kingship of England south of the Humber in 924, and conquered the south Northumbrian Viking kingdom of York in 927. Edmund and Eadred both inherited kingship of the whole kingdom, lost it shortly afterwards when York accepted Viking kings, and recovered it by the end of their reigns. In 954, the York magnates expelled their last king, Erik Bloodaxe, and Eadred appointed Osullf, the Anglo-Saxon ruler of the north Northumbrian territory of Bamburgh, as the first ealdorman of the whole of Northumbria. \nEadred had been very close to Edmund and inherited many of his leading advisers, such as his mother Eadgifu, Oda, Archbishop of Canterbury, and \u00c6thelstan, ealdorman of East Anglia, who was so powerful that he was known as the \"Half-King\". Dunstan, Abbot of Glastonbury and future Archbishop of Canterbury, was a close friend and adviser, and Eadred appears to have authorised Dunstan to draft charters when he became too ill to attend meetings of the \"witan\" (King's Council) in his last years.\nThe English Benedictine Reform did not reach fruition until the reign of Edgar, but Eadred was a strong supporter in its early stages. He was close to two of its leaders, \u00c6thelwold, whom he appointed Abbot of Abingdon, and Dunstan. However, like earlier kings he did not share the view of the circle around \u00c6thelwold that Benedictine monasticism was the only worthwhile religious life and he appointed \u00c6lfsige, a married man with a son, as Bishop of Winchester.\nBackground.\nIn the ninth century the four Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of Wessex, Mercia, Northumbria and East Anglia came under increasing attack from Viking raids, culminating in invasion by the Danish Viking Great Heathen Army in 865. By 878, they had overrun East Anglia, Northumbria, and Mercia, and nearly conquered Wessex, but in that year the West Saxons fought back under Alfred the Great and achieved a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington. In the 880s and 890s the Anglo-Saxons ruled Wessex and western Mercia, but the rest of England was under Viking rule. Alfred constructed a network of burhs (fortified sites), and these helped him to frustrate renewed Viking attacks in the 890s with the assistance of his son-in-law, \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians, and his elder son Edward, who became king when Alfred died in 899. In 909, Edward sent a force of West Saxons and Mercians to attack the Northumbrian Danes and the following year the Vikings retaliated with a raid on Mercia. While they were marching back to Northumbria, they were caught by an Anglo-Saxon army and decisively defeated at the Battle of Tettenhall, ending the threat from the Northumbrian Vikings for a generation. In the 910s, Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d \u2013 his sister and \u00c6thelred's widow \u2013 extended Alfred's network of fortresses and conquered Viking-ruled eastern Mercia and East Anglia. When Edward died in 924, he controlled all England south of the Humber.\nEdward was succeeded by his eldest son \u00c6thelstan, who seized control of Northumbria in 927, thus becoming the first king of all England. Soon afterwards, Welsh kings and the kings of Scotland and Strathclyde acknowledged his overlordship. After this, he styled himself in charters by titles such as \"king of the English\", or grandiosely, \"king of the whole of Britain\". In 934, he invaded Scotland and in 937, an alliance of armies of Scotland, Strathclyde, and the Vikings invaded England. \u00c6thelstan secured a decisive victory at the Battle of Brunanburh, cementing his dominant position in Britain. \u00c6thelstan died in October 939 and he was succeeded by his half-brother and Eadred's full brother Edmund. He was the first king to succeed to the throne of all England, but he soon lost control of the north. By the end of the year Anlaf Guthfrithson, the Viking king of Dublin, had crossed the sea to become king of York. He also invaded Mercia and Edmund was forced to surrender the Five Boroughs of north-east Mercia to him. Guthfrithson died in 941 and in 942, Edmund was able to recover the Five Boroughs. In 944, he recovered full control of England by expelling the Viking kings of York. On 26 May 946, he was stabbed to death trying to protect his seneschal from attack by a convicted outlaw at Pucklechurch in Gloucestershire, and as his sons were young children Eadred became king.\nFamily and early life.\nEadred's father, Edward the Elder, had three wives, eight or nine daughters, several of whom married Continental royalty, and five sons. \u00c6thelstan, the son of Edward's first wife, Ecgwynn, was born around 894, but she probably died around the time of Alfred's death, as by 901 Edward was married to \u00c6lffl\u00e6d. In about 919, he married Eadgifu, who had two sons, Edmund and Eadred. According to the twelfth-century chronicler William of Malmesbury, Edmund was about eighteen years old when he succeeded to the throne in 939, which dates his birth to 920\u2013921, and their father Edward died in 924, so Eadred was born around 923. He had one or two full sisters. Eadburh was a nun at Winchester who was later venerated as a saint. William of Malmesbury gives Eadred a second full sister called Eadgifu like her mother, who married Louis, prince of Aquitaine. William's account is accepted by the historians Ann Williams and Sean Miller, but \u00c6thelstan's biographer Sarah Foot argues that she did not exist, and that William confused her with \u00c6lfgifu, a daughter of \u00c6lffl\u00e6d. \nEadred grew up with his brother at \u00c6thelstan's court, and probably also with two important Continental exiles, his nephew Louis, future King of the West Franks, and Alain, future Duke of Brittany. According to William of Malmesbury, \u00c6thelstan showed great affection towards Edmund and Eadred: \"mere infants at his father's death, he brought them up lovingly in childhood, and when they grew up gave them a share in his kingdom\". At a royal assembly shortly before \u00c6thelstan's death in 939, Edmund and Eadred attested charter S 446, which granted land to their full sister, Eadburh. They both attested as \"regis frater\" (king's brother). This is the only charter of \u00c6thelstan attested by Eadred. \nEadgifu and Eadred attested many of Edmund's charters, showing a high degree of family cooperation; initially Eadgifu attested first, but from sometime in late 943 or early 944 Eadred took precedence, perhaps reflecting his growing authority. Eadgifu attested around one-third of Edmund's charters, always as \"regis mater\" (king's mother), including all grants to religious institutions and individuals. Eadred attested over half, and Pauline Stafford comments: \"No other adult male of the West Saxon house was ever given such prominence before his accession.\"\nReign.\nBattle for control of Northumbria.\nLike Edmund, Eadred inherited the whole English kingdom, but soon lost Northumbria and had to fight to get it back. The situation was complicated due to the number of rival factions in Northumbria. The Viking Anlaf Sihtricson (also called Olaf Sihtricson and Amlaib Cuaran) ruled Dublin and the southern Northumbrian kingdom of York at different periods. When king of York in the early 940s, he had accepted baptism with Edmund as his godfather, indicating submission to his rule, and his coins followed English designs, but Edmund had expelled him in 944. Both Anlaf and the Norse (Norwegian) prince Erik Bloodaxe ruled York for periods during Eadred's reign. Erik issued coins with a Viking sword design and represented a more serious threat to West Saxon power than Anlaf. The York magnates were key players, led by the powerful Wulfstan, Archbishop of York, who periodically made bids for independence by accepting Viking kings, but submitted to southern rule at other times. In the view of the historian Marios Costambeys, Wulfstan's influence in Northumbria appears to have been greater than Erik's. Osulf, the Anglo-Saxon ruler of the north Northumbrian territory of Bamburgh, supported Eadred when it was in his own interest. The sequence of events is very unclear because different manuscripts of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" contradict each other, and they also conflict with the evidence of charters, which are the only contemporary sources. Charters of 946, 949\u201350 and 955 call Eadred ruler of the Northumbrians, and these provide evidence of periods when York submitted to southern rule.\nFollowing Edmund's death, Charter S 521 states that \"it happened that Eadred, his uterine brother, [was] chosen in his stead by the nobles\". According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", he immediately \"reduced all Northumbria under his rule\" and obtained promises of obedience from the Scots. He may have invaded Northumbria in response to a rebellion supported by the Scots. He was crowned by Archbishop Oda of Canterbury on 16 August 946 at Kingston upon Thames, attended by Hywel Dda, king of Deheubarth in south Wales, Wulfstan and Osulf. The following year at Tanshelf, near the border between Northumbria and Mercia, Wulfstan and the other York magnates pledged allegiance to him. \nThe York magnates soon reneged on their promises and accepted Erik as king. Eadred responded by leading an army to Ripon, where he burnt down the Minster, no doubt to punish Wulfstan, as it was at the centre of his richest estate. The Northumbrians sought revenge: according to version D of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", \"when the king was on his way home, the army (which) was in York overtook the king's army at Castleford, and they made a great slaughter there. Then the king became so angry that he wished to march back into the land and destroy it utterly. When the councillors of the Northumbrians understood that, they deserted Erik and paid to King Eadred compensation for their act.\" Within a year or two they again changed sides and installed Anlaf Sihtricson as king. In 952, Eadred arrested Wulfstan and in the same year Erik displaced Anlaf, but in 954, the York magnates again threw out Erik and returned to English rule, this time not due to an invasion but by the choice of the northerners, and the change proved to be permanent. Erik was assassinated shortly afterwards, possibly at the instigation of Osulf, and the historian Frank Stenton comments that the time was past when an individual adventurer could establish a dynasty in England. Wulfstan was later released, probably in early 955, but he was apparently not allowed to resume his archbishopric and instead given the bishopric of Dorchester-on-Thames. Eadred then appointed Osulf as the first ealdorman of the whole of Northumbria. Osulf's position was probably so strong that the king had no choice but to appoint him, and it was not until the next century that southern kings were able to make their own choice of ealdormen in Bamburgh itself. In his will, Eadred left 1600 pounds to be used for protection of his people from famine or to buy peace from a heathen army, showing that he did not regard England as safe from attack.\nAdministration.\nCharters issued in the 930s and the 940s suggest continuity of royal government and smooth transitions between the reigns of \u00c6thelstan, Edmund and Eadred. Eadred's principal councillors were mainly people he had inherited from his brother Edmund, and in a few cases went back to his half-brother \u00c6thelstan. Oda, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ealdorman \u00c6thelstan of East Anglia, had been advisers of King \u00c6thelstan who had become dominant under Edmund. Ealdorman \u00c6thelstan's power under Edmund and Eadred was so great that he became known as \u00c6thelstan Half-King. His prestige was further increased when his wife \u00c6lfwynn became foster-mother to Edmund's younger son Edgar following his mother's early death. The Half-King's brother Eadric was ealdorman of central Wessex, and Eadred granted him land in Sussex which Eadric gave to Abingdon Abbey. Dunstan, the Abbot of Glastonbury and a future Archbishop of Canterbury, was one of Eadred's most trusted friends and advisers, and he attested many of Eadred's charters. Eadgifu had been sidelined under the rule of her stepson \u00c6thelstan, but she became powerful under the rule of her own sons Edmund and Eadred. \u00c6lfgar, the father of Edmund's second wife \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, was ealdorman of Essex from 946 to 951. Edmund presented \u00c6lfgar with a sword decorated with gold on its hilt and silver on its sheath, which \u00c6lfgar subsequently gave to Eadred. \u00c6lfgar consistently attested last among the ealdormen, and he may have been subordinate to \u00c6thelstan Half-King. Two thegns, Wulfric Cufing and another Wulfric who was Dunstan's brother, received massive grants of land from Edmund and Eadred, showing that royal patronage could transform minor local figures into great nobles. \nEadred is one of the few later Anglo-Saxon kings for whom no law code is known to survive, although he may have issued the \"Hundred Ordinance\". Ealdormen issued legal judgments on behalf of the king at a local level. One example during Eadred's reign concerned the theft of a woman, probably a slave. A man called \u00c6thelstan of Sunbury was later found to have her in his possession and could not prove he had acquired her legally. He surrendered possession and paid compensation to the owner, but Ealdorman Byrhtferth ordered him to pay his \"wer\" (the value of his life) to the king, and when \u00c6thelstan could not pay Byrhtferth required him to forfeit his Sunbury estate. In 952, Eadred ordered \"a great slaughter\" of the people of Thetford in revenge for their murder of Abbot Eadhelm, perhaps of St Augustine's, Canterbury. This was the usual punishment for crimes committed by communities. The historian Cyril Hart suggests that Eadhelm may have been trying to establish a new monastery there, against the opposition of the local inhabitants. Force was fundamental to West Saxon kings' domination of England, and the historian George Molyneaux sees the Thetford slaughter as an example of their \"intermittently unleashed crude but terrifying displays of coercive power\".\nThe Anglo-Saxon court was peripatetic, travelling around the country, and there was no fixed capital. Like other later Anglo-Saxon kings, Eadred's royal estates were mainly in Wessex and he and his court travelled between them. All known locations in Eadred's itinerary were in Wessex, apart from Tanshelf. There was also no central treasury, but Eadred did travel with his sacred relics, which were in the custody of his mass priests. According to Dunstan's first biographer, Eadred \"handed over to Dunstan his most valuable possessions: many land charters, the old treasure of earlier kings, and various riches of his own acquiring, all to be guarded faithfully behind the walls of his monastery\". However, Dunstan was only one of the people entrusted with Eadred's treasures; there were others such as Wulfhelm, Bishop of Wells. When Eadred was dying, he sent for the property so that he could distribute it, but he died before Dunstan arrived with his share. Ceremonial was important. A charter issued at Easter 949 describes Eadred as \"exalted with royal crowns\", displaying the king as an exceptional and charismatic character set apart from other men.\nCharters.\nThe period between 925 and 975 was the golden age of Anglo-Saxon royal diplomas, when they were at their peak as instruments of royal government, and kings used them to project images of royal power and as the most reliable means of communication between the court and the country. Most charters between late in \u00c6thelstan's reign and midway through Eadred's were written in the king's writing office in a style called the \"diplomatic mainstream\", for example, the charter which is displayed below, written by the scribe called \"Edmund C\". He wrote two charters dating to Edmund's reign and three in Eadred's. The style almost disappears between around 950 and the end of Eadred's reign. The number of surviving charters declines, with none dating to the years 952 and 954. Charters from this period belong to two other traditions. The reason for the dramatic change in around 950 is not known, but may be due to Eadred transferring responsibility for charter production from the royal writing office to other centres when his health declined in his last years.\nOne alternative tradition is found in the \"alliterative charters\", produced between 940 and 956, which display frequent use of alliteration and unusual vocabulary, in a style influenced by Aldhelm, the seventh-century Bishop of Sherborne. They are the work of a scribe who was very learned, almost certainly someone in the circle of Koenwald, Bishop of Worcester or perhaps the bishop himself. They have Mercian antecedents and most relate to estates north of the Thames. Seven charters of this type survive from 949 to 951, half the total for those years, and another two are dated 955. The historian Simon Keynes comments:\nThe \"alliterative\" charters represent an extraordinary body of material, intimately related to each other, and deeply interesting in their own right as works of learning and literature. Judged as diplomas, they are inventive, spirited, and delightfully chaotic. They stand apart from the diplomatic mainstream, yet they seem nonetheless to emerge from the very heart of the ceremonies of conveyance conducted at royal assemblies. \nThe other alternative tradition is found in the \"Dunstan B\" charters, which are very different from the \"alliterative\" charters, with a style which is plain and unpretentious, and which dispenses with the usual initial invocation and proem. They are associated with Dunstan and Glastonbury Abbey, and all the ones issued in Eadred's reign are for estates in the south and west. They were produced between 951 and 986, but they appear to be foreshadowed by a charter of 949 granting Reculver Minster and its lands to Christ Church, Canterbury, which claims to be written by Dunstan \"with his own fingers\". The document is not original and is thought to be a production of the later tenth century, but there are no anachronisms and it has many stylistic features of the \"Dunstan B\" charters, so it is probably an \"improved\" version of an original charter. Further evidence associating Dunstan with the charters is provided by commentaries on a manuscript of Caesarius of Arles's \"Expositio in Apocalypsin\", written on Dunstan's order, which has a script so similar to that of the only \"Dunstan B\" charter to survive as an original manuscript that it is likely that both documents were written by Glastonbury scribes. The charter is described by Keynes as \"well disciplined and thoroughly professional\". Eight charters of all types survive dating to 953 and 955, out of which six belong to this tradition and two are \"alliterative\". The six \"Dunstan B\" charters are not witnessed by the king, and Dunstan was probably authorised to produce charters in the king's name when he was too ill to carry out his duties.\nIn the 940s, the draftsmen of \"mainstream\" charters used the title \"king of the English\" and in the early 950s \"Dunstan B\" charters described Eadred as \"king of Albion\", whereas \"alliterative\" charters adopted complex political analysis in the wording of Eadred's title, and only after the final conquest of York described him as \"king of the whole of Britain\". Several \"alliterative\" charters, including one issued on the occasion of Eadred's coronation, use expressions such as \"the government of kingdoms of the Anglo-Saxons and Northumbrians, of the pagans and the Britons\". Keynes observes: \"It would be dangerous, of course, to press such evidence too far; but it is interesting nonetheless to be reminded that in the eyes of at least one observer, the whole was no greater than the sum of its component parts.\nCoinage.\nThe only coin in common use in late Anglo-Saxon England was the silver penny. Halfpennies were very rare but a few have been found dating to Eadred's reign, one of which has been cut in half to make a farthing. The average weight of a penny of around 24 grains in Edward the Elder's reign gradually declined until Edgar's pre-reform coinage, and by Eadred's time the reduction was about 3 grains. With a few exceptions, the high silver content of 85 to 90% in previous reigns was maintained under Eadred.\nOne common coin type in Eadred's reign is designated BC (bust crowned), with the king's head on the obverse. Many BC coins are based on an original style of \u00c6thelstan's reign but are of crude workmanship. Some were produced by moneyers who had worked in the previous reign, but there were over thirty new moneyers producing BC coins, out of which nearly twenty are represented by a single coin, so it is likely that there were other moneyers producing BC coins whose coins have not yet been found. \nThe H (Horizontal) type, with no king's bust on the obverse and the moneyer's name horizontally on the reverse, was even more common, with more than eighty moneyers known for Eadred's reign, many only from single specimens. The dominant styles in Eadred's reign were HT1 in the south and east, with trefoils top and bottom on the reverse (see right), and HR1 in the north midlands, with rosettes instead of trefoils, produced by around sixty moneyers and the most plentiful style in Eadred's reign.\nIn Northumbria and the north-east in Eadred's reign there were a few moneyers with a large output, whereas coins in the rest of the country were produced by many different moneyers. The mint town is shown on some BC coins, but rarely on H types. A few HRs show Derby and Chester, and one HT1 coin survives with an Oxford inscription and one with Canterbury. The leading York moneyer for almost the whole of Eadred's reign was Ingelgar (see right). He produced high-standard coins for Eadred, Anlaf and Erik and worked until the last months of Eadred's reign, when he was replaced by Heriger. Another large-scale moneyer was Hunred, who may have operated at Derby when York was in Viking hands.\nReligion.\nThe major religious movement of the tenth century, the English Benedictine Reform, reached its peak under Edgar, but Eadred was a strong supporter in its early stages. Another proponent was Archbishop Oda, who was a monk with a strong connection with the leading Continental centre, Fleury Abbey. When Eadred came to the throne, two of the future leaders of the movement were at Glastonbury Abbey: Dunstan had been appointed abbot by Edmund, and he had been joined by \u00c6thelwold, the future Bishop of Winchester. The reformers also had lay supporters such as \u00c6thelstan Half-King and Eadgifu, who were especially close to Dunstan. The historian Nicholas Brooks comments: \"The evidence is indirect and inadequate but may suggest that Dunstan drew much of his support from the regiment of powerful women in early tenth-century Wessex and from Eadgifu in particular.\" According to Dunstan's first biographer, Eadred urged Dunstan to accept the vacant see of Crediton, and when he refused Eadred got Eadgifu to invite Dunstan to a meal where she could use her \"woman's gift of words\" to persuade him, but her attempt was unsuccessful. \nDuring Eadred's reign, \u00c6thelwold asked for permission to go abroad to gain a deeper understanding of the scriptures and a monk's religious life, no doubt at a reformed monastery such as Fleury. He may have thought that the discipline at Glastonbury was too lax. Eadred refused his mother's advice that he should not allow such a wise man to leave his kingdom, instead appointing him as abbot of Abingdon, which was then served by secular priests and which \u00c6thelwold transformed into a leading Benedictine abbey. Eadred supported the community, including granting it a 100 hide royal estate at Abingdon, and Eadgifu was an even more generous donor. Eadred travelled to Abingdon to plan the monastery there and personally measured the foundations where he proposed to raise the walls. \u00c6thelwold then invited him to dine and he accepted. The king ordered that the mead should flow plentifully and the doors were locked so that none would be seen leaving the royal dinner. Some Northumbrian thegns accompanying the king got drunk, as was their custom, and were very merry when they left. However, Eadred died before the work could be carried out, and the building was not constructed until Edgar came to the throne. \nSupporters of monastic reform were devoted to cults of saints and their relics. When Eadred burnt down Ripon Minster during his invasion of Northumbria, Oda had the relics of Saint Wilfrid, and Ripon's copy of the \"Vita Sancti Wilfrithi\" by Eddius (Stephen of Ripon), seized and brought to Canterbury. The \"Vita\" provided the basis for a new metrical life of Wilfrid (\"Breuiloquium Vitae Wilfridi\") by Frithegod, a Frankish scholar in Oda's household, and a preface in Oda's name (although probably drafted by Frithegod) justified the theft by accusing Ripon of scandalous neglect of Wilfrid's relics. Michael Lapidge sees the destruction of the minster as providing the pretext for \"a notorious \"furtum sacrum\"\" (sacred theft). Wilfrid had been an assertively independent northern bishop and in the historian David Rollason's view the theft may have been intended to prevent the relics from becoming a focus for opposition to the West Saxon dynasty. Kings were also avid collectors of relics, which demonstrated their piety and increased their prestige, and Eadred left bequests in his will to priests he had appointed to look after his own relics. \nUnder Edgar, the view of \u00c6thelwold and his circle that Benedictine monasticism was the only worthwhile form of religious life became dominant, but this was not the view of earlier kings such as Eadred. In 951 he appointed \u00c6lfsige, a married man with a son, as bishop of Winchester. \u00c6lfsige was not a reformer and was later remembered as hostile to the cause. Eadred's reign saw a continuation of a trend away from ecclesiastical beneficiaries of charters. More than two-thirds of beneficiaries in \u00c6thelstan's reign were ecclesiastics and two-thirds were laymen in Edmund's. Under Eadred and Eadwig, three-quarters were laymen.\nIn the mid-tenth century, some religious noblewomen received grants of land without being members of communities of nuns. \u00c6thelstan granted two estates, Edmund seven and Eadred four. After this the practice ceased abruptly, apart from one further donation. The significance of the donations is uncertain, but the most likely explanation is that some aristocratic women were granted the estates so that they could pursue a religious vocation in their own way, whether by establishing a nunnery or living a religious life in their own homes. In 953, Eadred granted land in Sussex to his mother, and she is described in the charter as \"famula Dei\", which probably means that she adopted a religious life while retaining her own estates, and did not enter a monastery.\nLearning.\nGlastonbury and Abingdon were leading centres of learning, and Dunstan and \u00c6thelwold were both excellent Latinists, but little is known of the studies at their monasteries. Oda was also a competent Latin scholar and his household at Canterbury was the other main centre of learning in the mid-tenth century. The most brilliant scholar there was Frithegod. His poem \"Breuiloquium Vitae Wilfridi\" is described by Lapidge, an expert on medieval Latin literature, as \"perhaps the most remarkable monument of tenth-century Anglo-Latin literature\". It is \"one of the most brilliantly ingenious \u2013 but also damnably difficult \u2013 Latin products of Anglo-Saxon England\", which \"may be dubiously described as the 'masterpiece' of Anglo-Latin hermeneutic style\". Frithegod was a tutor to Oda's nephew Oswald, a future Archbishop of York and the third leader of the monastic reform movement. Frithegod returned to Francia when his patron Oda died in 958.\nEadred's will.\nEadred's will is one of only two wills of Anglo-Saxon kings to survive. It reads:\n\"In nomine Domini\". This is King Eadred's will. In the first place, he presents to the foundation wherein he desires that his body shall rest, two gold crosses and two swords with hilts of gold, and four hundred pounds. Item, he gives to the Old Minster at Winchester three estates, namely Downton, Damerham and Calne. Item, he gives to the New Minster three estates, namely Wherwell, Andover and Clere; and to the Nunnaminster, Shalbourne, Thatcham and Bradford. Item, he gives to the Nunnaminster at Winchester thirty pounds. and thirty to Wilton, and thirty to Shaftesbury.\nItem, he gives sixteen hundred pounds for the redemption of his soul, and the good of his people, that they may be able to purchase for themselves relief from want and from the heathen army, if they need [to do so]. Of this the Archbishop at Christchurch is to receive four hundred pounds, for the relief of the people of Kent and Surrey and Sussex and Berkshire; and if anything happen to the bishop, the money shall remain in the monastery, in the charge of the members of the council who are in that county. And \u00c6lfsige, bishop of the see of Winchester, is to receive four hundred pounds, two hundred for Hampshire and one hundred each for Wiltshire and Dorsetshire; and if anything happen to him, it shall remain-as in a similar case mentioned above-in the charge of the members of the council who are in that county. Item, Abbot Dunstan is to receive two hundred pounds and to keep it at Glastonbury for the people of Somerset and Devon; and if anything happen to him, arrangements similar to those above shall be made. Item, Bishop \u00c6lfsige is to receive the two hundred pounds left over, and keep [the money] at the episcopal see at Winchester, for whichever shire may need it. And Bishop Oscetel is to receive four hundred pounds, and keep it at the episcopal see at Dorchester for the Mercians, in accordance with the arrangement described above. Now Bishop Wulfhelm has that sum of four hundred pounds (?). Item, gold to the amount of two thousand mancuses is to be taken and minted into mancuses; and the archbishop is to receive one portion, and Bishop \u00c6lfsige a second, and Bishop Oscetel a third, and they are to distribute them throughout the bishoprics for the sake of God and for the redemption of my soul.\nItem, I give to my mother the estates at Amesbury and Wantage and Basing, and all the booklands which I have in Sussex, Surrey and Kent, and all those which she has previously had. Item I give to the archbishop two hundred mancuses of gold, reckoning the hundred at a hundred and twenty. And to each of my bishops one hundred and twenty mancuses of gold. And to each of my earls one hundred and twenty mancuses of gold. And to each [duly] appointed seneschal, and each appointed chamberlain and butler, eighty mancuses of gold. And to each of my chaplains whom I have put in charge of my relics, fifty mancuses of gold and five pounds in silver. And five pounds to each of the other priests. And thirty muncuses of gold to each [duly] appointed steward, and to every ecclesiastic who has been appointed (?) since I succeeded to the throne, and to every member of my household, in whatever capacity he be employed, unless he be ... to the royal palaces.\nItem, I desire that twelve almsmen be chosen on each of the estates mentioned above, and if anything happen to any of them, another is to be put appointed his place; and this is to hold good so long as Christianity endures, to the glory of God and the redemption of my soul; and if anyone refuses to carry it out, his estate is to revert to the place where my body shall rest.\nThe will is described by Stenton as \"the chief authority for the pre-Conquest royal household\". It shows that \"discthegns\" (seneschals) served at his table and that the other principal officers were butlers and \"hr\u00e6glthegns\" (keepers of the wardrobe). All the estates named in the will are in Wessex, reflecting the concentration of royal property there, although he also mentions booklands in the south-east without specifying the locations. Eadwig cannot have been happy at his exclusion from the will, and it appears to have been set aside following his accession.\nIllness and death.\nEadred suffered from ill health at the end of his life which gradually got worse and led to his early death. Dunstan's first biographer, who probably attended court as a member of his household, wrote:\nUnfortunately Dunstan's beloved King Eadred was very sickly all through his reign. At mealtimes, he would suck the juice out of his food, chew what was left of it for a little and then spit it out: a practice that often turned the stomachs of the thegns dining with him. He dragged on an invalid existence as best he could, despite the protests of his body (?), for quite a long time. Finally, his worsening illness came over him more and more often with a thousandfold weight, and brought him unhappily to his deathbed.\nThe eleventh century hagiographer Herman the Archdeacon described Eadred as \"debilis pedibus\" (crippled in both feet), and in his later years he probably delegated authority to leading magnates such as Dunstan. Meetings of the \"witan\" were rarer when he was ill and business was limited, with no appointments of ealdormen. He did not marry, perhaps due to his poor health, and he died in his early thirties on 23 November 955, at Frome in Somerset.\nHe was buried in the Old Minster, Winchester, although that was probably not his choice as in his will he made bequests to an unspecified location where \"he wishes his body to rest\", and then property to the Old Minster, implying that they were different places. Eadwig and \u00c6lfsige, bishop of Winchester, may have decided on the burial place. The historian Nicole Marafioti suggests that Eadred may have wished to be buried at Glastonbury and Eadwig insisted on Winchester in order to prevent Eadred's supporters from using the grave as \"ideological leverage\" against the new regime.\nAssessment.\nDomestic politics and recovering control over the whole of England were central to Eadred's rule and, unlike \u00c6thelstan and Edmund, he is not known to have played any part in West Frankish politics, although in 949 ambassadors from Eadred attended the court of Otto I, King of East Francia at Aachen. Securing a general recognition of his authority was Eadred's primary duty, and his main preoccupation was dealing with northern rebellions. Northumbria fought for its independence against successive West Saxon kings, but the acceptance of Erik proved to be its last throw and it was finally conquered during Eadred's reign. Historians disagree on how great his role was. In the view of the historian Ben Snook, Eadred \"relied on a kitchen cabinet to run the country on his behalf and seems never to have exercised much direct authority.\" \nHart suggests that in Edmund's reign, Eadgifu and \u00c6thelstan Half-King decided much of national policy, and the position did not change much under Eadred. By contrast, in Williams's view, Eadred was \"clearly an able and even energetic king, hampered by debility and (at the last) by a serious illness which brought about his early death\". \nEadred's attitude towards his nephews is uncertain. Some charters are attested by both Eadwig and Edgar as \"cliton\" (medieval Latin for prince), but others by Eadwig as \"cliton\" or \"\u00e6theling\" (Old English for prince) and Edgar as his brother. When he acceded, Eadwig dispossessed Eadgifu and exiled Dunstan, apparently as part of an attempt to free himself from the powerful advisers of his father and uncle. The attempt failed, as within two years he was forced to share the kingdom with Edgar, who became King of the Mercians, while Eadwig retained Wessex. Eadwig died in 959 after a rule of only four years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58522", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58522", "title": "\u00c6thelstan", "text": "King of the English from 927 to 939\n\u00c6thelstan or Athelstan (; ; ; lit.\u2009'noble stone'; c.\u2009894 \u2013 27 October 939) was King of the Anglo-Saxons from 924 to 927 and King of the English from 927 to his death in 939. He was the son of King Edward the Elder and his first wife, Ecgwynn. Modern historians regard him as the first King of England and one of the \"greatest Anglo-Saxon kings\". He never married and had no children; he was succeeded by his half-brother, Edmund I.\nWhen Edward died in July 924, \u00c6thelstan was accepted by the Mercians as king. His half-brother \u00c6lfweard may have been recognised as king in Wessex, but died within three weeks of their father's death. \u00c6thelstan encountered resistance in Wessex for several months, and was not crowned until September 925. In 927, he conquered the last remaining Viking kingdom, York, making him the first Anglo-Saxon ruler of the whole of England. In 934, he invaded Scotland and forced Constantine II to submit to him. \u00c6thelstan's rule was resented by the Scots and Vikings, and in 937 they invaded England. \u00c6thelstan defeated them at the Battle of Brunanburh, a victory that gave him great prestige both in the British Isles and on the Continent. After his death in 939, the Vikings seized back control of York, and it was not finally reconquered until 954.\n\u00c6thelstan centralised government; he increased control over the production of charters and summoned leading figures from distant areas to his councils. These meetings were also attended by rulers from outside his territory, especially Welsh kings, who thus acknowledged his overlordship. More legal texts survive from his reign than from any other tenth-century English king. They show his concern about widespread robberies and the threat they posed to social order. His legal reforms built on those of his grandfather, Alfred the Great. \u00c6thelstan was one of the most pious West Saxon kings, and was known for collecting relics and founding churches. His household was the centre of English learning during his reign, and it laid the foundation for the Benedictine monastic reform later in the century. No other West Saxon king played as important a role in European politics as \u00c6thelstan, and he arranged the marriages of several of his sisters to continental rulers.\nBackground.\nBy the ninth century the many kingdoms of the early Anglo-Saxon period had been consolidated into four: Wessex, Mercia, Northumbria and East Anglia. In the eighth century, Mercia had been the most powerful kingdom in southern England, but in the early ninth, Wessex became dominant under \u00c6thelstan's great-great-grandfather, Egbert. In the middle of the century, England came under increasing attack from Viking raids, culminating in invasion by the Great Heathen Army in 865. By 878, the Vikings had overrun East Anglia, Northumbria, and Mercia, and nearly conquered Wessex. The West Saxons fought back under Alfred the Great, and achieved a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington. Alfred and the Viking leader Guthrum agreed on a division that gave the Anglo-Saxons western Mercia, and eastern Mercia to the Vikings. In the 890s, renewed Viking attacks were successfully fought off by Alfred, assisted by his son (and \u00c6thelstan's father) Edward and \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians. \u00c6thelred ruled English Mercia under Alfred and was married to his daughter \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d. Alfred died in 899 and was succeeded by Edward. \u00c6thelwold, the son of \u00c6thelred, King Alfred's older brother and predecessor as king, made a bid for power, but was killed at the Battle of the Holme in 902.\nLittle is known of warfare between the English and the Danes over the next few years, but in 909, Edward sent a West Saxon and Mercian army to ravage Northumbria. The following year the Northumbrian Danes attacked Mercia, but suffered a decisive defeat at the Battle of Tettenhall. \u00c6thelred died in 911 and was succeeded as ruler of Mercia by his widow \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d. Over the next decade, Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d conquered Viking Mercia and East Anglia. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d died in 918 and was briefly succeeded by her daughter \u00c6lfwynn, but in the same year Edward deposed her and took direct control of Mercia.\nWhen Edward died in 924, he controlled all of England south of the Humber. The Viking king Sihtric ruled the Kingdom of York in southern Northumbria, but Ealdred maintained Anglo-Saxon rule in at least part of the former kingdom of Bernicia from his base in Bamburgh in northern Northumbria. Constantine II ruled Scotland, apart from the southwest, which was the British Kingdom of Strathclyde. Wales was divided into a number of small kingdoms, including Deheubarth in the southwest, Gwent in the southeast, Brycheiniog immediately north of Gwent, and Gwynedd in the north.\nEarly life.\nAccording to the Anglo-Norman historian William of Malmesbury, \u00c6thelstan was thirty years old when he came to the throne in 924, which would mean that he was born around 894. He was the oldest son of Edward the Elder. He was Edward's only son by his first consort, Ecgwynn. Very little is known about Ecgwynn, and she is not named in any contemporary source. Medieval chroniclers gave varying descriptions of her rank: one described her as an ignoble consort of inferior birth, while others described her birth as noble. Modern historians also disagree about her status. Simon Keynes and Richard Abels believe that leading figures in Wessex were unwilling to accept \u00c6thelstan as king in 924 partly because his mother had been Edward the Elder's concubine. However, Barbara Yorke and Sarah Foot argue that allegations that \u00c6thelstan was illegitimate were a product of the dispute over the succession, and that there is no reason to doubt that she was Edward's legitimate wife. She may have been related to St Dunstan.\nWilliam of Malmesbury wrote that Alfred the Great honoured his young grandson with a ceremony in which he gave him a scarlet cloak, a belt set with gems, and a sword with a gilded scabbard. Medieval Latin scholar Michael Lapidge and historian Michael Wood see this as designating \u00c6thelstan as a potential heir at a time when the claim of Alfred's nephew, \u00c6thelwold, to the throne represented a threat to the succession of Alfred's direct line, but historian Janet Nelson suggests that it should be seen in the context of conflict between Alfred and Edward in the 890s, and might reflect an intention to divide the realm between his son and his grandson after his death. Historian Martin Ryan goes further, suggesting that at the end of his life Alfred may have favoured \u00c6thelstan rather than Edward as his successor. An acrostic poem praising prince \"Adalstan\", and prophesying a great future for him, has been interpreted by Lapidge as referring to the young \u00c6thelstan, punning on the Old English meaning of his name, \"noble stone\". Lapidge and Wood see the poem as a commemoration of Alfred's ceremony by one of his leading scholars, John the Old Saxon. In Michael Wood's view, the poem confirms the truth of William of Malmesbury's account of the ceremony. Wood also suggests that \u00c6thelstan may have been the first English king to be groomed from childhood as an intellectual, and that John was probably his tutor. However, Sarah Foot argues that the acrostic poem makes better sense if it is dated to the beginning of \u00c6thelstan's reign.\nEdward married his second wife, \u00c6lffl\u00e6d, at about the time of his father's death, probably because Ecgwynn had died, although she may have been put aside. The new marriage weakened \u00c6thelstan's position, as his step-mother naturally favoured the interests of her own sons, \u00c6lfweard and Edwin. By 920 Edward had taken a third wife, Eadgifu, probably after putting \u00c6lffl\u00e6d aside. Eadgifu also had two sons, the future kings Edmund and Eadred. Edward had several daughters, perhaps as many as nine.\n\u00c6thelstan's later education was probably at the Mercian court of his aunt and uncle, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and \u00c6thelred, and it is likely the young prince gained his military training in the Mercian campaigns to conquer the Danelaw. According to a transcript dating from 1304, in 925 \u00c6thelstan gave a charter of privileges to St Oswald's Priory, Gloucester, where his aunt and uncle were buried, \"according to a pact of paternal piety which he formerly pledged with \u00c6thelred, ealdorman of the people of the Mercians\". When Edward took direct control of Mercia after \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's death in 918, \u00c6thelstan may have represented his father's interests there.\nReign.\nThe struggle for power.\nEdward died at Farndon in northern Mercia on 17 July 924, and the ensuing events are unclear. \u00c6lfweard, Edward's eldest son by \u00c6lffl\u00e6d, had ranked above \u00c6thelstan in attesting a charter in 901, and Edward may have intended \u00c6lfweard to be his successor as king, either of Wessex only or of the whole kingdom. If Edward had intended his realms to be divided after his death, his deposition of \u00c6lfwynn in Mercia in 918 may have been intended to prepare the way for \u00c6thelstan's succession as king of Mercia. When Edward died, \u00c6thelstan was apparently with him in Mercia, while \u00c6lfweard was in Wessex. Mercia acknowledged \u00c6thelstan as king, and Wessex may have chosen \u00c6lfweard. However, \u00c6lfweard outlived his father by only sixteen days.\nEven after \u00c6lfweard's death there seems to have been opposition to \u00c6thelstan in Wessex, particularly in Winchester, where \u00c6lfweard was buried. At first \u00c6thelstan behaved as a Mercian king. A charter relating to land in Derbyshire, which appears to have been issued at a time in 925 when his authority had not yet been recognised outside Mercia, was witnessed only by Mercian bishops. In the view of historians David Dumville and Janet Nelson he may have agreed not to marry or have heirs in order to gain acceptance. However, Sarah Foot ascribes his decision to remain unmarried to \"a religiously motivated determination on chastity as a way of life\".\n\u00c6thelstan's coronation took place on 4 September 925 at Kingston upon Thames, perhaps due to its symbolic location on the border between Wessex and Mercia. He was crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Athelm, who probably designed or organised a new \"ordo\" (religious order of service) in which the king wore a crown for the first time instead of a helmet. The new \"ordo\" was influenced by West Frankish liturgy and in turn became one of the sources of the medieval French \"ordo\".\nOpposition seems to have continued even after the coronation. According to William of Malmesbury, an otherwise unknown nobleman called Alfred plotted to blind \u00c6thelstan on account of his supposed illegitimacy, although it is unknown whether he aimed to make himself king or was acting on behalf of Edwin, \u00c6lfweard's younger brother. Blinding would have been a sufficient disability to render \u00c6thelstan ineligible for kingship without incurring the odium attached to murder. Tensions between \u00c6thelstan and Winchester seem to have continued for some years. The Bishop of Winchester, Frithestan, did not attend the coronation or witness any of \u00c6thelstan's known charters until 928. After that, he witnessed fairly regularly until his resignation in 931 but was listed in a lower position than he was entitled to by his seniority.\nIn 933 Edwin drowned in a shipwreck in the North Sea. His cousin, Adelolf, Count of Boulogne, took his body for burial at the Abbey of Saint Bertin in Saint-Omer. According to the abbey's annalist, Folcuin\u2014who wrongly believed that Edwin had been king \u2014 thought he had fled England \"driven by some disturbance in his kingdom\". Folcuin stated that \u00c6thelstan sent alms to the abbey for his dead brother and received monks from the abbey graciously when they came to England, although Folcuin did not realise that \u00c6thelstan died before the monks made the journey in 944. The twelfth century chronicler Symeon of Durham said that \u00c6thelstan ordered Edwin to be drowned, but this is dismissed by most historians. Edwin might have fled England after an unsuccessful rebellion against his brother's rule, and his death may have put an end to Winchester's opposition.\nKing of the English.\nEdward the Elder had conquered the Danish territories in east Mercia and East Anglia with the assistance of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and her husband \u00c6thelred, but when Edward died the Danish king Sihtric still ruled the Viking Kingdom of York (formerly the southern Northumbrian kingdom of Deira). In January 926, \u00c6thelstan arranged for his only full sister to marry Sihtric. The two kings agreed not to invade each other's territories or to support each other's enemies. The following year Sihtric died, and \u00c6thelstan seized the chance to invade. Guthfrith, a cousin of Sihtric, led a fleet from Dublin to try to take the throne, but \u00c6thelstan easily prevailed. He captured York and received the submission of the Danish people. According to a southern chronicler, he \"succeeded to the kingdom of the Northumbrians\", and it is uncertain whether he had to fight Guthfrith. Southern kings had never ruled the north, and his usurpation was met with outrage by the Northumbrians, who had always resisted southern control. However, at Eamont, near Penrith, on 12 July 927, King Constantine II of Alba, King Hywel Dda of Deheubarth, Ealdred of Bamburgh, and King Owain of Strathclyde (or Morgan ap Owain of Gwent) accepted \u00c6thelstan's overlordship. His triumph led to seven years of peace in the north.\nWhereas \u00c6thelstan was the first English king to achieve lordship over northern Britain, he inherited his authority over the Welsh kings from his father and aunt. In the 910s Gwent acknowledged the lordship of Wessex, and Deheubarth and Gwynedd accepted that of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d; following Edward's takeover of Mercia, they transferred their allegiance to him. According to William of Malmesbury, after the meeting at Eamont \u00c6thelstan summoned the Welsh kings to Hereford, where he imposed a heavy annual tribute and fixed the border between England and Wales in the Hereford area at the River Wye. The dominant figure in Wales was Hywel Dda of Deheubarth, described by the historian of early medieval Wales Thomas Charles-Edwards as \"the firmest ally of the 'emperors of Britain' among all the kings of his day\". Welsh kings attended \u00c6thelstan's court between 928 and 935 and witnessed charters at the head of the list of laity (apart from the kings of Scotland and Strathclyde), showing that their position was regarded as superior to that of the other great men present. The alliance produced peace between Wales and England, and within Wales, lasting throughout \u00c6thelstan's reign, though some Welsh resented the status of their rulers as under-kings, as well as the high level of tribute imposed upon them. In \"Armes Prydein Vawr\" (The Great Prophecy of Britain), a Welsh poet foresaw the day when the British would rise up against their Saxon oppressors and drive them into the sea.\nAccording to William of Malmesbury, after the Hereford meeting \u00c6thelstan went on to expel the Cornish from Exeter, fortify its walls, and fix the Cornish boundary at the River Tamar. This account is regarded sceptically by historians, however, as Cornwall had been under English rule since the mid-ninth century. Thomas Charles-Edwards describes it as \"an improbable story\", while historian John Reuben Davies sees it as the suppression of a British revolt and the confinement of the Cornish beyond the Tamar. \u00c6thelstan emphasised his control by establishing a new Cornish see and appointing its first bishop, but Cornwall kept its own culture and language.\n\u00c6thelstan became the first king of all the Anglo-Saxon peoples, and in effect overlord of Britain. His successes inaugurated what John Maddicott, in his history of the origins of the English Parliament, calls the \"imperial phase\" of English kingship between about 925 and 975, when rulers from Wales and Scotland attended the assemblies of English kings and witnessed their charters. \u00c6thelstan tried to reconcile the aristocracy in his new territory of Northumbria to his rule. He lavished gifts on the minsters of Beverley, Chester-le-Street and York, emphasising his Christianity. He also purchased the vast territory of Amounderness in Lancashire, and gave it to the Archbishop of York, his most important lieutenant in the region. But he remained a resented outsider, and the northern British kingdoms preferred to ally with the pagan Norse of Dublin. In contrast to his strong control over southern Britain, his position in the north was far more tenuous.\nInvasion of Scotland in 934.\nIn 934, \u00c6thelstan invaded Scotland. His reasons are unclear, and historians give alternative explanations. The death of his half-brother Edwin in 933 might have finally removed factions in Wessex opposed to his rule. Guthfrith, the Norse king of Dublin who had briefly ruled Northumbria, died in 934; any resulting insecurity among the Danes would have given \u00c6thelstan an opportunity to stamp his authority on the north. An entry in the \"Annals of Clonmacnoise\", recording the death in 934 of a ruler who was possibly Ealdred of Bamburgh, suggests another possible explanation, a dispute between \u00c6thelstan and Constantine over control of Bamburgh. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" briefly recorded the expedition without explanation, but the twelfth-century chronicler John of Worcester stated that Constantine had broken his treaty with \u00c6thelstan.\n\u00c6thelstan set out on his campaign in May 934, accompanied by four Welsh kings: Hywel Dda of Deheubarth, Idwal Foel of Gwynedd, Morgan ap Owain of Gwent, and Tewdwr ap Griffri of Brycheiniog. His retinue also included eighteen bishops and thirteen earls, six of whom were Danes from eastern England. By late June or early July he had reached Chester-le-Street, where he made generous gifts to the tomb of St Cuthbert, including a stole and maniple (ecclesiastical garments) originally commissioned by his step-mother \u00c6lffl\u00e6d as a gift to Bishop Frithestan of Winchester. The invasion was launched by land and sea. According to Symeon of Durham, his land forces ravaged as far as Dunnottar in north-east Scotland, the furthest north that any English army had reached since Ecgfrith's disastrous invasion in 685, while the fleet raided Caithness, then probably part of the Norse kingdom of Orkney.\nNo battles are recorded during the campaign, and chronicles do not record its outcome. By September, however, he was back in the south of England at Buckingham, where Constantine witnessed a charter as \"subregulus\", thus acknowledging \u00c6thelstan's overlordship. In 935 a charter was attested by Constantine, Owain of Strathclyde, Hywel Dda, Idwal Foel, and Morgan ap Owain. At Christmas of the same year Owain of Strathclyde was once more at \u00c6thelstan's court along with the Welsh kings, but Constantine was not. His return to England less than two years later would be in very different circumstances.\nBattle of Brunanburh.\nIn 934, Olaf Guthfrithson succeeded his father Guthfrith as the Norse King of Dublin. The alliance between the Norse and the Scots was cemented by the marriage of Olaf to Constantine's daughter. By August 937 Olaf had defeated his rivals for control of the Viking part of Ireland, and he promptly launched a bid for the former Norse kingdom of York. Individually Olaf and Constantine were too weak to oppose \u00c6thelstan, but together they could hope to challenge the dominance of Wessex. In the autumn they joined with the Strathclyde Britons under Owain to invade England. Medieval campaigning was normally conducted in the summer, and \u00c6thelstan could hardly have expected an invasion on such a large scale so late in the year. He seems to have been slow to react, and an old Latin poem preserved by William of Malmesbury accused him of having \"languished in sluggish leisure\". The allies plundered English territory while \u00c6thelstan took his time gathering a West Saxon and Mercian army. However, Michael Wood praises his caution, arguing that unlike Harold in 1066, he did not allow himself to be provoked into precipitate action. When he marched north, the Welsh did not join him, and they did not fight on either side.\nThe two sides met at the Battle of Brunanburh, resulting in an overwhelming victory for \u00c6thelstan, supported by his young half-brother, the future King Edmund. Olaf escaped back to Dublin with the remnant of his forces, while Constantine lost a son. The English also suffered heavy losses, including two of \u00c6thelstan's cousins, sons of Edward the Elder's younger brother, \u00c6thelweard.\nThe battle was reported in the \"Annals of Ulster\":\nA great, lamentable and horrible battle was cruelly fought between the Saxons and the Northmen, in which several thousands of Northmen, who are uncounted, fell, but their king Amlaib [Olaf], escaped with a few followers. A large number of Saxons fell on the other side, but \u00c6thelstan, king of the Saxons, enjoyed a great victory.\nA generation later, the chronicler \u00c6thelweard reported that it was popularly remembered as \"the great battle\", and it sealed \u00c6thelstan's posthumous reputation as \"victorious because of God\" (in the words of the homilist \u00c6lfric of Eynsham). The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" abandoned its usual terse style in favour of a heroic poem vaunting the great victory, employing imperial language to present \u00c6thelstan as ruler of an empire of Britain. The site of the battle is uncertain, however, and over thirty sites have been suggested, with Bromborough on the Wirral the most favoured among historians.\nHistorians disagree over the significance of the battle. Alex Woolf describes it as a \"pyrrhic victory\" for \u00c6thelstan: the campaign seems to have ended in a stalemate, his power appears to have declined, and after he died Olaf acceded to the kingdom of Northumbria without resistance. Alfred Smyth describes it as \"the greatest battle in Anglo-Saxon history\", but he also states that its consequences beyond \u00c6thelstan's reign have been overstated. In the view of Sarah Foot, on the other hand, it would be difficult to exaggerate the battle's importance: if the Anglo-Saxons had been defeated, their hegemony over the whole mainland of Britain would have disintegrated.\nKingship.\nAdministration.\nAnglo-Saxon kings ruled through ealdormen, who had the highest lay status under the king. In ninth-century Wessex they each ruled a single shire, but by the middle of the tenth they had authority over a much wider area, a change probably introduced by \u00c6thelstan to deal with the problems of governing his extended realm. One of the ealdormen, who was also called \u00c6thelstan, governed the eastern Danelaw territory of East Anglia, the largest and wealthiest province of England. He became so powerful that he was later known as \u00c6thelstan Half King. Several of the ealdormen who witnessed charters had Scandinavian names, and while the localities they came from cannot be identified, they were almost certainly the successors of the earls who led Danish armies in the time of Edward the Elder, and who were retained by \u00c6thelstan as his representatives in local government.\nBeneath the ealdormen, reeves\u2014royal officials who were noble local landowners\u2014were in charge of a town or royal estate. The authority of church and state was not separated in early medieval societies, and the lay officials worked closely with their diocesan bishop and local abbots, who also attended the king's royal councils.\nAs the first king of all the Anglo-Saxon peoples, \u00c6thelstan needed effective means to govern his extended realm. Building on the foundations of his predecessors, he created the most centralised government that England had yet seen. Previously, some charters had been produced by royal priests and others by members of religious houses, but between 928 and 935 they were produced exclusively by a scribe known to historians as \"\u00c6thelstan A\", showing an unprecedented degree of royal control over an important activity. Unlike earlier and later charters, \"\u00c6thelstan A\" provides full details of the date and place of adoption and an unusually long witness list, providing crucial information for historians. After \"\u00c6thelstan A\" retired or died, charters reverted to a simpler form, suggesting that they had been the work of an individual, rather than the development of a formal writing office.\nA key mechanism of government was the king's council (\"witan\" in Old English). Anglo-Saxon kings did not have a fixed capital city. Their courts were peripatetic, and their councils were held at varying locations around their realms. \u00c6thelstan stayed mainly in Wessex, however, and controlled outlying areas by summoning leading figures to his councils. The small and intimate meetings that had been adequate until the enlargement of the kingdom under Edward the Elder gave way to large bodies attended by bishops, ealdormen, thegns, magnates from distant areas, and independent rulers who had submitted to his authority. Frank Stenton sees \u00c6thelstan's councils as \"national assemblies\", which did much to break down the provincialism that was a barrier to the unification of England. John Maddicott goes further, seeing them as the start of centralised assemblies that had a defined role in English government, and \u00c6thelstan as \"the true if unwitting founder of the English parliament\".\nLaw.\nThe Anglo-Saxons were the first people in northern Europe to write administrative documents in the vernacular, and law codes in Old English go back to \u00c6thelberht of Kent at the beginning of the seventh century. The law code of Alfred the Great, from the end of the ninth century, was also written in the vernacular, and he expected his ealdormen to learn it. His code was strongly influenced by Carolingian law going back to Charlemagne in such areas as treason, peace-keeping, organisation of the hundreds and judicial ordeal. It remained in force throughout the tenth century, and \u00c6thelstan's codes were built on this foundation. Legal codes required the approval of the king, but they were treated as guidelines which could be adapted and added to at the local level, rather than a fixed canon of regulations, and customary oral law was also important in the Anglo-Saxon period.\nMore legal texts survive from \u00c6thelstan's reign than from any other tenth-century English king. The earliest appear to be his tithe edict and the \"Ordinance on Charities\". Four legal codes were adopted at Royal Councils in the early 930s at Grateley in Hampshire, Exeter, Faversham in Kent, and Thunderfield in Surrey. Local legal texts survive from London and Kent, and one concerning the 'Duns\u00e6te' on the Welsh border probably also dates to \u00c6thelstan's reign. In the view of the historian of English law Patrick Wormald, the laws must have been written by Wulfhelm, who succeeded Athelm as Archbishop of Canterbury in 926. Other historians see Wulfhelm's role as less important, giving the main credit to \u00c6thelstan himself, although the significance placed on the ordeal as an ecclesiastical ritual shows the increased influence of the church. Nicholas Brooks sees the role of the bishops as marking an important stage in the increasing involvement of the church in the making and enforcement of law.\nThe two earliest codes were concerned with clerical matters, and \u00c6thelstan stated that he acted on the advice of Wulfhelm and his bishops. The first asserts the importance of paying tithes to the church. The second enforces the duty of charity on \u00c6thelstan's reeves, specifying the amount to be given to the poor and requiring reeves to free one penal slave annually. His religious outlook is shown in a wider sacralisation of the law in his reign.\nThe later codes show his concern with threats to social order, especially robbery, which he regarded as the most important manifestation of social breakdown. The first of these later codes, issued at Grateley, prescribed harsh penalties, including the death penalty for anyone over twelve years old caught in the act of stealing goods worth more than eight pence. This apparently had little effect, as \u00c6thelstan admitted in the Exeter code: \"I King \u00c6thelstan, declare that I have learned that the public peace has not been kept to the extent, either of my wishes, or of the provisions laid down at Grateley, and my councillors say that I have suffered this too long.\" In desperation the Council tried a different strategy, offering an amnesty to thieves if they paid compensation to their victims. The problem of powerful families protecting criminal relatives was to be solved by expelling them to other parts of the realm. This strategy did not last long, and at Thunderfield \u00c6thelstan returned to the hard line, softened by raising the minimum age for the death penalty to fifteen \"because he thought it too cruel to kill so many young people and for such small crimes as he understood to be the case everywhere\". His reign saw the first introduction of the system of tithing, sworn groups of ten or more men who were jointly responsible for peacekeeping (later known as frankpledge). Sarah Foot commented that tithing and oath-taking to deal with the problem of theft had its origin in Frankia: \"But the equation of theft with disloyalty to \u00c6thelstan's person appears peculiar to him. His preoccupation with theft\u2014tough on theft, tough on the causes of theft\u2014finds no direct parallel in other kings' codes.\"\nHistorians differ widely regarding \u00c6thelstan's legislation. Patrick Wormald's verdict was harsh: \"The hallmark of \u00c6thelstan's law-making is the gulf dividing its exalted aspirations from his spasmodic impact.\" In his view, \"The legislative activity of \u00c6thelstan's reign has rightly been dubbed 'feverish'... But the extant results are, frankly, a mess. In the view of Simon Keynes, however, \"Without any doubt the most impressive aspect of King \u00c6thelstan's government is the vitality of his law-making\", which shows him driving his officials to do their duties and insisting on respect for the law, but also demonstrates the difficulty he had in controlling a troublesome people. Keynes sees the Grateley code as \"an impressive piece of legislation\" showing the king's determination to maintain social order.\nCoinage.\nIn the 970s, \u00c6thelstan's nephew, King Edgar, reformed the monetary system to give Anglo-Saxon England the most advanced currency in Europe, with a good quality silver coinage, which was uniform and abundant. In \u00c6thelstan's time, however, it was far less developed, and minting was still organised regionally long after \u00c6thelstan unified the country. The Grately code included a provision that there was to be only one coinage across the king's dominion. However, this is in a section that appears to be copied from a code of his father, and the list of towns with mints is confined to the south, including London and Kent, but not northern Wessex or other regions. Early in \u00c6thelstan's reign, different styles of coin were issued in each region, but after he conquered York and received the submission of the other British kings, he issued a new coinage, known as the \"circumscription cross\" type. This advertised his newly exalted status with the inscription, \"Rex Totius Britanniae\". Examples were minted in Wessex, York, and English Mercia (in Mercia bearing the title \"Rex Saxorum\"), but not in East Anglia or the Danelaw.\nIn the early 930s a new coinage was issued, the \"crowned bust\" type, with the king shown for the first time wearing a crown with three stalks. This was eventually issued in all regions apart from Mercia, which issued coins without a ruler portrait, suggesting, in Sarah Foot's view, that any Mercian affection for a West Saxon king brought up among them quickly declined.\nChurch.\nChurch and state maintained close relations in the Anglo-Saxon period, both socially and politically. Churchmen attended royal feasts as well as meetings of the Royal Council. During \u00c6thelstan's reign these relations became even closer, especially as the archbishopric of Canterbury had come under West Saxon jurisdiction since Edward the Elder annexed Mercia, and \u00c6thelstan's conquests brought the northern church under the control of a southern king for the first time.\n\u00c6thelstan appointed members of his own circle to bishoprics in Wessex, possibly to counter the influence of the Bishop of Winchester, Frithestan. One of the king's mass-priests (priests employed to say Mass in his household), \u00c6lfheah, became Bishop of Wells, while another, Beornstan, succeeded Frithestan as Bishop of Winchester. Beornstan was succeeded by another member of the royal household, also called \u00c6lfheah. Two of the leading figures in the later tenth-century Benedictine monastic reform in Edgar's reign, Dunstan and \u00c6thelwold, served in early life at \u00c6thelstan's court and were ordained as priests by \u00c6lfheah of Winchester at the king's request. According to \u00c6thelwold's biographer, Wulfstan, \"\u00c6thelwold spent a long period in the royal palace in the king's inseparable companionship and learned much from the king's wise men that was useful and profitable to him\". Oda, a future Archbishop of Canterbury, was also close to \u00c6thelstan, who appointed him Bishop of Ramsbury. Oda may have been present at the battle of Brunanburh.\n\u00c6thelstan was a noted collector of relics, and while this was a common practice at the time, he was marked out by the scale of his collection and the refinement of its contents. The abbot of Saint Samson in Dol sent him some as a gift, and in his covering letter he wrote: \"we know you value relics more than earthly treasure\". \u00c6thelstan was also a generous donor of manuscripts and relics to churches and monasteries. His reputation was so great that some monastic scribes later falsely claimed that their institutions had been beneficiaries of his largesse. He was especially devoted to the cult of St. Cuthbert in Chester-le-Street, and his gifts to the community there included Bede's Lives of Cuthbert. He commissioned it especially to present to Chester-le Street, and out of all manuscripts he gave to a religious foundation which survive, it is the only one which was wholly written in England during his reign. It has a portrait of \u00c6thelstan presenting the book to Cuthbert, the earliest surviving manuscript portrait of an English king. In the view of Janet Nelson, his \"rituals of largesse and devotion at sites of supernatural power ... enhanced royal authority and underpinned a newly united imperial realm\".\n\u00c6thelstan had a reputation for founding churches, although it is unclear how justified this is. According to late and dubious sources, these churches included minsters at Milton Abbas in Dorset and Muchelney in Somerset. In the view of historian John Blair, the reputation is probably well-founded, but \"these waters are muddied by \u00c6thelstan's almost folkloric reputation as a founder, which made him a favourite hero of later origin-myths\". However, while he was a generous donor to monasteries, he did not give land for new ones or attempt to revive the ones in the north and east destroyed by Viking attacks.\nHe also sought to build ties with continental churches. Cenwald was a royal priest before his appointment as Bishop of Worcester, and in 929 he accompanied two of \u00c6thelstan's half-sisters to the Saxon court so that the future Holy Roman Emperor, Otto, could choose one of them as his wife. Cenwald went on to make a tour of German monasteries, giving lavish gifts on \u00c6thelstan's behalf and receiving in return promises that the monks would pray for the king and others close to him in perpetuity. England and Saxony became closer after the marriage alliance, and German names start to appear in English documents, while Cenwald kept up the contacts he had made by subsequent correspondence, helping the transmission of continental ideas about reformed monasticism to England.\nLearning.\n\u00c6thelstan built on his grandfather's efforts to revive ecclesiastical scholarship, which had fallen to a low state in the second half of the ninth century. John Blair described \u00c6thelstan's achievement as \"a determined reconstruction, visible to us especially through the circulation and production of books, of the shattered ecclesiastical culture\". He was renowned in his own day for his piety and promotion of sacred learning. His interest in education, and his reputation as a collector of books and relics, attracted a cosmopolitan group of ecclesiastical scholars to his court, particularly Bretons and Irish. \u00c6thelstan gave extensive aid to Breton clergy who had fled Brittany following its conquest by the Vikings in 919. He made a confraternity agreement with the clergy of Dol Cathedral in Brittany, who were then in exile in central France, and they sent him the relics of Breton saints, apparently hoping for his patronage. The contacts resulted in a surge in interest in England for commemorating Breton saints. One of the most notable scholars at \u00c6thelstan's court was Israel the Grammarian, who may have been a Breton. Israel and \"a certain Frank\" drew a board game called \"Gospel Dice\" for an Irish bishop, Dub Innse, who took it home to Bangor. \u00c6thelstan's court played a crucial role in the origins of the English monastic reform movement.\nFew prose narrative sources survive from \u00c6thelstan's reign, but it produced an abundance of poetry, much of it Norse-influenced praise of the King in grandiose terms, such as the Brunanburh poem. Sarah Foot even makes a case that \"Beowulf\" may have been composed in \u00c6thelstan's circle.\n\u00c6thelstan's court was the centre of a revival of the elaborate hermeneutic style of later Latin writers, influenced by the West Saxon scholar Aldhelm (c.\u2009639\u00a0\u2013 709), and by early tenth-century French monasticism. Foreign scholars at \u00c6thelstan's court such as Israel the Grammarian were practitioners. The style was characterised by long, convoluted sentences and a predilection for rare words and neologisms. The \"\u00c6thelstan A\" charters were written in hermeneutic Latin. In the view of Simon Keynes it is no coincidence that they first appear immediately after the king had for the first time united England under his rule, and they show a high level of intellectual attainment and a monarchy invigorated by success and adopting the trappings of a new political order. The style influenced architects of the late tenth-century monastic reformers educated at \u00c6thelstan's court such as \u00c6thelwold and Dunstan, and became a hallmark of the movement. After \"\u00c6thelstan A\", charters became more simple, but the hermeneutic style returned in the charters of Eadwig and Edgar.\nThe historian W. H. Stevenson commented in 1898:\nThe object of the compilers of these charters was to express their meaning by the use of the greatest possible number of words and by the choice of the most grandiloquent, bombastic words they could find. Every sentence is so overloaded by the heaping up of unnecessary words that the meaning is almost buried out of sight. The invocation with its appended clauses, opening with pompous and partly alliterative words, will proceed amongst a blaze of verbal fireworks throughout twenty lines of smallish type, and the pyrotechnic display will be maintained with equal magnificence throughout the whole charter, leaving the reader, dazzled by the glaze and blinded by the smoke, in a state of uncertainty as to the meaning of these frequently untranslatable and usually interminable sentences.\nLapidge argues that however unpalatable the hermeneutic style seems to modern taste, it was an important part of late Anglo-Saxon culture, and deserves more sympathetic attention than it has received from modern historians. In the view of historian David Woodman, \"\u00c6thelstan A\" should \"be accorded recognition as an individual author of no little genius, a man who not only overhauled the legal form of the diploma but also had the ability to write Latin that is as enduringly fascinating as it is complex ... In many ways the diplomas of \"\u00c6thelstan A\" represent the stylistic peak of the Anglo-Saxon diplomatic tradition, a fitting complement to \u00c6thelstan's own momentous political feats and to the forging of what would become England.\"\nBritish monarch.\nHistorians frequently comment on \u00c6thelstan's grand and extravagant titles. On his coins and charters he is described as \"Rex totius Britanniae\", or \"King of the whole of Britain\". A gospel book he donated to Christ Church, Canterbury is inscribed \"\u00c6thelstan, king of the English and ruler of the whole of Britain with a devout mind gave this book to the primatial see of Canterbury, to the church dedicated to Christ\". In charters from 931 he is \"king of the English, elevated by the right hand of the almighty to the throne of the whole kingdom of Britain\", and in one manuscript dedication he is even styled \"basileus et curagulus\", the titles of Byzantine emperors. Some historians are not impressed. \"Clearly\", comments Alex Woolf, \"King \u00c6thelstan was a man who had pretensions,\" while in the view of Simon Keynes, \"\u00c6thelstan A\" proclaimed his master king of Britain \"by wishful extension\". But according to George Molyneaux \"this is to apply an anachronistic standard: tenth-century kings had a loose but real hegemony throughout the island, and their titles only appear inflated if one assumes that kingship ought to involve domination of an intensity like that seen within the English kingdom of the eleventh and later centuries.\"\nEuropean relations.\nThe West Saxon court had connections with the Carolingians going back to the marriage between \u00c6thelstan's great-grandfather \u00c6thelwulf and Judith, daughter of the king of West Francia (and future Holy Roman Emperor) Charles the Bald, as well as the marriage of Alfred the Great's daughter \u00c6lfthryth to Judith's son by a later marriage, Baldwin II, Count of Flanders. One of \u00c6thelstan's half-sisters, Eadgifu, married Charles the Simple, king of the West Franks, in the late 910s. He was deposed in 922, and Eadgifu sent their son Louis to safety in England. By \u00c6thelstan's time the connection was well established, and his coronation was performed with the Carolingian ceremony of anointment, probably to draw a deliberate parallel between his rule and Carolingian tradition. His \"crowned bust\" coinage of 933\u2013938 was the first Anglo-Saxon coinage to show the king crowned, following Carolingian iconography.\nLike his father, \u00c6thelstan was unwilling to marry his female relatives to his own subjects, so his sisters either entered nunneries or married foreign husbands. This was one reason for his close relations with European courts, and he married several of his half-sisters to European nobles in what historian Sheila Sharp called \"a flurry of dynastic bridal activity unequalled again until Queen Victoria's time\". Another reason lay in the common interest on both sides of the Channel in resisting the threat from the Vikings, while the rise in the power and reputation of the royal house of Wessex made marriage with an English princess more prestigious to European rulers. In 926 Hugh, Duke of the Franks, sent \u00c6thelstan's cousin, Adelolf, Count of Boulogne, on an embassy to ask for the hand of one of \u00c6thelstan's sisters. According to William of Malmesbury, the gifts Adelolf brought included spices, jewels, many swift horses, a crown of solid gold, the sword of Constantine the Great, Charlemagne's lance, and a piece of the Crown of Thorns. \u00c6thelstan sent his half-sister Eadhild to be Hugh's wife.\n\u00c6thelstan's most important European alliance was with the new Liudolfing dynasty in East Francia. The Carolingian dynasty of East Francia had died out in the early tenth century, and its new Liudolfing king, Henry the Fowler, was seen by many as an \"arriviste\". He needed a royal marriage for his son to establish his legitimacy, but no suitable Carolingian princesses were available. The ancient royal line of the West Saxons provided an acceptable alternative, especially as they (wrongly) claimed descent from the seventh-century king and saint, Oswald, who was venerated in Germany. In 929 or 930 Henry sent ambassadors to \u00c6thelstan's court seeking a wife for his son, Otto, who later became Holy Roman Emperor. \u00c6thelstan sent two of his half-sisters, and Otto chose Eadgyth. Fifty years later, \u00c6thelweard, a descendant of Alfred the Great's older brother, addressed his Latin version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" to Mathilde, Abbess of Essen, who was Eadgyth's granddaughter, and had apparently requested it. The other sister, whose name is uncertain, was married to a prince from near the Alps who has not definitely been identified.\nIn early medieval Europe, it was common for kings to act as foster-fathers for the sons of other kings. \u00c6thelstan was known for the support he gave to dispossessed young royalty. In 936 he sent an English fleet to help his foster-son, Alan II, Duke of Brittany, to regain his ancestral lands, which had been conquered by the Vikings. In the same year he assisted the son of his half-sister Eadgifu, Louis, to take the throne of West Francia, and in 939 he sent another fleet that unsuccessfully attempted to help Louis in a struggle with rebellious magnates. According to later Scandinavian sources, he helped another possible foster-son, Hakon, son of Harald Fairhair, king of Norway, to reclaim his throne, and he was known among Norwegians as \"\u00c6thelstan the Good\".\n\u00c6thelstan's court was perhaps the most cosmopolitan of the Anglo-Saxon period. The close contacts between the English and European courts ended soon after his death, but descent from the English royal house long remained a source of prestige for continental ruling families. According to Frank Stenton in his history of the period, \"Anglo-Saxon England\", \"Between Offa and Cnut there is no English king who played so prominent or so sustained a part in the general affairs of Europe.\"\nForeign contemporaries described him in panegyrical terms. The French chronicler Flodoard described him as \"the king from overseas\", and the \"Annals of Ulster\" as the \"pillar of the dignity of the western world\". Some historians take a similar view. Michael Wood titled an essay, \"The Making of King Aethelstan's Empire: an English Charlemagne?\", and described him as \"the most powerful ruler that Britain had seen since the Romans\". In the view of Veronica Ortenberg, he was \"the most powerful ruler in Europe\" with an army that had repeatedly defeated the Vikings; continental rulers saw him as a Carolingian emperor, who \"was clearly treated as the new Charlemagne\". She wrote:\nWessex kings carried an aura of power and success, which made them increasingly powerful in the 920s, while most Continental houses were in military trouble and engaged in internecine warfare. While the civil wars and the Viking attacks on the Continent had spelled the end of unity of the Carolingian empire, which had already disintegrated into separate kingdoms, military success had enabled \u00c6thelstan to triumph at home and to attempt to go beyond the reputation of a great heroic dynasty of warrior kings, in order to develop a Carolingian ideology of kingship.\nDeath.\n\u00c6thelstan died at Gloucester on 27 October 939. His grandfather Alfred, his father Edward, and his half-brother \u00c6lfweard had been buried at Winchester, but \u00c6thelstan chose not to honour the city associated with opposition to his rule. By his own wish, he was buried at Malmesbury Abbey in Wiltshire, where he had buried his cousins who died at Brunanburh. No other member of the West Saxon royal family was buried there, and, according to William of Malmesbury, \u00c6thelstan's choice reflected his devotion to the abbey and to the memory of its seventh-century abbot Saint Aldhelm. William described \u00c6thelstan as fair-haired \"as I have seen for myself in his remains, beautifully intertwined with gold threads\". His bones were later lost, but he is commemorated by an empty fifteenth-century tomb.\nAftermath.\nAfter \u00c6thelstan's death, the men of York immediately chose the Viking king of Dublin, Olaf Guthfrithson, as their king, and Anglo-Saxon control of the north, seemingly made safe by the victory of Brunanburh, collapsed. The reigns of \u00c6thelstan's half-brothers Edmund (939\u2013946) and Eadred (946\u2013955) were largely devoted to regaining control. Olaf seized the east midlands, leading to the establishment of a frontier at Watling Street. In 941 Olaf died, and Edmund took back control of the east midlands in 942 and York in 944. Following Edmund's death, York again returned to Viking control, and it was only when the Northumbrians finally drove out their Norwegian Viking king, Eric Bloodaxe, in 954 and submitted to Eadred that Anglo-Saxon control of the whole of England was finally restored.\nPrimary sources.\nChronicle sources for the life of \u00c6thelstan are limited, and the first biography, by Sarah Foot, was only published in 2011. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" in \u00c6thelstan's reign is principally devoted to military events, and it is largely silent apart from recording his most important victories. An important source is the twelfth-century chronicle of William of Malmesbury, but historians are cautious about accepting his testimony, much of which cannot be verified from other sources. David Dumville goes so far as to dismiss William's account entirely, regarding him as a \"treacherous witness\" whose account is unfortunately influential. However, Sarah Foot is inclined to accept Michael Wood's argument that William's chronicle draws on a lost life of \u00c6thelstan. She cautions, however, that we have no means of discovering how far William \"improved\" on the original.\nIn Dumville's view, \u00c6thelstan has been regarded by historians as a shadowy figure because of an ostensible lack of source material, but he argues that the lack is more apparent than real. Charters, law codes, and coins throw considerable light on \u00c6thelstan's government. The scribe known to historians as \"\u00c6thelstan A\", who was responsible for drafting all charters between 928 and 935, provides very detailed information, including signatories, dates, and locations, illuminating \u00c6thelstan's progress around his realm. \"\u00c6thelstan A\" may have been Bishop \u00c6lfwine of Lichfield, who was close to the king. By contrast with this extensive source of information, no charters survive from 910 to 924, a gap which historians struggle to explain, and which makes it difficult to assess the degree of continuity in personnel and the operation of government between the reigns of Edward and \u00c6thelstan. Historians are also paying increasing attention to less conventional sources, such as contemporary poetry in his praise and manuscripts associated with his name.\nLegacy.\nThe reign of \u00c6thelstan has been overshadowed by the achievements of his grandfather, Alfred the Great, but he is now considered one of the greatest kings of the West Saxon dynasty. Modern historians endorse the view of twelfth-century chronicler William of Malmesbury that \"no one more just or more learned ever governed the kingdom\". Frank Stenton and Simon Keynes both describe him as the one Anglo-Saxon king who will bear comparison with Alfred. In Keynes's view he \"has long been regarded, with good reason, as a towering figure in the landscape of the tenth century\u00a0... he has also been hailed as the first king of England, as a statesman of international standing\". David Dumville describes \u00c6thelstan as \"the father of mediaeval and modern England\", while Michael Wood regards Offa, Alfred, and \u00c6thelstan as the three greatest Anglo-Saxon kings, and \u00c6thelstan as \"one of the more important lay intellectuals in Anglo-Saxon history\".\n\u00c6thelstan is regarded as the first King of England by modern historians. Although it was his successors who would achieve the permanent conquest of Viking York, \u00c6thelstan's campaigns made this success possible. His nephew Edgar called himself King of the English and revived the claim to rule over all the peoples of Britain. Simon Keynes argued that \"the consistent usages of Edgar's reign represent nothing less than a determined reaffirmation of the polity created by \u00c6thelstan in the 930s\". Historian Charles Insley, however, sees \u00c6thelstan's hegemony as fragile: \"The level of overlordship wielded by \u00c6thelstan during the 930s over the rest of Britain was perhaps not attained again by an English king until Edward I.\" George Molyneaux argues that:\nThe tendency of some modern historians to celebrate \u00c6thelstan as \"the first king of England\" is, however, problematic, since there is little sign that in his day the title \"rex Anglorum\" was closely or consistently tied to an area similar to that which we consider England. When \u00c6thelstan's rule was associated with any definite geographical expanse, the territory in question was usually the whole island of Britain.\nSimon Keynes saw \u00c6thelstan's law-making as his greatest achievement. His reign predates the sophisticated state of the later Anglo-Saxon period, but his creation of the most centralised government England had yet seen, with the king and his council working strategically to ensure acceptance of his authority and laws, laid the foundations on which his brothers and nephews would create one of the wealthiest and most advanced systems of government in Europe. \u00c6thelstan's reign built upon his grandfather's ecclesiastical programme, consolidating the ecclesiastical revival and laying the foundation for the monastic reform movement later in the century.\n\u00c6thelstan's reputation was at its height when he died. According to Sarah Foot, \"He found acclaim in his own day not only as a successful military leader and effective monarch but also as a man of devotion, committed to the promotion of religion and the patronage of learning.\" Later in the century, \u00c6thelweard praised him as a very mighty king worthy of honour, and \u00c6thelred the Unready, who named his eight sons after his predecessors, put \u00c6thelstan first as the name of his eldest son. In his biography of \u00c6thelred, Levi Roach commented, \"The king was clearly proud of his family and the fact that \u00c6thelstan stands atop this list speaks volumes: though later overtaken by Alfred the Great in fame, in the 980s it must have seemed as if everything had begun with the king's great-uncle (a view with which many modern historians would be inclined to concur).\"\nMemory of \u00c6thelstan then declined until it was revived by William of Malmesbury, who took a special interest in him as the one king who had chosen to be buried in his own house. William's account kept his memory alive, and he was praised by other medieval chroniclers. In the early sixteenth century William Tyndale justified his English translation of the Bible by stating that he had read that King \u00c6thelstan had caused the Holy Scriptures to be translated into Anglo-Saxon. From the sixteenth century onwards, Alfred's reputation became dominant, and \u00c6thelstan largely disappeared from popular consciousness. Sharon Turner's \"History of the Anglo-Saxons\", first published between 1799 and 1805, played a crucial role in promoting Anglo-Saxon studies, and he helped to establish Brunanburh as a key battle in English history, but his treatment of \u00c6thelstan was slight in comparison with Alfred. Charles Dickens had only one paragraph on \u00c6thelstan in his \"Child's History of England\", and although Anglo-Saxon history was a popular subject for nineteenth-century artists, and Alfred was frequently depicted in paintings at the Royal Academy between 1769 and 1904, there was not one picture of \u00c6thelstan.\nWilliams comments: \"If \u00c6thelstan has not had the reputation which accrued to his grandfather, the fault lies in the surviving sources; \u00c6thelstan had no biographer, and the \"Chronicle\" for his reign is scanty. In his own day he was 'the roof-tree of the honour of the western world'.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58526", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58526", "title": "Lists of monarchs in the British Isles", "text": " \nLists of monarchs in the British Isles are lists of monarchs that have reigned over the various kingdoms and other states that have existed in the British Isles throughout recorded history. They include monarchs of Britain as a whole, and monarchs of states that covered part or whole of what are now England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales and the Isle of Man.\nEngland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIreland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScotland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWales.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "58527", "revid": "1260740805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58527", "title": "Finitely generated abelian group", "text": "Commutative group where every element is the sum of elements from one finite subset\nIn abstract algebra, an abelian group formula_1 is called finitely generated if there exist finitely many elements formula_2 in formula_3 such that every formula_4 in formula_3 can be written in the form formula_6 for some integers formula_7. In this case, we say that the set formula_8 is a \"generating set\" of formula_3 or that formula_10 \"generate\" formula_3. So, finitely generated abelian groups can be thought of as a generalization of cyclic groups.\nEvery finite abelian group is finitely generated. The finitely generated abelian groups can be completely classified.\nExamples.\nThere are no other examples (up to isomorphism). In particular, the group formula_15 of rational numbers is not finitely generated: if formula_16 are rational numbers, pick a natural number formula_17 coprime to all the denominators; then formula_18 cannot be generated by formula_16. The group formula_20 of non-zero rational numbers is also not finitely generated. The groups of real numbers under addition formula_21 and non-zero real numbers under multiplication formula_22 are also not finitely generated.\nClassification.\nThe fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups can be stated two ways, generalizing the two forms of the fundamental theorem of \"finite\" abelian groups. The theorem, in both forms, in turn generalizes to the structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain, which in turn admits further generalizations.\nPrimary decomposition.\nThe primary decomposition formulation states that every finitely generated abelian group \"G\" is isomorphic to a direct sum of primary cyclic groups and infinite cyclic groups. A primary cyclic group is one whose order is a power of a prime. That is, every finitely generated abelian group is isomorphic to a group of the form\nformula_23\nwhere \"n\" \u2265 0 is the \"rank\", and the numbers \"q\"1, ..., \"q\"\"t\" are powers of (not necessarily distinct) prime numbers. In particular, \"G\" is finite if and only if \"n\" = 0. The values of \"n\", \"q\"1, ..., \"q\"\"t\" are (up to rearranging the indices) uniquely determined by \"G\", that is, there is one and only one way to represent \"G\" as such a decomposition.\nThe proof of this statement uses the basis theorem for finite abelian group: every finite abelian group is a direct sum of primary cyclic groups. Denote the torsion subgroup of \"G\" as \"tG\". Then, \"G/tG\" is a torsion-free abelian group and thus it is free abelian. \"tG\" is a direct summand of \"G\", which means there exists a subgroup \"F\" of \"G\" s.t. formula_24, where formula_25. Then, \"F\" is also free abelian. Since \"tG\" is finitely generated and each element of \"tG\" has finite order, \"tG\" is finite. By the basis theorem for finite abelian group, \"tG\" can be written as direct sum of primary cyclic groups.\nInvariant factor decomposition.\nWe can also write any finitely generated abelian group \"G\" as a direct sum of the form\nformula_26\nwhere \"k\"1 divides \"k\"2, which divides \"k\"3 and so on up to \"k\"\"u\". Again, the rank \"n\" and the \"invariant factors\" \"k\"1, ..., \"k\"\"u\" are uniquely determined by \"G\" (here with a unique order). The rank and the sequence of invariant factors determine the group up to isomorphism.\nEquivalence.\nThese statements are equivalent as a result of the Chinese remainder theorem, which implies that formula_27 if and only if \"j\" and \"k\" are coprime.\nHistory.\nThe history and credit for the fundamental theorem is complicated by the fact that it was proven when group theory was not well-established, and thus early forms, while essentially the modern result and proof, are often stated for a specific case. Briefly, an early form of the finite case was proven by Gauss in 1801, the finite case was proven by Kronecker in 1870, and stated in group-theoretic terms by Frobenius and Stickelberger in 1878. The finitely \"presented\" case is solved by Smith normal form, and hence frequently credited to , though the finitely \"generated\" case is sometimes instead credited to Poincar\u00e9 in 1900; details follow.\nGroup theorist L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Fuchs states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As far as the fundamental theorem on finite abelian groups is concerned, it is not clear how far back in time one needs to go to trace its origin. ... it took a long time to formulate and prove the fundamental theorem in its present form ...\nThe fundamental theorem for \"finite\" abelian groups was proven by Leopold Kronecker in 1870, using a group-theoretic proof, though without stating it in group-theoretic terms; a modern presentation of Kronecker's proof is given in , 5.2.2 Kronecker's Theorem, https://. This generalized an earlier result of Carl Friedrich Gauss from \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" (1801), which classified quadratic forms; Kronecker cited this result of Gauss's. The theorem was stated and proved in the language of groups by Ferdinand Georg Frobenius and Ludwig Stickelberger in 1878. Another group-theoretic formulation was given by Kronecker's student Eugen Netto in 1882.\nThe fundamental theorem for \"finitely presented\" abelian groups was proven by Henry John Stephen Smith in , as integer matrices correspond to finite presentations of abelian groups (this generalizes to finitely presented modules over a principal ideal domain), and Smith normal form corresponds to classifying finitely presented abelian groups.\nThe fundamental theorem for \"finitely generated\" abelian groups was proven by Henri Poincar\u00e9 in 1900, using a matrix proof (which generalizes to principal ideal domains). This was done in the context of computing the\nhomology of a complex, specifically the Betti number and torsion coefficients of a dimension of the complex, where the Betti number corresponds to the rank of the free part, and the torsion coefficients correspond to the torsion part.\nKronecker's proof was generalized to \"finitely generated\" abelian groups by Emmy Noether in 1926.\nCorollaries.\nStated differently the fundamental theorem says that a finitely generated abelian group is the direct sum of a free abelian group of finite rank and a finite abelian group, each of those being unique up to isomorphism. The finite abelian group is just the torsion subgroup of \"G\". The rank of \"G\" is defined as the rank of the torsion-free part of \"G\"; this is just the number \"n\" in the above formulas.\nA corollary to the fundamental theorem is that every finitely generated torsion-free abelian group is free abelian. The finitely generated condition is essential here: formula_28 is torsion-free but not free abelian.\nEvery subgroup and factor group of a finitely generated abelian group is again finitely generated abelian. The finitely generated abelian groups, together with the group homomorphisms, form an abelian category which is a Serre subcategory of the category of abelian groups.\nNon-finitely generated abelian groups.\nNote that not every abelian group of finite rank is finitely generated; the rank 1 group formula_28 is one counterexample, and the rank-0 group given by a direct sum of countably infinitely many copies of formula_30 is another one.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58528", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58528", "title": "221 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 221 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Asina and Rufus/Lepidus (or, less frequently, year 533 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 221 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58530", "revid": "1309252095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58530", "title": "300 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 300 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Corvus and Pansa (or, less frequently, year 454 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 300 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58533", "revid": "1315055329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58533", "title": "Alliteration", "text": "Repetition of consonant sounds in literature\nAlliteration is the repetition of syllable-initial consonant sounds between nearby words, or of syllable-initial vowels if the syllables in question do not start with a consonant. It is often used as a literary device. A common example is \"Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers\".\nHistorical use.\nThe word \"alliteration\" derives from the Latin word \"littera\", meaning \"letter of the alphabet\". It was first coined in a Latin dialogue by the Italian humanist Giovanni Pontano in the 15th century. Pontano, however, used the term in a broader sense to include examples where the repeated letter does not start a word or a stressed syllable, e.g. .\nAlliteration is used in the alliterative verse of Old English poems like Beowulf, Middle English poems like Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Old Norse works like the Poetic Edda, and in Old High German, Old Saxon, and Old Irish. It was also used as an ornament to suggest connections between ideas in classical Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit poetry.\nToday, alliteration is used poetically in various languages around the world, including German, Mongolian, Hungarian, American Sign Language, Somali, Finnish, and Icelandic. It is also used in music lyrics, article titles in magazines and newspapers, and in advertisements, business names, comic strips, television shows, video games and in the dialogue and naming of cartoon characters.\nTypes of alliteration.\nThere are several concepts to which the term \"alliteration\" is sometimes applied:\nExamples of use.\nPoetry.\nPoets can call attention to certain words in a line of poetry by using alliteration. They can also use alliteration to create a pleasant, rhythmic effect. In the following poetic lines, notice how alliteration is used to emphasize words and to create rhythm:\nAlliteration can also add to the mood of a poem. If a poet repeats soft, melodious sounds, a calm or dignified mood can result. If harsh, hard sounds are repeated, on the other hand, the mood can become tense or excited. In this poem, alliteration of the s, l, and f sounds adds to a hushed, peaceful mood:\nExamples from alliterative verse.\nSource:\nRhetoric.\nLiterary alliteration has been used in various spheres of public speaking and rhetoric. It can also be used as an artistic constraint in oratory to sway the audience to feel some type of urgency, or another emotional effect. For example, S sounds can imply danger or make the audience feel as if they are being deceived. Other sounds can likewise generate positive or negative responses. Alliteration serves to \"intensify any attitude being signified\".\nAn example is in John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address, in which he uses alliteration 21 times. The last paragraph of his speech is given as an example here.\n\"Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you. With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that here on Earth God's work must truly be our own.\" \u2014 John F. Kennedy\nExamples of alliteration from public speeches.\nTranslation can lose the emphasis developed by this device. For example, in the accepted Greek text of Luke 10:41 the repetition and extension of initial sound are noted as Jesus doubles Martha's name and adds an alliterative description: \u039c\u03ac\u03c1\u03b8\u03b1 \u039c\u03ac\u03c1\u03b8\u03b1 \u03bc\u03b5\u03c1\u03b9\u03bc\u03bd\u1fb7\u03c2 (Martha, Martha, merimnas). This is lost in the English NKJ and NRS translations \"Martha, Martha, you are \"w\"orried and distracted by many things.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58534", "revid": "44941471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58534", "title": "White-nosed coati", "text": "Species of mammal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe white-nosed coati (Nasua narica), also known as the coatimundi (), is a species of coati and a member of the family Procyonidae (raccoons and their relatives). Local Spanish names for the species include antoon, gato solo, pizote, and tej\u00f3n, depending upon the region. It weighs about , and the nose-to-tail length of the species is about with about half of that being the tail length. However, small females can weigh as little as , while large males can weigh as much as .\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe white-nosed coati is distributed from as far north as Flagstaff, Arizona, New Mexico, through Mexico, Central America, and the far northwestern region of Colombia near the border with Panama. It inhabits wooded areas in tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests and in tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests at elevations from sea level to .\nCoatis from Cozumel Island have been treated as a separate species, the Cozumel Island coati, but the vast majority of recent authorities treat it as a subspecies, \"N.\u00a0narica nelsoni\", of the white-nosed coati. They are smaller than white-nosed coatis from the adjacent mainland (\"N.\u00a0n.\u00a0yucatanica\"), but when compared more widely to white-nosed coatis the difference in size is not as clear. The level of other differences also support its status as a subspecies rather than separate species.\nWhite-nosed coatis have also been found in Florida, where they were introduced. It is unknown precisely when introduction occurred; an early specimen in the Florida Museum of Natural History, labeled an \"escaped captive\", dates to 1928. There are several later documented cases of coatis escaping captivity, and since the 1970s there have been a number of sightings, and several live and dead specimens of various ages have been found. These reports have occurred over a wide area of southern Florida, and there is probable evidence of breeding, indicating that the population is well established.\nAlthough rare, there is evidence of the White-nosed coatis in Texas in Cameron County, as far back as 1877. Other sightings occurred in Maverick (1938), Brewster (1939), and Uvalde (1943) counties. There were sightings in Aransas and Kerr Counties, and three sightings were reported in the Big Bend area from 1959 to 1966. A possible escaped pet was discovered as road-kill near Abilene in 1975. The latest two sightings were on 27 Jul 1994, near the Guadalupe River and on 29 Apr 1995, a coati was seen crossing State Road 175, north of the intersection of Texas State Highway 77 and State Road 175.\nBehavior and ecology.\nUnlike many of their Procyonidae cousins, such as raccoons and kinkajous, coatis are diurnal and therefore do much of their foraging during the day. \nPollination.\nWhite-nosed coatis are known pollinators of the balsa tree, as observed in a study of a white-nosed coati population in Costa Rica. The coati were observed inserting their noses into the flowers of the tree and ingesting nectar, while the flower showed no subsequent signs of damage. Pollen from the flowers covers the face of the coati following feeding and disseminates through the surrounding forest following detachment. Scientists observed a dependent relationship between the balsa tree, which provides a critical resource of hydration and nutrition to the white-nosed coati when environmental resources are scarce, and the coati, which increases proliferation of the tree through pollination.\nFeeding habits.\nThe white-nosed coati is an omnivore and forages mostly on the ground for small vertebrates, fruits, carrion, insects, snakes, and eggs. It can climb trees easily and uses its tail for balancing.\nReproduction and life span.\nAdult male coatis live solitary lives except during the mating season. Female coatis live in groups, called bands, with their offspring, including males less than two years old. Gestation lasts 10 to 11 weeks, and litters consist of two to seven young. The young are weaned at four months and reach adult size at 15 months.\nCoatis can live as long as seven years in the wild. In captivity, the average lifespan is about 14 years, but some coatis in human care have been known to live into their late teens.\nConservation.\nThe International Union for Conservation of Nature lists both the white-nosed coati and the South American coati as least concern. However, the coati is an endangered species in New Mexico.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58540", "revid": "36367370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58540", "title": "Leah Goldberg", "text": "Israeli poet (1911\u20131970)\nLeah Goldberg or Lea Goldberg (; May 29, 1911, K\u00f6nigsberg \u2013 January 15, 1970, Jerusalem) was a prolific Hebrew-language poet, author, playwright, literary translator, illustrator and painter, and comparative literary researcher. \nHer writings are considered classics of Israeli literature.\nBiography.\nLeah Goldberg was born to a Jewish Lithuanian family from Kaunas, however her mother traveled to the nearby German city of K\u00f6nigsberg (today, Russian Kaliningrad) in order to give birth in better medical conditions. When asked about her place of birth, Goldberg often stated \"Kaunas\" rather than K\u00f6nigsberg.\nWhen the First World War broke out, three-year-old Goldberg had to escape with her parents to the Russian Empire, where they spent a year in hard conditions. In Russia, her mother gave birth to a baby boy, Immanuel, who died before reaching his first birthday.\nAccording to Goldberg's autobiographical account, when the family traveled back to Kaunas in 1919, a Lithuanian border patrol stopped them and accused her father of being a \"Bolshevik spy\". They locked the father in a nearby abandoned stable, and abused him by preparing his execution every morning for about a week and cancelling it at the last moment. When the border guards finally let the family go, Goldberg's father was in a serious mental state. He eventually lost his ability to function normally and left Kaunas and his family to receive treatment, though it is unclear what his fate was and why he never returned to his family. Goldberg and her mother became very close and lived together until Leah Goldberg's death.\nGoldberg's parents spoke several languages, though Hebrew was not one of them. However, Goldberg learned Hebrew at a very young age, as she received her elementary education in a Jewish Hebrew-language school. She began keeping a diary in Hebrew when she was 10 years old. Her first diaries still show limited fluency in Hebrew and the influence of the Russian language, but she was determined to write in Hebrew and mastered the language within a short period of time. Even though she was fluent and literate in various European languages, Goldberg wrote her published works, as well as her personal notes, only in Hebrew. In 1926, when she was 15 years old, she wrote in her personal diary, \"The unfavourable condition of the Hebrew writer is no secret to me [...] Writing in a different language than Hebrew is the same to me as not writing at all. And yet I want to be a writer [...] This is my only objective.\"\nGoldberg received a PhD from the Universities of Berlin and Bonn in Semitic languages and German. Her dissertation on the Samaritan Targum was supervised by Paul E. Kahle. Her erudition and renown was such that a leading newspaper in Palestine excitedly reported her plans to immigrate to that country. In 1935, she settled in Tel Aviv, where she joined a group of Zionist Hebrew poets of Eastern-European origin known as \"Yachdav\" ( \"together\"). This group was led by Avraham Shlonsky and was characterised by adhering to Symbolism especially in its Russian Acmeist form, and rejecting the style of Hebrew poetry that was common among the older generation, particularly that of Haim Nachman Bialik.\nShe never married and lived with her mother, first in Tel Aviv and later in Jerusalem. Goldberg was a heavy smoker, and in her late years she became aware of the damage in this habit, as reflected in her poem \"About the Damage of Smoking\". In the spring of 1969, she was diagnosed with breast cancer. After removing one of her breasts, her physicians were optimistic. Goldberg went on a short visit to Switzerland, but returned in a bad physical condition, as the cancer spread through her body. She died on 15 January 1970. Goldberg received the Israel Prize posthumously, her mother accepted the prize in her name.\nLiterary career.\nGoldberg worked as a high-school teacher she and earned a living writing rhymed advertisements until she was hired as an editor by the Hebrew newspapers Davar and Al HaMishmar. She also worked as a children\u2019s book editor at Sifriyat Po'alim publishing house, while also writing theatre reviews and literary columns. In 1954 she became a literature lecturer at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, advancing to senior lecturer in 1957 and full professor in 1963, when she was appointed head of the university's Department of Comparative Literature. \nGoldberg wrote Hebrew poetry, drama, and children's literature. Goldberg's books for children, among them \"Room for Rent\" and \"Miracles and Wonders\" (\"\u05e0\u05d9\u05e1\u05d9\u05dd \u05d5\u05e0\u05e4\u05dc\u05d0\u05d5\u05ea\", \"nisim veniflaot\"), have become classics of Hebrew-language children's literature.\nWith exemplary knowledge of seven languages, Goldberg also translated numerous foreign literary works exclusively into Modern Hebrew from Russian, Lithuanian, German, Italian, French, and English. Of particular note is her \"magnum opus\" of translation, Tolstoy's epic novel \"War and Peace\", as well as translations of Rilke, Thomas Mann, Chekhov, Akhmatova, Shakespeare, and Petrarch, plus many other works including reference books and works for children.\nAnd This is the Light.\nIn 1946, Goldberg published her only novel, And This is the Light (Hebrew: \"\u05d5\u05d4\u05d5\u05d0 \u05d4\u05d0\u05d5\u05e8\", \"Vehu Ha'Or\", \"And he is the light\"; \"it is the light\"; \"this is the light\"). The novel had a strong autobiographical basis, and has been received as shedding much light on the rest of her work.\nThe novel is set in the summer of 1931, with twenty-year-old protagonist Nora Krieger visiting her Lithuanian hometown while on holiday from her studies at a university in Berlin. Although she has planned to show how mature she has become, Nora instead experiences unrequited love, bad memories, and observation brought on by the limits imposed on her a classist and antisemitic society.\nIn 2011, \"The Toby Press\" released Barbara Harshav's English translation \"And This is the Light\".\nRoom for Rent.\nIn 1948, Goldberg wrote an Israeli children's short story and poem titled Room for Rent (Hebrew: \"\u05d3\u05d9\u05e8\u05d4 \u05dc\u05d4\u05e9\u05db\u05d9\u05e8\", \"Dira Lehaskir\", \"Flat for Rent\"), which is based on an Eastern European folktale and was first published in Hebrew in the periodical \"Mishmar LaYladim\".\nIn 1959, \"Room for Rent\" was republished as a children's book with illustrations by Shoshana Heiman - reportedly as a reaction to the Wadi Salib riots during which Israelis of Middle Eastern descent protested against racist government officials and discrimination.\nIn 1970, \"Room for Rent\" was again republished as a children's book with new illustrations by Shmuel Katz.\nIn the 1990s, \"Room for Rent\" was first translated into English by Bracha Kaplan as \"A Flat for Rent\".\nIn 2016, Ilan Greenfield of Jerusalem-based Gefen Publishing House commissioned San Antonio native Jessica Setbon to retranslate \"Room for Rent\" into English; the new English version of Goldberg's children's book was released in 2017 along with Katz's illustrations.\nThe plot of Goldberg's short story takes place in a five storey house that is home to four animals: a Cornish Hen on the first floor, a Cuckoo on the second, a black Cat on the third, and a Squirrel on the fourth; Sir Reginald Mouse lived on the fifth and topmost floor, but had recently moved out.\nThe four remaining tenants, who also happen to be friends, decide to rent out the fifth room and wait for a new neighbor to move into it.\nFour animals show up at the house and although they find the room nice, they offend the tenants with their reasons for not moving in: the hardworking Miss Ant dislikes Miss Hen for being fat and lazy; the motherly Mrs. Rabbit despises the Cuckoo for abandoning her sons in other birds' nests despite her visiting them daily; the white-skinned Snortimus Pig gets chased out for refusing to be neighbors with the black-furred Cat; and the musical Nightingale complains that the Squirrel is noisy whenever she cracks the pecans she shares with her friends.\nLastly, a kind Dove arrives at the house and inspects the room. When asked if she wants to stay, the Dove agrees for she wishes to be friends and neighbors with Miss Hen, the Cuckoo, the Cat, and the Squirrel despite their habits.\nConsidered a classic in Israeli literature, \"Room for Rent\" is read to children to teach them the timely message of tolerating diverse people's races, beliefs, and practices, and that friends come in all shapes and sizes.\nOn March 19, 2020, former Israeli president Reuven Rivlin uploaded a YouTube video of himself narrating \"Room for Rent\".\nLiterary style and influences.\nGoldberg was widely read in Russian, German, and French poetry. Symbolism and Acmeism were strong influences on her style. Her poetry is notable for coherence and clarity, and for an emphasis on ideas over baroque forms. Nili Gold, Modern Hebrew Literature scholar and editor of the English translation of \"And This is the Light\", has noted Goldberg's \"high aestheticism, musicality, and unique merging of intellect and humanity\".\nGoldberg's poetics perceive the general in the specific: a drop of dew represents vast distances and the concrete reflects the abstract. Her poetry has been described as \"a system of echoes and mild reverberations, voices and whispers,\" that recognizes the limitations of the poem and language. Her work is minor and modest, taking a majestic landscape like the Jerusalem hills and focusing on a stone, a thorn, one yellow butterfly, a single bird in the sky.\nUnlike many of her contemporary peers, most notably Nathan Alterman, Goldberg avoided outright political poetry, and did not contribute occasional poetry to Hebrew periodicals with overt current-affairs discourse.\nAcclaim and remembrance.\nGoldberg received in 1949 the Ruppin Prize (for the volume \"Al Haprikh\u00e1\")\nand, in 1970, the Israel Prize for literature.\nThe American Hebraist, Gabriel Preil, wrote a poem about Goldberg: \"Leah's Absence\".\nIn 2011, Goldberg was announced as one of four great Israeli poets who would appear on Israel's currency (together with Rachel Bluwstein, Shaul Tchernichovsky, and Natan Alterman).\nThe design of the 100 new shekel banknote includes the portrait of Leah Goldberg and her poem \"In the land of my love the almond tree blossoms\" in microprint.\nOn May 29, 2013, Google commemorated what would have been Goldberg's 102nd birthday by uploading a Google Doodle in which the website's logo is made up of the characters and setting from her children's book \"Room for Rent\".\nMany of Goldberg's songs, including those written before the establishment of the State of Israel, have been performed and recorded over the years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58541", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58541", "title": "I'm Sorry I'll Read That Again", "text": ""}
{"id": "58543", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58543", "title": "Bridgwater", "text": "Market town in Somerset, England\nBridgwater is a historic market town and civil parish in Somerset, England. The town had a population of 41,276 at the 2021 census. Bridgwater is at the edge of the Somerset Levels, in level and well-wooded country. The town lies along both sides of the River Parrett; it has been a major inland port and trading centre since the industrial revolution. Most of its industrial bases still stand today. Its larger neighbour, Taunton, is linked to Bridgwater via a canal, the M5 motorway and the Bristol\u2013Exeter railway line.\nHistorically, the town had a politically radical tendency. The Battle of Sedgemoor, where the Monmouth Rebellion was finally crushed in 1685, was fought nearby. Notable buildings include the Church of St Mary and Blake Museum, which is a largely restored house in Blake Street and was the birthplace of Admiral Blake in 1598. The town has an arts centre and plays host to the annual Bridgwater Guy Fawkes Carnival.\nToponymy.\nIt is thought that the town was originally called Brigg, meaning \"quay\". It has been argued that the name may instead come from the Old English \"brycg\" (gang plank) or Old Norse \"bryggja\" (quay), though this idea has been opposed on etymological grounds. In the Domesday Book the town is listed as Brugie, while Brugia was also used. After the Norman invasion the land was given to Walter of Douai, hence becoming known variously as Burgh-Walter, Brugg-Walter and Brigg-Walter, eventually corrupted to Bridgwater. An alternative version is that it derives from \"Bridge of Walter\" (i.e. Walter's Bridge).\nHistory.\nBridgwater proper.\nBridgwater is mentioned both in the \"Domesday Book\" and in the earlier \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" dating from around 800, owing its origin as a trade centre to its position at the mouth of the chief river in Somerset. It was formerly part of the Hundred of North Petherton. In a legend of Alfred the Great, he burnt some cakes while hiding in the marshes of Athelney near Bridgwater, after the Danish invasion in 875, while in 878 the major engagement of the Battle of Cynwit may have been at nearby Cannington.\nWilliam Briwere was granted the lordship of the Manor of Bridgwater by King John in 1201, and founded Bridgwater Friary. Through Briwere's influence, King John granted three charters in 1200; for the construction of Bridgwater Castle, for the creation of a borough, and for a market. Bridgwater Castle was a substantial structure built in Old Red Sandstone, covering a site of 8 or 9\u00a0acres (32,000 to 36,000\u00a0m2). A tidal moat, up to wide in places, flowed about along the line of the modern thoroughfares of Fore Street and Castle Moat, and between Northgate and Chandos Street. The main entrance opposite the Cornhill was built with a pair of adjacent gates and drawbridges. In addition to a keep, located at the south-east corner of what is now King Square, documents show that the complex included a dungeon, chapel, stables and a bell tower. Built on the only raised ground in the town, the castle controlled the crossing of the town bridge. A thick portion of the castle wall and water gate can still be seen on West Quay, and the remains of a wall of a building that was probably built within the castle can be viewed in Queen Street. The foundations of the tower forming the north-east corner of the castle are buried beneath Homecastle House. William Briwere also founded St John's hospital which, by the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII, was worth the substantial sum of almost 121 pounds, as well as starting the construction of the town's first stone bridge. William Briwere also went on to found the Franciscan Bridgwater Friary in the town.\nDuring the 13th century Second Barons' War against Henry III, Bridgwater was held by the barons against the King. Other charters were granted by Henry III in 1227 (confirmed in 1318, 1370, 1380), which gave Bridgwater a guild merchant which was important for the regulation of trade, allowing guild members to trade freely in the town, and to impose payments and restrictions upon others. Bridgwater's peasants under Nicholas Frampton took part in the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, sacking Sydenham House, murdering the local tax collectors and destroying the records.\nBridgwater was incorporated by charter of Edward IV (1468), confirmed in 1554, 1586, 1629 and 1684. Parliamentary representation as a borough constituency began in 1295 and continued until 1870, when the original borough constituency was disenfranchised for corruption; from 4 July 1870 the town was incorporated within the county constituency of West Somerset. When parliamentary seats were redistributed for the 1885 general election, a new county division of Bridgwater was created. A variety of markets were granted to the town during the Middle Ages including a Midsummer fair (on 24 June), one at the beginning of Lent was added in 1468, and one at Michaelmas. The importance of these markets and fairs for the sale of wool and wine, and later of cloth, declined after medieval times. The shipping trade of the port revived after the construction of the new dock in 1841, and corn and timber have been imported for centuries.\nGunpowder Plotter Guy Fawkes is remembered during the carnival season, including a grand illuminated procession through Bridgwater town centre, which culminates in the Squibbing. Bridgwater, being staunchly Protestant at the time of the plot, celebrated the thwarting of the conspiracy with particular enthusiasm.\nIn the English Civil War the town and the castle were held by the Royalists under Colonel Edmund Wyndham, a personal acquaintance of the King. British history might have been very different had his wife, Lady (Crystabella) Wyndham, been a little more accurate with a musket shot that missed Oliver Cromwell but killed his aide de camp. Eventually, with many buildings destroyed in the town, the castle and its valuable contents were surrendered to the Parliamentarians on 21 July 1645. The castle itself was deliberately destroyed (slighted) the following year, while in 1651 Colonel Wyndham made arrangements for Charles II to flee to France following the Battle of Worcester.\nFollowing the restoration of the monarchy, in 1663 the non-conformist Reverend John Norman, vicar from 1647 to 1660, was one of several 'religious fanatics' confined to their homes by Lord Stawell's militia. A large religious meeting house, thought to have been Presbyterian, was demolished and its furniture burned on the Cornhill in 1683. By 1688, matters had calmed down enough for a new chapel, Christ Church, to be founded in Dampiet Street, the congregation of which became Unitarian in 1815.\nIn the 1685 Monmouth Rebellion, the rebel Duke of Monmouth was proclaimed King on the Cornhill in Bridgwater and in other local towns. He eventually led his troops on a night-time attack on the King's position near Westonzoyland. Surprise was lost when a musket was accidentally discharged, and the Battle of Sedgemoor resulted in defeat for the Duke. He was later beheaded at the Tower of London, and nine locals were executed for treason.\nThe Chandos Glass Cone was built in 1725 as a glasswork firing kiln by James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos as part of an industrial development. After a short period of use for glassmaking it was converted for the production of pottery, bricks and tiles, which continued until 1939. The majority of the brickwork cone was demolished in 1943. The bottom has been preserved and scheduled as an ancient monument.\nBridgwater became the first town in Britain to petition the government to ban slavery, in 1785.\nThe population of Bridgwater in 1841 was 9,899.\nIn 1896, the trade unionists of Bridgwater's brick and tile industry were involved a number of strikes. The Salisbury government sent troops to the town to clear the barricades by force after the reading of the Riot Act.\nA by-election in 1938 enabled the town to send a message to the government and Hitler, when an Independent anti-appeasement candidate, journalist Vernon Bartlett was elected MP.\nIn World War II the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal formed part of the Taunton Stop Line, designed to prevent the advance of a German invasion. Pillboxes can still be seen along its length. The first bombs fell on Bridgwater on 24 August 1940, destroying houses on Old Taunton Road, and three men, three women and one child were killed. Later a prisoner of war camp was established at Colley Lane, holding Italian prisoners. During the preparations for the invasion of Europe, American troops were based in the town.\nThe first council estate to be built was in the 1930s at Kendale Road, followed by those at Bristol Road. The 1950s saw the start of a significant increase in post-war housebuilding, with council house estates being started at Sydenham and Rhode Lane and the former cooperative estate near Durleigh.\nOn 4 November 2011 West Quay alongside the River Parrett and 19 adjoining properties were evacuated after a stretch of the retaining wall partially collapsed after heavy rain and flooding. The old hospital in Salmon Parade, which was built in 1813, closed in 2014 and has been replaced with a community hospital in Bower Lane. This provides a maternity unit and 30 inpatient beds. The old hospital site has been sold for development at a price of \u00a31.6 million, and may be turned into a hotel.\nPort of Bridgwater.\nIn the medieval period the River Parrett was used to transport Hamstone from the quarry at Ham Hill. Bridgwater was part of the Port of Bristol until the Port of Bridgwater was created in 1348, covering of the Somerset coast line, from the Devon border to the mouth of the River Axe. Under an 1845 Act of Parliament the Port of Bridgwater extends from Brean Down to Hinkley Point in Bridgwater Bay, and includes parts of the River Parrett (to Bridgwater), River Brue and the River Axe.\nHistorically, the main port on the river was at Bridgwater; the river was bridged at this point: the first bridge was built in 1200. Quays were built in 1424; another quay, the \"Langport slip\", was built in 1488 upstream of the Town Bridge. A Customs House was sited at Bridgwater, on West Quay; and a dry dock, launching slips and a boat yard on East Quay. The river was navigable, with care, to Bridgwater Town Bridge by vessels. By trans-shipping into barges at the Town Bridge the Parrett was navigable as far as Langport and (via the River Yeo) to Ilchester. After 1827, it was also possible to transfer goods to Taunton via the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal at Huntworth. A floating harbour was constructed between 1837\u20131841 and the canal was extended to the harbour. The harbour area contained flour mills, timber yards and chandlers.\nShipping to Bridgwater expanded with the construction of Bridgwater Docks, and reached a peak between 1880 and 1885; with an average of 3,600 ships per year entering the port. Bridgwater also built some 167 ships; the last one was the \"Irene\", launched in 1907. Peak tonnage occurred in 1857, with 142 vessels totalling .\nDunball wharf was built in 1844 by Bridgwater coal merchants, and was formerly linked to the Bristol &amp; Exeter Railway by a rail track which crossed the A38. In 1875, the local landowner built The Dunball Steam Pottery &amp; Brick &amp; Tile Works adjacent to the wharf.\nAlthough ships no longer dock in the town of Bridgwater, of cargo were handled within the port authority's area in 2006, most of which was stone products via the wharf at Dunball. It is no longer linked to the railway system. The link was removed as part of the railway closures made as a result of the Beeching Report in the 1960s. Dunball railway station, which had opened in 1873, was closed to both passengers and goods in 1964. All traces of the station, other than \"Station Road\" have been removed. The wharf is now used for landing stone products, mainly marine sand and gravels dredged in the Bristol Channel. Marine sand and gravel accounted for of the total tonnage of using the Port facilities in 2006, with salt products accounting for in the same year.\nSomerset Council acts as the Competent Harbour Authority for the port, and has provided pilotage services for all boats over using the river since 1998, when it took over the service from Trinity House. Pilotage is important because of the constant changes in the navigable channel resulting from the large tidal range, which can exceed on spring tides.\nIts historic estates include the manor of Sydenham.\nGovernance.\nThe Local Government Act 1972 removed the historic status of Bridgwater as a Borough, as it became part of the district of Sedgemoor, which had its headquarters in King Square.\nBridgwater Town Council, which is based at Bridgwater Town Hall, was created in 2003, with sixteen elected members representing six wards of the town; Bower (three), Eastover (two), Hamp (three), Quantock (three), Sydenham (three) and Victoria (two). With powers or functions over allotments, bus shelters, making of byelaws, cemeteries, clocks, crime prevention, entertainment and arts, highways, litter, public buildings, public conveniences, recreation, street lighting, tourism, traffic calming, community transport and war memorials.\nAll other local services for the town are delivered by the unitary authority of Somerset Council, which took over from Sedgemoor and Somerset County Council on 1 April 2023.\nBridgwater is a county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election. The current MP, elected in 2024, is Ashley Fox, a member of the Conservative Party.\nIn 2018, Diogo Rodrigues became the first Portuguese national to be elected as a Mayor in England, also becoming Bridgwater's youngest ever mayor.\nMembers of Parliament.\nThe Bridgwater constituency has been represented in Parliament since 1295. After the voting age was lowered in January 1970, Susan Wallace became the first 18-year-old to vote in the UK, during the 1970 Bridgwater by-election that elected Tom King, who took the title Baron King of Bridgwater in 2001.\nAt the 2010 General Election, Bridgwater became part of the new Bridgwater and West Somerset constituency. Following the completion of the 2023 review of Westminster constituencies, the seat was re-established as plain Bridgwater for the 2024 general election, primarily formed from the now abolished of Bridgwater and West Somerset seat but excluding the area comprising the former District of West Somerset.\nBridgwater was in the South West England constituency for elections to the European Parliament, prior to Brexit in 2020.\nTwinning.\nBridgwater is twinned with the following towns and cities:\nGeology.\nBridgwater is centred on an outcrop of marl in an area dominated by low-lying alluvial deposits. There are local deposits of gravels and sand. It is situated in a level and well-wooded area, on the edge of the Somerset Levels. To the north are the Mendip range and on the west the Quantock hills. The town lies along both sides of the River Parrett, from its mouth, which then flows to discharge into the Bridgwater Bay National Nature Reserve. It consists of large areas of mud flats, saltmarsh, sandflats and shingle ridges, some of which are vegetated. It has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest since 1989, and is designated as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention. The risks to wildlife are highlighted in the local Oil Spill Contingency Plan.\nClimate.\nAlong with the rest of South West England, Bridgwater has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country. The annual mean temperature is approximately . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures. The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately . In winter mean minimum temperatures of are common. In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south-west of England, however convective cloud sometimes forms inland, reducing the number of hours of sunshine. Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1,600\u00a0hours. Most of the rainfall in the south-west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection. Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions, which is when they are most active. In summer, a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms. Average rainfall is around . About 8\u201315 days of snowfall is typical. November to March have the highest mean wind speeds, and June to August have the lightest winds. The predominant wind direction is from the south-west.\nDemography.\nBridgwater had a population of 35,800 according to the 2001 census (up from 22,718 in 1951, 7,807 in 1831 and 3,634 in 1801).\nEconomy.\nAs early as 1300, the port exported wheat, peas and beans to Ireland, France and Spain, and by 1400 was also exporting cloth from Somerset and the adjoining counties. By 1500 it was the largest port in Somerset, later becoming the fifth largest in England, until eclipsed by Bristol in the 18th century. In its heyday, imports included wine, grain, fish, hemp, coal and timber. Exports included wheat, wool, cloth, cement, bricks and tiles. Unlike Bristol, Bridgwater was never involved in the slave trade and, in 1785, was the first town in Britain to petition the government to ban it.\nThe Bridgwater ship the \"Emanuel\" was one of three that took part in Martin Frobisher's 1577 search for the Northwest Passage. In 1828, 40 ships were registered in the port, averaging 60\u00a0tons each.\nIndustry.\nBridgwater was the leading industrial town in Somerset and remains a major centre for manufacturing. A major manufacturing centre for clay tiles and bricks in the 19th century, including the famous \"Bath brick\", were exported through the port. In the 1890s there were a total of 16 brick and tile companies, and 24 million bricks per annum were exported during that decade alone. These industries are celebrated in the Somerset Brick and Tile Museum on East Quay.\nThese industries collapsed in the aftermath of World War II due to the failure to introduce mechanisation, although the automated Chilton Tile Factory, which produced up to 5 million tiles each year, lasted until 1968. The importance of the Bath Brick declined with the advent of detergents and other cleaning products. Dunware ponds used to make bricks and can still be found along the paths.\nDuring the 19th century, Castle House (originally named Portland Castle after Portland cement), reputedly the first domestic house in the UK to be built from concrete, was constructed in 1851 by John Board, a local brick and tile manufacturer. The building is now Grade II* listed, and in 2004 was featured in the BBC television programme \"Restoration\".\nIn the 19th century, Bridgwater was also home to a number of iron foundries. George Hennet's Bridgwater Iron Works worked on bridges, railways and machinery for Brunel and Robert Stephenson. This location allowed the import by boat of raw materials from Wales and the dispatch of finished work to south Devon using the Bristol &amp; Exeter Railway. The carriage workshops for the latter were on an adjacent site. The works passed to his son and then traded as Hennet, Spink &amp; Else. Some of the ironwork was produced for the Royal Albert Bridge at Saltash, Cornwall. In 1873 it became the Bridgwater Engineering Company Limited but this failed in 1878. W&amp;F Wills Ltd produced steam locomotives and fingerposts.\nAt the start of World War II, the government built a factory to manufacture high explosives at Puriton near Bridgwater. Called ROF Bridgwater, the plant became owned by BAE Systems and closed after decommissioning was completed in July 2008.\nBritish Cellophane Ltd, a joint venture between La Cellophane SA and Courtaulds opened a major factory producing cellophane in Bridgwater 1937. The factory produced Bailey bridges during World War II for the invasion of Europe. Bought by UCB Films in 1996, the town suffered a blow in 2005 when Innovia Films closed the cellophane factory. At one time the factory employed around 3,000 people, although at the time of closure this had been reduced to just 250. However recovery has begun with the establishment of new businesses on the \"Express Park\" business park including the relocation of Gerber Juice and new enterprises Toolstation and Interpet as well as the Exel centre for the NHS Logistics Authority.\nBridgwater is now a major centre of industry in Somerset, with industries including the production of plastics, engine parts, industrial chemicals, and foods. Bowerings Animal Feed Mill is now the only industry still located at the docks. Being close to the M5 motorway and halfway between Bristol and Exeter, Bridgwater is also home to two major distribution centres, while retailer Argos has a regional distribution centre based at Huntworth. A new \u00a3100\u00a0m Regional Agricultural Business Centre opened in 2007, following construction which began in 2006.\nAs of 2021, a commercial development campus named Gravity, targeting the low-carbon economy, is planned for the former ROF Bridgwater site north of Bridgwater.\nLandmarks.\nBridgwater is home to the Somerset Brick and Tile Museum, built on part of the former Barham Brothers site (brick and tile manufacturers between 1857 and 1965). Castle House was built in 1851 and was one of the first to make extensive use of concrete demonstrating \"an innovative interpretation of traditional masonry features in concrete\".\nThe Bridgwater Town Mill, originating in the Middle Ages is located at the end of Blake Street, and there are plans to develop it as an extension to the Blake Museum\nA house in Blake Street, largely restored, is believed to be the birthplace of Robert Blake in 1598, and is now the Blake Museum. It was built in the late 15th or early 16th century, and has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II* listed building. His statue from 1898 by F. W. Pomeroy has been repositioned from the front of the Corn Exchange to face down Cornhill. The public library by E Godfrey Page dates from 1905.\nSydenham House was previously a manor estate built in the early 16th century, which was refronted and rebuilt after 1613. Its owners were on the losing side in the Civil War and again in the Monmouth Rebellion. It now stands in the grounds of the former British Cellophane plant. In 2012 EDF purchased the site, including the Grade II listed 16th century building. In 2015 the industrial site was razed to the ground. It is intended for construction of temporary accommodation for 1,000 workers involved in the construction of Hinkley Point C nuclear power station.\nTransport.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs trade expanded during the Industrial Revolution, Bridgwater was linked to Taunton by the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal (1827), although initially it ran from a basin south of Bridgwater at Huntworth. As trade grew docks were built in the town, linked to an extension of the canal, with both opening in 1841. The docks were dredged by a scraper-dredger Bertha similar to the one Isambard Kingdom Brunel had designed for the Bristol Floating Harbour. 14 June 1841 saw the opening of the Bristol &amp; Exeter Railway from Bristol to Bridgwater. The railway also opened a coach and wagon works in the town; the last of the buildings was in 2005 scheduled for demolition. Bridgwater railway station, designed by Brunel is now a Grade II listed building. An end to the unequal competition between rail and canal came in 1867 when the Bristol &amp; Exeter Railway purchased the canal. A number of local branches were also built, for example to serve the Northgate Brewery (now replaced by a car park north of Angel Crescent) and the former British Cellophane factory. The Somerset and Dorset branch line to Edington was opened in 1890. Its former Bridgwater station is now occupied by J Sainsbury.\nThe importance of shipping and the docks started to decline after 1886, the year in which the opening of the Severn Tunnel caused a severe drop in coal imports by sea. The situation worsened as the railways were extended into Somerset and beyond, and ships became too big for the port. The last commercial use of the docks was when coal imports ceased on 31 July 1971, and although they now house a marina they are currently little used. The surrounding quays have been developed for housing, although the remains of wooden quays on the riverbank can still be seen. All but a small remnant of the \"mump\" (a huge mound of spoil from the original dock excavations) was removed in the 1980s to make way for the development on the north side of the dock. Due to the port, ship building was also an important industry, and around 140 ships were built in the town during the 19th century by companies including David Williams, Joseph Gough, Watsons and William Lowther. F J Carver and Son owned a small dry dock on East Quay and constructed the last ship to be built in the town\u00a0\u2014 the \"Irene\". The former associated industry of rope making is commemorated in street furnishings and paving on East Quay and in the name of \"Ropewalk\" street.\nThe Drove Bridge, which marks the current extent of the Port of Bridgwater is the nearest to the mouth and the newest road bridge to cross the river. With a span of , the bridge was constructed as part of the Bridgwater Northern Distributor road scheme (1992), and provides a navigable channel which is wide with headroom at normal spring high tides. Upstream of this is the retractable Telescopic Bridge, built in 1871 to the design of Sir Francis Fox, the engineer for the Bristol &amp; Exeter Railway. It carried a railway siding over the river to the docks, but had to be movable, to allow boats to proceed upriver. An section of railway track to the east of the bridge could be moved sideways, so that the main girders could be retracted, creating a navigable channel which was wide. It was manually operated for the first eight months, and then powered by a steam engine, reverting to manual operation in 1913, when the steam engine failed. The bridge was last opened in 1953, and the traverser section was demolished in 1974, but public outcry at the action resulted in the bridge being listed as a Scheduled Ancient Monument, and the rest of the bridge was kept. It was later used as a road crossing, until the construction of the Chandos road bridge alongside it, and is now only used by pedestrians. Parts of the steam engine were moved to Westonzoyland Pumping Station Museum in 1977.\nThe next bridge is the Town Bridge. There has been a bridge here since the 13th century, when Bridgwater was granted a charter by King John. The present bridge was designed by R. C. Else and G. B. Laffan, and the cast iron structure was completed in 1883. It replaced an earlier bridge, which was the first cast iron bridge to be built in Somerset when it was completed in 1797. The stone abutments of that bridge were reused by the later bridge, which formed the only road crossing of the river in Bridgwater until 1958. Above the bridge there were two shoals, called The Coals and The Stones, which were a hazard to barge traffic on the river, and bargees had to choose carefully when to navigate the river, to ensure that there was sufficient water to carry them over these obstructions. In March 1958 a new reinforced concrete road bridge, the Blake Bridge, was opened as part of a bypass to take traffic away from the centre of Bridgwater. It now carries the A38 and A39 roads. On the southern edge of Bridgwater there is a bridge which carries the Bristol &amp; Exeter Railway across the River Parrett. Isambard Kingdom Brunel designed a brick bridge, known as the Somerset Bridge, with a span but a rise of just . Work started in 1838 and was completed in 1841. Brunel left the scaffold supporting the centre of the bridge in place as the foundations were still settling but was forced to remove it in 1843 to reopen the river for navigation. Brunel demolished the brick arch and had replaced it with a timber arch within six months without interrupting the traffic on the railway. This was in turn replaced in 1904 by a steel girder bridge. Slightly further east is a modern concrete bridge which carries the M5 motorway over both the river and the railway line. It was started in 1971 and opened in 1973.\nBridgwater is served twice daily by Berrys Coaches 'Superfast' service to and from London.\nEducation.\nThe primary and infant schools in Bridgwater include: Eastover Community Primary School, Hamp Community Junior School, Sedgemoor Manor School, St George's Church School, St John and St Francis Primary School, St Joseph's Catholic Primary School, St Mary's Primary School, Somerset Bridge Primary School, Spaxton Church of England Primary School, Westover Green Primary School and Hamp Nursery and Infants School. Secondary schools include: Robert Blake Science College, Brymore Academy, Chilton Trinity School, Bridgwater College Academy which was previously known as Sydenham School and is a Performing and Visual Arts College, and Haygrove School which has specialist Language College status. Special schools in the town include: Elmwood Special School, New Horizon Centre School and Penrose School.\nBridgwater was selected as the first town in the South West, outside Bristol, to be selected for the UK government's Building Schools for the Future (BSF) initiative, which aimed to rebuild and renew nearly every secondary school in England. Within Bridgwater, BSF was to redevelop all of the four secondary schools and two special provision schools at an expected cost of around \u00a3100 million. This included the complete relocation and rebuilding of a new school combining both the Haygrove and Penrose Schools. In July 2010, several components of the Bridgwater BSF programme were cancelled and others were singled out for further review. Following a meeting with Education Secretary Michael Gove, Bridgwater MP Ian Liddell-Grainger announced that the fate of all six affected schools would be subject to review, including the ones that were cancelled.\nFurther Education is provided by Bridgwater and Taunton College which was formerly Bridgwater Technical School. In February 2018 the southern hub of the National College for Nuclear was launched at the Bridgwater campus, intended to service the building and operation of the Hinkley Point C nuclear power station.\nSchools which have since closed include: Bridgwater Grammar School For Boys (originally the Poplar School of Engineering And Navigation, then Dr Morgan's Grammar School For Boys, which became Haygrove School with the Somerset County Council introduction of Comprehensive education), Bridgwater Grammar School For Girls, also in Durleigh, and Westover Senior Council School.\nReligious sites.\nAmong several places of worship the chief is the Church of St Mary; this has a north porch and windows dating from the 14th century, besides a slender spire; but it has been much altered by restoration. It possesses a fine painted reredos, and has been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building.\nThere is also Christ Church Unitarian Chapel on Dampiet Street, built in 1688, it still retains many of its original features from 1688 and its remodeling in 1788. It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II* listed building.\nThe Church of St John the Baptist in Blake Place was built by the Revd. John More Capes and designed by John Brown in 1843. Elim Pentecostal Church on Church Street was a public house after being used as a church and is now a shop. There is a Salvation Army Citadel located in Moorland Road, on the Sydenham Estate and St Joseph's Roman Catholic in Binford Place.\nClasses in Buddhism and meditation were held in the Quaker Meeting House on Friarn Street. In 2014 the building was put up for auction and purchased by local Muslims to become Bridgwater Islamic Centre.\nArts.\nNearing Bridgwater on the M5 motorway it is possible to see the \"Willow Man\" sculpture, a striding human figure constructed from willow, sometimes called the \"Angel of the South\" (see also \"Angel of the North\"). Standing tall, it was created by sculptor Serena de la Hey and is the largest known sculpture in willow, a traditional local material.\nBridgwater is the home of Music on the Quantocks, Somerset's most successful music series specialising in world-class classical music. The series also features performance poetry, jazz and folk. Most events are staged in venues such as churches, barns and halls surrounding Bridgwater and attract audiences up to 850 people at an event. Artists featured have included Sir James Galway, The Sixteen, Nigel Kennedy, The Hilliard Ensemble, The Tallis Scholars, Roger McGough and John Cooper Clarke.\nThe Bridgwater Arts Centre was opened on 10 October 1946, the first community arts centre opened in the UK with financial assistance from the newly established Arts Council of England. It is situated in a Grade I listed building in the architecturally protected Georgian \"Castle Street\", designed by Benjamin Holloway for the Duke of Chandos, and built over the site of the former castle. Holloway was also the architect of the Lions building on West Quay, constructed around 1730. Bridgwater Arts Centre was the venue for the first post-war meeting of the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne in 1947.\nSomerset Film (then Somerset Film &amp; Video) opened their community media centre, The Engine Room, in March 2003. The centre allows the public to drop in and use the computers and equipment for free (on certain days) to teach themselves how to edit video, design websites or screen films at open evenings. Cameras and edit suites can also be hired and day courses on using creative software are run regularly.\nCastle Street was used as a location in the 1963 film \"Tom Jones\". Horror writer and film journalist Kim Newman was educated at Dr Morgan's school in Bridgwater, and set his 1999 experimental novel \"Life's Lottery\" in a fictionalised version of the town (Sedgwater). A sailor who had sailed \"from Bridgwater with bricks\" and found \"There was lice in that bunk in Bridgwater\" features in James Joyce's Ulysses (Chapter 16).\nIn 2013, community radio station Access FM was launched on 104.2 FM. This was the first truly local radio station for the town since BCR FM was bought by Choice Media in 2006 which eventually became The Breeze. Access FM was initiated as a function of Bridgwater's YMCA and as such held the same values as the charity. The community station began with the intentions of providing youth based programming to 16- to 25-year-olds in order to give the younger generation something new and productive to get involved with. Many of the voluntary presenters were aged 16 \u2013 20 and the station acted as the first step into the industry. Access FM had mild success within the community, attending multiple events and marking new ground for local radio in the area. The station was the first in history to provide live broadcast coverage from Bridgwater Guy Fawkes Carnival in 2014.\nIn October 2015 the station went through a re-branding process under a revised management team, creating Sedgemoor FM, which launched on 4 April 2016. Sedgemoor FM broadcasts on 104.2FM across Bridgwater and the rest of the district, providing listeners with programming specific for the community.\nAnnual events.\nBridgwater is now best known for the illuminated \"Bridgwater Guy Fawkes Carnival\" that attracts around 150,000 people from around the country and overseas. Now held annually on the Saturday after the first Friday of November (i.e. - the nearest Saturday to 5 November), it was original held on the first Thursday of November, later moving to the first Friday. It consists of a display of 100 or more entries, many consisting of large vehicles (\"Carnival carts\") up to long, festooned with dancers (or team member in tableaux) and up to 22,000 lightbulbs, that follows a route over 2 to 3 hours. Later in the evening of the Carnival, there is the simultaneous firing of large fireworks (known as squibs) in the street outside the town hall, known as \"squibbing\".\nBridgwater Fair normally takes place in September\u00a0\u2014 it starts on the last Wednesday in September and lasts four days. The fair takes place on St Matthew's Field, better known locally as the Fair Field. The fair is now a funfair, ranked as second largest in England after the Nottingham Goose Fair. It originated in 1249 as a horse and cattle fair, lasting for eight days near St Matthew's day (21 September), giving the venue its name. During the first weekend of July, the annual \"Somerfest\" arts festival is held in Bridgwater. The event includes an extensive programme of rock, jazz and classical music, dance, drama and visual arts with national and local participants.\nA new annual event was launched in 2014, taking place in May each year. The Bridgwater Science Festival brings science-related family entertainment and activities to town. The event takes place in the Town Hall, and works with local organisations and the University of the West of England.\nAn annual Food and Drink Festival also takes place each year at the Bridgwater Town Hall. The Bridgwater Food and Drink Festival takes place at the beginning of March each year and features the best in local produce with cooking demonstrations taking place from local chefs.\nMedia.\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC West and ITV West Country. Bridgwater's local radio stations are BBC Radio Somerset, Heart West, Greatest Hits Radio South West and Sedgemoor FM. Local newspapers include the \"Somerset County Gazette\", \"SomersetLive\", and \"Bridgwater Mercury\".\nSport and leisure.\nSport.\nBridgwater United F.C. are a football club based at Fairfax Park. The original version of the club was founded in 1898. The club currently plays in the Southern League Division One South and West. \n&lt;br&gt;\nBridgwater &amp; Albion are Somerset's highest-placed rugby team, playing in South and are based at College Way. It was founded in 1875. \n&lt;br&gt;\nThe cricket club play at The Parks on Durleigh Road. &lt;br&gt;\nBridgwater Hockey Club was founded in 1925 and field four men's teams and three women's teams, playing fixtures at 1610 Leisure Centre.\nLeisure.\nEast Bridgwater Sports Centre offers badminton courts, outside football pitches, squash courts and a fitness room.\nBridgwater had a series of swimming pools from 1890 until 2009. The first pool, on Old Taunton Road, was replaced by the \"Bridgwater Lido\" on Broadway, which was opened in 1960 by the Mayor, Alderman Mrs A. B. Potterton. The lido, which had three pools, a diving bay and paddling pool, was demolished in the late 1980s to make way for a supermarket and to fund the indoor \"Sedgemoor Splash\" swimming pool in Mount Street, which opened in 1991. In 2009, after the local council were unable to raise the funds needed to upgrade the pool, it was closed and demolished to make way for another supermarket. A new pool was planned as part of the Building Schools for the Future (BSF) rebuild of Chilton Trinity School,\nThe town is both on the route of the Samaritans Way South West and the River Parrett Trail.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "58546", "revid": "93616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58546", "title": "Kocha", "text": ""}
{"id": "58547", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58547", "title": "River Parrett", "text": "River in Dorset and Somerset, England\nThe River Parrett is a river that flows through the counties of Dorset and Somerset in South West England, from its source in the Thorney Mills springs in the hills around Chedington in Dorset. Flowing northwest through Somerset and the Somerset Levels to its mouth at Burnham-on-Sea, into the Bridgwater Bay nature reserve on the Bristol Channel, the Parrett and its tributaries drain an area of \u00a0\u2013 about 50\u00a0per cent of Somerset's land area, with a population of 300,000.\nThe Parrett's main tributaries include the Rivers Tone, Isle, and Yeo, and the River Cary via the King's Sedgemoor Drain. The long river is tidal for up to Oath. Between Langport and Bridgwater, the river falls only , so it is prone to frequent flooding in winter and during high tides. Many approaches have been tried since at least the medieval period to reduce the incidence and effect of floods and to drain the surrounding fields.\nIn Anglo-Saxon times, the river formed a boundary between Wessex and Dumnonia. It later served the Port of Bridgwater and enabled cargoes to be transported inland. The arrival of the railways led to a decline in commercial shipping, and the only working docks are at Dunball. Human influence on the river has left a legacy of bridges and industrial artefacts. The Parrett along with its connected waterways and network of drains supports an ecosystem that includes several rare species of flora and fauna. The River Parrett Trail has been established along the banks of the river.\nCourse.\nThe River Parrett is long, flowing roughly south to north from Dorset through Somerset. Its source is in the Thorney Mills springs in the hills around Chedington, from that of the River Axe, in nearby Beaminster, which runs in the opposite direction to the English Channel at Axmouth in Devon. The two rivers give their names to Parrett and Axe Parish Council.\nFrom its source, the Parrett runs north through South Perrott and under the Salisbury to Exeter railway line before passing to the west of North Perrott and Haselbury Plucknett. It then runs through fields between Merriott to the west and West Chinnock and Chiselborough to the east. Passing under the A303 road to the east of South Petherton, the river flows between East Lambrook and Bower Hinton west of Martock and then towards Kingsbury Episcopi, through Thorney and Muchelney, passing the remains of Muchelney Abbey before entering Langport, which is about north of Chiselborough. Below Thorney Bridge the river's banks have been raised to mitigate flooding.\nThe Parrett then flows northwest for approximately another to Bridgwater through the Somerset Levels past Aller, close to the Aller and Beer Woods and Aller Hill biological Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). The sluice gate (formerly a lock built in the late 1830s) at the deserted medieval village of Oath marks the river's tidal limit. The river then crosses Southlake Moor. The next major landmark along the river's course is Burrow Mump, an ancient earthwork owned by the National Trust. The river then arrives in Burrowbridge, where the old pumping station building was once a museum. Flowing north, it passes Langmead and Weston Level SSSI, and on past the land-drainage pumping station at Westonzoyland.\nFurther downstream the river passes the village of Huntworth before flowing under the M5 motorway at Dunwear. As it enters Bridgwater it passes under Somerset and Hamp Bridges, and past Bridgwater Castle, which had a tidal moat up to wide in places, fed by water from the river. From Bridgwater to the sea is approximately . The King's Sedgemoor Drain empties into the River Parrett next to the wharf at Dunball; it enters via a clyce (or clyse), which is a local word for a sluice. The clyce has been moved about downstream from its original position and now obstructs the entrance to the small harbour next to the wharf.\nThe course of the river below Bridgwater is now somewhat straighter than in former times. The village of Combwich lies adjacent to a channel in the river known as \"Combwich Reach\"; from here the Parrett flows to the Bristol Channel past the Steart Peninsula. Cartographic evidence indicates that in the early 18th century the peninsula was longer than at present. A \"neck\" started to form in the peninsula, and by 1802 the tip had broken off to form Stert Island. Fenning Island also broke away but has rejoined the peninsula. Much of the peninsula's northern end eroded away or now exists as \"islands\" visible at low tide within an intertidal area of mud known as the Stert Flats.\nThe mouth at Burnham-on-Sea is a nature reserve where the river flows into Bridgwater Bay on the Bristol Channel. In addition to the rivers Parrett, Brue and Washford, several of the man-made drainage ditches, including the River Huntspill from the Somerset Levels, and the Cannington Brook from the \"Pawlett Hams\", also discharge into the bay.\nFlow and tidal bore.\nThe Parrett has only one gauging station, at Chiselborough, fairly close to the source. It measures flow from the first of the drainage basin, or about 4.3\u00a0per cent of the total. The mean flow measured by the Environment Agency at Chiselborough was , with a peak of on 30 May 1979 and a minimum of over a seven-day period in August 1976. Tributaries of the Parrett with gauging stations include the Yeo, Isle, Cary, and Tone.\nThe lower Parrett has a fall of only between Langport and Bridgwater. To the northeast of the River Parrett's mouth, the Bristol Channel becomes the Severn Estuary, which has a tidal range of . The rate and direction of flow of the Parrett is therefore dependent on the state of the tide on the River Severn. In common with the lower reaches of the River Severn, the Parrett experiences a tidal bore. Certain combinations of the tides funnel the rising water into a wave that travels upstream at about , against the river's current.\nHydrology and water quality.\nNear the source at Chiselborough the typical level range for the depth of the river is to but has reached a maximum of . The mean flow rate is . By the time it reaches Gaw Bridge the normal level range is to and a highest reading of . At West Quay in Bridgwater where the river is tidal the highest astronomical tide level is above ordnance datum (AOD).\nFor the purpose of water quality measurement, the river is divided into five water body areas by the Environment Agency. In 2015, both the area from the source to Broad River around Crewkerne and the area from Broad River to Lopen Brook are rated good for chemical quality and moderate for ecological quality. The area from Lopen Brook to the River Isle, around Martock and South Petherton, is rated good for chemical quality, poor for ecological quality and poor overall. From the River Isle to River Yeo around Muchelney, chemical quality is rated good, and ecology is rated moderate. The section around Langport to the West Sedgemoor Drain continues to rate good for chemical quality and moderate for ecological quality, as does the final area leading to Bridgwater Bay.\nHistory.\nThe origin of the name Parrett is unclear, but several derivations from the Celtic languages used in Wales have been suggested. Priestley-Evans suggests, \"Parrett has been said to be a form of the Welsh \"pared\", a partition, and that it was the name which the Welsh people of Somerset and Devon gave to that river because it was at one time the dividing line between themselves and the Saxons\". Another spelling, \"parwydydd\", is also translated as `partition'. Another explanation from Welsh, \"Peraidd\", meaning \"the sweet or delicious river\", has also been suggested. An alternative explanation, based on Celtic, is a derivation from \"Pedair\" or \"Pedride\" from \"pedr\", meaning four and the Old Cornish \"Rit\" meaning `flow', which in this case would relate to the four flows or streams: the Tone, Yeo, Isle and Parrett. This is based on the explanation given in Ekwall's 1928 book \"English River-Names\". Whichever derivation is correct, the name Parrett and its spelling variations have been in use since the Anglo-Saxon era, as evidenced by the addition of \"-tun\" onto river names as seen in the local towns North Petherton and South Petherton. The spelling \"Pedred\" and \"Pedrida\" are also mentioned in connection with the Parrett. The Oxford Dictionary of British Place-Names states only that the name is a 'pre-English river-name of obscure origin'.\nLandscape.\nThe River Parrett, the Bristol Channel and the Severn Estuary are believed to have been used for riverine bulk transportation of people and supplies in Somerset under Roman and later Anglo-Saxon and Norman occupation. Roman Somerset, which lasted for over 250\u00a0years until around the beginning of the 5th century, had various settlements, including Bath (\"Aquae Sulis\"), Ilchester (\"Lindinis\") and lead mines at Charterhouse; and four roads surrounding the Somerset Levels. There is evidence of two Roman ports on the Parrett. The port at Combwich, on the west bank, was ill-recorded before its destruction by quarrying and erosion. The other at Crandon Bridge on the east bank near where the current King's Sedgemoor Drain enters the Parrett, was in use between the first and the fourth centuries. Evidence of an extensive site with storehouses was found in the mid-1970s, during motorway construction works. The Crandon Bridge site may have been linked by a probable Roman road over the Polden Hills to the Fosse Way, at Ilchester. Ilchester, the largest Roman town in Somerset, was a port with large granaries, sited where the Fosse Way crossed the Ilchester Yeo by means of a paved ford. The Yeo was navigable by small craft all the way to the Parrett allowing military supplies to be brought by boat directly to Ilchester; however, disembarkation at Crandon Bridge and use of the Polden Hills roadway allowed more rapid movement to Ilchester. The Yeo may already have been straightened and canalised before Roman occupation.\nThe Parrett was established as the border between the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex and the Brythonic kingdom of Dumnonia in 658, following the Dumnonians' defeat at the Battle of Peonnum that year. This natural border endured for almost a century until further fighting between the Anglo-Saxons and Britons in the mid-8th century, when the border shifted west to its current location between the modern ceremonial counties of Somerset and Devon. It is thought a ford, usable only at low tide, crossed the river near its mouth, between Combwich and Pawlett (east bank). This crossing, at the western end of the Polden Hills, was known since Roman times and lay on the route of a Saxon \"herepath\". It was here, or in the immediate vicinity, that Hubba, the Danish raider, was defeated and killed by Odda in 878. In the \"Domesday Book\" Combwich was known as Comich, which means \"the settlement by the water\", from the Old English \"cumb\" and \"wic\". The ford was later replaced by a ferry, one of which was in operation from at least the 13th century. In the 15th century the ferry was regarded as part of the \"King's Highway\", and both passengers and cattle were carried in the 16th and 17th centuries. Records of the joint Manorial ownership and costs of the ferry exist for 1589 and 1810. The \"White House Inn\", a licensed victualler and part-owner of the ferry, traded on the Pawlett bank from 1655 to 1897; the building was retained as a farm dwelling for another 20\u00a0years. The Combwich river crossing, which was a main route until the 18th century, fell out of use due to turnpike trusts improving what were to become the A38 and A39 roads, and traffic went via Bridgwater; the former inn was demolished c.\u00a01930.\nAfter the departure of the Romans, the low-lying Somerset Levels appear to have been abandoned, as the archaeological record shows that they were flooded and the former Roman landscape covered with a thick layer of alluvial deposits. Recovery of the levels involved both the construction of sea walls and the containment of the Parrett. Celtic Christianity came to the remoter areas of the Somerset Levels, making use of \"island\" sites. Glastonbury Abbey, possibly founded in the 7th century (or earlier), was nearby and had undertaken extensive water management to enable it to bring materials by boat to Glastonbury, albeit not via the Parrett. Muchelney Abbey, founded in the mid-8th century, was sited at the confluence of the Parrett and its tributaries, the rivers Isle and Yeo; and Athelney Abbey lay on another tributary, the River Tone. These three abbeys together with the Bishop of Bath and Wells were major landowners with fishing and riparian rights, often conflicting, on these rivers. They gained financially from improvements to land and waterways due to the resulting greater fertility of their lands and the increased rents that they were able to charge their tenants.\nContinuing land reclamation and control of the Parrett was a long-running cycle of neglect followed by improvement. Work was carried out on the upper River Parrett basin in the Middle Ages by Glastonbury Abbey. Abbot Michael's survey of 1234 showed of meadow recovered around the \"island\" of Sowy; from the accounts in the Abbey's rent books, this had increased to by 1240. Flooding of adjacent moor land was partially addressed in the 13th century by building a number of embankment walls to contain the Parrett. These included Southlake Wall, Burrow Wall and Lake Wall. The River Tone was also diverted by the Abbot of Athelney and other land owners into a new embanked channel, joining the Parrett upstream from its original confluence. After the dissolution of the monasteries in the 16th century, much of the former abbey lands came under the control of the Crown, particularly King's Sedgemoor, which had been wholly owned by Glastonbury Abbey, with Henry VI's Courts of Sewers made responsible for maintaining existing drainage and various Commissions made responsible for land improvements. Further reclamation work was carried out over the next 500\u00a0years. In 1597, of land were recovered near the Parrett estuary; a few years later near Pawlett were recovered by means of embankments; three further reclamations, totalling , were undertaken downstream of Bridgwater by 1660. Kings James I, Charles I, and Charles II continued to improve King's Sedgemoor.\nAttempts were also made to improve navigation on the lower river. Between 1677 and 1678, Sir John Moulton cut a new channel at \"Vikings Creek\" on the Horsey Levels to remove a large meander; the old river bed soon silted up, providing of new land. A further scheme was proposed in 1723 to improve navigation, shorten the journey time for boats, and recover land by obtaining an act of Parliament to make an artificial cut across the Steart Peninsula. Eventually, after much debate, the cut was not made due to lack of land owner support and concerns over costs and risks. The English Civil War put a stop to most reclamation work; however, in 1764 a clyse was built at Dunball to contain tidal influences on a run-off stream near King's Sedgemoor. Extensive land recovery was undertaken in the Somerset Levels by land owners between 1770 and the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, as part of a general scheme of agricultural improvements, including improvements to the Brue Valley and to King's Sedgemoor. The latter involved the connection of various drainage schemes into a new hand-dug channel connected to the clyse at Dunball\u00a0\u2013 the King's Sedgemoor Drain. Further drainage improvements were needed in the 19th century, which involved the use of mechanical pumping engines, originally steam powered but later powered by electricity. In January 1940, further improvements were funded by the Ministry of Supply, during the Second World War, as \"Priority War Work\" during the construction of Royal Ordnance Factory (ROF) Bridgwater. This involved doubling the width of the King's Sedgemoor Drain at its western end and the excavation of the River Huntspill. In the longer-term this provided a drain for the Brue valley, but in war-time the scheme provided a guaranteed daily supply of of water for the ROF.\nThe town of Bridgwater, from \"Brigewaltier\" (place at) the bridge held by Walter of Douai, or alternatively \"Brugie\" from Old English \"brycg\" meaning gang plank between ships, or from Old Norse \"brygja\" meaning quay, was founded as a new borough about 1200; it had a castle and a market and became a port in its own right. It was the major port for Somerset which, around the Quantocks, the Brendon Hills and the Tone valley, was mainly agricultural, producing arable crops and vegetables to supply the new industrial towns. Combwich was the traditional River Parrett pilots' harbour from at least the 14th century. It also served as a port for the export of local produce and, from the 15th century, the import of timber. Until the late 1930s, when the creek silted up, coastal shipping served Combwich's local brick and coal yard.\nIn the medieval era the river was used to transport Hamstone from the quarry at Ham Hill for the construction of churches throughout the county. Later, in the 19th century, coal from south Wales, for heating, Bath bricks, bricks and tiles would be carried. Brick making, which had been carried out intermittently in Bridgwater from the 17th century, by the late 18th century had expanded into an industry based on permanent brickyards in the Bridgwater area adjacent to the Parrett. The brick and tile industry made use of the local alluvial clays and the Parrett's coastal trade, using ketches mostly based at Bridgwater to transport their products, which were heavy and bulky, and to bring in coal to heat the kilns. The 19th century industrial revolution opened up mass markets leading to further expansion of the industry, particularly beginning in 1850 when the duty (tax) on bricks was abolished. Brick and tile works, making use of river transport, were opened in the 1840s and 1850s south of Bridgwater at North Petherton and Dunwear, in Bridgwater itself, and downstream at Chilton Trinity, Combwich, Puriton and Pawlett. Numerous brickworks were also opened elsewhere in Somerset, but many of them used the railways to transport their products; some 264 sites are listed in the Somerset Industrial Archaeological Society's \"Gazetteer of sites\". Silt was also dredged from the river over a stretch between Somerset Bridge and Castle Fields, Bridgwater, to make Bath bricks, an early abrasive cleaning material patented in 1827.\nPort of Bridgwater.\nBridgwater was part of the Port of Bristol until the Port of Bridgwater was created in 1348, covering of the Somerset coast line, from the Devon border to the mouth of the River Axe. Under the Bridgwater Navigation and Quays Act 1845 (8 &amp; 9 Vict. c. lxxxix) the Port of Bridgwater extends from Brean Down to Hinkley Point in Bridgwater Bay, and includes parts of the River Parrett (to Bridgwater), River Brue and the River Axe.\nHistorically, the main port on the river was at Bridgwater, where a span crossed the river from 1200 AD onwards. Quays were built at Bridgwater in 1424, with another quay, the \"Langport slip\", being built in 1488 upstream of the Town Bridge. A custom house was sited at Bridgwater, on West Quay, and a dry dock, launching slips and a boat yard on East Quay. Bridgwater built some 167 ships, the last one being the \"Irene\" launched in 1907.\nThe river was navigable, with care, to Bridgwater Town Bridge by vessels. By trans-shipping goods into barges at the Town Bridge, the Parrett was navigable as far as Langport and (via the River Yeo) to Ilchester. After 1827, it was also possible to transport goods to Taunton via the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal at Huntworth. A floating harbour, known as the \"docks\", was constructed between 1837 and 1841, and the canal was extended through Bridgwater to the floating harbour. The dock area contained flour mills, timber yards and chandlers.\nShipping to Bridgwater expanded with the construction of the docks, which opened on 25 March 1841, and reached a peak in the 19th century between 1880 and 1885, with an average of 3,600 ships per year entering the port. Peak tonnage occurred in 1857, with 142 vessels totaling . In the short term, the opening of the docks increased the profitability of the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal, which carried of cargo in 1840. This peaked in 1847 at of cargo; however, by the mid-1850s the canal was bankrupt due to competition from the railways.\nCombwich Pill, a small creek near the mouth of the river, had been used for shipping since the 14th century. From the 1830s, with the development of the brick and tile industry in the Combwich area, the wharf was used by two local brickyards to import coal and export tiles to Wales and parts of Gloucestershire. This traffic ceased in the 1930s; in the late 1950s the wharf was taken over and upgraded by the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) to bring in heavy materials for the Hinkley Point nuclear power stations. Construction of Hinkley Point A nuclear power station was ordered in 1957, with a scheduled completion date of 1960, but was not completed until 1965. This was followed by Hinkley Point B nuclear power station, which began operation in 1976. It is proposed to use the wharf again for the construction of Hinkley Point C.\nDunball wharf was built in 1844 by Bridgwater coal merchants, and was linked to the Bristol and Exeter Railway by a rail track which crossed the A38. The link was built in 1876, also by coal merchants, and was originally operated as a horse-drawn tramway. In 1875, the local landowner built The Dunball Steam Pottery &amp; Brick &amp; Tile Works adjacent to the wharf.\nThe Bridgwater and Taunton Canal, which had been bought out by the Bristol and Exeter Railway in 1866 and later passed into the control of the Great Western Railway had, by the beginning of the First World War, fallen into disrepair due to lack of trade. This trade, particularly the Wales-Somerset traffic after the opening of the Severn Tunnel in 1886, had been lost to the railways; the canal continued to be used as a source of water. In the mid-1950s, the Port of Bridgwater was importing some of cargo, mainly sand and coal by tonnage, followed by timber and flour. It was also exporting some of bricks and tiles. By then, Bridgwater's brick and tile industry was in terminal decline. In the 1960s, British Rail, the owner of the docks, which were limited by the size of its locks to boats of maximum size , decided that they were commercially non-viable. British Railways offered to sell the docks to any buyer; however, there were no takers, so the docks were closed to river traffic.\nAlthough ships no longer dock in the town of Bridgwater, of cargo were handled within the port authority's area in 2006, most of which was stone products via the wharf at Dunball. It is no longer linked to the railway system. The link was removed in the 1960s as part of the railway closures following the Beeching Report. Dunball railway station, which had opened in 1873, was closed to both passengers and goods in 1964. All traces of the station, other than \"Station Road\", have been removed. The wharf is now used for landing stone products, mainly marine sand and gravels dredged in the Bristol Channel. Marine sand and gravel accounted for of the total tonnage of using the Port facilities in 2006, with salt products accounting for in the same year, while the roll-on roll-off berth at Combwich is used occasionally for the transfer of heavy goods for the two existing Hinkley Point nuclear power stations. With the possible future construction of the two Hinkley Point C nuclear power stations by EDF Energy, it is proposed that Combwich wharf be employed to transfer heavy goods to the sites. Combwich Pill is the only site where recreational moorings are available in the estuary.\nSedgemoor District Council acts as the Competent Harbour Authority for the port, and has provided pilotage services for all boats over using the river since 1998, when it took over the service from Trinity House. Pilotage is important because of the constant changes in the navigable channel resulting from the large tidal range, which can exceed on spring tides. Most commercial shipping travels upriver as far as Dunball wharf, which handles bulk cargoes.\nParrett Navigation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Parrett Navigation was a series of improvements to the river to allow increased boat traffic between Burrowbridge and Thorney. The work, done in the 1830s and 1840s, was made mostly obsolete by the coming of railways in 1853, though some aspects survive to this day.\nBackground.\nTrade on the river upstream of Bridgwater had developed during the 18th century, with barges operating between Bridgwater and Langport, while smaller barges carrying operated on the upper reaches between Langport and Thorney, and along the River Yeo to Long Load Bridge and Ilchester. The channel below the junction with the River Tone had been improved as a result of Acts of Parliament passed in 1699 and 1707, \"for making and keeping the River Tone navigable from Bridgewater to Taunton\", and a third act with a similar purpose was passed in 1804. Traffic on the higher reaches was hindered by shoals in the river and by the Great Bow Bridge at Langport, which consisted on nine small arches, none of them big enough for navigation. All cargoes heading upstream had to be off-loaded from the bigger barges, carried to the other side of the bridge, and reloaded into the smaller barges. Traffic above Langport was sporadic, as the water levels were often inadequate, forcing boats to wait several days for the right conditions before proceeding.\nThe abortive Ivelchester and Langport Navigation scheme had sought to avoid the Great Bow Bridge by making the Portlake Rhine navigable, rebuilding Little Bow Bridge in the centre of Langport, and making a new cut to Bicknell's Bridge. Seven locks, each with a small rise, were planned, but the scheme foundered in 1797 due to financial difficulties. After the cessation of hostilities with France at the beginning of the 19th century, there was renewed interest in canal building in Somerset; the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal was authorised in 1824, the Glastonbury Canal in 1827, and the Chard Canal in 1834.\nWhen the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal was opened in 1827, it joined the Parrett by a lock at Huntworth, where a basin was constructed, but in 1841 the canal was extended to the new floating harbour in Bridgwater, and the Huntworth link was filled in. The canal and river were not re-connected at this point when the canal was restored, because the tidal Parrett, at Huntworth, is a salt water river laden with silt whereas the canal contains fresh water. Not only is there a risk of silt entering the canal, but the salt water cannot be allowed to contaminate the fresh, as the canal is still used for the transport of drinking water for Bridgwater's population.\nConstruction.\nWith the prospect of the Chard Canal in particular damaging trade on the Parrett, four traders from Langport including Vincent Stuckey and Walter Bagehot, who together operated a river freight business, commissioned the engineer Joseph Jones to carry out a survey for the Parrett Navigation which was then put before Parliament. It was supported by Brunel and a large quantity of documentary evidence. Objections from local landowners were handled by including clauses in the act to ensure that surplus water would be channelled to the Long Sutton Catchwater Drain by culverts, siphons, and sluices, and the Parrett Navigation and Canal Act 1836 (6 &amp; 7 Will. 4. c. ci) act of Parliament was passed on 4 July 1836.\nThe Parrett Navigation Act allowed the proprietors, of whom 25 were named, to raise \u00a310,500 in shares and \u00a33,300 by mortgage, with which to make improvements to the river from Burrow Bridge to Langport, to reconstruct the restrictive bridge at Langport, and to continue the improvements as far as Thorney. The River Isle, which joined the Parrett at Muchelney, was to be improved for its first mile, and then the Westport Canal was to be constructed from there to Westport. Locks were planned at Stanmoor, Langport, and Muchelney, with a half-lock at Thorney. An extra lock was added at Oath, when tests revealed that the depth of water would not meet that specified in the act without it. Costs were considerably higher than expected, and a second act of Parliament, the Parrett Navigation Act 1839 (2 &amp; 3 Vict. c. xxxvii), was obtained to allow an extra \u00a320,000 to be raised. The lock at Oath has since been replaced by a sluice gate to control flooding.\nThe section below Langport opened on 28 October 1839; the section to Thorney and the Westport Canal were completed in August 1840. The Langport Bridge was not finished until March 1841; of the \u00a33,749 cost of construction, \u00a3500 came from the Langport Corporation and the rest was raised by a bridge toll operated from March 1841 until January 1843. The total cost of the works was \u00a338,876, and no dividends were paid until 1853, as all profits were used to repay the loans which had been taken out. There are no records of traffic, but it has been estimated at per year, based on the toll receipts and the knowledge that the Stuckey and Bagehot boats carried about three-quarters of the total tonnage.\nDecline.\nThe Bristol and Exeter Railway opened in late 1853, and the effects on the Parrett Navigation were immediate. Despite petitions from users of the Westport Canal to keep their section open for navigation, the Commissioners opted to abandon the entire navigation; the canal was maintained for drain purposes only. Some boats continued to use the river to reach Langport and beyond until the early years of the 20th century. There is still a public right of navigation as far as Oath Lock, but very few private boats use the river, largely due to the fierce tides in the estuary and a lack of moorings along its route.\nIn 2019, the town of Langport obtained a grant of \u00a3179,000 from the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra). With a contribution from the town council and other sources, over \u00a3200,000 was available to improve access to of the river from Oath Lock to Thorney Bridge. The grant funded the construction of pontoons and access ramps, and improvements to the riverside pathway between Langport and Huish Bridge. The project covered of the upper Parrett, together with of the River Yeo and a tiny section of the River Isle. Langport councillor Ian Macnab launched a former ferry from Devon onto the upper Parrett on 5 July 2017, with a view to running it as a community boat. The launch of \"The Duchess of Cocklemoor\" was witnessed by over 200 local people, and the vessel has since had its diesel engine replaced by a electric motor, powered by solar panels mounted on the roof.\nBridges and structures.\nMuch of the history of the river is defined by its bridges, which are described here from mouth to source. The Drove Bridge, which marks the current extent of the Port of Bridgwater, is the nearest to the mouth and the newest road bridge to cross the river. With a span of , the bridge was constructed as part of the Bridgwater Northern Distributor road scheme (1992), and provides a navigable channel which is wide with headroom at normal spring high tides. Upstream of this is the retractable or Telescopic Bridge, built in 1871 to the design of Sir Francis Fox, the engineer for the Bristol and Exeter Railway. It carried a broad gauge (later standard gauge) railway siding over the river to the docks, and was movable, to allow boats to proceed up river. An section of railway track to the east of the bridge could be moved sideways, so that the main girders could be retracted, creating a navigable channel which was wide. It was manually operated for the first eight months, and then powered by a steam engine, reverting to manual operation in 1913, when the steam engine failed. The bridge was last opened in 1953, and the traverser section was demolished in 1974, but public outcry at this resulted in the bridge being listed as a scheduled monument, and the rest of the bridge was kept. It was later used as a road crossing, until the construction of the Chandos road bridge alongside it, and is now only used by pedestrians. Parts of the steam engine were moved to Westonzoyland Pumping Station Museum in 1977.\nThe next bridge is the Town Bridge. There has been a bridge here since the 13th century, when Bridgwater was granted a charter by King John. The present bridge was designed by R. C. Else and G. B. Laffan, and the cast iron structure was completed in 1883. It replaced an earlier iron bridge, which was completed in 1797 and was the first cast iron bridge to be built in Somerset. The stone abutments of that bridge were reused for the later bridge, which was the only road crossing of the river in Bridgwater until 1958. Above the bridge there were two shoals, called The Coals and The Stones, which were a hazard to barge traffic on the river, and bargees had to navigate the river at high tide, when there was enough water to carry them over these obstructions. In March 1958 a new reinforced concrete road bridge, the Blake Bridge, was opened as part of a bypass to take traffic away from the centre of Bridgwater. It now carries the A38 and A39 roads. At the southern edge of Bridgwater is a bridge which carries the Bristol and Exeter Railway across the River Parrett. Isambard Kingdom Brunel designed a brick bridge, known as the Somerset Bridge, with a span but a rise of just . Work started in 1838 and was completed in 1841. Brunel left the centring scaffold in place, as the foundations were still settling, but had to remove it in 1843 to reopen the river for navigation. Brunel demolished the brick arch and replaced it with a timber arch within six months without interrupting the traffic on the railway. This was in turn replaced in 1904 by a steel girder bridge. Slightly further east is a modern concrete bridge which carries the M5 motorway over both the river and the railway line. It was started in 1971 and opened in 1973.\nBefore 1826, the bridge at Burrowbridge, just below the junction with the River Tone, consisted of three arches, each only a little wider than the barges that used the river. They restricted the flow of water in times of flood and made navigation difficult. The bridge was highlighted in a report made by William Armstrong in 1824, as a factor which would prevent the River Tone Navigation competing with the new Bridgwater and Taunton Canal, then being built. The Burrow Bridge (Somerset) Act 1824 (5 Geo. 4. c. xcii) was obtained by the Turnpike Commissioners, authorising the construction of a new bridge and the removal of the old. A design for a single-span bridge in cast iron was dropped because of the cost of cast iron at the time, and instead a stone bridge was built, which was completed in 1826. This is the longest single span masonry road bridge in the county, and was also the last toll bridge in Somerset until it was \"freed\" in 1946. It now carries the A361 road. Just below the bridge there was a shoal of rocks and stones, which was also mentioned in Armstrong's report, but no action was taken to remove it. Except at spring tides, Burrowbridge was the normal upper limit for barges riding the incoming tide. Above here, horses were used to pull the boats, either towards Langport or along the River Tone towards Taunton.\nStanmoor lock was constructed above the junction with the River Tone, but all traces of it have gone. Next to the pedestrian bridge at Stathe four living willow cones, which were woven in 1997 by Clare Wilks, have now rooted and sprouted. Oath lock no longer functions as a lock, but the sluice is used to regulate the river levels. Below Langport, the river is crossed by a lattice girder bridge, carrying the Taunton to Westbury railway line, which approaches the crossing on multi-arched viaducts. This is followed by the derelict remains of the Langport lock and sluice.\nAt Langport, the Great Bow Bridge, which now carries the A378, is a three-arched bridge, constructed under the terms of the Parrett Navigation Act 1836 (6 &amp; 7 Will. 4. c. ci). Completed in 1841 at a cost of \u00a33,749, it replaced the previous medieval bridge, with its nine tiny arches, all too small to allow navigation. A bridge at this site was first mentioned in 1220. The medieval bridge consisted of a total of 31 arches, of which nine crossed the river, and 19 of the original arches were located by ground-penetrating radar in 1987, buried beneath the road which runs from Great Bow Bridge to Little Bow Bridge. The Warehouse in Langport was built in the late 18th century of English bond red brick, with Flemish bond extensions. It has clay plain tile roofs with hipped ends. It was built by the Parrett Navigation Company, a trading company owned by Vincent Stuckey and Walter Bagehot, on the banks of the River. When the river became unnavigable, the building was no longer needed, and it was eventually abandoned. The Somerset Trust for Sustainable Development, which became the Ecos Trust, purchased the site, designated as a brown field site, in February 2003, and worked with Somerset Buildings Preservation Trust, English Heritage and local councils to redevelop it into a craft, heritage learning and small business centre, with the surrounding land being used for an eco-friendly housing development. It is a grade II listed building.\nThe newest bridge across the Parrett is Cocklemoor Bridge, a pedestrian footbridge close to the Great Bow Bridge. It was erected in 2006 and forms part of the River Parrett Trail. The next bridge upstream is Bicknell's bridge, which was formerly known as Bickling bridge, which carries the road from Huish Episcopi to Muchelney. It replaced a footbridge in 1829 or 1830. At Muchelney the Westover Bridge carries a minor road over the river, and another minor road crosses on the Thorney Bridge close to the Thorney (or silent) Mill and a lock. The mill, with an iron overshot wheel, was built to grind corn in 1823. Another bridge and mill occur further upstream at Gawbridge west of Martock, where the mill has been the subject of a feasibility study by the South Somerset Hydropower Group. Carey's Mill Bridge was built of Ham stone in the 18th century and named after Carey's Mill, which originally occupied the site. It is surrounded by a collection of buildings known as the Parrett Iron Works, founded in 1855 on the site of a former snuff mill, which included a foundry, with a prominent chimney, ropewalk, workshops and several smaller workshops and cottages. The sluice which powered the waterwheel and sluice keeper's cottage still exist. Further south the river flows under the A303 near Norton-sub-Hamdon and the A356 near Chedington.\nFlood prevention.\nThe waters of the Severn Estuary, which are heavily laden with silt, flow into the lower reaches of the Parrett and the Tone on each tide. This silt can rapidly gather on the banks of the rivers, reducing the capacity and performance of the channel, and increasing the risk of flooding of surrounding land.\nThe river is a highland carrier, as it is embanked and the water level is often higher than the land through which it flows. Water from the surrounding countryside does not therefore drain into the river naturally, and drainage schemes have relied on pumping to remove the water. The pumping station at Westonzoyland was built in 1830, the first mechanical pumping station on the Somerset Levels. It was designed to drain the area around Westonzoyland, Middlezoy and Othery, and the success of the drainage system led to the formation of internal drainage boards and the construction of other pumping stations.\nThe pump at Westonzoyland originally comprised a beam engine and scoop wheel, which is similar to a water wheel, except that it is driven round by the engine and lifts water up to a higher level. After 25\u00a0years, there were problems pumping the water away as the land surface had dropped as it dried out. A better method was sought, and in 1861 a replacement pump was installed. The engine was built by Easton and Amos of London, to a design patented in 1858 by Charles Amos. It is a twin cylinder, vertical condensing engine, driving a centrifugal pump. A similar engine was on display at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and was shown to be able to lift 100\u00a0tons of water per minute (1,700 L/s), to a height of . The Westonzoyland pump lifts water from the rhyne (pronounced \"reen\") into the River Parrett. The pump operated until 1951, when a new diesel-powered pumping station, capable of pumping 35\u00a0tons per minute (600 L/s) at any state of the tide, was built beside the old one. The pumping station is now an Industrial Heritage museum of steam powered machinery and land drainage, and houses most of the equipment from the disused Burrowbridge pumping station.\nThe Somerset River Authority was established in the 1960s, and later became part of Wessex Water. Tidal models were used to explore the effects of any improvements to the river, and the likelihood of adverse consequences, i.e. flooding and subsequent silting. Engineering works were undertaken at the Parrett, King's Sedgemoor Drain, and River Brue systems, to try to ensure that the agricultural land benefited from a potable water supply in the groundwaters from the Quantock Hills to the coastline.\nVarious measures including sluice gates, known locally as \"clyce\", have been deployed to try to control flooding. Completed in 1972, the Sowy River is a embanked channel which starts at Monks Leaze clyce below Langport, and carries excess water from the river to the Kings Sedgemoor Drain, from where it flows to the estuary by gravity, rejoining the Parrett near Dunball wharf. Construction of the channel, together with improvements to the Kings Sedgemoor Drain and the rebuilding of the clyce at Dunball, to create a fresh water seal which prevents salt water entering the drain from the river, cost \u00a31.4\u00a0million. The scheme has resulted in less flooding on Aller Moor.\nIn the 1970s a study was commissioned by Wessex Water to investigate the likely effects of constructing a tide-excluding barrier, aimed at stopping the silt, just upriver of Dunball Wharf on the hydraulic, sedimentary and pollutant regime of the estuary. Results showed that a site further upriver could be viable.\nThe area around the estuary, known as Parrett Reach, around the Steart Peninsula has flooded many times during the last millennium. As a result, the Environment Agency produced the Stolford to Combwich Coastal Defence Strategy Study in 2002, to examine options for the future. In July 2010 the Environment Agency presented plans to convert the peninsula into wetland habitat. It was claimed to be the largest wetland habitat creation scheme in England. The old sea-wall has been breached to let salt marsh develop.\nFollowing summer floods of 1997 and the prolonged flooding of 1999\u20132000 the Parrett Catchment Project was formed, partly funded by the European Union Regional Development Fund, by 30 organisations, including British Waterways, Campaign to Protect Rural England, Countryside Agency, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Environment Agency, Kings Sedgemoor and Cary Vale Internal Drainage Board (now part of Parrett Internal Drainage Board), Levels and Moors Partnership, National Farmers Union, Sedgemoor, Somerset County Council, South Somerset District Council, Taunton Deane and Wessex Water. They aim to tackle twelve areas, which, when combined, will make a significant contribution to reducing the adverse effects of flooding. These include the conversion of arable land, adoption of the Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) approach to controlling rainwater runoff from developed areas, dredging, raising riverbanks and improving pumping facilities. Further studies of the possible beneficial effects of woodland in reducing flooding have also been undertaken.\nDuring the winter flooding of 2013\u201314 on the Somerset Levels the River Parrett overflowed at new year, during the rain and storms from Storm Dirk, with many residents asking for the Environment Agency to resume river dredging. On 24 January 2014, in light of the continued flooded extent of the Somerset Moors and forecast new rainfall as part of the winter storms of 2013\u201314 in the United Kingdom, both Somerset County Council and Sedgemoor District Council declared a major incident, as defined under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004. At this time, with of agricultural land having been under water for over a month, the village of Thorney was abandoned and Muchelney was cut off by flood waters for almost a month. Northmoor Green, which is more commonly known as Moorland, was also severely affected. By the end of January, agricultural land under water included North Moor, Curry and Hay Moors and Greylake. Bridgwater was partly flooded on 10 February 2014. Over 600 houses were flooded, and both flooding and groundwater disrupted services including trains on the Bristol to Exeter line between Bridgwater and Taunton.\nAs a result of the extensive flooding, more funds were allocated to dredge the Parrett, although there are doubts as to whether this is an effective solution to the problem of flooding. Also, earlier proposals for a tidal barrage across the Parrett were reviewed, and new proposals were suggested to construct the barrage at an estimated cost of between \u00a326,000 and \u00a3100,000. Further planning and construction could take up to ten years. The Inland Waterways Association has suggested that the barrage should include a lock to enable boats to travel to Bridgwater and potentially to reopen the link to the harbour and the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal.\nIn January 2022 a \u00a3100m scheme to construct a tidal barrier at Bridgwater was announced, planned to be in place by 2027. It is to be built between Express Park and Chilton Trinity, with two vertical lift gates to allow the waterway to be blocked to stop water from flowing upstream during very high tides in the Bristol Channel.\nGeology.\nClose to the source of the river the underlying geology is a thin layer of Fuller's earth clay over Yeovil Sands. The resulting light soil made the area important for the production of flax and for market gardening in the past.\nBurrow Mump, an ancient earthwork owned by the National Trust, is a natural hill of Triassic sandstone capped by Keuper marl, standing at a strategic point where the River Tone and the old course of the River Cary join the River Parrett. It probably served as a natural outwork to the defended royal island of Athelney at the end of the 9th century.\nThe Levels and Moors are a largely flat area in which there are some slightly raised parts, called \"burtles\" as well as higher ridges and hills. It is an agricultural region typically with open fields of permanent grass, surrounded by ditches lined with willow trees. Access to the Levels and Moors is by \"droves\", i.e. green lanes. The Levels are a coastal sand and clay barrier about above mean sea level (roughly west of the M5 motorway) whereas the inland Moors can be below peak tides and have large areas of peat. The geology of the area is that of two basins mainly surrounded by hills, the runoff from which forms rivers that originally meandered across the plain but have now been controlled by embanking and clyces. The area is prone to winter floods of fresh water and occasional salt water inundations, the worst of which in recorded history was the Bristol Channel floods of 1607, which resulted in the drowning of an estimated 2,000 or more people, with houses and villages swept away, an estimated of farmland inundated and livestock destroyed. A further severe flood occurred in 1872\u20131873 when over were under water from October to March.\nThe extraction of peat from the Moors is known to have taken place during Roman times, and has been an ongoing practice since the levels were first drained. The introduction of plastic packaging in the 1950s allowed the peat to be packed without rotting. This led to the industrialisation of peat extraction during the 1960s as a major market in horticultural peat was developed. The reduction in water levels that resulted put local ecosystems at risk; peat wastage in pasture fields was occurring at rates of over 100\u00a0years.\nEcology.\nThe river flows through several areas of ecological interest and supports a variety of rare and endangered species.\nFrom January until May, the Parrett provides a source of European eels (\"Anguilla anguilla\") and young elvers, which are caught by hand netting as this is the only legal means of catching them. A series of eel passes have been built on the Parrett at the King's Sedgemoor Drain to help this endangered species; cameras have shown 10,000 eels migrating upstream in a single night. The 2003 BBC Radio 4 play \"Glass Eels\" by Nell Leyshon was set on the Parrett.\nTo the north of the river bank northwest of Langport are the Aller and Beer Woods and Aller Hill biological Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). Aller and Beer Woods is a Somerset Wildlife Trust reserve. It consists of large blocks of semi-natural ancient woodland along the west-facing slope of Aller Hill, overlooking King's Sedgemoor. The reserve is about and the underlying geology of most of it is Lias limestone. Prior to the 20th century it appears to have been managed for centuries as traditional coppice woodland, and it provides an outstanding example of ancient escarpment woodland. The woodland is a variant of the calcareous ash/wych elm stand-type, with pedunculate oak (\"Quercus robur\"), and ash (\"Fraxinus excelsior\") the dominant canopy trees throughout, and with scattered concentrations of wych elm (\"Ulmus glabra\"). Ancient woodland indicators include small-leaved lime (\"Tilia cordata\"), and wild service tree (\"Sorbus torminalis\"), both of which are locally common. Plants of particular interest include bird's nest orchid (\"Neottia nidus-avis\"), greater butterfly orchid (\"Platanthera chlorantha\") and the very rare Red Data Book species purple gromwell (\"Lithospermum purpurocaeruleum\"). Aller Hill contains three species of plant which are nationally rare and a further three which are of restricted distribution in Somerset. The central area contains a sward dominated by sheep's fescue (\"Festuca ovina\") in combination with yellow oat-grass (\"Trisetum flavescens\") and quaking-grass (\"Briza media\"). Salad burnet (\"Sanguisorba minor\") forms a major component of the sward with the two nationally rare species rough marsh-mallow (M\"alva setigera\") and nit-grass (\"Gastridium ventricosum\"), also present.\nSouthlake Moor is another SSSI. The marshes and ditches provide grazing. At certain times of the year sluice gates can be opened to flood the moor. Greater water-parsnip (\"Sium latifolium\") is among the 96 aquatic and vascular plant species on the moor. Numerous wildfowl visit the flooded moor; up to 22,000 wigeon (\"Anas penelope\"), 250\u00a0Bewick's swan (\"Cygnus bewickii\") and significant populations of pochard (\"Aythya ferina\"), teal (\"Anas crecca\") and tufted duck (\"Aythya fuligula\"). Signs of European otters (\"Lutra lutra\") have also been seen on the river banks. Palmate newts (\"Triturus helveticus\") have been found in surrounding ditches.\nLangmead and Weston Level is nationally important for its species-rich neutral grassland and the invertebrate community found in the ditches and rhynes. The terrestrial and aquatic invertebrates recorded on the site include four nationally\nrare species: the great silver diving beetle (\"Hydrophilus piceus\"), the soldier fly \"Odontomyia ornata\", which is now called the ornate brigadier, and two other flies, \"Lonchoptera scutellata\" and \"Stenomicra cogani\".\nThe Parrett then flows through the Somerset Levels National Nature Reserve, which contains a rich biodiversity of national and international importance. It supports a vast variety of plant species, including common plants such as marsh-marigold (\"Caltha palustris\"), meadowsweet (\"Filipendula ulmaria\") and ragged-robin (\"Lychnis flos-cuculi\"). The area is an important feeding ground for birds including Bewick's swan (\"Cygnus columbianus bewickii\"), Eurasian curlew (\"Numenius arquata\"), common redshank (\"Tringa totanus\"), skylark (\"Alauda arvensis\"), common snipe (\"Gallinago gallinago\"), common teal (\"Anas crecca\"), Eurasian wigeon (\"Anas penelope\") and Eurasian whimbrel (\"Numenius phaeopus\"), as well as birds of prey including the western marsh harrier (\"Circus aeruginosus\") and peregrine falcon (\"Falco peregrinus\"). A wide range of invertebrate species is also present including rare insects, particularly the hairy click beetle (\"Synaptus filiformis\"), which until recently was only known in Britain from the Parrett, and other insects, including the lesser silver water beetle (\"Hydrochara caraboides\"), \"Bagous nodulosus\", \"Hydrophilus piceus\", \"Odontomyia angulata\", \"Oulema erichsoni\" and \"Valvata macrostoma\". In addition, the area supports an important European otter (\"Lutra lutra\") population. 282 American mink (\"Mustela vison\") have been captured after their escape from breeding farms, which is encouraging water voles (\"Arvicola amphibius\") to recolonise areas of the Levels where they have been absent for 10\u00a0years. The Levels and Moors include 32 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (twelve of them also Special Protection Areas), the Huntspill River and Bridgwater Bay National Nature Reserves, the Somerset Levels and Moors Ramsar Site covering about , the Somerset Levels National Nature Reserve, Shapwick Heath National Nature Reserve, and numerous Scheduled Ancient Monuments. In addition, some of the Levels are recognised as an environmentally sensitive area, while other portions are designated as Areas of High Archaeological Potential. Despite this, there is currently no single conservation designation covering the entire area of the Levels and Moors.\nOn the outskirts of Bridgwater at Huntworth the river passes several local nature reserves which provide roosts for thousands of common starlings (\"Sturnus vulgaris\") each winter. The mouth of the river is where it flows into the National Nature Reserve at Bridgwater Bay on the Bristol Channel. It consists of large areas of mudflats, saltmarsh, sandflats and shingle ridges, some of which are vegetated. It has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest since 1989, and is designated as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention. The risks to wildlife are highlighted in the local Oil Spill Contingency Plan.\nTourism.\nThe River Parrett Trail is a long-distance footpath following the Parrett from its source to the sea. The river passes many landmarks and places of interest including: Burrow Hill Cider Farm, Muchelney Abbey, West Sedgemoor (a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), the Blake Museum, Westonzoyland Pumping Station Museum, the site of the Battle of Sedgemoor, and finally discharges into Bridgwater Bay (another SSSI). The Langport and River Parrett Visitor Centre located at Langport details local life, history and wildlife.\nSince 2000, attempts have been made to clarify the legal status and organisational responsibilities for the maintenance of the river and explore issues involving the sustainability and safe use of the waterway for a public trip boat and recreational craft. The work has identified economic and social benefits from the development of the Parrett navigation.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58548", "revid": "43603560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58548", "title": "Walter Ulbricht", "text": "Leader of East Germany from 1950 to 1971\nWalter Ernst Paul Ulbricht (; ; 30 June 1893\u00a0\u2013 1 August 1973) was a German communist politician. Ulbricht played a leading role in the creation of the Weimar-era Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and later in the early development and establishment of the German Democratic Republic. As the First Secretary of the Communist Socialist Unity Party from 1950 to 1971, he was the chief decision-maker in East Germany. From President Wilhelm Pieck's death in 1960, he was also the East German head of state until his own death in 1973. As the leader of a significant Communist satellite, Ulbricht had a degree of bargaining power with the Kremlin that he used effectively. For example, he demanded the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 when the Kremlin was reluctant.\nUlbricht began his political life during the German Empire, when he joined first the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) in 1912 later joining the anti-World War I Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) in 1917. The following year, he deserted the Imperial German Army and took part in the German Revolution of 1918. He joined the Communist Party of Germany in 1920 and became a leading party functionary, serving in its Central Committee from 1923 onward. After the Nazi takeover of Germany in 1933 and the Nazi-led investigation into his role in ordering the 1931 murder of police captains Paul Anlauf and Franz Lenck, Ulbricht lived in Paris and Prague from 1933 to 1937 and in the Soviet Union from 1937 to 1945.\nAfter the end of World War II, Ulbricht re-organized the German Communist Party in the Soviet occupation zone along Stalinist lines. He played a key role in the forcible merger of the KPD and SPD into the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) in 1946. He became the First Secretary of the SED and effective leader of the recently established East Germany in 1950. The Soviet Army occupation force violently suppressed the uprising of 1953 in East Germany on 17 June 1953, while Ulbricht hid in the Soviet Army headquarters in Berlin-Karlshorst. East Germany joined the Soviet-controlled Warsaw Pact upon its founding in 1955. Ulbricht presided over the total suppression of civil and political rights in the East German state, which functioned as a communist-ruled dictatorship from its founding in 1949 onward.\nThe nationalization of East German industry under Ulbricht failed to raise the standard of living to a level comparable to that of West Germany. The result was massive emigration, with hundreds of thousands of people fleeing the country to the west every year in the 1950s. When Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev gave permission for a wall to stop the outflow in Berlin, Ulbricht had the Berlin Wall built in 1961, which triggered a diplomatic crisis but succeeded in curtailing emigration. The failures of Ulbricht's New Economic System and Economic System of Socialism from 1963 to 1970 led to his forcible retirement for \"health reasons\" and replacement as First Secretary in 1971 by Erich Honecker with Soviet approval. Ulbricht remained the symbolic head of state for two more years, suffering from declining health until dying of a stroke in August 1973.\nEarly years.\nUlbricht was born in 1893 in Leipzig, Saxony, into a Protestant family to Pauline Ida (n\u00e9e Rothe) and Ernst August Ulbricht, an impoverished tailor. He spent eight years in primary school (\"Volksschule\") and this constituted all of his formal education since he left school to train as a joiner. Both his parents worked actively for the Social Democratic Party (SPD), which Walter joined in 1912. The young Ulbricht first learned about radical socialism at home in Leipzig's Naund\u00f6rfchen workers' district before they moved to the Gottschedstrasse.\nFirst World War and the German Revolution.\nUlbricht served in the Imperial German Army during World War I from 1915 to 1917 in Galicia, on the Eastern Front, and in the Balkans. He deserted the Army in 1918, as he had opposed the war from the beginning. For this, he was sentenced to two months in prison. Shortly after his release, while stationed in Brussels, Ulbricht was arrested for having anti-war leaflets. He avoided further prosecution when the November Revolution broke due to collapse of Imperial Germany.\nIn 1917 he became a member of the Independent Social Democratic Party (USPD) after it split off from the Social Democratic Party over support of Germany's participation in World War I.\nDuring the German Revolution of 1918, Ulbricht became a member of the soldier's soviet of his army corps. In 1919, he joined the \"Spartakusbund\".\nThe Weimar years.\nAlong with the bulk of the USPD, he joined the KPD in 1920 and became one of its active organizers. He rose fast in the ranks of the KPD, becoming a member of the Central Committee in 1923. Ulbricht was an adherent of the Lenin model, which favored a highly centralized party. Ulbricht attended the International Lenin School of the Comintern in Moscow in 1924/1925. He came home in 1926 and went on to assist the newly appointed party chief Ernst Th\u00e4lmann. The electors subsequently voted him into the regional parliament of Saxony (\"S\u00e4chsischer Landtag\") in 1926. He became a Member of the \"Reichstag\" for South Westphalia from 1928 to 1933 and served as KPD chairman in Berlin and Brandenburg from 1929.\nIn the years before the 1933 Nazi election to power, paramilitary wings of Marxist and extreme nationalist parties provoked massive riots connected with demonstrations. Besides the Berlin Police, the KPD's arch-enemies were street-fighters like the Nazi Party's SA, the monarchist German National People's Party's Stahlhelm, and Stormtroopers affiliated with \"radical nationalist parties\". The Social Democratic Party of Germany and its paramilitary Reichsbanner forces, which dominated local and national politics from 1918 to 1931 and which the KPD accused of \"social fascism\", were their most detested foe. Ulbricht quickly became a KPD functionary and this was attributed to the Bolshevization of the party.\nAt an event arranged by the Nazi Party on 22 January 1931, Ulbricht was allowed by Joseph Goebbels, the Nazi Party's Gauleiter of Berlin and Brandenburg, to give a speech. Subsequently, Goebbels delivered his own speech. The attempt at a friendly discussion turned hostile and became a debate. A struggle between Nazis and Communists began: police officers divided them. Both sides had tried to use this event for their election propaganda. The brawl took two hours to disperse and over a hundred were injured in the melee.\nThe B\u00fclowplatz murders.\nDuring the last days of the Weimar Republic, the KPD had a policy of assassinating two Berlin police officers in retaliation for every KPD member killed by the police.\nOn 2 August 1931, KPD members of the Reichstag Heinz Neumann and Hans Kippenberger received a dressing down from Ulbricht, who was the party's leader in the Berlin-Brandenburg region. According to John Koehler, enraged by police interference and by Neumann and Kippenberger's failure to follow the policy, Ulbricht snarled, \"At home in Saxony we would have done something about the police a long time ago. Here in Berlin we will not fool around much longer. Soon we will hit the police in the head.\"\nKippenberger and Neumann decided to assassinate Paul Anlauf, the captain of the Berlin Police's Seventh Precinct. Captain Anlauf had been nicknamed \"Schweinebacke\", or \"Pig Face\" by the KPD. Anlauf was notorious for his brutal methods in breaking up Communist-led demonstrations at the time.\nAccording to John Koehler, \"Of all the policemen in strife-torn Berlin, the reds hated Anlauf the most. His precinct included the area around KPD headquarters, which made it the most dangerous in the city. The captain almost always led the riot squads that broke up illegal rallies of the Communist Party.\"\nIn 1934, the Nazi government erected a memorial to Anlauf and Lenck at the square where they were killed, then renamed Horst-Wessel-Platz after a Nazi martyr. In 1950 the socialist German government destroyed the monument and the square was renamed Rosa-Luxemburg-Platz.\nNazi and war years.\nThe Nazi Party attained power in Germany in January 1933, and very quickly began a purge of Communist and Social Democrat leaders in Germany. Following the arrest of the KPD's leader, Ernst Th\u00e4lmann, Ulbricht campaigned to be Th\u00e4lmann's replacement as head of the party.\nUlbricht lived in exile in Paris and Prague from 1933 to 1937. The German Popular Front under the leadership of Heinrich Mann in Paris was dissolved after a campaign of behind-the-scenes jockeying by Ulbricht to place the organization under the control of the Comintern. Ulbricht tried to persuade the KPD founder Willi M\u00fcnzenberg to go to the Soviet Union, allegedly so that Ulbricht could have \"them take care of him\". M\u00fcnzenberg refused. He would have been in jeopardy of arrest and purge by the NKVD, a prospect in both M\u00fcnzenberg's and Ulbricht's minds. Ulbricht spent some time in Spain during the Civil War, as a Comintern representative, ensuring the murder of Germans serving on the Republican side who were regarded as not sufficiently loyal to Soviet leader Joseph Stalin; some were sent to Moscow for trial, others were executed on the spot. Ulbricht lived in the Soviet Union from 1937 to 1945, leaving from Hotel Lux to return to Germany on 30 April 1945.\nAt the time of the signing of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, in August 1939, Ulbricht and the rest of the German Communist Party had supported the treaty.\nFollowing the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, Ulbricht was active in a group of German communists under NKVD supervision called the National Committee for a Free Germany (a group including, among others, the poet Erich Weinert and the writer Willi Bredel) which, among other things, translated propaganda material into German, prepared broadcasts directed at the invaders, and interrogated captured German officers. In February 1943, following the surrender of the German Sixth Army at the close of the Battle of Stalingrad, Ulbricht, Weinert and Wilhelm Pieck conducted a Communist political rally in the center of Stalingrad which many German prisoners were forced to attend.\nPost-war political career.\nRole in communist takeover of East Germany.\nIn April 1945, Ulbricht led a group of party functionaries (\"Ulbricht Group\") into Germany to begin reconstruction of the communist party along anti-revisionist lines. According to Grieder, \"Espousing the motto 'it must look democratic but we must control everything',\" he worked to set up an undisguised Communist regime in the Soviet zone. Within the Soviet occupied zone of Germany, the Social Democrats were pressured into merging with the Communists to form the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (\"Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands\" or \"SED\"), and Ulbricht played a key role in this. The merger was almost entirely on Communist terms, and most of the recalcitrant members of the SPD half were soon pushed out, leaving the SED as a renamed and enlarged KPD.\nRise to power.\nAfter the founding of the German Democratic Republic on 7 October 1949, Ulbricht became deputy chairman (\"Stellvertreter des Vorsitzenden\") of the Council of Ministers (\"Ministerrat der DDR\") under Minister-President and chairman Otto Grotewohl, i.e., deputy prime minister. In 1950, as the SED restructured itself along more orthodox Soviet lines, he became General Secretary of the SED Central Committee, replacing Grotewohl and State President Wilhelm Pieck as co-chairmen. This position was renamed \"First Secretary\" in 1953.\nLeadership of East Germany.\nConsolidation of authority.\nAfter the death of Stalin (whose funeral was attended by Ulbricht, Grotewohl and other German communists) in March of that year, Ulbricht's position was in danger because Moscow was considering taking a soft line regarding Germany.\nThe June 1953 East German uprising forced Moscow to turn to a hardliner, and his reputation as an archetypal Stalinist helped Ulbricht. On 16 June 1953, a protest erupted at East Berlin's Stalin Allee as enraged workers demanded comprehensive economic reforms. The East German police had to call in Soviet military units stationed in the city to help suppress the demonstration and communist rule was restored after several dozen deaths and 1,000 arrests. He was summoned to Moscow in July 1953, where he received the Kremlin's full endorsement as leader of East Germany. He returned to Berlin and he took the lead in calling in Soviet troops to suppress the widespread unrest with full backing from Moscow and its large army stationed inside the GDR. His position as leader of the GDR was now secure. The frustrations led many to flee to the West: over 360,000 did so in 1952 and the early part of 1953.\nUlbricht managed to rise to power despite having a peculiarly squeaky falsetto voice, the result of a bout of diphtheria in his youth. His Upper Saxon accent, combined with the high register of his voice, made his speeches sound incomprehensible at times.\nConstruction of a socialist society in GDR.\nAt the third congress of the SED in 1950, Ulbricht announced a five-year plan concentrating on the doubling of industrial production. As Stalin was at that point keeping open the option of a re-unified Germany, it was not until July 1952 that the party moved towards the construction of a socialist society in East Germany. The \"building of socialism\" (\"Aufbau des Sozialismus\") had begun in earnest as soon as talks of reunification faltered. By 1952, 80% of industry had been nationalized.\nThe Council of Ministers of East Germany decided to close the Inner German Border in May 1952. The National People's Army (NVA) was established in March 1956, an expansion of the Kasernierte Volkspolizei which been set up already in June 1952. The Stasi (MfS) was founded in 1950, rapidly expanded and employed to intensify the regime's repression of the people. The states (\"L\u00e4nder\") were effectively abolished in July 1952 and the country was governed centrally through districts.\nUlbricht uncritically followed the orthodox Stalinist model of industrialization: concentration on the development of heavy industry.\nIn 1957, Ulbricht arranged a visit to an East German collective farm at Trinwillershagen in order to demonstrate the GDR's modern agricultural industry to the visiting Soviet Politburo member Anastas Mikoyan. The collectivization of agriculture was completed in 1960, later than Ulbricht had expected. Following the death of President Wilhelm Pieck in 1960, the SED wrote the president's post out of the constitution. Taking its place was a collective head of state, the \"Council of State\". Ulbricht was named its chairman, a post equivalent to that of president. His power consolidated, Ulbricht suppressed critics such as Karl Schirdewan, Ernst Wollweber, Fritz Selbmann, Fred Oelssner, Gerhart Ziller and others from 1957 onward, designated them as \"factionalists\" and eliminated them politically.\nThe Berlin Wall.\nDespite economic gains, emigration still continued. By 1961, 1.65\u00a0million people had fled to the west. Fearful of the possible consequences of this continued outflow of refugees, and aware of the dangers an East German collapse would present to the Eastern Bloc, Ulbricht pressured Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in early 1961 to stop the outflow and resolve the status of Berlin. During this time, the refugees' mood was rarely expressed in words, though East German laborer Kurt Wismach did so effectively by shouting for free elections during one of Ulbricht's speeches.\nWhen Khrushchev approved the building of a wall as a means to resolve this situation, Ulbricht threw himself into the project with abandon. Delegating different tasks in the process while maintaining overall supervision and careful control of the project, Ulbricht managed to keep secret the purchase of vast amounts of building materials, including barbed wire, concrete pillars, timber, and mesh wire. On 13 August 1961, work began on what was to become the Berlin Wall, only two months after Ulbricht had emphatically denied that there were such plans (\"Nobody has the intention of building a wall\"), thereby mentioning the word \"wall\" for the very first time. Ulbricht deployed GDR soldiers and police to seal the border with West Berlin overnight. The mobilization included 8,200 members of the People's Police, 3,700 members of the mobile police, 12,000 factory militia members, and 4,500 State Security officers. Ulbricht also dispersed 40,000 East German soldiers across the country to suppress any potential protests. Once the wall was in place, Berlin went from being the easiest place to cross the border between East and West Germany to being the most difficult.\nThe 1968 invasion by Warsaw Pact troops of Czechoslovakia and the suppression of the Prague Spring were also applauded by Ulbricht. East German soldiers were among those massed on the border but did not cross over, probably due to Czech sensitivities about German troops on their soil during World War II. It earned him a reputation as a staunch Soviet ally, in contrast to Romanian leader Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu, who condemned the invasion.\nThe New Economic System.\nFrom 1963, Ulbricht and his economic adviser Wolfgang Berger attempted to create a more efficient economy through a New Economic System (\"Neues \u00d6konomisches System\" or N\u00d6S). This meant that under the centrally coordinated economic plan, a greater degree of local decision-making would be possible. The reason was not only to stimulate greater responsibility on the part of companies, but also the realization that decisions were sometimes better taken locally. One of Ulbricht's principles was the \"scientific\" execution of politics and economy: making use of sociology and psychology but most of all the natural sciences. The effects of the N\u00d6S, which corrected mistakes made in the past, were largely positive, with growing economic efficiency.\nThe New Economic System, which involved measures to end price hikes and increase access to consumer goods, was not very popular within the party, however, and from 1965 onwards opposition grew, mainly under the direction of Erich Honecker and with tacit support of Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. Ulbricht's preoccupation with science meant that more and more control of the economy was being relegated from the party to specialists. The ideological hardliners of the party also accused Ulbricht of having motivations that were at odds with the communist ideals.\nCultural and architectural policy.\nThe communist regime demolished large numbers of important historical buildings. The Berlin Palace and the Potsdam City Palace were destroyed in 1950 and 1959. About 60 churches, including intact, rebuilt or ruined ones, were blown up, including 17 in East Berlin. The Ulrich Church in Magdeburg was razed in 1956, the Dresden Sophienkirche in 1963, the Potsdam Garrison Church in June 1968 and the fully intact Leipzig Paulinerkirche in May 1968. Citizens protesting the church demolitions were imprisoned.\nUlbricht attempted to shield the GDR from the cultural and social influences of the capitalist parts of the Western world, particularly its youth culture. He intended to create the most comprehensive youth culture of the GDR, which should be largely independent of capitalist influences.\nIn 1965 at the 11th Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee of the SED, he made a critical speech about copying culture from the Western world by referring to the \"Yeah, Yeah, Yeah\" of the Beatles song: \"Is it truly the case that we have to copy every dirt that comes from the West? I think, comrades, with the monotony of the \"yeah, yeah, yeah\" and whatever it is all called, yes, we should put an end to it\".\nDismissal and death.\nBy the late 1960s, Ulbricht was finding himself increasingly isolated both at home and abroad. The construction of the Berlin Wall became a public relations disaster for him, not only in the West, but even with the Eastern Bloc. This became gradually critical as East Germany faced increasing economic problems due to his failed reforms, and other countries refused to offer any kind of assistance. His refusal to seek rapprochement with West Germany on Soviet terms, and his rejection of d\u00e9tente infuriated Soviet leader Brezhnev who, by that time, found Ulbricht's demands for greater independence from Moscow increasingly intolerable (especially in the aftermath of the Prague Spring). One of his few victories during this time was the replacement of the GDR's original people's democratic constitution with a completely Communist document in 1968. The document formally declared East Germany to be a socialist state under the leadership of the SED, thus codifying the \"de facto\" state of affairs since 1949.\nDuring his later years, Ulbricht became increasingly stubborn and tried to assert dominance vis-a-vis other Eastern bloc countries, and even the Soviet Union. He declared at economic conferences that post-war times when East Germany had to offer other socialist countries free patents, were over once and for all and everything actually had to be paid for. Ulbricht began to believe that he had achieved something special, like Lenin and Stalin had. At the celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the October Revolution in Moscow, he untactfully boasted about having personally known Lenin and having been an active communist in the USSR already 45 years ago. In 1969 Ulbricht's Soviet guests at the State Council (\"Staatsrat\") showed clear signs of dissatisfaction when he lectured them heavily on East Germany's supposed economic successes.\nOn 3 May 1971 Ulbricht was forced to resign from virtually all of his public functions \"due to reasons of poor health\" and was replaced, with the consent of the Soviets, by Erich Honecker. Ulbricht was allowed to remain as Chairman of the State Council, the effective head of state, and held on to this post for the rest of his life. Additionally, the honorary position of Chairman of the SED was created especially for him. Ulbricht died at a government guesthouse in Gro\u00df D\u00f6lln near Templin, north of East Berlin, on 1 August 1973, during the World Festival of Youth and Students, having suffered a stroke two weeks earlier. He was honoured with a state funeral, cremated and buried at the \"Memorial to the Socialists\" () in the Friedrichsfelde Central Cemetery, Berlin.\nLegacy.\nUlbricht remained loyal to Marxist-Leninist principles throughout his life, rarely able or willing to make doctrinal compromises. Inflexible and unlikeable, a \"widely-loathed Stalinist bureaucrat well known for his tactics denouncing rivals\", he never attracted much public admiration. Nevertheless, he combined strategic intransigence with tactical flexibility; and until his 1971 downfall, he was able to get himself out of more than one difficult situation that defeated many communist leaders with much greater charisma than himself.\nDespite stabilising the GDR to some extent, and making improvements in the national economy which were unimaginable in many other Warsaw Pact states, he never succeeded in raising East Germany's standard of living to a level comparable to that in the West. Nikita Khrushchev observed, \"A disparity quickly developed between the living conditions of Germans in East Germany and those in West Germany.\"\nGerman historian J\u00fcrgen Kocka in 2010 summarized the consensus of scholars about the state that Ulbricht headed for its first two decades:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Conceptualizing the GDR as a dictatorship has become widely accepted, while the meaning of the concept dictatorship varies. Massive evidence has been collected that proves the repressive, undemocratic, illiberal, nonpluralistic character of the GDR regime and its ruling party.\nCult of personality.\nWith his below-average height of , his high-pitched voice, which may have come into being as a result of a larynx disease he carried with him since 1925, his strong Saxon accent, his lack of rhetorical talent, his consistent use of the confirmatory term \"ja?\" at the end of sentences and his generally dislikeable character, Ulbricht was a very uncharismatic politician. After attempts to stylise him as a charismatic leader in the 1950s failed due to lack of popular support, the East German leadership at least pretended that such charisma existed. The historian Rainer Gries states on that subject: \"Ultimately, the Ulbricht propaganda no longer focussed on the acquisition of charisma, but merely the pretention of charisma.\"\nIn the 1950s, several industrial plants, institutions and sport facilities were named after Ulbricht, for example the German Academy for State and Legal Sciences. The East German Postal Office replaced its stamp series of the deceased president Pieck with one bearing the portrait of Ulbricht. His images were hung in schools, residencies, and industrial facilities. In 1956, when Destalinisation started both in the Soviet Union as well as the Eastern Bloc countries, the newspaper \"Neues Deutschland\" published an article titled: \"With Walter Ulbricht for the fortune of humanity.\"\nEspecially at Ulbricht's round birthdays in 1958, 1963 and 1968, the cult of personality around him was extended. The festivities around his 60th birthday in 1953 were however cut short because of the crisis developing into the 1953 East German uprising: An already finished propaganda movie about him was not published and a stamp with his image was not publicised either. On other dates, the official East German propaganda followed the standards set by the personality cults of Lenin and Stalin in the Soviet Union. On these occasions, Ulbricht's origin from a working-class family was emphasised, he was hailed as the \"foundation of a new life\" (by Johannes R. Becher) as well as a \"worker genius\" and \"master of the times\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The German Democratic Republic views him as an idol in terms of dilligence, energy and workforce - as the personification of unimaginable achievements. The construction of socialism greets you as its most important architect. And all of us, who love their homeland, who all love peace, love you, Walter Ulbricht, the German worker's son.\nUlbricht was accused of building a cult of personality around himself, with an elaborate jubilee planned for his 60th birthday on 30 June 1953, which Ulbricht later cancelled. The propaganda film \"Baumeister des Sozialismus \u2013 Walter Ulbricht\", was not screened until the fall of the GDR. On the occasion of his 70th birthday on 30 June 1963, the East German regime organised grand festivities, to which Nikita Khrushchev was also invited in order to meet and honour the \"creator of the socialist German miracle\". On the occasion of those festivities and in several biographies published throughout the 1960s, Ulbricht was portrayed as a warrior against fascism, a good German and overall a good person. Special emphasis was put on his supposed closeness to the people, who supposedly trusted him in all aspects. From this, he formulated his motto: \"From the people, with the people, for the people\". Erich Honecker brought this identification of the dictator and the state together with the motto: \"Ulbricht will win. And Ulbricht - that is all of us.\"\nUlbricht was awarded all civil medals of East Germany, in addition to several Soviet honours.\nPublicly, the effect of such propaganda remained limited. Ulbricht's dialect, his falsetto voice and his crampness lent several enemies the opportunity to create caricatures of him. For instance, he was called a \"grey, whistling mouse\" by Gerhard Zwerenz. Using the term \"Spitzbart\", referring to Ulbricht's beard and using the adjective \"all-knowing\" for Ulbricht constituted defamation of the state in the eye of the judicial system of East Germany.\nA tape containing a recitation of Goethe's Faust by a parodist imitating Ulbricht was in wide circulation in East Germany, eventually causing the Stasi secret police to intervene on the charge of defamation of the state.\nPersonal life.\nUlbricht lived in Majakowskiring, Pankow, East Berlin. He married twice: in 1920 to Martha Schmellinsky and from 1953 until his death to Lotte Ulbricht \"n\u00e9e\" K\u00fchn (1903\u20132002). Ulbricht and Schmelinsky had a daughter in 1920, who grew up and lived separated from Ulbricht for almost her entire life. After the failure of this first marriage, he was in a relationship with Rosa Michel (born Marie Wacziarg, 1901\u20131990). With Michel, Ulbricht had another daughter, Rose (1931\u20131995).\nHis marriage with Lotte K\u00fchn, his partner for most of his life (they had been together since 1935), remained childless. The couple adopted a daughter whom they named Beate. She was born in 1944 to a Ukrainian forced laborer in Leipzig. Although Beate Ulbricht remembered her father warmly, she referred to her mother in an extensive interview given to a tabloid in 1991 as \"the hag\", adding that she was \"cold-hearted and egoistic\". She also said that Walter Ulbricht was ordered to marry Lotte by Stalin.\nDecorations.\nIn 1956, Ulbricht was awarded the Hans Beimler Medal, for veterans of the Spanish Civil War, which caused controversy among other recipients, who had actually served on the front line. He was awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union on 29 June 1963. On visiting Egypt in 1965, Ulbricht was awarded the Great Collar of the Order of the Nile by Nasser. On 9 June 1965, he was awarded the Order of the Yugoslav Great Star.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58549", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58549", "title": "Berserker (disambiguation)", "text": "A berserker was a Norse warrior who fought in a trance-like fury.\nBerserker or Berzerker may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58550", "revid": "42664955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58550", "title": "Thymine", "text": "Chemical compound of DNA\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nThymine () (symbol T or Thy) is one of the four nucleotide bases in the nucleic acid of DNA that are represented by the letters G\u2013C\u2013A\u2013T. The others are adenine, guanine, and cytosine. Thymine is also known as 5-methyluracil, a pyrimidine nucleobase. In RNA, thymine is replaced by the nucleobase uracil. Thymine was first isolated in 1893 by Albrecht Kossel and Albert Neumann from calf thymus glands, hence its name.\nDerivation.\nAs its alternate name (5-methyluracil) suggests, thymine may be derived by methylation of uracil at the 5th carbon. In RNA, thymine is replaced with uracil in most cases. In DNA, thymine (T) binds to adenine (A) via two hydrogen bonds, thereby stabilizing the nucleic acid structures.\nThymine combined with deoxyribose creates the nucleoside deoxythymidine, which is synonymous with the term thymidine. Thymidine can be phosphorylated with up to three phosphoric acid groups, producing dTMP (deoxythymidine monophosphate), dTDP, or dTTP (for the di- and tri- phosphates, respectively).\nOne of the common mutations of DNA involves two adjacent thymines or cytosine, which, in presence of ultraviolet light, may form thymine dimers, causing \"kinks\" in the DNA molecule that inhibit normal function.\nThymine could also be a target for actions of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in cancer treatment. 5-FU can be a metabolic analog of thymine (in DNA synthesis) or uracil (in RNA synthesis). Substitution of this analog inhibits DNA synthesis in actively dividing cells.\nThymine bases are frequently oxidized to hydantoins over time after the death of an organism.\nThymine imbalance causes mutation.\nDuring growth of bacteriophage T4, an imbalance of thymine availability, either a deficiency or an excess of thymine, causes increased mutation. The mutations caused by thymine deficiency appear to occur only at AT base pair sites in DNA and are often AT to GC transition mutations. In the bacterium \"Escherichia coli\", thymine deficiency was also found to cause the same mutation.\nTheoretical aspects.\nIn March 2015, NASA scientists reported that, for the first time, complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine and thymine, have been formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions, using starting chemicals, such as pyrimidine, found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), another carbon-rich compound, may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds, according to the scientists. Thymine has not been found in meteorites, which suggests the first strands of DNA had to look elsewhere to obtain this building block. Thymine likely formed within some meteorite parent bodies, but may not have persisted within these bodies due to an oxidation reaction with hydrogen peroxide.\nSynthesis.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nThymine was first prepared by hydrolysis of the corresponding nucleoside obtained from natural sources. Interest in its direct chemical synthesis began in the early 1900s: Emil Fischer published a method starting from urea but a more practical synthesis used methylisothiourea in a condensation reaction with ethyl formyl propionate, followed by hydrolysis of the pyrimidine intermediate:\nMany other preparative methods have been developed, including optimised conditions so that urea can be used directly in the reaction shown above, preferably with methyl formyl propionate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58551", "revid": "45371308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58551", "title": "Sleepy Hollow, New York", "text": "Sleepy Hollow is a village in the town of Mount Pleasant in Westchester County, New York, United States.\nThe village is located on the east bank of the Hudson River, about north of New York City, and is served by the Philipse Manor stop on the Metro-North Hudson Line. To the south of Sleepy Hollow is the village of Tarrytown, and to the north and east are unincorporated parts of Mount Pleasant. The population of the village at the 2020 census was 9,986.\nOriginally incorporated as North Tarrytown in the late 19th century as a way to draft off Tarrytown's success during the Industrial Revolution, the village adopted its current name in 1996, some three and a half centuries after the first Dutch settlers called the area \"Slapershaven\" or \"Sleepers' Haven.\"\nThe village is known internationally through \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\", an 1820 short story by Washington Irving about the local area and its infamous specter, the Headless Horseman. Irving lived in Tarrytown and is buried in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, where numerous other notable people are buried. Owing to \"The Legend\", as well as the village's roots in early American history and folklore, Sleepy Hollow is considered by some to be one of the \"most haunted places in the world\". Despite this designation, Sleepy Hollow has also been called \"one of the safest places to live in the United States\".\nHistory.\nThe two square miles of land that would become Sleepy Hollow belonged to the larger domain of the Wecquaesgeek, a Munsee-speaking band of Wappinger people. Their fort and burying ground may have been located on the hillside where the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow was to be built later. In 1609, Henry Hudson claimed the Hudson Valley (known then as the Tappan Zee) for the Netherlands. There was relative peace between the Native Americans and the Dutch until the mid-seventeenth century, and the Dutch West India Company had been providing its investors with large land grants called patroonships to encourage settlement of the New Netherland colony on lands bought from local Native American tribes along the East Coast of what is now the United States.\nThe Upper Mills.\nMuch of the land that would become Philipsburg Manor had previously belonged to Adriaen van der Donck, who had invested in such a patroonship before the English conquest of New Netherland in 1664. In 1672, merchants Frederick Philipse, Thomas Delavall, and Thomas Lewis purchased from his widow's brother the first tracts of land in current-day northern Yonkers. Philipse made several additional purchases between 1680 and 1686 from the Wiechquaeskeck and Sintsink tribes, expanding the property to both the north and south. Philipse also bought out his partners' stakes during this time, enticing friends from New Amsterdam and Long Island to move with him with the promise of free land and limited taxes. The manor grew to around 52,000 acres (21,000 ha) or about 81 sq mi (210\u00a0km2), comprising much of today's lower Westchester County, Philipse was granted a royal charter in 1693, creating the Manor of Philipsburg and establishing him as first lord.\nPhilipse established his country seat at the mouth of the Pocantico River, in the northern part of his manor, which would be called the Upper Mills. A small Dutch community had already been firmly established there when he arrived in 1683. He built a mill and shipping depot, today part of the Philipse Manor House historic site. A pious man, he was architect and financier of the settlement's stone church, known today as the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow, and was said to have built the pulpit with his own hands. The church served successive lords and ladies of the manor and their tenant farmers (who were largely Dutch, French Huguenot, Swiss, and German immigrants) until the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War.\nWhen Philipse died in 1702, the manor was divided between his son, Adolphus Philipse, and his grandson, Frederick Philipse II. Adolph received the Upper Mills property, which extended from Dobbs Ferry to the Croton River. Frederick II was given the Lower Mills at the confluence of the Saw Mill and Hudson Rivers, the two parcels being reunited on his uncle's death. His son, Frederick Philipse III, became the third lord of the manor in 1751.\nIn the late 1790s, Washington Irving visited the Sleepy Hollow area with his friend James K. Paulding, a local militiaman who in 1780 had previously helped capture British Major John Andre in what is now known as Patriot's Park and thereby foiled the plans of Benedict Arnold during the American Revolutionary War. Together they explored the area, hunting, fishing and talking with the local folk. The visits of Irving\u2014and the local folklore and ghost tales he heard while there\u2014were immortalized in the story \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\".\nBeekman Town.\nIn 1779, Frederick III, a Loyalist, was attainted for treason. Philipsburg Manor was confiscated and sold at public auction, split between 287 buyers, most of whom were Philipses\u2019 tenant farmers who used the opportunity to buy the plots they worked. The largest tract of land (about ) was at the Upper Mills. It was purchased by the New York merchant Gerard (sometimes spelled Gerardus) Garret Beekman Jr., a member of the prominent Beekman family. He operated his Upper Mills property as an agricultural enterprise consisting of small farms. Beekman's tenant farmers were veterans of the American Revolutionary War, as was Beekman himself (he had served as a lieutenant in the 1st New York Regiment). \nGerard Beekman died in 1822, and his widow, Cornelia, laid out a portion of the estate into streets and sold building lots. The development became known as Beekman Town (also spelled Beekmantown), with Beekman Street (soon to be upgraded to Beekman Avenue) as its main street. Cornelia was a known figure among Westchester Patriots and a daughter of Pierre Van Cortlandt, the first lieutenant governor of New York. She named one of the streets \"Cortlandt\" and another one \"Clinton,\" after George Clinton, the first governor of New York. By 1839, all lots were sold and released to the town of Mount Pleasant. Sometime after 1866, the waterfront tract at the foot of Beekman Avenue was bought by Ambrose Kingsland as part of his Hudson River estate.\nMeanwhile, Beekman Town's closest neighbor, Tarrytown, was developing as a trading center on the Albany Post Road and a commercial port on the Hudson River. The Industrial Revolution brought to it a railway station on the Hudson River Railroad, industrial mills, banks, and throngs of new people. Eventually, the industrial boom started spilling over into Beekman Town. Constructed between 1837 and 1842, the first Croton Aqueduct, New York City\u2019s original water supply system, passed through Beekman Town as part of its route to the city. It was built primarily by Irish immigrants (as was the Hudson River Railroad), many of whom settled in the village.\nNorth Tarrytown.\nBeekman Town incorporated in 1874 as North Tarrytown, using the recognizable name of its commercially successful neighbor to the south. Italian, German, and Eastern European immigrants began settling in the Tarrytowns in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to open stores and shops and join the industrial workforce.\nNorth Tarrytown began its association with the automobile industry in 1899, when magazine publisher, developer, and automobile enthusiast John Brisben Walker acquired the Stanley Brothers patents, bought the North Tarrytown segment of the former Ambrose Kingsland estate, and built there a large factory, designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White, to produce steam-powered \"Mobiles.\" In 1900, his Mobile Company of America went into operation at the foot of Beekman Avenue. Advertising claimed it to be the largest automobile factory in the world.\nWalker began subdividing the northern part of his North Tarrytown property, attempting to capitalize on the site's location along the Hudson River Railroad. One of his selling points for this residential development, called Philipse Manor in a confused reference to nearby Philipsburg Manor House,&lt;ref name=\"Philipse/Philipsburg Manor\"&gt;The actual Philipse Manor is in Yonkers, some to the south (both manor houses served the original Philipsburg Manor).&lt;/ref&gt; was the rail access, but this failed to materialize, and Walker's Philipse Manor Land Company floundered. The Mobile Company of America also failed: steam-powered carriages proved to be inferior to gasoline internal combustion vehicles. The heavily indebted Walker had to sell his North Tarrytown properties to William Abraham Bell, who had invested in Walker\u2019s automobile venture. \nBell, with his extensive experience in railroad development, not only continued the residential construction at Philipse Manor but also made the rail service possible by building the station and presenting it to the railroad. Wealthy New Yorkers started eagerly buying homes in Philipse Manor. A second residential neighborhood, Sleepy Hollow Manor, was developed in the vicinity of the station in the 1920s, on the former estate of renowned explorer and politician John C. Fr\u00e9mont. Today, the two neighborhoods form the northern part of the village. The Philipse Manor station is on the National Register of Historic Places. A parcel of the former Ambrose Kingsland estate where Kingsland's opulent mansion once stood was acquired by New York's Westchester County in 1924 and converted into a public park. It opened in 1926 and was named Kingsland Point Park.\nIn 1903, the closed automobile plant at the foot of Beekman Avenue was leased (and subsequently sold) to Maxwell-Briscoe, manufacturer of gasoline internal combustion automobiles. Destroyed in a fire in 1907, it was rebuilt and acquired by Chevrolet in 1914-1915. In 1918, Chevrolet was integrated into General Motors (GM), and the plant became the GM North Tarrytown Assembly facility.\nTo alleviate housing shortage for workers of the expanding plant, John D. Rockefeller Jr. (whose estate was two miles from North Tarrytown) conceived and financed the construction of a large housing cooperative on Beekman Avenue. Completed in 1929, the five-story Van Tassel Apartments complex, arranged around a large courtyard, is a prime example of early garden apartment architecture. Bricks for the building were imported from the Netherlands, and its design embraces the area's Dutch heritage. The main entrance is flanked by bas-relief medallions featuring explorer Henry Hudson and Katrina Van Tassel, the building's literary namesake from \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.\" Other bas-reliefs on the building depict scenes from Dutch colonial history. (The idea for the building's name and the bas reliefs belonged to Abby Aldrich Rockefeller, John Rockefeller's wife.) The building was known for its high-quality construction and luxury (for the time) amenities, such as ra\u00addio an\u00adten\u00adnas and kitchens with elec\u00adtric re\u00adfrig\u00ader\u00ada\u00adtors, gas ranges, and dumbwaiters. To this day, the Van Tassell is still the largest single residential building in Sleepy Hollow by unit count.\nBy the middle of the 20th century, North Tarrytown was a quintessential factory town, with the sprawling GM plant, or \u201cthe Shop\u201d as the locals called it, being the village's single largest employer. The ranks of GM workers had swelled with French Canadian, Polish, and Slovak immigrants, followed by Cubans, Dominicans, Ecuadorians, and others. The plant at its peak employed over 4,000 workers.\nThe industrial heyday of the Tarrytowns lasted until the 1973\u20131975 recession in the United States. Manufacturing employment in the Tarrytowns started steadily declining, following a nationwide trend. The Duracell (formerly, P. R. Mallory and Co) battery manufacturing facility on Elm Street closed in 1984. The North Tarrytown Assembly followed in 1996. Manufacturing buildings were demolished. (The two heavily polluted sites subsequently underwent a lengthy decontamination.)\nThe Village of Sleepy Hollow.\nWith its days as a factory town over, North Tarrytown began reconnecting with, and drawing upon, its storied history, literary heritage, and natural beauty of its surroundings. Luckily, much of its historic and natural sites survived the industrial era, largely through the restoration and preservation efforts of John D. Rockefeller Jr. and other members of several generations of the Rockefeller family.\nIn 1996, the same year General Motors closed its North Tarrytown operations, the village officially changed its name to the historical name of the area immortalized in \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.\" The idea of Sleepy Hollow disaffiliating from the town of Mount Pleasant has been raised periodically (most notably in the mid-1970s and again around 2007 by longtime mayor Philip Zegarelli) often as a way to consolidate services and save money by eliminating one layer of government. These attempts did not succeed.\nSome 20 years the GM plant closed, its former site was developed into a large residential community called Edge-on-Hudson. The site's extensive waterfront, which was inaccessible to the public for more than a century, is now part of the Westchester RiverWalk, offering breathtaking views of the Hudson River. Sleepy Hollow has become a major tourist destination, especially during the Halloween season, when tens of thousands of people flock to the village, drawn by its myths, legends, and historic sites. In the words of Washington Irving, \"the place still continues under the sway of some witching power, that holds a spell over the minds of the good people, causing them to walk in a continual reverie\" (\"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\").\nGeography.\nSleepy Hollow is located at (41.091998, \u221273.864361). According to the United States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , of which is land and , or 55.58%, is water.\nThe boundary between Tarrytown on the south and Sleepy Hollow on the north runs more or less along Andre Brook (formerly, Clark's Kill), which originates on Kykuit Hill above the villages and empties into the Hudson River near Tarrytown Boat Club. These days, the brook flows mostly through culverts under streets and roadways, daylighting in a few places near the Sleepy Hollow High School and in Patriot's Park.\nThe two villages share the postal (ZIP) code 10591.\nDirectly across the river from Sleepy Hollow is the village of Nyack in New York's Rockland County.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 9,870 people, 3,181 households, and 2,239 families residing in the village. The population density was . There were 3,253 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the village was 61.0% White, 6.2% African American, 0.8% Native American, 3.3% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 23.5% from other races, and 5.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 51.0% of the population, many of whom are Ecuadorian, Dominican, Chilean, and Puerto Rican. Sleepy Hollow has one of the highest proportions of Ecuadorian American residents of any community nationwide, standing at 17.5% as of the 2010 census.\nThere were 3,181 households, out of which 36.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.5% were married couples living together, 13.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.6% were non-families. 23.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.89 and the average family size was 3.37.\nIn the village, the population was spread out, with 25.0% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 36.7% from 25 to 44, 18.9% from 45 to 64, and 10.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the village was $54,201, and the median income for a family was $63,889. Males had a median income of $39,923 versus $32,146 for females. The per capita income for the village was $28,325. About 5.7% of families and 7.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.3% of those under age 18 and 7.9% of those age 65 or over.\nNotable landmarks.\nThe village is home to the aforementioned Philipsburg Manor House and the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow, listed as National Historic Landmarks. Local sites listed in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) are the Sleepy Hollow Cemetery; Patriot's Park; the Edward Harden Mansion, now serving as the administration building for the Public Schools of the Tarrytowns; the Philipse Manor Railroad Station, now repurposed by the Hudson Valley Writers Center; the Tarrytown Light; and the Old Croton Aqueduct State Historic Park, segments of which run through Sleepy Hollow.\nJust outside the village boundaries are several more sites listed in the NRHP, including the Rockefeller estate, Kykuit; the Scarborough Historic District, with Sleepy Hollow Country Club as its contributing property; and the Union Church of Pocantico Hills. Rockefeller State Park Preserve (on the New York State Register of Historic Places) abuts the Sleepy Hollow Cemetery. Part of the preserve containing the remnants of William Rockefeller Jr.'s estate, Rockwood Hall, lies just north of Sleepy Hollow's Phelps Hospital. On the campus of the hospital, across the road from Rockwood Hall, sits the handsome Italianate-style mansion, the James House, one of a few remaining mid-19th-century mansions in the lower Hudson Valley. The granite and brownstone mansion was built in 1851 for the son of copper magnate Anson Green Phelps. (It is now a rental venue.)\nWorth visiting is also the village\u2019s picturesque northernmost neighborhood, Sleepy Hollow Manor, with its meandering tree-lined streets and handsome houses built in the 1920s and 1930s on the former estate of John C. Fr\u00e9mont. His now-updated house still overlooks the Hudson River there. Also of note is Kingsland Point Park with its massive Kidd's Rock (according to local lore, the boulder was a clandestine meeting place for Frederick Philipse and Captain Kidd, a privateer-turned-pirate and allegedly a business associate of Philipse). On Broadway (U.S. Route 9), near the Old Dutch Church, visitors can see an 18th-century milestone that reads \"Miles from New York 28\" and an old mounting block used for mounting horses and getting into carriages. Broadway was part of the historic Albany Post Road, and milestones were placed along it to assist travelers with navigation and to help calculate postage delivery fees. Broadway, New York's longest street, ends less than a mile north of this stone marker, on the northern boundary of Sleepy Hollow.\nEmergency services.\nAs of 2025, the village's police department had 24 officers, six school crossing guards, and 10 civilian employees. The village is also served by the New York State Police and Westchester County Department of Public Safety. The Westchester County Marine Unit provides police coverage and services along the Westchester County side of the Hudson River.\nThe Sleepy Hollow Fire Department began with organization of the North Tarrytown Fire Patrol on May 26, 1876. Within 25 years it had grown to five companies in three fire stations. As of 2025, there were three engines, one tower ladder, one rescue, two fireboats and other equipment. The fire department is run by volunteers and responds to over 300 calls each year.\nEmergency medical services in Sleepy Hollow depend on volunteers assisted by paid staff. The Ambulance Corps has two basic life support ambulances and an EMT fly-car. Mount Pleasant Paramedics provides advanced life support. The award-winning Emergency Department of the local Phelps Hospital sees more than 28,000 patient visits annually.\nEducation.\nMost of Sleepy Hollow is in Union Free School District of the Tarrytowns while a portion is in Pocantico Hills Central School District. Sleepy Hollow High School is part of the Union Free School District of Tarrytowns. The mascot of the school is the Headless Horseman. It is consistently ranked in the top 5-10% of high schools in New York State.\nThe Warner Library, member of Westchester Library System, is located on North Broadway just south of Patriot's Park where Tarrytown ends and Sleepy Hollow begins. The library has served both villages since 1929. It was built and gifted to the two communities by Worcester Reed Warner, a mechanical engineer, wealthy industrialist, and philanthropist, and his wife Cornelia. The library provides a wide variety of cultural and educational resources, from bilingual storytimes and thematic lectures to concerts and art workshops.\nPlaces of Worship.\nFor information on places of worship in the Sleepy Hollow-Tarrytown area, see Tarrytown, New York--Places of Worship in Tarrytown/Sleepy Hollow.\nIn popular culture.\nSleepy Hollow has been used as a setting or filming location for numerous media works, including films, games, literature, motion pictures, and television productions, including:\nTelevision shot on location in Sleepy Hollow includes:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58552", "revid": "43283345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58552", "title": "Zymotic disease", "text": "Medical term for acute infectious diseases\nZymotic disease was a 19th-century medical term for acute infectious diseases, especially \"chief fevers and contagious diseases (e.g. typhus and typhoid fevers, smallpox, scarlet fever, measles, erysipelas, cholera, whooping-cough, diphtheria, etc.)\".\nZyme or microzyme was the name of the organism presumed to be the cause of the disease.\nAs originally employed by William Farr, of the British Registrar-General's department, the term included the diseases which were \"epidemic, endemic and contagious,\" and were regarded as owing their origin to the presence of a morbific principle in the system, acting in a manner analogous to, although not identical with, the process of fermentation.\nIn the late 19th century, Antoine B\u00e9champ proposed that tiny organisms he termed \"microzymas\", and not cells, are the fundamental building block of life. B\u00e9champ claimed these microzymas are present in all things\u2014animal, vegetable, and mineral\u2014whether living or dead. Microzymas coalesce to form blood clots and bacteria. Depending upon the condition of the host, microzymas assume various forms. In a diseased body, the microzymas become pathological bacteria and viruses. In a healthy body, microzymas form healthy cells. When a plant or animal dies, the microzymas live on. His ideas did not gain acceptance.\nThe word \"zymotic\" comes from the Greek word \u03b6\u03c5\u03bc\u03bf\u1fe6\u03bd \"zumo\u00fbn\" which means \"to ferment\". It was in British official use from 1839. This term was used extensively in the English Bills of Mortality as a cause of death from 1842. In 1877, Thomas Watson wrote in a \"Scientific American\" article \"Zymotic Disease\" describing contagion as the origin of infectious diseases.\nRobert Newstead (1859\u20131947) used this term in a 1908 publication in the \"Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology\", to describe the contribution of house flies (\"Musca domestica\") towards the spread of infectious diseases. However, by the early 1900s, bacteriology \"displaced the old fermentation theory\", and so the term became obsolete.\nIn her \"Diagram of the causes of mortality in the army in the East\", Florence Nightingale depicts The blue wedges measured from the centre of the circle represent area for area the deaths from Preventible or Mitigable Zymotic diseases; the red wedges measured from the centre the deaths from wounds, &amp; the black wedges measured from the centre the deaths from all other causes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58553", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58553", "title": "Zwolle", "text": "Zwolle () is a city and municipality in the Northeastern Netherlands. It is the capital of the province of Overijssel and the province's second-largest municipality, after Enschede, and has a population of 132,441 as of December 2023. Zwolle borders the province of Gelderland and lies on the eastern side of the River IJssel.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArchaeological findings indicate that the area surrounding Zwolle has been inhabited since ancient times. A woodhenge found in the Zwolle-Zuid suburb in 1993 was dated to the Bronze Age period. During the Roman era, the area was inhabited by Salian Franks.\nThe modern city was founded around 800 CE by Frisians merchants and troops of Charlemagne. Previous spellings of its name include the identically pronounced \"Suolle\", which means \"hill\" (cf. the English cognate verb \"to swell\"). This refers to an incline in the landscape between the four rivers surrounding the city, IJssel, Vecht, Aa and Zwarte Water. The hill was the only piece of land that would remain dry during the frequent floodings of the rivers. Zwolle was established on that incline.\nA document mentions the existence of a parish church dedicated to St Michael. That church, the Grote of Sint Micha\u00eblskerk (St. Michael's church), was renovated in the first half of the 15th century and exists to this day. The church contains a richly carved pulpit, the work of Adam Straes van Weilborch (about 1620), some good carving, and an exquisite Baroque organ from 1721 designed by master organ builder Arp Schnitger and completed by his sons Franz Caspar and Johann Georg.\nOn 31 August 1230, the bishop of Utrecht granted Zwolle city rights. Zwolle became a member of the Hanseatic league in 1294, and in 1361 joined the war between the Hanseatic League and Valdemar IV of Denmark. In the 1370 Treaty of Stralsund that ended the war, Zwolle was awarded a \"vitte\", a trade colony, in Scania, then part of Denmark. Zwolle's golden age came in the 15th century. Between 1402 and 1450, the city's Gross Regional Product multiplied by about six.\nIn July 1324 and October 1361, regional noblemen set fire to Zwolle. In the 1324 fire, only nine buildings escaped the flames.\nZwolle was also, with Deventer, one of the centers of the Brethren of the Common Life, a monastic movement. from Zwolle, on a slight eminence called the Agnietenberg (hill of St Agnes), once stood the Augustinian convent in which Thomas \u00e0 Kempis spent the greatest part of his life and died (in 1471).\nAt least as early as 1911, Zwolle had a considerable trade by river, a large fish market, and the most important cattle market in the Netherlands after Rotterdam. The more important industries comprised cotton manufactures, iron works, boat-building, dyeing and bleaching, tanning, rope-making, and salt-making.\nIn World War II, Zwolle was single-handedly liberated from the Nazis by Canadian soldier L\u00e9o Major. He was made an honorary citizen of Zwolle on 14 April 2005, the 60th anniversary of his liberating of the city. He also has a street named after him, Leo Majorlaan.\n21st century.\nIn 2004, Zwolle's De Librije restaurant was honored with 3 stars by Michelin Guide; as of 2018, it is one of only three restaurants so honored in the entire country.\nIn 2023, Tewelde Goitom, an Eritrean convicted in Ethiopia of migrant smuggling, kidnapping in Sinai and human trafficking appeared at a pretrial hearing in Zwolle, which made international headlines.\nBlauwvingers.\nCitizens of Zwolle are colloquially known as \"Blauwvingers\" (Bluefingers). According to legend, the name dates back to 1682, when the St\u00a0Michael's church tower collapsed. The authorities were strapped for cash and saw no option but to sell the church bells to the neighbouring city Kampen. To make sure that Kampen would not make too much profit from the deal, the local authorities asked a high price for the church bells. Kampen accepted, but when the bells arrived it became clear that they were too damaged to be played. In revenge, Kampen paid in copper coins of four \"duiten\" (the equivalent of two-and-a-half cents). Zwolle distrusted Kampen and wanted to be sure they truly paid the entire price. After the meticulous counting of the vast number of copper coins, their fingers had turned blue.\nIn reality, the name Blauwvinger stems from 1521, when the governors of Zwolle broke the oath of loyalty they made to the Duke of Gelre. The name Blauwvinger refers to the raised fingers with which the governors had promised their loyalty to the Duke at his inauguration. At that time, Zwolle and Kampen were embroiled in a dispute over toll collection on the IJssel River. Zwolle initially aligned with the Duke of Gelre, Charles of Egmont, but eventually returned to the Bishop of Utrecht. During this period of political unrest, Duke Charles of Gelre was captured when he entered Zwolle. Ultimately, he was allowed to depart under the condition that Zwolle would retain its independence. The name Blauwvingers stems from the fact that the residents committed perjury twice, first to the bishop and then to the duke.\nSites.\nThe Grote of Sint Micha\u00eblskerk (St. Michael's church) has a baroque organ built by Arp Schnitger. The Roman Catholic \"Onze Lieve Vrouwe ten Hemelopneming\"-basilica (Our Lady of the Assumption) dates back to 1399. The church tower, called \"Peperbus\" (pepperpot), is one of the tallest and most famous church towers in the Netherlands. The modernized town hall was originally built in 1448.\nThe \"Broerenkerk\" church was part of a Dominican monastery founded in 1465. The monastery was closed in 1580 and the monks were expelled. From 1640 until 1982 the church was used for Protestant services. Following a restoration in 1983\u20131988 it was used for cultural events and became a bookstore.\n\"See also \"\nEducational institutions.\nZwolle is home to several universities of applied sciences and colleges:\nTransport.\nCycling.\nNearly half of all trips in Zwolle were cycled as of 2013.\nRoad transport.\nThe A28 serves Zwolle with 4 exits, and runs from Utrecht to Groningen. It was being widened to 8 lanes across the IJssel River and 6 lanes from Zwolle to Meppel in 2010 and 2011. The motorway initially opened between 1964 and 1970.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns\u2014sister cities.\nZwolle is currently twinned with:\nIn the past, Zwolle had partnerships with:\nThere is also a small rural town in the U.S. State of Louisiana named after Zwolle. The two cities maintain close informal ties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58554", "revid": "29840718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58554", "title": "Perpetual motion machine", "text": ""}
{"id": "58555", "revid": "45371308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58555", "title": "Sleepy Hollow Cemetery", "text": "Cemetery in Westchester County, New York, US\nSleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York, is the final resting place of numerous famous figures, including Washington Irving, whose 1820 short story \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" is set in the adjacent burying ground of the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow. Incorporated in 1849 as Tarrytown Cemetery, the site posthumously honored Irving's request that it change its name to Sleepy Hollow Cemetery. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2009.\nHistory.\nThe cemetery is a non-profit, non-sectarian burying ground of about . It is contiguous with, but separate from, the churchyard of the Old Dutch Church, the colonial-era church that was a setting for \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\". The Rockefeller family estate (Kykuit), whose grounds abut Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, contains the private Rockefeller cemetery.\nIn 1894 under the leadership of Marcius D. Raymond, publisher of the local \"Tarrytown Argus\" newspaper, funds were raised to build a granite monument honoring the soldiers of the American Revolutionary War buried in the cemetery.\nNotable monuments.\nThe Helmsley mausoleum, final resting place of Harry and Leona Helmsley, features a window showing the skyline of Manhattan in stained glass. It was built by Mrs. Helmsley at a cost of $1.4 million in 2007. She had her husband's body moved from its resting place in Woodlawn Cemetery (Bronx, New York) to the new mausoleum.\nNotable burials.\nNumerous notable people are interred at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, including:\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral outdoor scenes from the feature film \"House of Dark Shadows\" (1970) were filmed at the cemetery's receiving vault. The cemetery also served as a location for the Ramones' 1989 music video \"Pet Sematary\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58556", "revid": "385115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58556", "title": "Zwieidneck von Sudenhorst, Hans", "text": ""}
{"id": "58557", "revid": "41682320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58557", "title": "Zwickau", "text": "Town in Saxony, Germany\nZwickau (; ) is the fourth-largest city of Saxony, Germany, after Leipzig, Dresden and Chemnitz, with around 88,000 inhabitants.\nThe West Saxon city is situated in the valley of the Zwickau Mulde (German: \"Zwickauer Mulde\"; progression: Mulde\u2192 Elbe\u2192 North Sea), and lies in a string of cities sitting in the densely populated foreland of the Elster and Ore Mountains stretching from Plauen in the southwest via Zwickau, Chemnitz and Freiberg to Dresden in the northeast. Zwickau is the seat of the Zwickau District, the most densely populated district in the new states of Germany.\nZwickau is the seat of the West Saxon University of Zwickau (German: \"Wests\u00e4chsische Hochschule Zwickau\") with campuses in Zwickau, Markneukirchen, Reichenbach im Vogtland and Schneeberg (Erzgebirge). The city is the birthplace of composer Robert Schumann.\nZwickau has historically been one of the centres of the German automotive industry. It is the cradle of Audi and its forerunner Horch. Horchwerke AG Zwickau was founded there in 1904 and was renamed to Audiwerke Zwickau AG in 1909. Zwickau was also the seat of VEB Sachsenring (now Sachsenring GmbH), which produced East Germany's most popular car, the Trabant, in Zwickau. Since 1990, there is a large Volkswagen plant in Zwickau-Mosel.\nThe Zwickau Mulde River, originating in Sch\u00f6neck/Vogtl. in the Western Ore Mountains, traverses the city in a south-to-north direction. It enters Zwickau between Zwickau-Cainsdorf and Zwickau-Bockwa, and leaves at Zwickau-Schlunzig near the Volkswagen plant, and is spanned by 17 bridges within the city. The Silver Road, Saxony's longest tourist route, connects Dresden with Zwickau.\nZwickau can be reached by car via the nearby \"Autobahn\"s A4 and A72, the main railway station (Zwickau Hauptbahnhof), via a public airfield which takes light aircraft, and by bike along the Zwickau Mulde River on the so-called Mulderadweg.\nHistory.\nThe region around Zwickau was settled by Sorbs as early as the 7th century AD. The name Zwickau is probably a Germanization of the Sorbian toponym \"\u0160wikawa\", which derives from Svarozi\u010d, the Slavic Sun and fire god. In the 10th century, German settlers began arriving and the native Slavs were Germanized. A trading place known as \"terretorio Zcwickaw\" (in Medieval Latin) was mentioned in 1118. The settlement received a town charter in 1212, and hosted Franciscans and Cistercians during the 13th century. Zwickau was a free imperial city from 1290 to 1323, but was subsequently granted to the Margraviate of Meissen. Although regional mining began in 1316, extensive mining increased with the discovery of silver in the Schneeberg in 1470. Because of the silver ore deposits in the Erzgebirge, Zwickau developed in the 15th and 16th centuries and grew to be an important economic and cultural centre of Saxony.\nIts nine churches include the Gothic church of St.\u00a0Mary (1451\u20131536), with a spire high and a bell weighing 51 tons. The church contains an altar with wood carvings, eight paintings by Michael Wohlgemuth and a piet\u00e0 in carved and painted wood by Peter Breuer.\nThe late Gothic church of St.\u00a0Catharine has an altar piece ascribed to Lucas Cranach the elder, and is remembered because Thomas M\u00fcntzer was once pastor there (1520\u201322). The city hall was begun in 1404 and rebuilt many times since. The municipal archives include documents dating back to the 13th century.\nEarly printed books from the Middle Ages, historical documents, letters and books are kept in the City Archives (e.g. Meister Singer volumes by Hans Sachs (1494\u20131576)), and in the School Library founded by scholars and by the city clerk Stephan Roth during the Reformation.\nIn 1520 Martin Luther dedicated his treatise \"On the Freedom of the Christian Man\" to his friend Hermann Muehlpfort, the Lord Mayor of Zwickau. The Anabaptist movement of 1525 began at Zwickau under the inspiration of the \"Zwickau prophets\". After Wittenberg, it became the first city in Europe to join the Lutheran Reformation. The late Gothic Gewandhaus (cloth merchants' hall), was built in 1522\u201324 and is now converted into a theatre. The city was seriously damaged during the Thirty Years' War.\nThe old city of Zwickau, perched on a hill, is surrounded by heights with extensive forests and a municipal park. Near the city are the Hartenstein area, for example, with Stein and Wolfsbrunn castles and the Prinzenh\u00f6hle cave, as well as the Auersberg peak (1019 meters) and the winter sports areas around Johanngeorgenstadt and the Vogtland.\nIn the Old Town the Cathedral and the \"Gewandhaus\" (cloth merchants' hall) originate in the 16th century and when Schneeberg silver was traded. In the 19th century the city's economy was driven by industrial coal mining and later by automobile manufacturing.\nDuring World War II, in 1942, a Nazi show trial of the members of the Czarny Legion Polish underground resistance organization from Gosty\u0144 was held in Zwickau, after which 12 members were executed in Dresden, and several dozen were imprisoned in Nazi concentration camps, where 37 of them died. In May 1942, five Polish students of the Salesian Oratory in Pozna\u0144, known as the \"Pozna\u0144 Five\" or five of the 108 Blessed Polish Martyrs of World War II, were imprisoned in Zwickau, before being executed in Dresden. A subcamp of the Flossenb\u00fcrg concentration camp was located in Zwickau, whose prisoners were mostly Poles and Russians, but also Italians, French, Hungarians, Jews, Czechs, Germans and others.\nOn 17 April 1945, US troops entered the city. They withdrew on 30 June 1945 and handed Zwickau to the Soviet Red Army. Between 1944 and 2003, the city had a population of over 100,000.\nA major employer is Volkswagen which assembles its ID.3, ID.4 and ID.5 models, as well as Audi and Cupra EV's in the Zwickau-Mosel vehicle plant.\nEconomic history.\nCoal mining.\nCoal mining is mentioned as early as 1348. However, mining on an industrial scale first started in the early 19th century. The coal mines of Zwickau and the neighbouring Oelsnitz-Lugau coalfield contributed significantly to the industrialisation of the region and the city.\nIn 1885 Carl Wolf invented an improved gas-detecting safety mining-lamp. He held the first world patent for it. Together with his business partner Friemann he founded the \"Friemann &amp; Wolf\" factory. Coal mining ceased in 1978. About 230 million tonnes had been mined to a depth of over 1,000 metres. In 1992 Zwickau's last coke oven plant was closed.\nMany industrial branches developed in the city in the wake of the coal mining industry: mining equipment, iron and steel works, textile, machinery in addition to chemical, porcelain, paper, glass, dyestuffs, wire goods, tinware, stockings, and curtains. There were also steam saw-mills, diamond and glass polishing works, iron-foundries, and breweries.\nAutomotive industry.\nIn 1904 the Horch automobile plant was founded, followed by the Audi factory in 1909. In 1932 both brands were incorporated into Auto Union but retained their independent trademarks. Auto Union racing cars, developed by Ferdinand Porsche and Robert Eberan von Eberhorst, driven by Bernd Rosemeyer, Hans Stuck, Tazio Nuvolari, Ernst von Delius, became well known nationally and internationally. During World War II, the Nazi government operated a satellite camp of the Flossenb\u00fcrg concentration camp in Zwickau which was sited near the Horch Auto Union plant. The Nazi administration built a hard labour prison camp at Osterstein Castle. Both camps were liberated by the US Army in 1945. On 1 August 1945 military administration was handed over to the Soviet Army. The Auto Union factories of Horch and Audi were dismantled by the Soviets; Auto Union relocated to Ingolstadt, Bavaria, evolving into the present day Audi company. In 1948 all large companies were seized by the East German government.\nWith the founding of the German Democratic Republic in 1949 in East Germany, post-war reconstruction began. In 1958 the Horch and Audi factories were merged into the Sachsenring plant. At the Sachsenring automotive plant the compact \"Trabant\" cars were manufactured. These small cars had a two-cylinder, two-stroke engine. The car was the first vehicle in the world to be industrially manufactured with a plastic car body. The production of the Trabant was discontinued after German reunification, but Volkswagen built a new factory in the nearby Mosel area to the north of the city and Sachsenring is now a supplier for the automobile industry. The former VEB Sachsenring manufacturing site was acquired by Volkswagen in 1990 and has since been redeveloped as an engine and transmission manufacturing facility. Nowadays the headquarters of Volkswagen-Saxony Ltd. (a VW subsidiary) is in the northern part of Zwickau.\nAudi together with the city of Zwickau operates the August Horch Museum in the former Audi works. In 2021, production of the Audi Q4 e-tron began at the Zwickau-Mosel plant, marking the return of the manufacture of Audi badged cars in Zwickau for the first time in over 80 years.\nUranium mining.\nTwo major industrial facilities of the Soviet SDAG Wismut were situated in the city: the uranium mill in Zwickau-Crossen, producing uranium concentrate from ores mined in the Erzgebirge and Thuringia, and the machine building plant in Zwickau-Cainsdorf producing equipment for the uranium mines and mills of East Germany. Uranium milling ended in 1989, and after the unification the Wismut machine building plant was sold to a private investor.\nBoundaries.\nZwickau is bounded by M\u00fclsen, Reinsdorf, Wilkau-Hasslau, Hirschfeld (Verwaltungsgemeinschaft Kirchberg), Lichtentanne, Werdau, Neukirchen, Crimmitschau, Dennheritz (Verwaltungsgemeinschaft Crimmitschau), and the city of Glauchau.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nZwickau is home to the University of Applied Sciences Zwickau, with about 4,700 students and two campuses within the boundaries of Zwickau.\nDr. Martin Luther School (German: \"Dr. Martin Luther Schule\") is a grade 1\u20134 school of the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church in Zwickau.\nPolitics.\nMayor and city council.\nThe first freely elected mayor after German reunification was Rainer Eichhorn of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), who served from 1990 to 2001. The mayor was originally chosen by the city council, but since 1994 has been directly elected. Dietmar Vettermann, also of the CDU, served from 2001 until 2008. He was succeeded by Pia Findei\u00df of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), who was in office until 2020. The most recent mayoral election was held on 20 September 2020, with a runoff held on 11 October, at which Constance Arndt (B\u00fcrger f\u00fcr Zwickau) was elected.\nThe most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:\nTransport.\nThe city is close to the A4 (Dresden-Erfurt) and A72 (Hof-Chemnitz) \"Autobahns\".\nZwickau Hauptbahnhof is on the Dresden\u2013Werdau line, part of the Saxon-Franconian trunk line, connecting Nuremberg and Dresden. There are further railway connections to Leipzig as well as Karlovy Vary and Cheb in the Czech Republic. The core element of Zwickau's urban public transport system is the Zwickau tramway network; the system is also the prototype of the so-called Zwickau Model for such systems.\nThe closest airport is Leipzig-Altenburg, which has no scheduled commercial flights. The nearest major airports are Leipzig/Halle Airport and Dresden Airport, both of which offer a large number of national and international flights.\nMuseums.\nIn the city centre there are three museums: an art museum from the 19th century and the houses of priests from 13th century, both located next to St.\u00a0Mary's church. Just around the corner there is the Robert-Schumann museum. The museums offer different collections dedicated to the history of the city, as well as art and a mineralogical, palaeontological and geological collection with many specimens from the city and the nearby Ore Mountains.\nZwickau is the birthplace of the composer Robert Schumann. The house where he was born in 1810 still stands in the marketplace. This is now called Robert Schumann House and is a museum dedicated to him.\nThe histories of the Audi and Horch automobile factories are presented at the \"August Horch Museum Zwickau\". The museum is an \"Anchor Point\" of the European Route of Industrial Heritage (EIRH).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nZwickau is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58558", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58558", "title": "Zweibr\u00fccken", "text": "Zweibr\u00fccken (; ; ; literally translated as \"Two Bridges\") is a town in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany, on the Schwarzbach River.\nName.\nThe name \"Zweibr\u00fccken\" means 'two bridges'; older forms of the name include Middle High German \"Zweinbr\u00fccken\", Latin \"Geminus Pons\" and \"Bipontum\", and French \"Deux-Ponts\", all with the same meaning.\nHistory.\nThe town was the capital of the former Imperial State of Palatine Zweibr\u00fccken owned by the House of Wittelsbach. The ducal castle is now occupied by the high court of the Palatinate (\"Oberlandesgericht\"). There is a fine Gothic Protestant church, Alexander's church, founded in 1493 and rebuilt in 1955.\nFrom the end of the 12th century, Zweibr\u00fccken was the seat of the County of Zweibr\u00fccken, the counts being descended from Henry I, youngest son of Simon I, Count of Saarbr\u00fccken (d. 1182). The line became extinct on the death of Count Eberhard II (1394), who in 1385 had sold half his territory to the Count Palatine of the Rhine, and held the other half as his feudal domain. Louis (d. 1489), son of Stephen, founded the line of the House of Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken. In 1533, Wolfgang, Count Palatine of Zweibr\u00fccken converted Palatine Zweibr\u00fccken to the new Protestant faith. In 1559, Wolfgang founded the earliest grammar school in the town (Herzog-Wolfgang-Gymnasium), which lasted until 1987.\nWhen Charles X Gustav, the son of John Casimir, Count Palatine of Kleeburg, succeeded his cousin, Queen Christina of Sweden, on the Swedish throne, Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken was in personal union with Sweden, a situation that lasted until 1718.\nStarting in 1680, Louis XIV's Chambers of Reunion awarded Zweibruecken and other localities to France, but under the 1697 Treaty of Rijswijk, \"The Duchy of Zweibruecken was restored to the King of Sweden, as Count Palatine of the Rhine.\"\nIn 1731, Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken passed to the Palatinate-Birkenfeld-Zweibr\u00fccken branch of the counts palatine, from where it came under the sway of Bavaria in 1799. It was occupied by France in 1793 and on 4 November 1797, Zweibr\u00fccken became a canton centre in department of Mont Tonnerre. At the Peace of Lun\u00e9ville in 1801, the French annexation of Zweibr\u00fccken was confirmed; on its reunion with Germany in 1814 the greater part of the territory was given to Bavaria, the remainder to Oldenburg and Kingdom of Prussia. The town of Zweibr\u00fccken became part of the Palatine region of the Kingdom of Bavaria.\nAt the ducal printing office at Zweibr\u00fccken the fine series of the classical editions known as the Bipontine Editions was published (1779 sqq.).\nIn 1848, the estimated population was 7,300 inhabitants.\nThe last prominent social event before the First World War was the inauguration of the \"Rosengarten\" (rose garden) by Princess Hildegard of Bavaria in June 1914. As a consequence of the First World War, Zweibr\u00fccken was occupied by French troops between 1918 and 1930. In the course of the \"Kristallnacht\" in 1938, Zweibr\u00fccken's synagogue was destroyed. On the outbreak of the Second World War the town was evacuated in 1939\u20131940, as it lay in the \u2018Red Zone\u2019 on the fortified Siegfried Line. Shortly before the end of the war, on 14 March 1945, the town was nearly completely destroyed in an air raid by the Royal Canadian Air Force, with the loss of more than 200 lives. On 20 March, American ground troops reached Zweibr\u00fccken. The town became part of the new state of Rhineland-Palatinate after the war.\nIn 1993, the town underwent a major change. With the departure of the Americans, the military area became free, which corresponded altogether to a third of the entire urban area. Unemployment increased to approximately 21%, leading to a decrease in demand in the retail trade of approximately 25%.\nGeography.\nZweibr\u00fccken is in the Southwestern portion of the Western Palatinate, bordering the state of Saarland. It is about from Pirmasens, from Saarbr\u00fccken and from Kaiserslautern. The town stretches about north to south and about east-west.\nEconomy.\nWeaving, brewing and the manufacture of machinery, chicory, cigars, malt, boots, furniture and soap were the chief industries before World War II. Nowadays Terex cranes and bulldozers and John Deere harvesting equipment are the chief industries.\nThe Hochschule Kaiserslautern http://, one of the largest universities in the Rhineland-Palatinate with about 6,300 students, has one of its three campuses in Zweibr\u00fccken.\nCulture and sights.\nThe city of Zweibr\u00fccken is represented at various cultural events by the Rose Queen, who is elected every two years.\nParks.\nZweibr\u00fccken has one of the largest Rosariums in the World with 45000 Plants and 1500 Species. It consists of 2 gardens with the main garden having a area of 50.000 square meters. The second, smaller garden is accessible without entry fee and is located at the Fasanerie and contains Wild Rose plants. The city is sometimes known as the \"Rose City\".\nMuseums.\nThe Zweibr\u00fccken City Museum has a permanent exhibition in the former residence of court gardener Ernst August Bernhard Petri, documenting the eventful history of Zweibr\u00fccken. In addition, special exhibitions take place regularly, e.g. on the occasion of the 200th anniversary of the State Stud.\nLibraries.\nThe Bibliotheca Bipontina is a scientific regional library in Zweibr\u00fccken, whose holdings mainly go back to rescued parts of the ducal libraries and therefore partly houses very valuable first editions from the 16th century. It is part of the Landesbibliothekszentrum Rheinland-Pfalz (Rhineland-Palatinate State Library Centre) and one of the most important old holdings libraries in the state. The Bibliotheca Bipontina is housed in the building of the Helmholtz-Gymnasium Zweibr\u00fccken. The Zweibr\u00fccken City Library, which has existed since 1903, is housed in an adjoining building of the town hall and has a stock of around 50,000 volumes. Branches are the youth library and the Rimschweiler branch.\nZweibr\u00fccken Air Base.\nOn the outskirts of the town, Zweibr\u00fccken Air Base was home during the Cold War to the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) until early 1969, then to the United States Air Forces in Europe (USAFE) from 1969. The RCAF stationed No. 3 Fighter Wing of No.1 Canadian Air Division at Zweibr\u00fccken AB. During the years 1953 to 1968, it was the home to the RCAF's 413, 427 and 434 Fighter Squadrons flying F-86 Sabre jets, and 440 Squadron, which flew the CF-100 Canuck, then the CF-104 Starfighter. When the RCAF transferred the wing southeast to CFB Baden\u2013Soellingen, the USAFE moved onto the base with Phantom RF-4C aircraft, under the 38th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron of the 26th Tactical Reconnaissance Wing. These were photo-reconnaissance aircraft with missions all over Europe and used in Operation Desert Storm.\nThe Short C-23 Sherpa, a small prop-driven transport plane, also flew out of the base in the 1980s under the 10th Military Airlift Squadron, a tenant Military Airlift Command unit. The squadron's mission was to deliver high-priority aircraft parts to bases in USAFE to ensure a maximum number of aircraft were combat-ready. Today Zweibr\u00fccken Air Base has been transformed into the modern Zweibr\u00fccken Airport, an international airport with flights to Palma de Mallorca, Antalya, Gran Canaria, Teneriffe, Rhodos, Heraklion and Fuerteventura (TUIfly), Istanbul (Pegasus Airlines).\nOn the other side of the town was Kreuzberg Kaserne, home to various units of the United States Army. Only one combat unit was located there: Battery A, 2nd Battalion, 60th Air Defense Artillery, with its Headquarters and Headquarters Battery (HHB) at Ramstein Air Base. The 3d Battalion, 60th ADA was a subordinate unit of the 32nd Army Air Defense Command. Major tenants at Kreuzberg Kaserne were USAISEC-EUR (Information Systems Engineering Command - Europe) and the USA MATCOMEUR (Material Command, Europe), later renamed the US Army Material Management Agency, Europe. During the US military draw down in the 1990s, control of the Air Base was transferred to the Bundeswehr. The base's housing toward the center of the city and Kreuzberg itself were eventually also transferred to the German government by the mid-1990s.\nTransport.\nZweibr\u00fccken is situated at the Landau-Rohrbach railway and offsets hourly connections to Saarbr\u00fccken. This line is operated by DB Regio Mitte with currently DMU's of the Class 642 (Siemens Desiro Classic).\nThe public transport is operated by Stadtbus Zweibr\u00fccken GmbH, a Transdev Germany company, with currently eight bus lines (221-226, 228 and 229 on saturday from 2 p.m. and sundays). The company is integrated in the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Neckar (VRN). The bus service operates from 5:00\u00a0a.m. to 8:00\u00a0p.m. on weekdays, on weekends the times are changed depending on the requirements. On Sunday, the bus service does not start until 2:00\u00a0p.m. and is then only provided with lines 225 and 229. The end of operations is then 7:30\u00a0p.m. The fleet consists of 10 MAN Lion's City city buses from 2020, and 4 articulated buses Mercedes-Benz Citaro G and a further 3 MAN Lion's City buses are available for school buses and booster traffic in the rush hour.\nMotorsport.\nFrom 1996 to 1999, a temporary circuit at Zweibrucken Airport held various rounds of the Super Tourenwagen Cup and the German F3 Championship. The track still hosts historic racing events as recently as September 3, 2020\nClimate.\nClimate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is \"\" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nZweibr\u00fccken is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58559", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58559", "title": "Maya mythology", "text": " \nMaya or Mayan mythology is part of Mesoamerican mythology and comprises all of the Maya tales in which personified forces of nature, deities, and the heroes interacting with each other play the main roles. The mythology of the Pre-Spanish era has to be reconstructed from iconography and incidental hieroglyphic captions. Other parts of Mayan oral tradition (such as animal tales, folk tales, and many moralising stories) are not considered here.\nImportant Early-Colonial and recent narrative themes.\nIn Maya narrative, the origin of many natural and cultural phenomena is set out, often with the moral aim of defining the ritual relationship between humankind and its environment. In such a way, one finds explanations about the origin of the heavenly bodies (Sun and Moon, but also Venus, the Pleiades, the Milky Way); the mountain landscape; clouds, rain, thunder and lightning; wild and tame animals; the colors of the maize; diseases and their curative herbs; agricultural instruments; the steam bath, etc. The following more encompassing themes can be discerned.\nCosmogony.\nThe \"Popol Vuh\" describes the creation of the earth by a group of creator deities, as well as its sequel. The Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel relates the collapse of the sky and the deluge, followed by the slaying of the earth crocodile, the raising of the sky and the erection of the five World Trees. The Lacandons also knew the tale of the creation of the Underworld.\nCreation of Humankind.\nThe \"Popol Vuh\" gives a sequence of four efforts at creation: First were animals, then wet clay, wood, and then last, the creation of the first ancestors from maize dough. To this, the Lacandons add the creation of the main kin groupings and their 'totemic' animals. A Verapaz myth preserved by Las Casas in his 'Apolog\u00e9tica Historia Sumaria' assigns the creation of humankind to artisan gods similar to the \"Popol Vuh\" monkey brothers. The creation of humanity is concluded by the Mesoamerican tale of the opening of the Maize (or Sustenance) Mountain by the Lightning deities.\nActions of the Heroes: Arranging the World.\nThe best-known hero myth, included in the \"Popol Vuh\", is about the defeat of a bird demon and of the deities of disease and death by the Hero Twins, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Of considerable interest is also the parallel narrative of a maize hero defeating the deities of Thunder and Lightning and establishing a pact with them. Although its present spread is confined to the Gulf Coast areas, various data suggest that this myth was once a part of Mayan oral tradition as well. Important mythological fragments about the heroic reduction of the jaguars and the acquisition of jaguar power have been preserved by the Tzotzil and Chol Maya.\nMarriage with the Earth.\nThis mythological type defines the relationship between humankind and the game and crops. An ancestral hero \u2013 Xbalanque in a Kekchi tradition \u2013 changes into a hummingbird to woo the daughter of an Earth God while she is weaving, or to abduct her; the hero's wife is finally transformed into the game, bees, snakes and insects, or the maize. If the hero gets the upper hand, he becomes the Sun, his wife the Moon. A moralistic Tzotzil version has a man rewarded with a daughter of the Rain Deity, only to get divorced and lose her again.\nOrigin of Sun and Moon.\nThe origin of Sun and Moon is not always the outcome of a marriage with the Earth. From Chiapas and the western Guatemalan Highlands comes the tale of Younger Brother and his jealous Elder Brethren: Youngest One becomes the Sun, his mother becomes the Moon, and the Elder Brethren are transformed into wild pigs and other forest animals. In a comparable way, the Elder Brethren of the \"Popol Vuh\" Twin myth are transformed into monkeys, with their younger brothers becoming Sun and Moon. To the west of the Maya area, the transformation of two brothers into sun and moon is the main subject of many tales.\nReconstructing pre-Spanish mythology.\nIt is doubtful that mythological narratives were ever completely rendered hieroglyphically, even though a sort of 'strip books' may once have existed. The surviving Mayan books are mainly of a ritual and also (in the case of the Paris Codex) historical nature, and contain few mythical scenes. As a consequence, depictions on temple walls, stelae, and movable objects (especially the so-called 'ceramic codex') are used to aid reconstruction of pre-Spanish Mayan mythology. A main problem with depictions is defining what constitutes a mythological scene, since any given scene might also represent a moment in a ritual sequence, a visual metaphor stemming from oral literature, a scene from mundane life, or a historical event. The easiest way to solve this problem is to focus on scenes that include known mythological actors. This only became possible in the early 1970s, when an enormous increase in the number of Maya vases available for study occurred.\nIn the seventies, the leading Maya scholar Michael D. Coe identified several actors of the \"Popol Vuh\" hero myth on ceramics, chief amongst these Hunahpu, Xbalanque, and the Howler Monkey brothers (Hun Batz and Hun Choven). This initiated a tendency among scholars to interpret vase scenes nearly exclusively in terms of the \"Popol Vuh\". Especially influential in this respect was one of Coe's students, Karl Taube, who equated the so-called \"tonsured maize god\" with Hun-Hunahpu, the father of the \"Popol Vuh\" hero brothers. Using bits from monumental inscriptions, Linda Schele even composed a cosmogonic myth for this \"First Father\", one that still awaits iconographic confirmation. It runs as follows: \n\"Under the aegis of First Father, One-Maize-revealed, three stones were set up at a place called 'Lying-down-sky', forming the image of the sky. First Father had entered the sky and made a house of eight partitions there. He had also raised the Wakah-Chan, the World Tree, so that its crown stood in the north sky. And finally, he had given circular motion to the sky, setting the constellations into their dance through the night.\" \nMore recently, two major works by Oswaldo Chinchilla Mazariegos (2011, 2017) opened up new horizons of iconographic interpretation by considering a great variety of Mayan and Mesoamerican tales in addition to the \"Popol Vuh\".\nImportant Late-Preclassic and Classic narrative themes.\nMythological representations run from the Late-Preclassic murals of San Bartolo up to the Late-Postclassic codices. The following is an overview of ancient myths that connect, in grand part, to the broad narrative themes of early-colonial and more recent oral traditions outlined above.\nCosmogony: Defeat of the Great Crocodile.\nIn an early description of a Yucatec fire ritual (Relaci\u00f3n de M\u00e9rida), a crocodile symbolizes the deluge and the earth; such a crocodile, called Itzam Cab Ain, was instrumental in causing a flood and was defeated by having its throat cut (Books of Chilam Balam of Man\u00ed and Tizim\u00edn). Pre-Spanish data are suggestive of these events. A water-spewing, deer-hooved celestial dragon on page 74 of the Dresden Codex is generally believed to be causing a deluge. A Postclassic mural from Mayapan shows a tied crocodile in the water, whereas a Classic inscription from Palenque (Temple XIX) mentions the decapitation of a crocodile.\nCreation of Humankind: Monkey Brothers.\nOn several vases, the Monkey Brothers of the \"Popol Vuh\", Hun-Batz ('One Howler Monkey') and Hun-Choven, are shown as Howler monkey gods writing books and sculpting human heads. Hieroglyphically and metaphorically, the acts of writing and sculpting can refer to the creation of human beings. A myth transmitted by Las Casas puts these acts in their proper, transcendent perspective by describing how previous efforts at creation failed, until two artisan brothers, Hun-Ahan and Hun-Cheven, received permission to create humankind and, indeed, the present universe, through their artifice.\nActions of the Heroes.\nHero Twins.\nTales about the Hero Brothers whom the \"Popol Vuh\" calls Hunahpu and Xbalanque (the iconographical 'Headband Gods') already circulated in the Classic Period, albeit in versions only partially coinciding with the sixteenth-century narrative. It is, for example, not at all common to find them as ball players. Two or three other episodes stand out instead. The first one, corresponding to the isolated Vucub Caquix tale in the \"Popol Vuh\", is the defeat of a bird demon already illustrated in Late-Preclassic Izapa and the earliest ball court of Copan, and found all over Mesoamerica. The second episode, not represented in the \"Popol Vuh\", has the hero brothers tend to a dying deer covered by a shroud with crossed bones, in a scene that may represent the transformation of the heroes' father into a deer. In both Maya and non-Maya hero tales, such a transformation is equivalent to the origin of death. The San Bartolo west wall murals may show still another episode, namely, Hunahpu bringing the first sacrifices in the four quarters of the world. Finally, the Headband Gods often participate in the mythology of the Tonsured Maize God, the Maize Hero.\nMaize Hero.\nThe Tonsured Maize God is the subject of many episodes, only part of which has been explained. Often he is accompanied by the Hero Twins. Some scholars consider him the Classic form of the Hero Twins' father, the failed hero Hun-Hunahpu, and accordingly view the maize god's head attached to a cacao tree as the severed head of Hun-Hunahpu suspended in a calabash tree. However, there is also a tendency to treat the Tonsured Maize God as an agent in his own right. Scholars have compared him to the maize hero of the Gulf Coast peoples and identified several episodes from this deity's mythology in Maya art, such as his aquatic birth and rebirth, his musical challenge to the deities of water and rain (on San Bartolo's west wall) and his victorious emergence from the latter's turtle abode. Others, however, prefer to view the 'musical challenge' as a rainmaking ritual and the emergence from the turtle abode as the Opening of the Maize Mountain. Another frequent scene, the maize god surrounded by nude women, may relate to the fact that the Tonsured Maize God also functions as a moon god; for in many Mesoamerican sun and moon tales, a playful young man becomes moon rather than sun upon giving in to the lures of young women. Other scholars, however, view the women as 'corn maidens', or even as the maize deity's 'harem', a concept not otherwise attested.\nJaguar Slayers.\nAccording to a concept prevalent among Maya groups of Chiapas, in the dim past jaguars presented a continuous threat to humankind. In their myths and rituals, Tzotzil, Tzeltal and Ch'ol Mayas have therefore highlighted the deeds of jaguar-slaying heroes, deeds such as killing jaguars transfixed to their stone seats; catching jaguars in a 'stone trap'; and burning them on a certain rock. All of these jaguars represent the power of hostile social groups. Codical vases show similar feats but appear to ascribe them to four men. A down-lying jaguar deity associated with war and terrestrial fire has a boulder thrown onto his belly, perhaps belonging to a trap; alternatively, he is tied and put to the torch, in one scene while being seated on a boulder-like altar. Probably because jaguars can also symbolize hostile rulers and their warriors, the latter episode is referred to in certain monumental inscriptions at Naranjo, as well as in the art of Tonina (bound captive with jaguar god attributes). The same inscriptions connect the Classic Jaguar Slayer theme to that of the enigmatic Jaguar Baby.\nMarriage with the Earth.\nHummingbird Suitor.\nAs mentioned earlier, 'Hummingbird' is the hero of a widespread narrative about the wooing and abduction of the daughter of the principal mountain deity. Since the daughter represents the 'bride-wealth' of the earth, this tale was also recited as part of the procedures for asking the hand of a girl. Accordingly, a famous Classic vase shows a suitor with a hummingbird mask presenting a vase to the upper god and what appears to be his daughter, the moon. In the same context belongs the well-known figurine of a bird perched on a loom and observing a young woman weaving.\nAbduction Episode.\nA number of codical vases show antlered young men together with young women and amazons mounting a deer, all of them surrounding a wounded or dying old man who is the patron deity of the deer (Sip). Additional scenes have the upper god, Itzamna, riding a deer and the hero brothers hunting a boar with the upper god clinging to it. The group with the wounded old man has been explained by concepts and tales relating to the hunt, but also by the abduction episode of Hummingbird myth, in a reconstructed Classic version. One such version runs like this: \n\u201cThe aged god Huk Si\u02bcp [the Lord of the Deer] fell ill. One of the Twins changes to a deer in order to abduct his wife. The wife of Huk Si\u02bcp flees with the Twins. The aged god asks Itzamnaaj that he brings back his wife. Riding on a deer Itzamnaaj pursues the Twins. The Twins attack Itzamnaaj and wound him. Itzamnaaj saves himself from them by riding a peccary [wild boar]. The Twins reconcile with Itzamnaaj and bring him gifts.\u201d\nAnother reconstruction, however, casts an antlered maize deity ('Maize-Deer God') in the role of the presumed abductor. Much is still speculative here.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nK-numbers refer to vases on https://research.mayavase.com/kerrmaya.html\nUP = University Press"}
{"id": "58562", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58562", "title": "Doomsday machine", "text": ""}
{"id": "58563", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58563", "title": "Hamberg", "text": "Hamberg may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58564", "revid": "1319080486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58564", "title": "Winter wheat", "text": "Strain of wheat grown over the winter, rather than the summer\nWinter wheat (usually \"Triticum aestivum\") are strains of wheat that are planted in the autumn to germinate and develop into young plants that remain in the vegetative phase during the winter and resume growth in early spring. Classification into spring wheat versus winter wheat is common and traditionally refers to the season during which the crop is grown. For winter wheat, the physiological stage of heading (when the ear first emerges) is delayed until the plant experiences vernalization, a period of 30 to 60 days of cold winter temperatures ().\nWinter wheat is usually planted from September to November (in the Northern Hemisphere) and harvested in the summer or early autumn of the next year. Winter wheat usually yields more than spring wheat.\nSo-called \"facultative\" wheat varieties need shorter periods of vernalization time (15\u201330 days) and temperatures of . In many areas facultative varieties can be grown either as winter or as a spring, depending on time of sowing.\nIn countries that experience mild winters, such as in South Asia (India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh), North Africa, the Middle East and the lower latitudes (e.g. Sonora in Mexico), spring wheat (not requiring a period of vernalization) is also sown in the autumn (November\u2013December) and harvested in late spring (April\u2013May) the next year. This spring wheat planted in the autumn and grown over the winter is sometimes also incorrectly called \"winter wheat\", and is also known as a Rabi crop.\nHard winter wheats have a higher gluten protein content than other wheats. They are used to make flour for yeast breads, or are blended with soft spring wheats to make the all-purpose flour used in a wide variety of baked products. Pure soft wheat is used for specialty or cake flour. Durum, the hardest wheat, is primarily used for making pasta. Almost all durum wheat grown in North America is spring-planted.\nWinter wheat is grown throughout Europe and North America, and in Siberia.\nCultivation.\nWinter wheat is grown as a cash crop and a forage crop. Optimal growing conditions for winter wheat include high-drainage soil with medium texture. Mid-quality soil nutrient content is best for winter wheat, with an appropriate supply of nitrogen being critical for the wheat to be able to establish itself in time before winter dormancy. In addition, a firm seedbed helps protect the wheat over the winter period. In the United States, about 40% of the total wheat production is of a strain known as hard red winter wheat, with soft red winter wheat contributing another 15% of the annual wheat crop. There are also winter varieties of white wheat. Soft red winter wheat is also grown in the Canadian province of Ontario, along with white winter wheat.\nUnited States.\nWinter wheat was brought to Kansas by German-Russian Mennonites in the 19th century. Bernhard Warkentin and Mark A. Carleton played a major part in the spread of winter wheat as a commercial crop. Warkentin organized mills in central Kansas and imported seed from Ukraine to meet growing demand. Carleton worked for the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) as a crop explorer. He went to Russia to find other wheat varieties and worked with Kansas State University researchers to develop new ones. Winter wheat production quickly spread throughout the Great Plains, and was, as it still is, usually grown using the techniques of dryland farming.\nEffects of climate change.\nFor temperate climate zones such as Canada, increases in yields for winter wheat due to climate change are predicted. For Ukraine, where temperatures are increasing throughout the year and precipitation is predicted to increase, winter wheat yields could increase by 20\u201340% in the north and northwestern regions between 2010 and 2050.\nRegional variations.\nWinter wheat cultivation practices vary significantly by region, primarily due to differences in climate &amp; pest pressures. For example, in the North American Great Plains, a primary concern is the plants ability to survive harsh winters, leading to the selection of cold-hardy varieties of hard red winter wheat.\nIn contrast, in regions with mild winters (such as USDA hardiness zones 8 and 9) the primary concerns are different. Cultivation in these areas is adapted to address a shorter vernalization period, heat stress, &amp; a higher risk of pests and diseases. In these climates, growers often prefer soft red winter wheat varieties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58565", "revid": "42525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58565", "title": "Doomsday weapon", "text": ""}
{"id": "58567", "revid": "44290549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58567", "title": "History of Germans in Russia, Ukraine, and the Soviet Union", "text": "The German minority population in Russia, Ukraine, and the Soviet Union stemmed from several sources and arrived in several waves. Since the second half of the 19th century, as a consequence of the Russification policies and compulsory military service in the Russian Empire, large groups of Germans from Russia emigrated to the Americas (mainly Canada, the United States, Brazil and Argentina), where they founded many towns. During World War II, ethnic Germans in the Soviet Union were persecuted and many were forcibly resettled to other regions such as Central Asia. In 1989, the Soviet Union declared an ethnic German population of roughly two million. By 2002, following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, many ethnic Germans had emigrated (mainly to Germany) and the population fell by half to roughly one million. 597,212 Germans self-identified as such in the 2002 Russian census, making Germans the fifth-largest ethnic group in the Russian Federation. There were 353,441 Germans in Kazakhstan and 21,472 in Kyrgyzstan (1999); while 33,300 Germans lived in Ukraine (2001 census).\nEmigrants from Germany first arrived in Kievan Rus during the reign of Olga of Kiev. The Germans of Russia did not necessarily speak Russian; many spoke German, while French was often used as the language of the high aristocracy. Depending on geography and other circumstances, many Russian Germans spoke Russian as their first or second language. The large numbers of farmers and village tradesmen who arrived following Catherine the Great's invitation were allowed to settle in German-only villages and to keep their German language, religion, and culture until the 1920s. \nToday's ethnic Germans who inhabit lands of the former Soviet Union speak mostly Russian, as they are in the gradual process of assimilation. As such, many may not necessarily be fluent in German. Consequently, Germany has recently strictly limited their repatriation. In addition, Kazakhstan Germans from Kazakhstan are moving to Russia rather than Germany. As conditions for Germans in Russia generally deteriorated in the late 19th century and early 20th century during the period of unrest and revolution, many ethnic Germans migrated from Russia to the Americas and elsewhere. They became collectively known as Germans from Russia.\nGermans in Imperial Russia (partitioned Poland and Caucasus).\nGerman merchants established a trading post at Novgorod, which they called Peterhof. In 1229, German merchants at Novgorod were granted certain privileges that made their positions more secure.\nThe earliest German settlement in Moscow dates to the reign of Vasili III, Grand Prince of Moscow, from 1505 to 1533. A handful of German and Dutch craftsmen and traders were allowed to settle in Moscow's German Quarter (\"\u041d\u0435\u043c\u0435\u0446\u043a\u0430\u044f \u0441\u043b\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u0430\", or Nemetskaya \"sloboda\"), as they provided essential technical skills in the capital. Gradually, this policy extended to a few other major cities. In 1682, Moscow had about 200,000 citizens; some 18,000 were classified as \"Nemtsy\", which means either \"German\" or \"western foreigner\".\nThe international community located in the German Quarter greatly influenced Peter the Great (reigned 1682-1725). His efforts to transform Russia into a more modern European state are believed to have derived in large part from his experiences among Russia's established Germans. By the late 17th century, foreigners were no longer so rare in Russian cities, and Moscow's German Quarter had lost its ethnic character by the end of that century.\nVistula Germans (Poland).\nThrough wars and the partitions of Poland, Prussia acquired an increasing amount of northern, western, and central Polish territory. The Vistula River flows south to north, with its mouth on the Baltic Sea near Danzig (now Gda\u0144sk). Germans and Dutch settled its valley beginning at the sea coast and gradually moving further south to the interior. Eventually, Prussia acquired most of the Vistula's watershed, and the central portion of then-Poland became South Prussia. Its existence was brief - 1793 to 1806, but by its end many German settlers had established Protestant agricultural settlements within its earlier borders. By contrast, most Polish were Roman Catholics. Some German Roman Catholics also entered the region from the southwest, especially the area of Prussian Silesia. The http:// shows the distribution of German settlements in what became central Poland.\nNapoleon's victories ended the short existence of South Prussia. The French Emperor incorporated that and other territories into the Duchy of Warsaw. After Napoleon's defeat in 1815, however, the Duchy was divided. Prussia annexed the western Posen region, and what is now central Poland became the Russian client-state known as Congress Poland. Many Germans continued to live in this central region, maintaining their middle-German Prussian dialect, similar to the Silesian dialect, and their Protestant and Catholic religions. (The Russian population was primarily Russian Orthodox, which was the established national church.)\nDuring both World Wars, the eastern front was fought over in this area. The Soviet government increased the conscription of young men. The rate of Vistula Germans' migrations to this area from Congress Poland increased. Some became Polonized, however, and their descendants remain in Poland.\nDuring the last year of and after World War II, many ethnic Germans fled or were forcibly expelled by the Russians and the Poles from Eastern Europe, particularly those who had maintained their German language and separate religions. The Russians and Poles blamed them for being allies of the Nazis and the reason that Nazi Germany had invaded the East in its program of \"lebensraum.\" The Germans were also held to have abused the native populations in internal warfare, allied with the Germans during their occupation. Under the Potsdam Agreement, major population transfers were agreed to by the Allies. The deportees generally lost all their property and were often attacked during their deportations. Those who survived joined millions of other displaced peoples on the road after the war.\nVolga Germans (Russia).\nCzarina Catherine II was German, born in Stettin in Pomerania (now Szczecin in Poland). After gaining her power, she proclaimed open immigration for foreigners wishing to live in the Russian Empire on 22 July 1763, marking the beginning of a wave of German migration to the Empire. She wanted German farmers to redevelop farmland that had been fallow after conflict with the Ottomans. German colonies were founded in the lower Volga river area almost immediately afterward. These early colonies were attacked during the Pugachev uprising, which was centred on the Volga area, but they survived the rebellion.\nGerman immigration was motivated in part by religious intolerance and warfare in central Europe, as well as by frequently difficult economic conditions, particularly among the southern principalities. Catherine II's declaration freed German immigrants from requirements for military service (which was imposed on native Russians) and from most taxes. It placed the new arrivals outside of Russia's feudal hierarchy and granted them considerable internal autonomy. Moving to Russia gave German immigrants political rights that they would not have possessed in their own lands. Religious minorities found these terms very agreeable, particularly Mennonites from the Vistula River valley. Their unwillingness to participate in military service, and their long tradition of dissent from mainstream Lutheranism and Calvinism, made life under the Hohenzollerns very difficult for them. Nearly all of the Prussian Mennonites emigrated to Russia over the following century, leaving no more than a handful in Prussia.\nOther German minority churches took advantage of Catherine II's offer as well, particularly Evangelical Christians such as the Baptists. Although Catherine's declaration forbade them from proselytizing among members of the Orthodox Church, they could evangelize Russia's Muslim and other non-Christian minorities.\nGerman colonization was most intense in the Lower Volga, but other areas also received immigrants. Many settled in the area around the Black Sea, and the Mennonites favoured the lower Dnieper river area, around Ekaterinoslav (now Dnipro) and Aleksandrovsk (now Zaporizhia).\nIn 1803, Catherine II's grandson, Tsar Alexander I, reissued her proclamation. In the chaos of the Napoleonic wars, Germans responded in great numbers, fleeing their war-torn land. The Tsar's administration eventually imposed minimum financial requirements on new immigrants, requiring them to have either 300 gulden in cash or special skills in order to be accepted for entry to Russia.\nThe abolition of serfdom in the Russian Empire in 1861 created a shortage of labour in agriculture. The need for workers attracted new German immigration, particularly from the increasingly crowded central European states. There was no longer enough fertile land there for full employment in agriculture.\nFurthermore, a sizable portion of Russia's ethnic Germans migrated into Russia from its Polish possessions. The 18th-century partitions of Poland (1772\u20131795) dismantled the Polish-Lithuanian state, dividing it among Austria, Prussia and Russia. Many Germans already living in those parts of Poland transferred to Russia, dating back to medieval and later migrations. Many Germans in Congress Poland migrated further east into Russia between then and World War I, particularly in the aftermath of the Polish insurrection of 1830. The Polish insurrection in 1863 added a new wave of German emigration from Poland to those who had already moved east, and led to the founding of extensive German colonies in Volhynia. When Poland reclaimed its independence in 1918 after World War I, it ceased to be a source of German emigration to Russia, but by then many hundreds of thousands of Germans had already settled in enclaves across the Russian Empire.\nGermans settled in the Caucasus area from the beginning of the 19th century and in the 1850s expanded into the Crimea. In the 1890s, new German colonies opened in the Altay mountain area in Russian Asia (see Mennonite settlements of Altai). German colonial areas continued to expand in Ukraine as late as the beginning of World War I.\nAccording to the first census of the Russian Empire in 1897, about 1.8 million respondents reported German as their mother tongue.\nBlack Sea Germans (Moldova and Ukraine).\nThe Black Sea Germans - including the Bessarabian Germans and the Dobrujan Germans - settled the territories of the northern bank of the Black Sea in present-day Ukraine in the late 18th and the 19th century. Catherine the Great had gained this land for Russia through her two wars with the Ottoman Empire (1768\u20131774) and from the annexation of the Crimean Khanates (1783).\nThe area of settlement did not develop as compactly as that of the Volga territory, and a chain of ethnic German colonies resulted. The first German settlers arrived in 1787, first from West Prussia, followed by immigrants from Western and Southwestern Germany (including Roman Catholics), and from the Warsaw area. Also many Germans, beginning in 1803, immigrated from the northeastern area of Alsace west of the Rhine River. They settled roughly 30 miles northeast of Odesa (city) in Ukraine, forming several enclaves that quickly expanded, resulting in daughter colonies springing up nearby.\nFrom 1783 onward the Crown initiated a systematic settlement of Russians, Ukrainians, and Germans in the Crimean Peninsula (in what was then the Crimean Khanate) in order to dilute the native population of the Crimean Tatars.\nIn 1939, around 60,000 of the 1.1 million inhabitants of Crimea were ethnic German. Two years later, following the end of the alliance and the Nazi German invasion of the Soviet Union, the government deported ethnic Germans from the Crimea to Central Asia in the Soviet Union's program of population transfers. Conditions were harsh and many of the deportees died. It was not until the period of Perestroika in the late 1980s that the government granted surviving ethnic Germans and their descendants the right to return from Central Asia to the peninsula.\nVolhynian Germans (Poland and Ukraine).\nThe migration of Germans into Volhynia (as of 2013[ [update]] covering northwestern Ukraine from a short distance west of Kiev to the border with Poland) occurred under significantly different conditions than those described above. By the end of the 19th century, Volhynia had more than 200,000 German settlers. Their migration began was encouraged by local noblemen, often Polish landlords, who wanted to develop their significant land-holdings in the area for agricultural use. Probably 75% or more of the Germans came from Congress Poland, with the balance coming directly from other regions such as East and West Prussia, Pomerania, Posen, W\u00fcrttemberg, and Galicia, among others.\nShortly after 1800, the first German families started moving into the area. A surge occurred after the first Polish rebellion of 1831 but by 1850, Germans still numbered only about 5000. The largest migration came after the second Polish rebellion of 1863, and Germans began to flood into the area by the thousands. By 1900 they numbered about 200,000. The vast majority of these Germans were Protestant Lutherans (in Europe they were referred to as Evangelicals). Limited numbers of Mennonites from the lower Vistula River region settled in the south part of Volhynia. Baptists and Moravian Brethren settled mostly northwest of Zhitomir. Another major difference between the Germans here and in other parts of Russia is that the other Germans tended to settle in larger communities. The Germans in Volhynia were scattered about in over 1400 villages. Though the population peaked in 1900, many Germans had already begun leaving Volhynia in the late 1880s for North and South America.\nBetween 1911 and 1915, a small group of Volhynian German farmers (36 families - more than 200 people were relocated to Eastern Siberia. They also were instructed that they would now be official citizens of Russia, including the requirement of military service and contribution of taxes. They were able to also make use of the resettlement subsidies of the government's Stolypin reform of 1906\u20131911. They settled in three villages (Pikhtinsk, Sredne-Pikhtinsk, and Dagnik) in what is today Zalarinsky District of Irkutsk Oblast, where they became known as the \"Bug Hollanders\". They apparently were not using the German language anymore, but rather spoke Ukrainian and Polish. They used Lutheran Bibles that had been printed in East Prussia, in the Polish form known as fraktur. Their descendants, many with German surnames, continue to live in the district into the 21st century.\nCaucasus Germans.\nA German minority of about 100,000 people existed in the Caucasus region, in areas such as the North Caucasus, Georgia, and Azerbaijan. In 1941 Joseph Stalin ordered all inhabitants with a German father to be deported, mostly to Siberia or Kazakhstan.\nMass emigration of Germans from Russia to the Americas, 1870s to 1910s.\nPrior to the 1870s, the Germans in Russia had enjoyed a unique ability to preserve their heritage and independence. Along with the freedoms from Russian military service or taxes, their colonies continued to speak their mother tongue of German, their children were taught in German classrooms, and they could practice their faith in peace. However, when Czar Alexander II came to power he changed this. In 1871 he rescinded most of the freedoms the Germans had been granted by Catherine II and Alexander I since first settling. Military service was required of all men of a certain age starting in 1874. This left the colonists with the loss of their men and reduced income, reducing their socioeconomic level down to the level of Russian peasants. As Czar Alexander III came to power, this move toward \u201cRussification\u201d of the Germans continued with his work to eliminate the use of the German language.\nMany Germans, discouraged by the elimination of privileges they had been promised, chose to emigrate. The Germans from Russia who emigrated to different countries of the Americas at the end of the 19th century, unlike those who remained in the Russian Empire, were able to avoid Russification, preserving their ancestral German culture.\nNorth America.\nNumerous people with German heritage who lived on the Great Plains of North America had ancestors who emigrated from the Russian Empire, and not modern-day Germany. \"The Canadian Encyclopedia\" states simply: \"Canada's main source of Germans was Russia \u2014 especially from the Volga, the Black Sea coast and Volhynia.\" The \"Encyclopedia of the Great Plains\" says that \"between 1873 and 1914 approximately 115,000 German Russians immigrated to the United States and about 150,000 to western Canada\" and \"it is estimated[...] that by 1910 approximately 44 percent of all German settlers in western Canada were Germans from Russia.\"\nSouth America.\nBrazil.\nBy 1876, the Empire of Brazil, now Brazil, was a monarchy and Pedro II invited the Volga Germans and other Germans from Russia to populate his territory. From then on, waves of German immigrants settled in the states of S\u00e3o Paulo, Paran\u00e1, Santa Catarina and R\u00edo Grande do Sul.\nArgentina.\nGermans from Russia, especially Volga Germans, founded many colonies in Argentina, mainly in the south of Buenos Aires Province, Entre R\u00edos Province and La Pampa Province. These colonies maintain their culture to this day and organize different festivals (\"Kerb\", \"Kreppelfest\", \"Schlachtfest\", etc.) in which they welcome the rest of the country's population. The total number of Volga German descendants in Argentina is estimated at more than two million inhabitants.\nDecline of the Russian Germans.\nThe decline of the Russian German community started with the reforms of Alexander II. In 1871, he repealed the open-door immigration policy of his ancestors, effectively ending any new German immigration into the Empire. Although the German colonies continued to expand, they were driven by natural growth and by the immigration of Germans from Poland.\nThe Russian nationalism that took root under Alexander II served as a justification for eliminating in 1871 the bulk of the tax privileges enjoyed by Russian Germans, and after 1874 they were subjected to military service. Only after long negotiations, Mennonites, traditionally a pacifist denomination, were allowed to serve alternative service in the form of work in forestry and the medical corps. The resulting disaffection motivated many Russian Germans, especially members of traditionally dissenting Protestant churches, to migrate to the United States and Canada, while many Catholics chose Brazil and Argentina. They moved primarily to the American Great Plains and western Canada, especially North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, and Colorado; to Canada Manitoba and Saskatchewan, and Alberta; to Brazil, especially Paran\u00e1, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul; and to Argentina, especially South of Buenos Aires Province, Entre R\u00edos Province and La Pampa Province. North Dakota and South Dakota attracted primarily Odesa (Black Sea area) Germans from Russia while Nebraska and Kansas attracted mainly Volga Germans from Russia. The majority of Volhynia Germans chose Canada as their destination with significant numbers later migrating to the United States. Smaller settlement pockets also occurred in other regions such as Volga and Volhynian Germans in southwestern Michigan, Volhynian Germans in Wisconsin, and Congress Poland and Volhynian Germans in Connecticut.\nAfter 1881, Russian Germans were required to study Russian in school and lost all their remaining special privileges. Many Germans remained in Russia, particularly those who had done well as Russia began to industrialise in the late 19th century. Russian Germans were disproportionately represented among Russia's engineers, technical tradesmen, industrialists, financiers and large landowners.\nWorld War I was the first time Russia went to war against Germany since the Napoleonic era, and Russian Germans were quickly suspected of having enemy sympathies. The Germans living in the Volhynia area were deported to the German colonies in the lower Volga river in 1915 when Russia started losing the war. Many Russian Germans were exiled to Siberia by the Tsar's government as enemies of the state - generally without trial or evidence. In 1916, an order was issued to deport the Volga Germans to the east as well, but the Russian Revolution prevented this from being carried out.\nThe loyalties of Russian Germans during the revolution varied. While many supported the royalist forces and joined the White Army, others were committed to Alexander Kerensky's Provisional Government, to the Bolsheviks, and even to smaller forces like Nestor Makhno's. Russian Germans \u2014 including Mennonites and Evangelicals \u2014- fought on all sides in the Russian Revolution and Civil War. Although some Russian Germans were very wealthy, others were quite poor and sympathised strongly with their Slavic neighbours. Educated Russian Germans were just as likely to have leftist and revolutionary sympathies as the ethnically Russian intelligentsia.\nIn the chaos of the Russian Revolution and the civil war that followed it, many ethnic Germans were displaced within Russia or emigrated from Russia altogether. The chaos surrounding the Russian Civil War was devastating to many German communities, particularly to religious dissenters like the Mennonites. Many Mennonites hold the forces of Nestor Makhno in Ukraine particularly responsible for large-scale violence against their community.\nThis period was also one of regular food shortages, caused by famine and the lack of long-distance transportation of food during the fighting. Coupled with the typhus epidemic and famine of the early 1920s, as many as a third of Russia's Germans may have perished. Russian German organisations in the Americas, particularly the Mennonite Central Committee, organised famine relief in Russia in the late 1920s. As the chaos faded and the Soviet Union's position became more secure, many Russian Germans simply took advantage of the end of the fighting to emigrate to the Americas. Emigration from the Soviet Union came to a halt in 1929 by Stalin's decree, leaving roughly one million Russian Germans within Soviet borders.\nThe Soviet Union seized the farms and businesses of Russian Germans, along with all other farms and businesses, when Stalin ended Vladimir Lenin's New Economic Policy in 1929 and began the forced collectivization of agriculture and liquidation of large land holdings.\nNonetheless, Soviet nationalities policy had, to some degree, restored the institutions of Russian Germans in some areas. In July 1924, the Volga German Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was founded, giving the Volga Germans some autonomous German-language institutions. Several ethnic German national raions were all so set up in the 1920s in Ukraine, Crimea, north Caucasus, Georgia, Orenburg and Siberia. The Lutheran church, like nearly all religious affiliations in Russia, was ruthlessly suppressed under Stalin. But, for the 600,000-odd Germans living in the Volga German ASSR, German was the language of local officials for the first time since 1881.\nAs a result of the German invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, Stalin decided to deport the German Russians to internal exile and forced labor in Siberia and Central Asia. It is evident that, at this point, the regime considered national minorities with ethnic ties to foreign states, such as Germans, potential fifth columnists. On 12 August 1941, the Central Committee of the Communist Party decreed the expulsion of the Volga Germans, allegedly for treasonous activity, from their autonomous republic on the lower Volga. On 7 September 1941, the Volga German Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was abolished and about 438,000 Volga Germans were deported. In subsequent months, an additional 400,000 ethnic Germans were deported to Siberia from their other traditional settlements such as Ukraine and the Crimea.\nThe Soviets were not successful in deporting all German settlers living in the Western and Southern Ukraine, however, due to the rapid advance of the Wehrmacht (German Army from 1935 to 1945). The secret police, the NKVD, was able to deport only 35% of the ethnic Germans from Ukraine. Thus in 1943, the Nazi German census registered 313,000 ethnic Germans living in the occupied territories of the Soviet Union. With the Soviet re-conquest, the Wehrmacht evacuated about 300,000 German Russians and brought them back to the Reich. Because of the provisions of the Yalta Agreement, all former Soviet citizens living in Germany at war's end had to be repatriated, most by force. More than 200,000 German Russians were deported, against their will, by the Allies and sent to the Gulag. Thus, shortly after the end of the war, more than one million ethnic Germans from Russia were in special settlements and labor camps in Siberia and Central Asia. It is estimated that 200,000 to 300,000 died of starvation, lack of shelter, overwork, and disease during the 1940s.\nOn 26 November 1948, Stalin made the banishment permanent, declaring that Russia's Germans were permanently forbidden from returning to Europe, but this was rescinded after his death in 1953. Many Russian Germans returned to European Russia, but quite a few remained in Soviet Asia.\nAlthough the post-Stalin Soviet state no longer persecuted ethnic Germans as a group, their Soviet republic was not re-founded. Many Germans in Russia largely assimilated and integrated into Russian society. There were some two million ethnic Germans in the Soviet Union in 1989. Soviet Union census revealed in 1989 that 49% of the German minority named German their mother tongue. According to the 1989 Soviet census, 957,518 citizens of German origin, or 6% of the total population, lived in\nKazakhstan, and 841,295 Germans lived in Russia including Siberia.\nPerestroika opened the Soviet borders and witnessed the beginnings of a massive emigration of Germans from the Soviet Union. With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, large numbers of Russian Germans took advantage of Germany's liberal law of return to leave the harsh conditions of the Soviet successor states. The German population of Kyrgyzstan has practically disappeared, and Kazakhstan has lost well over half of its roughly one million Germans. The drop in the Russian Federation's German population was smaller but still significant. Very few Germans returned to their ancestral provinces: about 6,000 settled in Kaliningrad Oblast.\nRussian Germans and Perestroika.\nSince migrating to Russia in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Germans had adopted many of the Slavic traits and cultures and formed a special group known as \"rossiskie nemtsy\", or Russian Germans. Recently, Russian Germans have become of national interest to Germany and to the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). Although ethnic Germans were no longer persecuted, their pre-Bolshevik lives and villages were not re-founded. Many Germans integrated into Soviet society where they now continue to live. The displaced Germans are unable to return to their ancestral lands in the Volga River Valley or the Black Sea regions, because in many instances, those villages no longer exist after being destroyed during Stalin's regime. In 1990, approximately 45,000 Russian Germans, or 6% of the population, lived in the former German Volga Republic. During the late twentieth century, three-quarters of Russian Germans were living in Central Asia (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan), South-West Siberia and Southern Urals.\nStarting in the 1970s, a push-pull effect began that would influence where Russian Germans would eventually live. Because of a bad economy, tensions increased between autochthonous groups and recently settled ethnic minorities living in Central Asia. This strain worsened after the start of the Afghanistan War in 1979. Germans and other Europeans felt culturally and economically pressured to leave these countries, and moved to the Russian Republic. This migration continued into the 1990s.\nDuring Perestroika in the 1980s, the Soviet borders were opened and the beginnings of a massive migration of Germans from the Soviet Union occurred. Entire families, and even villages, would leave their homes and relocate together in Germany or Austria. This move was necessary because they needed to show the German Embassy certain documents, such as a family Bible, as proof that their ancestors were originally from Germany. As a result, if a family member decided to stay in the Soviet Union, but later wanted to migrate to Germany, they could not do so, as they would no longer have the necessary paperwork. Another reason for this group migration was that Russian German villages were pretty much self-sustaining. If an individual necessary to the community, such as a teacher, mechanic or blacksmith, chose to leave, it was hard to find a replacement for these vital community members: an entire village could disappear because of one departure.\nLegal and economic pull factors contributed to Russian Germans' decision to move to Germany. They were given the special legal status of \"Aussiedler\" (exiles from former German territories or of German descent), which gave them instant German citizenship, the right to vote, an unlimited work permit, a flight from Moscow to Frankfurt (with all of their personal belongings and household possessions), job training, and unemployment benefits for three years.\nRussian Germans from South-West Siberia received completely different treatment than the Germans living in Central Asia. Local authorities were persuading Germans to stay by creating two self-governing districts.\nThe All-Union Society \"Wiedergeburt\" (Renaissance) was founded in 1989 to encourage Russian Germans to move back to, and restore the Volga Republic. This plan was not successful because Germany interfered with the discussions and created diplomatic friction, which resulted in Russian opposition to this project. A couple of those problems were that the two sides could not put aside their differences and could not agree on certain principles, such as the meaning of the word \"rehabilitation\". These efforts also neglected the economic reasons that motivated Russia to entice Russian Germans back to the Volga. In 1992, Russian Germans and Russian officials finally agreed on a plan, but Germany did not approve it.\nOn 21 February 1992, Boris Yeltsin, President of the Russian Federation, signed a German-Russian Federation agreement with Germany to restore citizenship to Russian Germans. This Federal Program intended to gradually restore the homeland of Russian Germans and their descendants, in the former Republic of Volga, thus encouraging Russian Germans to immigrate back to Russia. It aimed to guarantee the preservation of the national and cultural identity of Russian Germans, such as their culture, language and religion. At the same time, it stated it would not block or regulate the right to leave of Russians Germans, if they decided to do so at a later point. \nEvents proceeded differently in Siberia, because financially stable Russian German settlements already existed. Siberian officials were economically driven to keep their skilled Russian German citizens and not see them leave for other republics or countries. In the late 1980s, 8.1% of Russian Germans lived in the county of Altay in South-West Siberia, and they controlled one-third of profitable farms.\nIn early 1990, a few ideas were offered to the Officer of Exiles (the bureau in charge of emigrants after arriving in Germany) in order to retain Russian Germans, or to promote their return. They included the suggestion that the necessary important village specialists (mechanics, teachers, doctors, etc.) be offered incentives such as Trade Associations and additional training in order to keep, or to attract them to Russia. Other strategies recommend that Russian German schools and universities be reopened, or suggested to establish a financial institution that would help individuals buy homes, and start farms or small businesses. Unfortunately, the proposed initiatives did not gain traction and have not been instituted due to corruption, incompetency and inexperience. The Association for Germans Abroad (VDA) contracted with the business Inkoplan, to move families from Central Asia at vastly inflated costs. This resulted in VDA and Inkoplan personnel pocketing the difference. Examples of incompetency and inexperience included the fact that the VDA falsely projected the idea all Russian Germans wanted to leave their present homes and lives and move to the Volga region where they would start over and the fact that the Home Office was not fluent in the Russian language or familiar with foreign cultures abroad, which created many misunderstandings between various groups. Because of these actions by the Home Office, the migration back to Germany continues. Over 140,000 individuals migrated to Germany from CIS in 1990 and 1991, and almost 200,000 people migrated in 1992.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2010 Russian census, 394,138 Germans were enumerated, down from 597,212 in 2002, making Germans the 20th largest ethnic group in Russia. There are approximately 300,000 Germans living in Siberia. In addition, the same census found that there are 2.9 million citizens who understand the German language (although many of these are ethnic Russians or Yiddish-speaking Jews who had learned the language). Prominent ethnic Germans in modern Russia include Viktor Kress, governor of Tomsk Oblast from 1991 to 2002 and Herman Gref Minister of Economics and Trade of Russia from 2000 to 2007. Out of the 597,212 Germans enumerated in 2002, 68% lived in Asian federal districts and 32% lived in European federal districts. The Siberian Federal District, at 308,727 had the largest ethnic German population. But even in this federal district, they formed only 1.54% of the total population. The federal subjects with largest ethnic German populations were Altay Krai (79,502), Omsk Oblast (76,334), Novosibirsk (47,275), Kemerovo (35,965), Chelyabinsk (28,457), Tyumen (27,196), Sverdlovsk (22,540), Krasnodar (18,469), Orenburg (18,055), Volgograd (17,051), Tomsk (13,444), Saratov (12,093) and Perm Krai (10,152). Although emigration to Germany is no longer common, and some Germans move from Kazakhstan to Russia, the number of Germans in Russia continues to fall. The number of Germans in Russia fell further to 195,256 according to the 2021 Russian Census.\nIn 2011, the Kaluga Oblast included ethnic Germans living in the former republics of USSR, under the federal program for the return of compatriots to Russia.\nAccording to the 1989 census there were 100,309 Germans living in Kyrgyzstan. According to the most recent census data (1999), there were 21,472 Germans in Kyrgyzstan. The German population in Tajikistan was 38,853 in 1979.\nIn Germany, there are an estimated 2.3 million German Russians, who have established one of the largest Russian-speaking communities outside of the former Soviet Union along with Israel's.\nEducation.\nSeveral German international schools for expatriates living in the former Soviet Union are in operation.\nRussia:\nGeorgia:\nUkraine:\nGermans in the Baltics.\nThe German presence on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea dates back to the Middle Ages when traders and missionaries started arriving from central Europe. The German-speaking Livonian Brothers of the Sword conquered most of the Old Livonia (what is now Estonia and Latvia) in the early 13th century. In 1237, the Brothers of the Sword were incorporated into the Teutonic Knights.\nDuring Peter the Great's rule, the Russian Empire gained control over most of Latvia and Estonia from Sweden in the Great Northern War (1700\u20131721), but left the local German nobility in control. Until the Russification policies of the 1880s, the Baltic German community and its institutions were intact and protected under the Russian Empire. The Baltic German nobility were very influential in the Russian Tsar's army and administration.\nThe reforms of Alexander III replaced many of the traditional privileges of the German nobility with elected local governments and more uniform tax codes. Schools were required to teach Russian, and the Russian nationalist press began targeting segregated Germans as unpatriotic and \"insufficiently Russian\". Baltic Germans also became the target of emerging Latvian and Estonian nationalist movements.\nIn late 1939 (\"after\" the start of World War II), the majority of the Baltic German community in Latvia and Estonia \"answered the call of the F\u00fchrer\" Adolf Hitler and \"repatriated\" to the areas that Nazi Germany had conquered a few weeks before in western Poland (especially in the Warthegau). The \"legal basis\" for this had been agreed in the August 1939 Nazi\u2013Soviet Pact's secret clauses (the \"German\u2013Soviet Boundary and Friendship Treaty\"). Smaller scale \"repatriation\" of ethnic Germans (and their family members) continued after Stalin's Soviet Union had invaded and occupied Latvia and Estonia in 1940\u20131941. Only a few hundred Baltic Germans remained under the Soviet rule after 1945, mainly among those few who had refused Hitler's call to leave for Germany.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58568", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58568", "title": "Suez Crisis", "text": "1956 British\u2013French\u2013Israeli invasion of Egypt\nThe Suez Crisis, also known as the second Arab\u2013Israeli war, the Tripartite Aggression in the Arab world and the Sinai War in Israel, was a British\u2013French\u2013Israeli invasion of Egypt in 1956. Israel invaded on 29 October, having done so with the primary objective of re-opening the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba as the recent tightening of the eight-year-long Egyptian blockade further prevented Israeli passage. After issuing a joint ultimatum for a ceasefire, the United Kingdom and France joined the Israelis on 31 October, seeking to depose Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser and regain control of the Suez Canal, which Nasser had nationalised earlier in the year.\nShortly after the invasion began, the three countries came under heavy political pressure from both the United States and the Soviet Union, as well as from the United Nations, eventually prompting their withdrawal from Egypt.\nThe crisis demonstrated that the United Kingdom and France could no longer pursue their independent foreign policy without consent from the United States. Israel's four-month-long occupation of the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip and Egypt's Sinai Peninsula enabled it to attain freedom of navigation through the Straits of Tiran, but the Suez Canal was closed from October 1956 to March 1957.\nThe crisis strengthened Nasser's standing and led to international humiliation for the British\u2014with historians arguing that it signified the end of its role as a world superpower\u2014as well as the French amid the Cold War. As a result of the conflict, the UN established an\u00a0emergency force to police and patrol the Egypt\u2013Israel border. For his diplomatic efforts in resolving the conflict through UN initiatives, Canadian external affairs minister Lester B. Pearson received a Nobel Peace Prize.\nAnalysts have argued that the crisis may have emboldened the USSR, prompting the Soviet invasion of Hungary.\nBackground.\nThe Suez Canal before 1945.\nThe Suez Canal opened in 1869, financed by the French and Egyptian governments. The canal was operated by the Suez Company, an Egyptian-chartered company; the area surrounding the canal remained sovereign Egyptian territory.\nThe canal was strategically important, as it provided the shortest ocean link between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean.\nIn 1875, as a result of debt and financial crisis, Egypt was forced to sell its shares in the operating company to the British government. They obtained a 44% share in the company for \u00a34\u00a0million (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023). With the 1882 invasion and occupation of Egypt, the UK took \"de facto\" control of the country as well as the canal, its finances and operations.\nThe 1888 Convention of Constantinople declared the canal a neutral zone under British protection. In ratifying it, the Ottoman Empire agreed to permit international shipping to pass freely through the canal, in time of war and peace.\nDespite this convention, Britain closed the canal on several occasions. During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u201305, the British denied the Russian Baltic Fleet use of the canal after the Dogger Bank incident and forced it to sail around Africa, giving the Imperial Japanese Armed Forces time to consolidate their position. During the First World War, Britain and France closed the canal to non-Allied shipping.\n1945-1952.\nIn the aftermath of the Second World War, Britain's military complex at Suez was one of the largest military installations in the world. The Suez base was an important part of Britain's strategic position in the Middle East; however, it became a source of growing tension in Anglo-Egyptian relations.\nThe canal continued to be strategically important after the Second World War for oil shipment. Western Europe then imported two million barrels per day from the Middle East, 1,200,000 by tanker through the canal, and another 800,000 via pipeline from the Persian Gulf (Trans-Arabian Pipeline) and Kirkuk (Kirkuk-Baniyas pipeline) to the Mediterranean. These pipeline routes were prone to instability, which led British leaders to prefer to use the sea route through the canal.\nEgypt's domestic politics were experiencing a radical change. Unrest began to manifest in the growth of radical political groups, such as the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, and an increasingly hostile attitude towards Britain and its presence. Added to this anti-British fervour was the role Britain had played in the creation of Israel.\nIn October 1951, the Egyptian government unilaterally abrogated the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, the terms of which granted Britain a lease on the Suez base for 20 more years. Britain refused to withdraw from Suez, relying upon its treaty rights, as well as the presence of the Suez garrison. This resulted in an escalation in violent hostility towards Britain and its troops in Egypt.\nThe Egyptian Revolution.\nIn January 1952, British forces attempted to disarm a troublesome auxiliary police force barracks in Ismailia, resulting in the deaths of 41 Egyptians. This led to anti-Western riots in Cairo resulting in damage to property and the deaths of foreigners. This proved to be a catalyst for the removal of the Egyptian monarchy. On 23 July 1952 a military coup by the Egyptian nationalist 'Free Officers Movement'\u2014led by Muhammad Neguib and Gamal Abdul Nasser\u2014overthrew King Farouk.\nAfter the 1952 Egyptian Revolution.\nEgypt and the United States.\nAmerican policy was torn between a desire to maintain good relations with NATO allies such as Britain and France who were major colonial powers, and to align Third World nationalists such as Nasser, who resented British and French influence, with the Free World camp.\nThe Eisenhower administration saw the Near East as a gap into which Soviet influence could be projected, and which accordingly required an American-supported NATO-type organisation (the Middle East Defense Organization, or MEDO). The CIA offered Nasser a $3 million bribe if he would join the proposed Middle East Defense Organization; Nasser took the money, but refused to join. Nasser wanted an Egyptian-dominated Arab League to be the principal defence organisation in the Near East, which might be informally associated with the United States.\nDulles told Eisenhower in May 1953 that the Arab states believed that the United States would back Israel in aggressive expansion, and that the prestige of Western democracy in the Middle East was very low. The immediate consequence was a new policy of \"even-handedness\" where the United States very publicly sided with the Arab states in disputes with Israel and Britain in 1953\u201355.\nMost of all, Nasser wanted the United States to supply arms on a generous scale to Egypt. Nasser's anti-Zionism rendered it difficult for the Eisenhower administration to get the approval of Congress necessary to sell weapons to Egypt.\nEgypt and Britain.\nBritain's desire to mend Anglo-Egyptian relations in the wake of the coup saw the country strive for rapprochement throughout 1953-54. In October 1954, Britain and Egypt concluded the Anglo-Egyptian Agreement on the phased evacuation of British Armed Forces troops from the Suez base. Great Britain would withdraw all troops within 20 months, maintain the base, and retain a right to return for seven years. The Suez Company would revert to the Egyptian government in 1968.\nThe Baghdad Pact.\nEgyptian foreign policy under Nasser saw the entire Middle East as Egypt's rightful sphere of influence, and opposed all Western security initiatives in the Near East. Nasse believed that neither his regime nor Egypt's independence would be safe until Egypt had established itself as head of the Arab world. There was a feud between Nasser and the prime minister of Iraq, Nuri al-Said, for Arab leadership. The creation of the Baghdad Pact, (later the Central Treaty Organization) a Middle Eastern anti-Communist alliance of Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Iraq and the UK, in 1955 seemed to confirm Nasser's fears Britain was attempting to draw the Eastern Arab World into a bloc centred upon Iraq and sympathetic to Britain.\nThe conclusion of the Baghdad Pact occurred almost simultaneously with a dramatic Israeli reprisal operation on the Gaza Strip on 28 February 1955 in retaliation for Palestinian \"fedayeen\" raids into Israel.\nThe close occurrence of the two events was mistakenly interpreted by Nasser as part of coordinated Western effort to push him into joining the Baghdad Pact. The signing of the Baghdad Pact and the Gaza raid marked the beginning of the end of Nasser's good relations with the Americans.Throughout 1955 and 1956, Nasser pursued a number of policies that would frustrate British aims throughout the Middle East, and result in increasing hostility between Britain and Egypt. Nasser also began to align Egypt with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia\u2014whose rulers were hereditary enemies of the Hashemites\u2014in an effort to frustrate British efforts to draw Syria, Jordan and Lebanon into the orbit of the Baghdad Pact.\nEgypt and the Communist World.\nNasser had first broached the subject of buying weapons from the Soviet Union in 1954, as a way of pressuring the Americans into selling him the arms he desired. Instead of siding with either superpower, Nasser tried to have them compete in attempts to buy his friendship. During secret talks with the Soviets in 1955, Nasser's demands for weapons were more than amply satisfied. The news in September 1955 of the Egyptian purchase of a huge quantity of Soviet arms via Czechoslovakia was seen by the West as a major increase in Soviet influence in the Near East. In Britain, the increase of Soviet influence in the Near East was seen as an ominous development that threatened to put an end to British influence in the region.\nEgypt and Israel.\nPrior to 1955, Nasser had pursued efforts to reach peace with Israel and had worked to prevent cross-border Palestinian attacks. After the February 1955 Israeli raid on the Egyptian Army headquarters in Gaza in retaliation for a \"Palestinian fedayeen\" attack that killed an Israeli civilian, Nasser began allowing raids into Israel by the Palestinian militants. Egypt established fedayeen bases not just in Gaza but also in Jordan and Lebanon. The raids triggered a series of Israeli reprisal operations.\nIsrael wanted to occupy and annex both the Gaza Strip and the Sinai and exercise control over the Gulf of Aqaba.\nThe Israelis were concerned by Egypt's procurement of large amounts of Soviet weaponry. The influx of this advanced weaponry altered an already shaky balance of power. Israel believed it had only a narrow window of opportunity to hit Egypt's army. Additionally, Israel believed Egypt had formed a secret alliance with Jordan and Syria.\nEgypt and France.\nFrance and Israel were allied against Egypt, in part due to Egyptian support of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) rebels against the French. The French saw Nasser as a major threat. By early 1955, France was shipping large amounts of weapons to Israel, and by 1956 France agreed to disregard the Tripartite Declaration, and supply even more weapons to Israel. In 1956, Israeli prime minister Shimon Peres informed the French that Israel had decided upon war with Egypt in 1956. Peres claimed that Nasser was a genocidal maniac intent upon not only destroying Israel, but also exterminating its people, and as such, Israel wanted a war before Egypt received even more Soviet weapons, and there was still a possibility of victory for the Jewish state.\nEgyptian policies in 1956.\nIn January 1956, to end the incipient arms race between Egypt, armed by the Soviet Union, and Israel, armed by France, which he saw as opening the Near East to Soviet influence, Eisenhower launched a major effort to make peace between Egypt and Israel. Eisenhower sent his close friend Robert B. Anderson to serve as a secret envoy, who offered large quantities of American aid in exchange for a peace treaty with Israel. Nasser and Israeli prime minister David Ben-Gurion had conflicting demands and the meetings were unsuccessful.\nA second round of secret diplomacy by Anderson in February 1956 was equally unsuccessful. It is not clear if Nasser was sincerely interested in peace, or just merely saying what the Americans wanted to hear in the hope of obtaining American funding for the Aswan high dam and American weapons. However, the British historian P. J. Vatikitos noted that Nasser's determination to promote Egypt as the world's foremost anti-Zionist state as a way of reinforcing his claim to Arab leadership meant that peace was unlikely.\nNasser sponsored demonstrations in Amman which led King Hussein of Jordan to dismiss the British Commander of the Arab Legion, John Bagot Glubb (known to the Arabs as Glubb Pasha) in March 1956. After the sacking of Glubb Pasha, British prime minister Anthony Eden became consumed with an obsessional hatred for Nasser, and from March 1956 onwards, was in private committed to the overthrow of Nasser. As one British politician recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For Eden ... this was the last straw... This reverse, he insisted was Nasser's doing... Nasser was our Enemy No. 1 in the Middle East and he would not rest until he destroyed all our friends and eliminated the last vestiges of our influence... Nasser must therefore be ... destroyed.\nThe American historian Donald Neff wrote that Eden's often hysterical and overwrought views towards Nasser reflected the influence of the amphetamines to which Eden had become addicted following a botched operation in 1953 together with the related effects of sustained sleep deprivation (Eden slept on average about 5 hours per night in early 1956).\nOn 16 May 1956, Nasser officially recognised the People's Republic of China, which angered the US and Secretary Dulles This move, coupled with the impression that the project was beyond Egypt's economic capabilities, caused Eisenhower to withdraw all American financial aid for the Aswan Dam project on 19 July. The Eisenhower administration believed that if Nasser were able to secure Soviet economic support for the high dam, that would be beyond the capacity of the Soviet Union to support, and in turn would strain Soviet\u2013Egyptian relations.\nNationalisation of the Suez Canal.\nOn 26 July 1956, in a speech in Alexandria, Nasser announced the nationalisation of the canal. During his speech he used the name of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the builder of the canal, as a code-word for Egyptian forces to seize control of the canal. Egypt closed the canal (and the Straits of Tiran) to Israeli shipping. They also blockaded the Gulf of Aqaba, which was in contravention of the Constantinople Convention of 1888. Many argued that this was also a violation of the 1949 Armistice Agreements.\nThe Egyptian historian Abd al-Azim Ramadan notes Nasser's decision to nationalise the Suez Canal without political consultation as an example of his predilection for solitary decision-making.\nBritish response.\nThe nationalisation surprised Britain and its Commonwealth. There had been no discussion of the canal at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference in London in late June and early July. Egypt's action threatened British economic and military interests in the region.\nPrime Minister Eden was under immense domestic pressure from Conservative MPs who drew direct comparisons between the events of 1956 and those of the Munich Agreement in 1938. Since the US government did not support the British protests, the British government decided in favour of military intervention against Egypt to keep the oil supply flowing and avoid the complete collapse of British influence in the region.\nEden was hosting a dinner for King Feisal II of Iraq and his prime minister. Leader of the Opposition Hugh Gaitskell was also at the dinner. He immediately agreed that military action might be inevitable, but warned Eden would have to keep the Americans closely informed. Eden believed that Parliament would support him; Gaitskell spoke for the Labour Party when he called the nationalisation a \"high-handed and totally unjustifiable step\". When Eden made a ministerial broadcast on the nationalisation, Labour declined its right to reply.\nHowever, Gaitskell's support became more cautious as time went on. In two letters to Eden sent on 3 and 10 August 1956, Gaitskell condemned Nasser but warned that he would not support any action that violated the United Nations Charter, including an armed attack.\nTwo dozen Labour MPs issued a statement on 8 August stating that forcing Nasser to denationalise the canal against Egypt's wishes would violate the UN charter. Former Labour Foreign Minister Herbert Morrison hinted that he would support unilateral action by the government. Jo Grimond, who became Leader of the Liberal Party that November, thought if Nasser went unchallenged the whole Middle East would go his way.\nThe nationalisation was perceived as a direct threat to British interests. In a letter to the British Ambassador on 10 September 1956, Ivone Kirkpatrick, the Permanent Under-Secretary at the Foreign Office wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we sit back while Nasser consolidates his position and gradually acquires control of the oil-bearing countries, he can and is, according to our information, resolved to wreck us. If Middle Eastern oil is denied to us for a year or two, our gold reserves will disappear. If our gold reserves disappear, the sterling area disintegrates. If the sterling area disintegrates and we have no reserves, we shall not be able to maintain a force in Germany, or indeed, anywhere else. I doubt whether we shall be able to pay for the bare minimum necessary for our defence. And a country that cannot provide for its defence is finished.Direct military intervention, however, ran the risk of angering Washington and damaging Anglo-Arab relations. As a result, the British government concluded a secret military pact with France and Israel that was aimed at regaining control over the Suez Canal.\nFrench response.\nThe French prime minister Guy Mollet, outraged by Nasser's move, determined that Nasser would not get his way. French public opinion very much supported Mollet, and apart from the French Communist Party, all of the criticism of his government came from the right, who very publicly doubted that a socialist like Mollet had the guts to go to war with Nasser.\nOn 29 July 1956, the French Cabinet decided upon military action against Egypt in alliance with Israel. Britain was informed, and invited to co-operate if interested. At the same time, Mollet felt very much offended by what he considered to be the lackadaisical attitude of the Eisenhower administration to the nationalisation. This was especially the case because France had remained loyal to NATO even after the USSR had offered the French a deal earlier that year in which Paris would remain in NATO but become \"semi-neutralist\" in the Cold War if Moscow ended its support of the FLN in Algeria. In Mollet's view, his fidelity to NATO had earned him the right to expect firm American support against Egypt, and when that support proved not forthcoming, he became even more determined that if the Americans were not willing to do anything about Nasser, then France would act.\nCommonwealth response.\nBy 1956 the Panama Canal was much more important than the Suez to Australia and New Zealand. However, many still called the Suez Canal their \"lifeline\" to Britain or \"jugular vein\". Australian prime minister Robert Menzies and New Zealand Prime Minister Sidney Holland both supported Britain in the early weeks following the seizure. Menzies travelled to London from the United States after hearing of the nationalisation and became an informal member of the British Cabinet discussing the issue. \nThe \"non-white Dominions\" saw Egypt's seizing of the canal as an admirable act of anti-imperialism, and Nasser's Arab nationalism as similar to Asian nationalism. As India was a major user of the canal, Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru remained publicly neutral other than warning that any use of force, or threats, could be \"disastrous\". Pakistan was also cautious about supporting Egypt given their rivalry as leading Islamic nations, but its government did state that Nasser had the right to nationalise.\nDiplomatic solutions.\nAlmost immediately after the nationalisation, Eisenhower suggested to Eden a conference of maritime nations that used the canal. The British preferred to invite the most important countries, but the Americans believed that inviting as many as possible amid maximum publicity would affect world opinion. The eight surviving signatories of the Constantinople Convention and the 16 other largest users of the canal were invited: Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, West Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Iran, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Soviet Union, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. All except Egypt\u2014which sent an observer, and used India and the Soviet Union to represent its interests\u2014and Greece accepted the invitation, and the 22 nations' representatives met in London from 16 to 23 August.\nFifteen of the nations supported the American-British-French position of international operation of the canal. Ceylon, Indonesia, and the Soviet Union supported India's competing proposal\u2014which Nasser had preapproved\u2014of international supervision only. India criticised Egypt's seizure of the canal, but insisted that its ownership and operation remain in Egyptian hands. The majority of 18 chose five nations to negotiate with Nasser in Cairo led by Menzies, while their proposal for international operation of the canal would go to the Security Council.\nMenzies' argued for compensation for the Suez Canal Company and the \"establishment of principles\" for the future use of the canal in a 7 September official communique to Nasser, and called for a convention to recognise Egyptian sovereignty of the canal, but for the establishment of an international body to run the canal. Nasser rejected Menzies' proposals. Menzies hinted to Nasser that Britain and France might use force to resolve the crisis, but the US openly opposed the use of force and Menzies left Egypt without success.\nThe United States proposed an association of canal users that would set rules for its operation. Fourteen of the other nations, not including Pakistan, agreed. Britain believed that violation of the association rules would result in military force, but the United States opposed military action. Eisenhower felt the crisis had to be handled peacefully; he told Eden that American public opinion, and the international community, \"would be outraged\" unless all peaceful routes had been exhausted. The Americans refused to support any move that could be seen as imperialism or colonialism, seeing the US as the champion of decolonisation.\n\"The British and French reluctantly agreed to pursue the diplomatic avenue but viewed it as merely an attempt to buy time, during which they continued their military preparations.\" The British disregarded Eisenhower's argument that the American people would not accept a military solution, and doubted that Eisenhower had a determination to avoid war. Eden and other leading British officials believed that Nasser's engagement with communist states, support for Palestinian fedayeen, and attempts to destabilise pro-Western Arab regimes, would persuade the Americans to accept British and French actions if they were presented as a \"fait accompli\".\nMilitary preparations.\nAnglo-French planning.\nAnthony Eden began planning for an invasion in July 1956. Eden's plan called for the Cyprus-based 16th Independent Parachute Brigade Group to seize the canal zone. The prime minister's plan was rejected by Templer and the other service chiefs, who suggested the sea-power based Contingency Plan, which called for the Royal Marines to take Port Said, which would then be used as a base for three British divisions to overrun the canal zone.\nIn early August, the plan was modified by including a strategic bombing campaign that was intended to destroy Egypt's economy and thereby hopefully bring about Nasser's overthrow, as well as achieve air superiority. In addition, a role was allocated to the 16th Independent Parachute Brigade, which would lead the assault on Port Said in conjunction with the Royal Marine landing.\nThis operation (eventually named Musketeer) would require thousands of troops, leading the British to seek out France as an ally. In place of Port Said, Musketeer called for the capture of Alexandria. Once that city had been taken in assault from the sea, British armoured divisions would engage in a decisive battle of annihilation somewhere south of Alexandria and north of Cairo. To destroy the 300,000-strong Egyptian Army in his planned battle of annihilation, Stockwell estimated that he needed 80,000 troops, while at most the British Army could spare was 50,000 troops; the French could supply the necessary 30,000 troops to make up the shortfall.\nOn 11 August 1956, General Charles Keightley was appointed commander of Musketeer with French Admiral Pierre Barjot as his deputy commander. Andr\u00e9 Beaufrewould command the French forces. Most of the officers of the Anglo-French Task Force expressed regret that it was Beaufre who was Stockwell's deputy rather the other way around.\nA major problem both politically and militarily was the one-week interval between sending troops to the eastern Mediterranean and the beginning of the invasion. In late August 1956, Admiral Barjot suggested that Port Said once again be made the main target, which lessened the number of troops needed and thus reduced the interval between sending forces to the eastern Mediterranean and the invasion. Beaufre warned that merely capturing the canal zone made for a dangerously ambiguous goal.\nAdditionally, the coming of winter weather to the Mediterranean in late November would render the invasion impossible. An additional problem was Eden, who constantly interfered with the planning and was so obsessed with secrecy that he refused to tell Keightley whether he wanted to retake the Suez Canal or topple Nasser, or both.\nIn early September, Keightley embraced Barjot's idea of seizing Port Said, and presented Revise. On 8 September 1956 Revise was approved by the British and French cabinets.\nBoth Stockwell and Beaufre were opposed to Revise as an open-ended plan with no clear goal beyond seizing the canal zone, but was embraced by Eden and Mollet as offering greater political flexibility and the prospect of lesser Egyptian civilian casualties.\nFranco-Israeli planning.\nIn late September 1956, Guy Mollet had decided to attack Egypt with Britain, and if the British backed out (as Mollet believed that they might), with Israel. On 7 August, the French asked Ben Gurion if Israel would attack Egypt together with France; Israel agreed and joint planning began. On 30 September 1956 secret Franco-Israeli talks started in Paris, based on Britain's non-involvement. The French wanted to use British airfields in Cyprus to bomb Egypt, but wanted to use Israeli airfields if the ones in Cyprus were not available. Only on 5 October were the British informed of the secret Franco-Israeli alliance.\nIsraeli planning.\nIn July 1956, IDF chief of staff General Moshe Dayan advised Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion that Israel should attack Egypt at the first chance, but Ben-Gurion stated he preferred to attack Egypt with the aid of France.\nThe planning for Operation Kadesh called for the Israeli Air Force to win air superiority, which was to be followed up with \"one continuous battle\" in the Sinai. Israeli forces would in a series of swift operations encircle and then take the four main Egyptian strong points in the Sinai: Sharm el-Sheikh, Arish, Abu Uwayulah (Abu Ageila), and the Gaza Strip.\nAfter the capture of these four objectives, Israel hope that entire Egyptian Army would fall back into Egypt proper, and British and French forces would then be able to push the Egyptian Army against an Israeli advance, and crush in a decisive encounter.\nProtocol of S\u00e8vres.\nFrance, Israel and the United Kingdom reached a secret agreement regarding political and military cooperation to overthrow Nasser and de-nationalise the Canal during discussions held between 22 and 24 October 1956 in S\u00e8vres, France. Under the terms of the Protocol, Israel would attack Egypt on 29 October. The British and French governments would issue a joint appeal for both Egypt and Israel to cease firing and withdraw 10 miles from the canal. If both forces rejected this demand (a guarantee, since Israel was already aware of it), the French and British militaries would attack on 31 October.\nForces.\nBritish.\nThe 16th Independent Parachute Brigade Group, which was intended to be the main British strike force against Egypt, had neglected paratroop training in favour of counter-insurgency operations. The Royal Navy could project formidable power through the guns of its warships and aircraft flown from its carriers, but lacked amphibious capability.\nThe Royal Air Force (RAF) had just introduced two long-range bombers, the Vickers Valiant and the English Electric Canberra, but had not yet established proper bombing techniques for these aircraft. General Charles Keightley, the commander of the invasion force, believed that air power alone was sufficient to defeat Egypt. By contrast, General Hugh Stockwell, the Task Force's ground commander, believed that methodical and systematic armoured operations centred on the Centurion battle tank would be the key to victory.\nFrench.\nFrench paratroopers of the elite \"Regiment de Parachutistes Coloniaux\" (RPC) were extremely experienced soldiers, who had distinguished themselves in the fighting in Indochina and in Algeria. They followed a \"shoot first, ask questions later\" policy towards civilians, which led to the killing of Egyptian civilians.\nThe main French (and Israeli) tank, the AMX-13, was lightly armoured but agile: designed for mobile, flanking operations. The French Navy had a powerful carrier force but, like its British counterpart, suffered from a lack of landing craft.\nIsraeli.\nAmerican military historian Derek Varble called the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) the \"best\" military force in the Middle East while at the same time suffering from \"deficiencies\" such as \"immature doctrine, faulty logistics, and technical inadequacies\". The IDF's Chief of Staff, Major General Moshe Dayan, encouraged aggression, initiative, and ingenuity among the Israeli officer corps while ignoring logistics and armoured operations. Dayan preferred infantry at the expense of armour.\nThe IDF had a disorganised logistics arm, which was put under severe strain when the IDF invaded the Sinai. The main IDF tank was the AMX-13 and the main aircraft were the Dassault Myst\u00e8re IVA and the Ouragan. Superior pilot training gave the Israeli Air Force an edge over their Egyptian opponents. The Israeli Navy consisted of two destroyers, seven frigates, eight minesweepers, several landing craft, and fourteen torpedo boats.\nEgyptian.\nIn the Egyptian Armed Forces, politics rather than military competence was the main criterion for promotion. The Egyptian commander, Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer, was a heavy drinker who was close friends with Nasser and who would prove incompetent as a general during the Crisis. In 1956, the Egyptian military was well equipped with weapons from the Soviet Union such as T-34 and IS-3 tanks, MiG-15 fighters, Ilyushin Il-28 bombers, SU-100 self-propelled guns and assault rifles.\nRigid lines between officers and men in the Egyptian Army led to a mutual \"mistrust and contempt\" between officers and the men who served under them. Egyptian troops were excellent in defensive operations, but had little capacity for offensive operations, owing to the lack of \"rapport and effective small-unit leadership\".\nOperation Kadesh.\nThe fighting began on 29 October 1956. At about 3:00\u00a0pm, Israeli Air Force Mustangs launched a series of attacks on Egyptian positions all over the Sinai. Egyptian commander Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer at first treated the reports of an Israeli incursion into the Sinai as a large raid instead of an invasion, and did not order a general alert. By the time that Amer realised his mistake, the Israelis had made significant advances into the Sinai.\nBecause Israeli intelligence expected Jordan to enter the war on Egypt's side, the Israel Border Police militarised the Israel-Jordan border, including the Green Line with the West Bank. Israeli-Arab villages along the Jordanian border were placed under curfew. This resulted in the killings of 48 civilians in the Arab village of Kafr Qasim in an event known as the Kafr Qasim massacre.\nThe Israeli 9th Infantry Brigade captured Ras al-Naqb, an important staging ground for the later attack against Sharm el-Sheikh, during the night of 29-30 October. Also that night, the 4th Infantry Brigade stormed al-Qusaymah, a jumping off point for the assault against Abu Uwayulah.\nA portion of the paratroopers under Ariel Sharon's advanced to meet with the 1st Brigade. En route, Sharon assaulted Themed in a dawn attack, and was able to storm the town with his armour. Sharon decided to attack the Egyptian positions at Jebel Heitan. The Egyptians were defeated and forced to retreat. A total of 260 Egyptian and 38 Israeli soldiers were killed in the battle. Although the battle was an Israeli victory, the casualties sustained would surround Sharon with controversy.\nThe village of Abu Uwayulah served as the road centre for the entire Sinai, and thus was a key Israeli target. To the east of Abu Uwayulah were several ridges that formed a natural defensive zone known to the Israelis as the \"Hedgehog\". Holding the \"Hedgehog\" were 3,000 Egyptians of the 17th and 18th battalions of the 3rd Infantry Division commanded by Colonel Sami Yassa. Over the course of 30 October-1 November, the Israeli military repeatedly assaulted the position. Eventually, the lack of ammunition and water caused the Egyptians to retreat.\nAir operations.\nIn air combat, Israeli aircraft shot down between seven and nine Egyptian jets with the loss of one plane. On 1 November, President Nasser ordered his pilots to disengage and fly their planes to bases in southern Egypt.\nOn 3 November, Israeli Dassault Myst\u00e8re fighter jets attacked a British warship, the Black Swan class sloop HMS \"Crane\" as it was patrolling the approaches to the Gulf of Aqaba after it had been mistaken for an Egyptian Navy warship. Three crewmen were wounded in the attack. The ship put up heavy anti-aircraft fire, and there are conflicting accounts as to whether or not it shot down one of the attacking jets.\nNaval operations.\nThe Egyptian Navy's \"Ibrahim el Awal\", an ex-British , was damaged by the Israeli Navy and captured on 31 October after shelling Haifa. Also on 31 October, the Egyptian frigate \"Domiat\" was destroyed by a British light cruiser. On 4 November, a squadron of Egyptian motor torpedo boats attacked a British destroyer off the northeast coast of the Nile Delta. Three torpedo boats were sunk and the rest retreated.\nGaza Strip operations.\nThe city of Rafah was strategically important to Israel. Dayan ordered the IDF forces to focus on breaking through rather than reducing every Egyptian strongpoint. French warships led by the cruiser \"Georges Leygues\" provided fire support. In the morning of 1 November, Israeli tanks had encircled the city. At that point, the commander of the Egyptian forces, General al-Abd, ordered his forces to abandon their posts outside of Rafah and retreat into the city.\nWith Rafah more or less cut off and Israeli forces controlling the northern and eastern roads leading into the city, the 27th Armored Brigade to went west to take al-Arish. By this point, Nasser had ordered his forces to fall back towards the Suez Canal, so at first Bar-Lev and his men met little resistance as they advanced across the northern Sinai.\nHearing of the order to withdraw, General al-Abd and his men left Rafah on the morning of 1 November through a gap in the Israeli lines. Three hours later, the Israelis took Rafah. After taking Rafah, Israeli troops killed 111 people, including 103 refugees, in Rafah's Palestinian refugee camp. The circumstances of the killings are disputed. On 2 November, Bar-Lev's forces took al-Arish. The city itself fell without a fight after its defenders retreated.\nMeanwhile, the IDF attacked the Egyptian defences outside of Gaza City late on 1 November. Joined by infantry, the armour attacked the al-Muntar fortress outside of Gaza City, killing or capturing 3,500 Egyptian National Guard troops. By noon of 2 November, there was no more Egyptian opposition in the Gaza City area. By noon of 3 November, the Israelis had control of almost the entire Gaza Strip save for a few isolated strong points, which were soon attacked and taken.\nThe UN estimated that in total 447 to 550 Palestinian civilians were killed by Israeli troops during the first weeks of Israeli occupation of the strip. The manner in which these people were killed is disputed. A number of Palestinians were killed after the town of Khan Yunis was taken on 3 November. Israel maintains that the Palestinians were killed in street-fighting, while the Palestinians claimed that they were unarmed civilians executed by Israeli troops. The Director of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency later reported that 275 people were killed.\nIn both Gaza City and Khan Yunis, street-fighting led to the deaths of \"dozens, perhaps hundreds, of non-combatants\". Food and medicine distribution for refugees in need of assistance was complicated when some Palestinians ransacked the warehouses belonging to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency. This was compounded by a widespread view in Israel that the responsibility for the care of the Palestinian refugees rested with the UNRWA, not Israel, which led the Israelis to be slow with providing aid.\nSharm el-Sheikh operations.\nBy 3 November, Sharm el-Sheikh was the last Israeli objective. The Egyptian forces at Sharm el-Sheikh had the advantage of holding one of the most strongly fortified positions in the entire Sinai, but had been subjected to heavy Israeli air attacks from the beginning of the war. The main difficulty faced by Colonel Abraham Yoffe's 9th Infantry Brigade was logistical. There were no good roads linking Ras an-Naqb to Sharm el-Sheikh.\nAfter numerous skirmishes on the outskirts of Sharm el-Sheikh, Yoffe ordered an attack on the port around midnight on 4 November. After four hours of heavy fighting, Yoffe ordered his men to retreat. On the morning of 5 November, Israeli forces launched a massive artillery barrage and napalm strikes against Egyptian forces defending Sharm el-Sheikh. At 9:30\u00a0am on 5 November, the Egyptian commander, Colonel Raouf Mahfouz Zaki, surrendered Sharm el-Sheikh. The Israelis had lost 10 killed and 32 wounded, while the Egyptians had lost about 100 killed and 31 wounded. Another 864 Egyptian soldiers were taken prisoner.\nCasualties.\nThe Israeli losses were 172 dead and 817 wounded. The number of Egyptians killed was \"never reliably established\". Egyptian casualties to the Israeli invasion were estimated at 1,000\u20133,000 dead and 4,000 wounded, while losses to the Anglo-French operation were estimated at 650 dead and 900 wounded. 1,000 Egyptian civilians are estimated to have died.\nAnglo-French Canal invasion.\nThe Anglo-French military action had two phases: Operation Musketeer and Operation Telescope.\nOperation Musketeer Revise (often referred to as Operation Revise) was in two phases:\nTo support the invasion, large air forces had been deployed to Cyprus and Malta by Britain and France and many aircraft carriers were deployed. The two airbases on Cyprus were so congested that a third field which was in dubious condition had to be brought into use for French aircraft.\nOperation Telescope consisted of air- and sea-borne landings to capture the Canal Zone.\nOperation Revise.\nIn the morning of 30 October Britain and France sent ultimatums to Egypt and Israel. Eden and Mollet ordered Phase I of Operation Revise to begin 13 hours after the Anglo-French ultimatum with a bombing campaign.\nField Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer ordered Egyptian troops in the Sinai to stay put, as Amer confidently assured Nasser that the Egyptians could defeat the Israelis in the Sinai and then defeat the Anglo-French forces once they came ashore in the canal zone. Amer also advised Nasser to send more troops into the Sinai to inflict his promised defeat on Israel. Not until late on 31 October did Nasser disregard Amer's rosy assessment and ordered his forces to disengage in the Sinai and to retreat back to the canal zone to face the expected Anglo-French invasion.\nBritish night bombing proved ineffective.Starting on the morning of 1 November, carrier-based planes began a series of daytime strikes on Egypt. By the night of 1 November the Egyptian Air Force had lost 200 planes.\nWith the destruction of Egypt's air force, Keightley ordered the beginning of Revise Phase II, a wide-ranging interdiction campaign. By 3 November, Beaufre convinced Keightley and Stockwell to seize the canal zone with airborne landings instead of waiting the planned ten days for Revise II, and gained the approval for Operation Telescope, as Beaufre had code-named the airborne assault on the canal zone.\nParatroop attack on Port Said.\nIn the early morning of 5 November, an advance element of the 3rd Battalion of the British Parachute Regiment dropped on El Gamil Airfield, led by Brigadier M.A.H. Butler. At the same time, Lieutenant Colonel Pierre Chateau-Jobert landed with a force of the 2nd RPC at Raswa.\nThe British forces moved up towards Port Said with air support before digging in at 13:00 to hold until the beach assault. Overall, the British paratroopers had managed to inflict a decisive defeat on the Egyptians for the loss of 4 dead and 32 wounded.\nThe French paratroopers swiftly secured the western bridge. With close-air-support, the French paratroopers stormed and took Port Said's waterworks that morning. Chateau-Jobert followed up this success by beginning an attack on Port Fuad, which became a rout. During the fighting in the canal zone, the French paratroopers often executed Egyptian POWs.\nThe Egyptian commander at Port Said, General Salahedin Moguy then proposed a truce. Moguy had no interest in surrendering and had only made the truce offer to buy time for his men to dig in. As the paratroopers alone were not enough to take the city, Beaufre and British Admiral Manley Laurence Power urged that the sea-borne landings be accelerated and that Allied forces land the very next day.\nRoyal Marines come ashore at Port Said.\nAt first light on 6 November, Royal Marines of No. 42 and 40 Commando stormed the beaches The battle group standing offshore opened fire, giving covering fire for the landings. The town of Port Said sustained great damage and was seen to be alight.\nThe men of 42 Commando as much as possible chose to by-pass Egyptian positions and focused on trying to break through inland.Upon entering downtown Port Said, the Marines became engaged in fierce urban combat.\nIn the afternoon, 522 additional French paratroopers were dropped near Port Fuad. These were also constantly supported by the Corsairs of the French A\u00e9ronavale. The French were aided by AMX-13 light tanks.\nBritish Royal Marines of No. 45 Commando assaulted by helicopter, meeting stiff resistance, with shore batteries striking several helicopters, while friendly fire from British carrier-borne aircraft also mistakenly hit 45 Commando and HQ. One Marine was killed and 15 wounded when a carrier-based Wyvern mistakenly fired into a concentration of Marines. This was the first time helicopters were used by British forces to lift men directly into a combat zone.\nNasser proclaimed the Suez War to be a \"people's war\". As such, Egyptian troops were ordered to don civilian clothes while guns were freely handed out to Egyptian civilians. From Nasser's point of view, this presented the British and French with an unsolvable dilemma: cause deaths of innocent civilians and bring world sympathy to his cause while weakening morale in Britain and France, or fall prey to snipers attacking \"with near impunity by hiding among crowds of apparent non-combatants\".\nThese tactics worked especially well against the British. British leaders, especially Eden and the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir Louis Mountbatten, sincerely attempted to limit Egyptian civilian deaths. Despite Eden's best efforts, British bombing still killed hundreds of Egyptian civilians during Revise II, though these deaths were due more to imprecise aiming rather than a deliberate policy of \"area bombing\" such as that employed against Germany in World War II. At Port Said, the heavy fighting in the streets and the resulting fires destroyed much of the city, killing many civilians.\nMost Egyptian soldiers wore civilian clothing and operated in small groups, but remained organised. Civilians who took up arms as guerrillas were organised into eight groups with five additional groups joining them from outside the city. The Egyptians were gradually pushed back as the British took key objectives. Egyptian sniper attacks and the need to clear every building led 3 Para to be slowed in their attempts to link up with the Royal Marines. The link-up of British and French forces occurred close to the offices of the Suez Canal Company.\nBoth Stockwell and Beaufre spent the day in Port Said, and were thus cut off from the news. Only late in the day did Beaufre and Stockwell learn of the acceptance of the United Nations ceasefire. The British forces were at al-Cap, a small village four miles north of al-Qantarah at 2:00\u00a0am, when the ceasefire came into effect.\nTotal Royal Marine casualties in the Port Said landings were 9 killed and 60 wounded.\nResponses to military action.\nDomestic British response.\nEden's obsession with secrecy meant that the government did nothing in the months running up to the attack to explain to the British people or the reservists called up for their National Service in the summer and fall of 1956 why the war was necessary. Only one British soldier, however, refused to fight.\nAccording to some historians, the majority of British people were on Eden's side. According to public opinion polls at the time, 37% of the British people supported the war while 44% were opposed. On 10 and 11 November an opinion poll found 53% supported the war, with 32% opposed.\nAlthough the public believed the British government's justification of the invasion as a separation of Israeli and Egyptian forces, protests against the war occurred in Britain after it began. Stormy and violent debates in the House of Commons on 1 November 1956 almost degenerated into fist-fights after several Labour MPs compared Eden to Hitler. The British government pressured the BBC to support the war, and seriously considered taking over the network.\nThe majority of Conservative constituency associations passed resolutions of support to \"Sir Anthony\". The majority of letters written to MPs from their constituents were against the Suez attack. Significantly, many of the letters came from voters who identified as Conservatives.\nThe Labour Party and the Trade Union Congress organised nation-wide anti-war protests, starting on 1 November. On 4 November, at an anti-war rally in Trafalgar Square attended by 30,000 people (making it easily the biggest rally in London since 1945), the Labour MP Aneurin Bevan accused the government of \"a policy of bankruptcy and despair\". Inspired by Bevan's speech, the crowd at Trafalgar Square then marched on 10 Downing Street chanting \"Eden Must Go!\", and attempted to storm the prime minister's residence. The ensuing clashes between the police and the demonstrators which were captured by television cameras had a huge demoralising effect on the Eden cabinet, which was meeting there.\nThe conflict exposed the division within the Labour Party between its middle-class internationalist intelligentsia who opposed the conflict, and working-class voters who supported it. The Labour MP Richard Crossman said that \"when the Labour Party leadership tried to organise demonstrations in the Provinces of the kind they'd held in Trafalgar Square, there was great reluctance among the working classes, because we were at war. It was Munich in reverse.\" Another Labour MP, Barbara Castle, recalled that Labour's protest against the conflict was \"drowned in a wave of public jingoism\". The Suez Crisis played a key role in the reconciliation of the Gaitskellite and Bevanite factions of the Labour Party, which both condemned the invasion, after the 1955 leadership election.\nInternational responses.\nResponses by Western governments.\nAlong with the Suez crisis, the United States was also dealing with the near-simultaneous Hungarian revolution. Vice-President Richard Nixon later explained: \"We couldn't on one hand, complain about the Soviets intervening in Hungary and, on the other hand, approve of the British and the French picking that particular time to intervene against Nasser\". Eisenhower also believed that if the United States supported the attack on Egypt, that the resulting backlash in the Arab world might win the Arabs over to the Soviet Union.\nThe United States put financial pressure on the UK to end the invasion. Because the Bank of England had lost $45 million between 30 October and 2 November, and Britain's oil supply had been restricted by the closing of the Suez Canal, the British sought immediate assistance from the IMF, but it was denied by the United States.\nIn addition, Eisenhower ordered his secretary of the treasury, George M. Humphrey, to prepare to sell part of the US government's sterling bond holdings. Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, Harold Macmillan, told Eden that Britain's foreign exchange reserves could not sustain the devaluation of the pound that would come after the United States' actions; and that within weeks of such a move, the country would be unable to import sufficient food and energy supplies. However, there were suspicions in the Cabinet that Macmillan had deliberately overstated the financial situation in order to force Eden out. What Treasury officials had told Macmillan was far less serious than what he told the Cabinet.\nDespite having no commercial or military interest in the area, many countries were concerned with the growing rift between Western allied nations.\nWhen Israel refused to withdraw its troops from the Gaza Strip and Sharm el-Sheikh, Eisenhower sought UN-backed efforts to impose economic sanctions on Israel until it fully withdrew from Egyptian territory. The Democratic Party-controlled Senate would not co-operate with Eisenhower's position on Israel.\nA rare example of support for the Anglo-French actions against Egypt came from West Germany. Though his Cabinet was divided, West Germany's chancellor Konrad Adenauer told his Cabinet on 7 November that Nasser was a pro-Soviet force that needed to be cut down to size, and in his view the attack on Egypt was completely justified. Adenauer feared that the United States and Soviet Union would \"carve up the world\" according to their own interests. Because of this, Adenauer strengthened his relationship with Mollet and France.\nResponses in the Muslim world.\nThe attack on Egypt greatly offended many in the Muslim world. In Pakistan, 300,000 people took part in a rally in Lahore to show solidarity with Egypt, and a violent mob in Karachi chanting anti-British slogans burned down the British High Commission. In Syria, the government blew up the Kirkuk\u2013Baniyas pipeline, which had allowed Iraqi oil to reach tankers in the Mediterranean, to punish Iraq for supporting the invasion and to cut Britain off from one of its main routes for taking delivery of Iraqi oil. In concert with US actions, Saudi Arabia started an oil embargo against Britain and France. The US refused to fill the gap until Britain and France agreed to a rapid withdrawal. Other NATO members refused to sell oil they received from Arab nations to Britain or France.\nUN General Assembly Resolution 997.\nOn 30 October, the Security Council submitted a draft resolution calling upon Israel immediately to withdraw its armed forces behind the established armistice lines. It was not adopted because of British and French vetoes. A similar draft resolution sponsored by the Soviet Union was also rejected. On 31 October, as planned, France and the UK launched their attacks against targets in Egypt. Later that day, the Security Council passed Resolution 119, calling an emergency special session of the General Assembly for the first time, in order to make appropriate recommendations to end the fighting.\nThe emergency special session was convened on 1 November. The same day Nasser requested diplomatic assistance from the US, without requesting the same from the Soviet Union.\nIn the early hours of 2 November, the General Assembly adopted the United States' proposal for Resolution 997. It called for an immediate ceasefire, the withdrawal of all forces behind the armistice lines, an arms embargo, and the reopening of the Suez Canal, which was now blocked. The vote was 64 in favour and 5 opposed (Australia, New Zealand, Britain, France, and Israel) with 6 abstentions.\nOver the next several days, the emergency special session established the first United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF). This proposal of the emergency force and the resulting cease-fire was made possible primarily through the efforts of Lester B. Pearson, the Secretary of External Affairs of Canada, and Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld, the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Britain and France agreed to withdraw from Egypt within a week; Israel did not.\nPost-invasion Israeli initiatives.\nOn 7 November, David Ben-Gurion addressed the Knesset and declared a great victory, saying that the 1949 armistice agreement with Egypt was dead and buried, and that the armistice lines were no longer valid and could not be restored. Under no circumstances would Israel agree to the stationing of UN forces on its territory or in any area it occupied. He also made an oblique reference to his intention to annex the Sinai Peninsula. Isaac Alteras writes that Ben-Gurion \"was carried away by the resounding victory against Egypt\" and while \"a statesman well known for his sober realism, [he] took flight in dreams of grandeur\".\nThe speech marked the beginning of a four-month-long diplomatic struggle, culminating in withdrawal from all territory, under conditions far less palatable than those envisioned in the speech, but with conditions for sea access to Eilat and a UNEF presence on Egyptian soil. The speech immediately drew increased international pressure on Israel to withdraw. That day in New York, the emergency session passed Resolution 1002, again calling for the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops to behind the armistice lines, and for the immediate withdrawal of British and French troops from Egyptian territory. After a long Israeli cabinet meeting late on 8 November, Ben-Gurion informed Eisenhower that Israel declared its willingness to accept withdrawal of Israeli forces from Sinai, \"when satisfactory arrangements are made with the international force that is about to enter the canal zone\".\nSoviet response.\nPremier Nikolai Bulganin threatened to intervene on the Egyptian side, and to launch rocket attacks on Britain, France and Israel. It was later learned that the Soviets did not have the ICBMs necessary to launch this attack, but the West did not know this at the time.\nThe Soviet threat to send troops to Egypt to fight the Allies led Eisenhower to fear that this might be the beginning of World War III. Eisenhower immediately ordered Lockheed U-2 flights over Syria and Israel to search for any Soviet air forces on Syrian bases. The Americans excluded Israel from the guarantee against Soviet attack, however, alarming the Israeli government. The U-2 showed that Soviet aircraft were not in Syria despite the threats.\nCeasefire.\nAnthony Eden announced a cease fire on 6 November, warning neither France nor Israel beforehand. Troops were still in Port Said and on operational manoeuvres. Port Said had been overrun, and the military assessment was that the Suez Canal could have been completely taken within 24 hours.\nEisenhower was not in favour of an immediate withdrawal of British, French and Israeli troops until the US ambassador to the United Nations, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. pushed for it. Without further guarantee, the Anglo-French Task Force had to finish withdrawing by 22 December 1956, to be replaced by Danish and Colombian units of the UNEF.\nThe Israelis refused to host any UN force on Israeli-controlled territory and withdrew from the Sinai and Gaza in March 1957. Before the withdrawal the Israeli forces systematically destroyed infrastructure in the Sinai peninsula such as roads, railways and telephone lines, and all houses in the villages of Abu Ageila and El Quseima. Israeli troops confiscated Egyptian National Railways equipment for use by Israel Railways.\nThe UNEF was formed by forces from countries that were not part of either NATO or the Warsaw Pact. Canadian Armed Forces troops participated in later years, since Canada had spearheaded the idea of a neutral force. By 24 April 1957, the canal was fully reopened to shipping.\nAftermath.\nThe conflict resulted in a military victory for the Coalition, but a political victory for Egypt. Egypt maintained control of the canal.\nIsrael.\nIn the context of the massive armament of Egypt via Czechoslovakia, Israel had been expecting an Egyptian invasion in either March or April 1957, as well as a Soviet invasion of Syria, neither of which occurred after this war. The fight over the canal also laid the groundwork for the Six-Day War in 1967 due to the lack of a peace settlement following the 1956 war and rising of tensions between Egypt and Israel.\nThe Israel Defense Forces gained confidence from the campaign.\nThe Straits of Tiran, closed by Egypt since 1950, were re-opened to Israeli shipping. The Israelis also secured the presence of UN Peacekeepers in Sinai. Operation Kadesh bought Israel an eleven-year lull on its southern border with Egypt.\nIn addition, its refusal to withdraw without guarantees, even in defiance of the United States and United Nations, ended all Western efforts, mainly American and British ones, to impose a political settlement in the Middle East without taking Israel's security needs into consideration.\nIn October 1965 Eisenhower told Jewish fundraiser and Republican party supporter Max M. Fisher that he greatly regretted forcing Israel to withdraw from the Sinai peninsula.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union made major gains with regards to influence in the Middle East. Nikita Khrushchev's much publicised threat expressed through letters written by Nikolai Bulganin to begin rocket attacks on 5 November on Britain, France, and Israel if they did not withdraw from Egypt was widely believed at the time to have forced a ceasefire. Accordingly, it enhanced the prestige of the Soviet Union in Egypt, the Arab world, and the Third World, who believed the USSR was prepared to launch a nuclear attack on Britain, France, and Israel for the sake of Egypt. Though Nasser in private admitted that it was American economic pressure that had saved him, it was Khrushchev, not Eisenhower, whom Nasser publicly thanked as Egypt's saviour and special friend.\nShortly after it reopened, the canal was traversed by the first Soviet Navy warships since World War I. The Soviets' burgeoning influence in the Middle East, although it was not to last, included acquiring Mediterranean bases, and supporting the budding Palestinian liberation movement.\nKhrushchev took the view that the Suez crisis had been a great triumph for Soviet nuclear brinkmanship, arguing publicly and privately that his threat to use nuclear weapons was what had saved Egypt. Therefore, a long period of crises began, starting with the Berlin crisis, beginning later in November 1958, and culminating in the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962.\nThe Soviet Union was able to avoid most repercussions from its concurrent violent suppression of the rebellion in Hungary, and were able to present an image at the United Nations as a defender of small powers against imperialism.\nUnited States.\nThe crisis may also have hastened decolonisation, as many of the remaining British and French colonies gained independence over the next few years. Some argued that the imposed ending to the Crisis led to over-hasty decolonisation in Africa, increasing the chance of civil wars and military dictatorships in newly independent countries.\nUS secretary of state John Foster Dulles perceived a power vacuum in the Middle East, and he thought the United States should fill it. AIn order to prevent further Soviet expansion in the region, Eisenhower asked Congress on 5 January 1957 for authorisation to use military force if requested by any Middle Eastern nation to check aggression and, secondly, to set aside $200\u00a0million to help Middle Eastern countries that desired aid from the United States. Congress granted both requests and this policy became known as the Eisenhower Doctrine.\nNasser saw the Eisenhower Doctrine as a heavy-handed American attempt to dominate the Middle East and led him to ally Egypt with the Soviet Union as an effective counter-weight. It was only with the abandonment of the Eisenhower Doctrine in mid-1958 that Nasser started pulling away from the Soviet Union to resume his preferred role as an opportunist who tried to use both superpowers to his advantage.\nThe American historian Arthur L. Herman said that the episode ruined the usefulness of the United Nations to support American geopolitical aims.\nEurope.\nThe Bulganin letters showcased Europe's dependence upon the United States for security against Soviet nuclear threats while at the same time seeming to show that the American nuclear umbrella was not as reliable as had been advertised.\nAs a result, the French became determined to acquire their own nuclear weapons rather than rely upon the Americans, while Germany became even more interested in the idea of a European \"Third Force\" in the Cold War. This helped to lead to the formation of the European Economic Community, which was intended to be the foundation of the European \"Third Force\".\nEgypt.\nEgypt kept control of the Suez Canal. The British historian D. R. Thorpe wrote that the outcome gave Nasser \"an inflated view of his own power\", thinking he had overcome the combined forces of the United Kingdom, France and Israel, failing to attribute their withdrawal to pressure from the superpowers.\nAmerican historian Derek Varble commented, \"Although Egyptian forces fought with mediocre skill during the conflict, many Arabs saw Nasser as the conqueror of European colonialism and Zionism, simply because Britain, France and Israel left the Sinai and the northern Canal Zone.\" The fighting at Port Said became a symbol of Egyptian victory, linked to a global anti-colonial struggle.\nCrackdown on Egyptian Jews.\n In October 1956, Nasser brought in a set of sweeping regulations abolishing civil liberties and allowing the state to stage mass arrests without charge and strip away Egyptian citizenship from any group it desired; these measures were mostly directed against the Jews of Egypt. As part of its new policy, 1,000 Jews were arrested and 500 Jewish businesses were seized by the government.\nA statement branding the Jews as \"Zionists and enemies of the state\" was read out in the mosques of Cairo and Alexandria. Jewish bank accounts were confiscated and many Jews lost their jobs. Lawyers, engineers, doctors and teachers were not allowed to work in their professions. Thousands of Jews were ordered to leave the country.\nThey were allowed to take only one suitcase and a small sum of cash, and forced to sign declarations \"donating\" their property to the Egyptian government. Some 25,000 Jews, almost half of the Jewish community, left Egypt, mainly for Israel, Europe, the United States and South America. By 1957, the Jewish population of Egypt had fallen to 15,000.\nBritain.\nThe political and psychological impact of the crisis had a fundamental impact on British politics. Anthony Eden was accused of misleading parliament and resigned from office on 9 January 1957.\nThough British influence continued in the Middle East, Suez was a blow to British prestige in the Near East from which the country never recovered. Britain evacuated all positions East of Suez by 1971, though this was due mainly to economic factors.\nEden's successor, Harold Macmillan, accelerated the process of decolonisation and sought to restore Britain's special relationship with the United States. Benefiting from his personal popularity and a healthy economy, Macmillan's government increased its Parliamentary majority in the 1959 general election.\nDuring the 1960s there was much speculation that Prime Minister Harold Wilson's refusals to send British troops to the Vietnam War, were partially due to the Americans not supporting Britain during the Suez Crisis. In 1973, Prime Minister Edward Heath refused the US permission to use any of the UK's air bases to resupply during the Yom Kippur War, or to allow the Americans to gather intelligence from British bases in Cyprus.\nHowever, the British relationship with the United States did not suffer lasting consequences from the crisis. One example came with Britain's first hydrogen bomb test Operation Grapple which led to the 1958 US\u2013UK Mutual Defence Agreement. Six years after the crisis, the Americans sold Britain state-of-the-art missile technology at a moderate cost, which became the UK Polaris programme.\nThe war led to the eviction of GCHQ from several of its best foreign signals intelligence collection sites.\nFrance.\nRisse-Kappen argued that Franco-American ties never recovered from the Suez crisis. Previously there had already been strains in the Franco-American relationship triggered by what Paris considered US betrayal of the French war effort in Indochina in 1954. From the point of view of General Charles de Gaulle, the Suez events demonstrated to France that it could not rely on its allies. The British had initiated a ceasefire in the midst of the battle without consulting the French, while the Americans had opposed Paris politically. The damage to the ties between Paris and Washington, D.C., \"culminated in President de Gaulle's 1966 decision to withdraw from the military integration of NATO\".\nMuch of the French Army officer corps felt that they had been \"betrayed\" by politicians in Paris when they were on the verge of victory, just as they believed they had been \"betrayed\" in Vietnam in 1954, and accordingly became more determined to win the war in Algeria, even if it meant overthrowing the Fourth Republic to do so. The Suez crisis thus helped to set the stage for the military disillusionment with the Fourth Republic, which was to lead to the collapse of the republic in 1958.\nCanada.\nLester B. Pearson, who would later become the prime minister of Canada, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957 for his efforts in creating a mandate for a United Nations Peacekeeping Force, and he is considered the father of the modern concept of peacekeeping. The Suez Crisis contributed to the adoption of a new national flag of Canada in 1965, as the Egyptian government had objected to Canadian peacekeeping troops on the grounds that their flag at that time included a British ensign.\nMilitary thought.\nThe military lesson that was reinforced by the Suez War was the extent that the desert favoured highly fluid, mobile operations and the power of aerial interdiction. To operate in the open desert without air supremacy proved to be suicidal for the Egyptian forces in the Sinai. The Royal Marine helicopter assault at Port Said \"showed promise as a technique for transporting troops into small landing zones\". Egyptian urban warfare tactics at Port Said proved to be effective at slowing down the Allied advance.\nSee also.\nGeneral\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMedia links"}
{"id": "58569", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58569", "title": "Suez War", "text": ""}
{"id": "58570", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58570", "title": "Suez Campaign", "text": ""}
{"id": "58573", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58573", "title": "Zwolle, Netherlands", "text": ""}
{"id": "58575", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58575", "title": "Sendero Luminoso", "text": ""}
{"id": "58576", "revid": "51048454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58576", "title": "Lawrence Welk", "text": "American bandleader and TV impresario (1903\u20131992)\nLawrence Welk (March 11, 1903 \u2013 May 17, 1992) was an American accordionist, bandleader, and television impresario, who hosted \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" from 1951 to 1982. The program was known for its light and family-friendly style, and the easy listening music featured became known as \"champagne music\" to his radio, television, and live-performance audiences.\nWelk, a native of North Dakota who was born to German immigrants from Russia, began his career as a bandleader in the 1920s in the Great Plains. He gradually became more known throughout the country due to recordings and radio performances, and he and his orchestra were based in Chicago in the 1940s, where they had a standing residency at the Trianon Ballroom. By the start of the next decade, Welk relocated to Los Angeles and began hosting his eponymous television show, first on local television, before going national when the show was picked up by ABC in 1955. The show's popularity held through the following years, and with its focus on inoffensive entertainment, it was embraced by conservative audiences as an antidote to the counterculture of the 1960s. Welk vigorously sought to uphold this \"clean-cut\" reputation, and was deeply involved in managing both the on- and off-camera reputations of his show's performers. \nIn 1971, ABC cancelled \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" as part of a broader trend away from programs aimed at older or more rural audiences. Welk then continued his program in broadcast syndication until retiring in 1982. In the remaining decade of his life, he managed various business interests and packaged reruns of his show for broadcast on PBS, where it has continued to appear into the 21st century.\nEarly life.\nWelk was born in the German-speaking community of Strasburg, North Dakota. He was sixth of the eight children of Ludwig and Christiana (n\u00e9e Schwahn) Welk, Roman Catholic ethnic Germans who had emigrated in 1892 from Odessa in the Russian Empire (later Ukraine).\nWelk was a first cousin, once removed, of former Montana governor Brian Schweitzer (Welk's mother and Schweitzer's paternal grandmother were siblings). Welk's paternal great-great-grandparents, Moritz and Magdalena Welk, emigrated in 1808 from Germanophone Alsace-Lorraine to Ukraine.\nThe family lived on a homestead that became a tourist attraction. They spent the cold North Dakota winter of their first year inside an upturned wagon covered in sod. Welk left school during fourth grade to work full-time on the family farm.\nWelk decided on a career in music and persuaded his father to buy a mail-order accordion for $400 (equivalent to $ in 2024). He promised his father that he would work on the farm until he was 21, in repayment for the accordion. Any money he made elsewhere during that time, doing farmwork or performing, would go to his family.\nWelk became an iconic figure in the German-Russian community of the northern Great Plains\u2014his success story personified the American dream. Welk did not learn to speak English until he was 21; he never felt comfortable speaking in public. To the day he died, his English had a marked German accent.\nEarly career.\nOn his 21st birthday, having fulfilled his promise to his father, Welk left the family farm to pursue a career in music. During the 1920s, he performed with various bands before forming an orchestra. He led dance bands in North Dakota and eastern South Dakota, including the Hotsy Totsy Boys and the Honolulu Fruit Gum Orchestra. His band was also the station band for the popular radio programming WNAX in Yankton, South Dakota. The Lawrence Welk Orchestra scored an immediate success and began a daily radio show, which lasted from 1927 to 1936. The radio show led to many well-paying engagements for the band throughout the midwestern states. In 1927, he graduated from the MacPhail School of Music in Minneapolis, Minnesota.\nAlthough many associate Welk's music with a style quite separate from jazz, he recorded several jazzy sides; in November 1928 for Gennett Records, based in Richmond, Indiana: \"Spiked Beer\" and \"Doin' The New Low Down\" and in 1931 in Grafton, Wisconsin for Paramount Records \"Smile Darn Ya, Smile\".\nDuring the 1930s, Welk led a touring dance band specializing in dance tunes and \"sweet\" music (during this period, bands performing light-melodic music were referred to as \"sweet bands\" to distinguish them from the more rhythmic and assertive \"hot\" bands of artists like Benny Goodman and Duke Ellington). Initially, the band traveled around the country by car. They were too poor to rent rooms, so they usually slept and changed clothes in their cars. The term \"champagne music\" was derived from an engagement at the William Penn Hotel in Pittsburgh, after a dancer referred to his band's sound as \"light and bubbly as champagne.\" The hotel also lays claim to the original \"bubble machine,\" a prop left over from a 1920s movie premiere. Welk described his band's sound, saying, \"We still play music with the champagne style, which means light and rhythmic. We place the stress on melody; the chords are played pretty much the way the composer wrote them. We play with a steady beat so dancers can follow it.\"\nWelk's band performed across the country, but particularly in the Chicago and Milwaukee areas. In the early 1940s, the band began a 10-year stint at the Trianon Ballroom in Chicago, regularly drawing crowds of several thousand. His orchestra also performed frequently at the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City during the late 1940s. In 1944 and 1945, Welk led his orchestra in 10 \"Soundies\", three-minute movie musicals considered to be the early pioneers of music videos.\nWelk collaborated with Western artist Red Foley to record a version of Spade Cooley's \"Shame on You\" in 1945. The record (Decca 18698) was number 4 to Cooley's number 5 on \"Billboard\"'s September 15 \"Most Played Juke Box Folk Records\" listing. From 1949 through 1951, the band had radio programming on ABC, sponsored by Miller High Life, \"The Champagne of Bottled Beer.\"\nIn addition to his activities as a performing artist, Welk edited a course of modern music for the piano accordion which included arrangements by John Serry for the U. S. School of Music in New York City in 1953.\nRecordings.\nIn addition to the above-mentioned \"Spiked Beer\", Welk's territory band made occasional trips to Richmond, Indiana, and to Grafton, Wisconsin, to record a handful of sessions for the Gennett and Paramount companies. In November 1928 he recorded four sides for Gennett spread over two days (one side was rejected), and in 1931 he recorded eight sides for Paramount (in two sessions) that were issued on the Broadway and Lyric labels. These records are rare and highly valued.\nFrom 1938 to 1940, he recorded frequently in New York and Chicago for Vocalion Records. During this period Welk recorded numerous instrumentals especially for radio stations; these transcription records became a broadcasting staple. Welk signed with Decca Records in 1941, then recorded for Mercury Records and Coral Records for short periods of time before moving to Dot Records in 1959.\nIn 1967, Welk left Dot Records and joined its former executive Randy Wood in creating Ranwood Records. Welk bought back all his masters from Dot and Coral, and Ranwood became the outlet for all of Welk's many artists. They started with a huge reissue of old Dot albums in 1968 to get them started on the right foot. Wood's interest was sold to Welk in 1979. In 2015, Welk Music Group sold the Vanguard and Sugar Hill labels to Concord Bicycle Music while retaining ownership of the Ranwood catalog. Welk's estate licensed the Ranwood catalogue to Concord Music Group for 10 years.\n\"The Lawrence Welk Show\".\nIn 1951, Welk settled in Los Angeles. The same year, he began producing \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" on KTLA in Los Angeles, where it was broadcast from the Aragon Ballroom in Venice Beach. The show became a local hit and was picked up by ABC in June 1955. By 1956, Welk also signed with Ben Selvin at RCA Thesaurus for broadcasts of his \"New Lawrence Welk Show\" on leading national radio networks.\nDuring its first year on the air, the Welk hour instituted several regular features. To make Welk's \"Champagne Music\" tagline visual, the production crew engineered a \"bubble machine\" that spouted streams of large bubbles across the bandstand. While the bubble machine was originally engineered to produce soap bubbles, complaints from the band members about soapy build-ups on their instruments led to the machine being reworked to produce glycerine bubbles instead. During the show's first year, the bubble machine operated continuously, with the bubbles wafting across the musicians' faces and instruments for the entire hour. Within a year, the bubble machine was retired except for the opening and closing \"Champagne Music\" selections. Whenever the orchestra played a polka or waltz, Welk himself would dance with the band's female vocalist, the \"Champagne Lady\". This was a long-standing tradition in the Welk band; the first Champagne Lady was Lois Best (1939 to 1941), followed during the war years by Jayne Walton.\nBeginning with the Welk show's freshman year, Welk was careful to program current songs in addition to the traditional big-band standards. The Boyd Bennett rock-and-roll hit \"My Boy Flat Top\" was featured on two different programs (November 26, 1955, and December 10, 1955, the latter featuring Buddy Merrill on electric guitar). The policy was relaxed over the next year, with new songs still being included but now being treated as novelty arrangements. In the December 8, 1956, broadcast, \"Nuttin' for Christmas\" became a vehicle for Rocky Rockwell dressed in a child's outfit, and Elvis Presley's \"Don't Be Cruel\" was sung by the violinist Bob Lido, wearing fake Presley-style sideburns. In another episode, the Lennon Sisters and Norma Zimmer performed the Orlons' No. 2 pop hit \"The Wah-Watusi\" with the bass singer Larry Hooper wearing a beatnik outfit.\nThese stood in comparison to the contemporary \"American Bandstand\", which catered to a teenager audience and featured the latest acts. In a 1971 episode, Welk infamously billed the Brewer &amp; Shipley single \"One Toke Over the Line\" (performed as a duet by Gail Farrell and Dick Dale), which referenced the use of marijuana, as a \"modern spiritual\"; social conservatives of the era saw the song as subversive and it became the first casualty of an attempt by the Federal Communications Commission to get radio stations to ban all pro-drug songs. Later in the 1970s, however, Welk's programs often included current adult contemporary songs performed by his singers, including \"Feelings\" and \"Love Will Keep Us Together\" (made famous by Morris Albert and Captain &amp; Tennille, respectively), and current songs were included up through 1982, the final year of production of the show.\nWhenever a Dixieland tune was scheduled, Welk harked back to his days with the Hotsy Totsy Boys and enthusiastically led the band. Befitting the target audience, the type of music on \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" was conservative, concentrating on popular music standards, show tunes, polkas, and novelty songs, delivered in a smooth, calm, good-humored easy-listening style and \"family-oriented\" manner. Although described by one critic, Canadian journalist and entertainment editor Frank Rasky, as \"the squarest music this side of Euclid\", this strategy proved commercially successful, and the show remained on the air for 31 years.\nWelk's musicians included accordionist Myron Floren, the concert violinist Dick Kesner, the guitarist Buddy Merrill, and the New Orleans Dixieland clarinetist Pete Fountain. Though Welk was occasionally rumored to be tight with a dollar, he paid his regular band members top scale. Long tenure was common among the regulars. For example, Floren was the band's assistant conductor throughout the show's run. He was noted for spotlighting individual members of his band.\nWelk had a number of instrumental hits, including a cover of the song \"Yellow Bird\". His highest-charting record was \"Calcutta\", written by Heino Gaze, which achieved hit status in 1961. Welk himself was indifferent to the tune, but his musical director, George Cates, said that if Welk did not wish to record the song, he (Cates) would. Welk replied, \"Well, if it's good enough for you, George, I guess it's good enough for me.\" Although the rock-and-roll explosion in the mid-1950s had driven most older artists off the charts, \"Calcutta\" reached number 1 on the U.S. pop charts between February 13 and 26, 1961; it was recorded in only one take. The tune knocked The Shirelles' \"Will You Love Me Tomorrow\" out of the number 1 position, and it kept the Miracles' \"Shop Around\" from becoming the group's first number-1 hit, holding their recording at number 2. It sold more than one million copies and was awarded a gold disc.\nThe album \"Calcutta!\" also achieved number-one status. The albums \"Last Date\", \"Yellow Bird\", \"Moon River\", \"Young World\" and \"Baby Elephant Walk and Theme from the Brothers Grimm\", produced in the early 60s, were in \"Billboard\"'s top ten; nine more albums produced between 1956 and 1963 were in the top twenty. His albums continued to chart through 1973.\nWelk was adamant on providing wholesome entertainment. For example, he fired Alice Lon, at the time the show's \"Champagne Lady,\" because he believed she was showing too much leg. Welk told the audience that he would not tolerate such \"cheesecake\" performances on his show. A torrent of fan mail indicated that viewers opposed Lon's firing. Welk relented and offered Lon her job back, but Lon refused. He then had a series of short-term \"Champagne Ladies\" before Norma Zimmer became Lon's permanent replacement. He was highly involved with his stars' personal lives, often to the point of arbitrating their marital disputes. His musical conservatism caused occasional controversies as well. Despite the authentic New Orleans Dixieland clarinet that made him a popular cast member, Pete Fountain left the orchestra in a dispute with Welk over adding a jazz solo to a Christmas song.\nReflecting the controversies about the quality of Welk's music among the cognoscenti, in 1956, musical satirist Stan Freberg, known for his love of jazz, wrote and recorded a biting Welk satire, \"Wunnerful! Wunnerful!\" Freberg impersonated Welk. Recorded with some of Hollywood's best jazz musicians, arranged by Billy May to sound like authentic Welk, the single mocked Welk's accordion work, his sometimes-stumbling patter between songs and the music of such Welk favorites Rocky Rockwell (\"Stony Stonedwell\"), Champagne Lady Alice Lon (\"Alice Lean\") and Larry Hooper (\"Larry Looper\"). Welk was not amused, and when he met Freberg years later, claimed he never used the \"Wunnerful! Wunnerful!\" term. Ironically, it became the title of Welk's 1971 autobiography.\nDespite its staid reputation, \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" nonetheless kept up with the times and never limited itself strictly to music of the big-band era. During the 1960s and 1970s, for instance, the show incorporated material by such contemporary sources as the Beatles, Burt Bacharach and Hal David, Neil Sedaka, the Everly Brothers and Paul Williams (as well as, in the most notorious example, Brewer &amp; Shipley), all arranged in a format that was easily digestible to older viewers. Originally produced in black and white, in 1957 the show began being recorded on videotape, and it switched to color for the fall 1965 season.\nDuring its network run, \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" aired on ABC on Saturday nights at 9 p.m. (Eastern Time), moving up a half-hour to 8:30\u00a0p.m. in the fall of 1963. In fact, Welk headlined two weekly prime-time shows on ABC for three years. From 1956 to 1958, he hosted \"Top Tunes and New Talent\", which aired on Monday nights. The series moved to Wednesdays in the fall of 1958 and was renamed \"The Plymouth Show\", which ended in May 1959. During that time, the Saturday show was also known as \"The Dodge Dancing Party\". During this period, the networks were in the process of eliminating programming that was seen as having either too old an audience, did not appeal to urban residents, or both (the so-called Rural purge). As \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" fit into this category, ABC ended its run in 1971. Welk thanked ABC and the sponsors at the end of the last network show. \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" continued on as a first-run syndicated program shown on 250 stations across the country until the final original show was produced in 1982, when Welk decided to retire. While many longtime TV shows suffered a serious ratings drop during the counterculture movement of the late 1960s, \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" survived largely intact and even had increased viewership during this time, albeit consisting of mostly older viewers.\nFor the entire run, musical numbers were divided fairly evenly between prerecorded lip- and finger-sync performances and those recorded live on film or tape. Generally, the big production numbers featuring dancing and singing performances were recorded earlier in the day or the day before, often at famous recording studios in and around nearby Hollywood, while the more intimate numbers were recorded live on tape or film.\nAfter retiring from his show and the road in 1982, Welk continued to air reruns of his shows, which were repackaged first for syndication and, starting in 1986, for public television. He also starred in and produced a pair of Christmas specials in 1984 and 1985.\nBusiness ventures.\nWelk was a businessman and subsequent to his marriage in 1930, he was the manager of a hotel, restaurant, and music store.\nIn the late 1950s, he founded Teleklew Inc., which had investments in music publishing, recordings, and real estate.\nIn the 1970s, he developed the \"Lawrence Welk Plaza\", now known as the 100 Wilshire Blvd Building, in Santa Monica, California, the 21-story high rise which was the former GTE building. Next to that building is the \"Lawrence Welk Champagne Towers\" the 16-story luxury Apartment Complex, along with the 11-story Wilshire Palisades office building.\nIn the 1980s, the company became The Welk Group and subsequently split into Welk Music Group and Welk Resort Group.\nWelk was awarded four U.S. design patents for a musically themed restaurant menu, an accordion-themed tray for serving food at a restaurant, and an accordion-themed ashtray.\nPersonal life and death.\nWelk was married for 61 years, until his death in 1992, to Fern Renner (August 26, 1903 \u2013 February 13, 2002), with whom he had two daughters and a son. His son, Lawrence Welk Jr., married and divorced fellow \"Lawrence Welk Show\" performer Tanya Falan. Welk was survived by 10 grandchildren and a great-grandchild. His grandson Lawrence Welk III is a helicopter pilot who worked with Zoey Tur.\nA devout Roman Catholic, Welk was a daily communicant. He was a noted member of The Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks.\nHe died of pneumonia on May 17, 1992, at age 89, at his Santa Monica home, surrounded by his family. He was buried in Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California.\nHonors.\nIn 1961, Welk was inducted as a charter member of the Rough Rider Award from his native North Dakota. In 1967, he received the Horatio Alger Award from the Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans. He later served as the Grand Marshal for the Rose Bowl's Tournament of Roses parade in 1972. Welk received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1980.\nIn 1994, Welk was inducted into the International Polka Music Hall of Fame.\nWelk has a star for recording on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, located at 6613\u00bd Hollywood Boulevard. He has a second star at 1601 Vine Street for television.\nIn 2007, Welk became a charter member of the Gennett Records Walk of Fame in Richmond, Indiana.\nLegacy.\nWelk's band continues to appear in a dedicated theater in Branson, Missouri. In addition, the television show has been repackaged for broadcast on PBS stations, with updates from show performers appearing as wraparounds where the original shows had commercial breaks. The repackaged shows are broadcast at roughly the same Saturday night time slot as the original ABC shows, and special longer rebroadcasts are often shown during individual stations' fund-raising periods. These repackaged shows are produced by the Oklahoma Educational Television Authority.\nThe \"Live Lawrence Welk Show\" makes annual concert tours across the United States and Canada, featuring stars from the television series, including Ralna English, Mary Lou Metzger, Gail Farrell, and Anacani.\nBooks by Welk.\nAll of Welk's books are coauthored by, or written in conjunction with, Bernice McGeehan and published by Prentice Hall, except where indicated:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58577", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58577", "title": "Alpine", "text": "Alpine may refer to any mountainous region. It may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58578", "revid": "1288665476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58578", "title": "Ashland", "text": "Ashland may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58579", "revid": "1101750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58579", "title": "Auburn", "text": "Auburn may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58580", "revid": "82895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58580", "title": "Sim\u00e9on Poisson", "text": ""}
{"id": "58581", "revid": "7957594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58581", "title": "Avon", "text": "Avon may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58582", "revid": "47012757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58582", "title": "Bowling Green", "text": "A bowling green is a lawn used for playing the game of bowls.\nBowling Green may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nUnited States.\n\"Listed alphabetically by state in each sub-section\"\nUnited Kingdom.\n\"All located within England\"\nEducation.\n\"Note: the largest so-named school in the United States is Bowling Green State University in Ohio.\"\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58583", "revid": "47496819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58583", "title": "Bethel", "text": "Ancient Israelite city mentioned in the Bible\nBethel (, \"House of El\" or \"House of God\", also transliterated \"Beth El\", \"Beth-El\", \"Beit El\"; ; ) was an ancient Israelite city and sacred space that is frequently mentioned in the Hebrew Bible.\nBethel is first referred to in the Bible as being near the place where Abram pitched his tent. Later, Bethel is mentioned as the location of Jacob's Ladder that Jacob named Bethel \"House of God\". The name is further used for a border city located between the territory of the tribe of Benjamin and that of the tribe of Ephraim, which first belonged to the Benjaminites and was later conquered by the Ephraimites. In the 4th century, Eusebius and Jerome described Bethel as a small village that lay 12 Roman miles north of Jerusalem to the right or the east of the road leading to Neapolis.\nMost scholars identify Bethel with the modern-day village of Beitin, located in the West Bank, northeast of Ramallah. After the fall of the Crusader kingdom, Bethel was left in ruins under the rule of Saladin, remaining uninhabited for centuries until the mid-19th century when modern-day Beitin was established. In 1977, the biblical name was applied to the Israeli settlement of Beit El, founded nearby. In several countries, particularly the United States, the name has been given to various locations (see Bethel (disambiguation)).\nIdentification.\nBethel is widely identified by most scholars with the modern Arab village of Beitin, situated in the central part of the West Bank.\nAmong the earliest proponents of this identification was biblical scholar and traveler Edward Robinson, in his work \"Biblical Researches in Palestine\" (1838\u20131852). Robinson based this assessment on the location described in ancient texts, and on the philological similarities between the modern and ancient name, arguing that the replacement of the Hebrew \"el\" with the Arabic \"in\" was not unusual. This viewpoint was later reaffirmed by another early scholar, Henry Baker Tristram. The final 'l' in the name \"Bethel\" endured until the Crusader period. The name \"Beitin,\" with the /n/ ending, was not documented until the 19th century, possibly coming into use after the Early Middle Ages.A minority view was proposed by David Palmer Livingston and John J. Bimson, who proposed an alternative identification, suggesting that Bethel might be equated with al-Bireh, while positing Beitin as biblical Ophrah. However, Ophrah is commonly identified with the nearby village of Taybeh. These proposals have been rejected by Jules Francis Gomes, who wrote that \"The voices of Livingston and Bimson have hardly been taken seriously by those who worked on the excavations of Bethel.\"\nBiblical references.\nBook of Genesis.\nBethel is mentioned several times in the Book of Genesis. It is first mentioned in Lech-Lecha () as a place near the place where Abram stayed and built an altar on his way to Egypt and on his return. It is said to be close to Ai and just to the west of it. More famously, it is mentioned again in , when Jacob, fleeing from the wrath of his brother Esau, falls asleep on a stone and dreams of a ladder stretching between Heaven and Earth and thronged with angels; God stands at the top of the ladder, and promises Jacob the land of Canaan; when Jacob awakes he anoints the stone (baetyl) with oil and names the place Bethel.\nAnother account, from repeats the covenant with God and the naming of the place as El-Bethel, and makes this the site of Jacob's own change of name to Israel. Both versions state that the original name of the place was Luz, a Canaanite name.\nBook of Joshua.\nBethel is mentioned again in the book of as being close to Ai and on the west side of it; in this episode Joshua sent men from Jericho to capture Ai. At it is again said to be next to Luz, near Jericho, and part of the territory of the descendants of Joseph (that is Manasseh and Ephraim, cf. ).\nBook of Judges.\nIn the book of the descendants of Joseph capture the city of Bethel, which again is said to have previously been called Luz. At the prophetess Deborah is said to dwell at Bethel under the palm-tree of Deborah (presumably a reference to , where another Deborah, the nurse of Jacob's mother Rebecca, is said to have been buried under a tree at Bethel). Bethel is said in to be in Mount Ephraim.\nIn the narrative of Levite's concubine, in , where the Hebrew Beth-El is translated in the King James Version as the \"House of God\", the people of Israel go to Bethel to ask counsel of God when they are planning to attack the Tribe of Benjamin at the battle of Gibeah. They make a second visit () after losing the battle.\nBethel was evidently already an important religious centre at this time; it was so important, in fact, that the Ark of the Covenant was kept there, under the care of Phinehas the grandson of Aaron ( f). At , Bethel is said to be south of Shiloh.\nBook of Samuel.\nAt the next mention of the Ark, in , it is said to be kept at Shiloh.\nIn the book , it is said that the prophet Samuel, who resided at Ramah, used to make a yearly circuit of Bethel, Gilgal and Mizpah to judge Israel. At I Samuel 10:3, Samuel tells Saul to go to Bethel to visit the 'Hill of God,' where he will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place with a 'psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp.' It appears that there was a Philistine garrison there at that time. Bethel is mentioned again in and .\nFirst Book of Kings.\nAfter the kingdom of Israel was split into two kingdoms on the death of King Solomon (c.931 BC), Jeroboam, the first king of the northern Kingdom of Israel, made two golden calves ( ff) and set one up in Bethel, and the other in Dan in the far north of his kingdom. This was apparently to make it unnecessary for the people of Israel to have to go to Jerusalem to worship in the temple there. It seems that this action provoked the hostility of the Judaeans. A story is told at ff of how a man from Judah visited the shrine at Bethel and prophesied that it would eventually be destroyed by Josiah.\nSecond Book of Kings.\nAccording to ff, the prophets Elijah and Elisha visited Bethel on a journey from Gilgal to Jericho shortly before Elijah was taken up to heaven alive (). Later, when Elisha returned alone to Bethel, he was taunted by some young boys as he climbed up to the shrine, and cursed them; whereupon 42 of the young men were mauled by bears ( ff).\nBethel is next mentioned in connection with the tenth king of Israel, Jehu (c. 842\u2013815 BC). Despite his killing of the prophets of Baal and destruction of their temple, it is said that Jehu continued to tolerate the presence of the golden calves in Bethel and Dan (). The shrine at Bethel apparently avoided destruction in the Assyrian invasions of the Kingdom of Israel in c. 740 and 722, but was finally completely destroyed by King Josiah of Judah (c. 640\u2013609 BC).\nBooks of Amos, Hosea and Jeremiah.\nThe shrine is mentioned with disapproval by the prophet Amos (c. 750):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do not seek Bethel, do not go to Gilgal, do not journey to Beersheba. For Gilgal will surely go into exile, and Bethel will be reduced to nothing.\u2014\u200a\nAmaziah, a priest of Bethel, expels Amos from the shrine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Don\u2019t prophesy anymore at Bethel, because this is the king\u2019s sanctuary and the temple of the kingdom.\u2014\u200a\nA few years later, the prophet Hosea (8th century BC) speaks (at least according to modern translations) of the \"wickedness\" of Bethel () and Jeremiah (6th century BC) speaks of the \"shame\" which it brought on Israel (). describes how the Israelites are abandoning Adonai for the worship of Baal, and accuses them of making or using images for 'idol' worship. Chief among these, it appears, was the image of the bull at Bethel, which by the time of Hosea was being worshipped as an image of Baal.\nBooks of Ezra and Nehemiah.\nBethel is mentioned in and as being resettled at the time of the return of the exiles from Babylon.\nHistory and archaeology.\nWilliam F. Albright first excavated a test pit in Bethel in 1927, while extensive excavations were conducted at Beitin by Albright and James L. Kelso in 1934, which continued under the direction of Kelso in 1937, 1954, 1957, and 1960.\nDuring his excavation campaigns, James Kelso found a clay stamp in contextually challenging debris near a Middle Bronze Age wall on the site\u2019s south-west side in 1957. Intriguingly, this find bore a striking resemblance to one Theodore Bent brought back from al-Ma\u0161had W\u0101d\u012b Daw\u02bfan (Hadhramaut, Yemen) in 1894. Indeed, such was the similarity, some scholars considered that the Bethel stamp was actually the Bent find and that the latter\u2019s wife, Mabel Bent, had somehow, and for some reason, deposited the object there after her husband\u2019s untimely death in 1897. Bizarrely, neither of the stamps (or the single one) have been traced for decades, and the only evidence that can be seen today is a squeeze made of the Bent stamp, which is now in the Eduard Glaser Collection, Vienna.\nRecent excavations at Elevation Point 914, a prominent hill located 900 meters east of the village of Beitin, by Aharon Tavger have uncovered several Middle Bronze and Iron II remains which have led excavator at E.P. 914 to propose this place as the ancient cult site of Bethel, and perhaps the location of Abram\u2019s altar.\nChalcolithic period.\nHuman settlement at the site of Beitin dates back to the Chalcolithic period. Archaeological excavations in 1950 uncovered flint tools, pottery and animal bones from that time.\nBronze Age.\nIn the Early Bronze Age (around 3200 BCE) normally nomadic populations settled in the area. Canaanite tombs, houses and olive presses were discovered to the north and southeast of the village. The remains of a Canaanite temple were also excavated by archaeologists.\nIn the Middle Bronze Age (around 1750 BCE) its status was elevated from a village to a fortified Canaanite town which is believed to be biblical Luz. Two city gates dating to this period have been excavated, one in the northeast and the other northwest of the wall. A second temple was built in Luz during this period, but was destroyed as a result of an earthquake.\nThe Late Bronze Age city at Bethel was destroyed at some point during the late 13th or early 12th century BCE.\nIron Age.\nDuring the Early Iron Age, a newer settlement was established. This settlement was continuously inhabited during the early and later phases of the Iron Age, although the exact date of its destruction remains uncertain.\nHellenistic, Roman, Byzantine and medieval periods.\nBethel/Beitin was again inhabited and fortified by Bacchides the Syrian in the time of the Maccabees.\nDuring the Great Jewish Revolt, Vespasian captured Bethel in the summer of 69 CE.\nRobinson notes that after the writings of Eusebius and Jerome, he found no further references to Bethel in the written historical record. However, he notes that the ruins at Beitin are greater than those of a village and seem to have undergone expansion after the time of Jerome, noting also the presence of what appear to be ruins of churches from the Middle Ages. The town appears on the 6th century Madaba Map as Louza (), also known as Bethel (, \"Beth\u0113l\")\".\nEarly Muslim period.\nThe church fell into ruin after the Islamic Rashidun army conquered the area.\nCrusader and Ayyubid periods.\nThe church was rebuilt by the Crusaders in the 12th century. During the Crusader period, the village was given as fief by Baldwin V of Jerusalem to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. After the Crusaders were defeated by the Ayyubid forces of Saladin in 1187, the church was destroyed and the village was abandoned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58585", "revid": "38004052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58585", "title": "Belmont", "text": "Belmont may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58586", "revid": "482576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58586", "title": "John Denver", "text": "American singer (1943\u20131997)\nHenry John Deutschendorf Jr. (December 31, 1943\u00a0\u2013 October 12, 1997), known professionally as John Denver, was an American country and folk singer, songwriter, and actor. He was one of the most popular acoustic artists of the 1970s and one of the best selling artists in that decade. AllMusic has called Denver \"among the most beloved entertainers of his era.\"\nDenver recorded and released approximately 300 songs, about 200 of which he wrote himself. He released 33 albums and singles that were certified Gold and Platinum in the U.S. by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), with estimated sales of more than 33 million units. He recorded and performed primarily with an acoustic guitar and sang about his joy in nature, disdain for city life, enthusiasm for music, and relationship trials. Denver's music appeared on a variety of charts, including country music, the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and adult contemporary, earning 12 gold and four platinum albums with his signature songs \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\"; \"Poems, Prayers &amp; Promises\"; \"Annie's Song\"; \"Rocky Mountain High\"; \"Calypso\"; \"Thank God I'm a Country Boy\"; and \"Sunshine on My Shoulders\".\nDenver appeared in several films and television specials during the 1970s and 1980s, including the 1977 hit \"Oh, God!\", in which he starred alongside George Burns. He continued to record into the 1990s, also focusing on environmental issues as well as lending vocal support to space exploration and testifying in front of Congress to protest censorship in music. Known for his love of Colorado, Denver lived in Aspen for much of his life. In 1974, Denver was named poet laureate of the state. The Colorado state legislature also adopted \"Rocky Mountain High\" as one of its two state songs in 2007, and West Virginia did the same for \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\" in 2014. An avid pilot, Denver died at the age of 53 in 1997, in a single-fatality crash while piloting a recently purchased light plane.\nEarly life.\nHenry John Deutschendorf Jr. was born on December 31, 1943, in Roswell, New Mexico, to Erma Louise (n\u00e9e Swope; 1922\u20132010) and Captain Henry John \"Dutch\" Deutschendorf Sr. (1920\u20131982), a United States Army Air Forces pilot stationed at Roswell Army Air Field. Captain Deutschendorf Sr. was a decorated pilot who set a number of air speed records in a Convair B-58 Hustler in 1961.\nIn his 1994 autobiography \"Take Me Home\", Denver described his father as a stern man who could not show his love for his children. With a military father, Denver's family moved often, and he found difficulty making friends and assimilating with children of his own age. The introverted Denver often felt out of place and did not know where he truly belonged. While stationed at Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson, Arizona, the Deutschendorfs purchased a house and lived there from 1951 to 1959. Denver lived in Tucson from ages six to 14.\nDuring these years, Denver attended Mansfeld Junior High School and was a member of the Tucson Arizona Boys Chorus for two years. He was content in Tucson, but his father was transferred to Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Alabama. The family later moved to Carswell Air Force Base in Fort Worth, Texas, where Denver graduated from Arlington Heights High School. Denver was distressed with life in Fort Worth, and in his junior year of high school he drove his father's car to California to visit family friends and begin his music career. His father flew to California in a friend's jet to retrieve him, and Denver reluctantly returned to Texas to complete his schooling.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nAt age 11, Denver received an acoustic guitar from his grandmother. He learned to play well enough to perform at local clubs by the time he was in college. Denver decided to change his name when Randy Sparks, founder of the New Christy Minstrels, suggested that \"Deutschendorf\" would not fit comfortably on a marquee. Denver attended Texas Tech University in Lubbock and sang in a folk-music group, \"The Alpine Trio\", while studying architecture. He was also a member of the Delta Tau Delta fraternity. Denver dropped out of Texas Tech in 1963 and moved to Los Angeles, where he sang in folk clubs. In 1965, Denver joined The Chad Mitchell Trio, replacing founder Chad Mitchell. After more personnel changes, the trio later became known as \"Denver, Boise, and Johnson\" (John Denver, David Boise, and Michael Johnson), with whom he appeared at the Philadelphia Folk Festival in 1968, then alone in 1969 and 1970.\nIn 1969, Denver abandoned band life to pursue a solo career and released his first album for RCA Records, \"Rhymes &amp; Reasons\". Two years earlier, he had made a self-produced demo recording of some of the songs he played at his concerts. It included a song Denver had written called \"Babe, I Hate to Go\", later renamed \"Leaving on a Jet Plane\". He made several copies and gave them out as Christmas presents. Milt Okun, who produced records for The Chad Mitchell Trio and folk group Peter, Paul and Mary, had become Denver's producer as well. Okun brought the unreleased \"Jet Plane\" song to Peter, Paul and Mary. Their rendition hit number one on the Billboard Hot 100. Denver's song also made it to number 2 in the UK in February 1970, having also made number 1 on the US Cash Box chart in December 1969.\nRCA did not actively promote \"Rhymes &amp; Reasons\" with a series of live appearances, but Denver embarked on an impromptu supporting tour throughout the Midwest, stopping at towns and cities, offering to play free concerts at local venues. When he was successful in persuading a school, college, American Legion hall, or coffeehouse to let him perform, Denver distributed posters in the town and usually showed up at the local radio station, guitar in hand, offering himself for an interview. As the writer of \"Leaving on a Jet Plane\", Denver was often successful in gaining some promotional airtime, usually performing one or two songs live. Some venues let him play for the 'door'; others restricted him to selling copies of the album at intermission and after the show. After several months of this, Denver had built a solid fan base, many of whom remained loyal throughout his career.\nDenver recorded two more albums in 1970, \"Take Me to Tomorrow\" and \"Whose Garden Was This\", including a mix of songs he had written and covers of other writers' compositions.\nCareer peak.\nDenver's next album, \"Poems, Prayers &amp; Promises\" (1971), was a breakthrough for him in the United States, thanks in part to the single \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\", which went to number 2 on the \"Billboard\" charts despite the first pressings of the track being distorted. Its success was due in part to the efforts of his new manager, future Hollywood producer Jerry Weintraub, who signed Denver in 1970. Weintraub insisted on a reissue of the track and began a radio airplay campaign that started in Denver, Colorado. Denver's career flourished thereafter, and he had a series of hits over the next four years. In 1972, Denver had his first Top Ten album with \"Rocky Mountain High\", with its title track reaching the Top Ten in 1973. In 1974 and 1975, Denver had a string of four number 1 songs (\"Sunshine on My Shoulders\", \"Annie's Song\", \"Thank God I'm a Country Boy\", and \"I'm Sorry\") and three number 1 albums (\"John Denver's Greatest Hits\", \"Back Home Again\", and \"Windsong\").\nIn the 1970s, Denver's onstage appearance included long blond hair and wire-rimmed \"granny\" glasses. His embroidered shirts with images commonly associated with the American West were created by the designer and appliqu\u00e9 artist Anna Zapp. Weintraub insisted on a significant number of television appearances, including a series of half-hour shows in the United Kingdom, despite Denver's protests at the time, \"I've had no success in Britain\u00a0... I mean \"none\"\". In December 1976, Weintraub told Maureen Orth of \"Newsweek\": \"I knew the critics would never go for John. I had to get him to the people.\"\nAfter appearing as a guest on many shows, Denver hosted his own variety and music specials, including several concerts from Red Rocks Amphitheatre. His seasonal special \"Rocky Mountain Christmas\" was watched by more than 60 million people and was the highest-rated show for the ABC network at that time. In 1973, Denver starred in his own BBC television series, \"The John Denver Show\", a weekly music and variety show directed and produced by Stanley Dorfman.\nDenver's live concert special \"An Evening with John Denver\" won the 1974\u20131975 Emmy Award for Outstanding Special, Comedy-Variety or Music. When Denver ended his business relationship in 1982 because of Weintraub's focus on other projects, Weintraub threw Denver out of his office and accused him of Nazism. Denver later told Arthur Tobier when the latter edited his autobiography, \"I'd bend my principles to support something he wanted of me. And of course, every time you bend your principles\u2014whether because you don't want to worry about it, or because you're afraid to stand up for fear of what you might lose\u2014you sell your soul to the devil.\"\nDenver was also a guest star on \"The Muppet Show\", the beginning of the lifelong friendship between Denver and Jim Henson that spawned two television specials with the Muppets, \"A Christmas Together\" and \"Rocky Mountain Holiday\". He also tried acting, appearing in \"The Camerons are a Special Clan\" episode of the \"Owen Marshall, Counselor at Law\" television series in October 1973 and \"The Colorado Cattle Caper\" episode of the \"McCloud\" television series in February 1974. In 1977, Denver starred in the hit comedy film \"Oh, God!\" opposite George Burns. He also hosted the Grammy Awards five times in the 1970s and 1980s and guest-hosted \"The Tonight Show\" on several occasions.\nIn 1975, Denver was awarded the Country Music Association's Entertainer of the Year award. At the ceremony, outgoing Entertainer of the Year Charlie Rich presented the award to his successor after he set fire to the slip of paper containing the official notification of the award. Some speculated Rich was protesting the selection of a non-traditional country artist for the award, but Rich's son disputes that, saying his father was drunk, taking pain medication for a broken foot and just trying to be funny. Denver's music was defended by country singer Kathy Mattea, who told Alanna Nash of \"Entertainment Weekly\"\n\"A lot of people write him off as lightweight, but he articulated a kind of optimism, and he brought acoustic music to the forefront, bridging folk, pop, and country in a fresh way\u00a0... People forget how huge he was worldwide.\"\nIn 1977, Denver co-founded The Hunger Project with Werner Erhard and Robert W. Fuller. He served for many years and supported the organization until his death. President Jimmy Carter appointed Denver to serve on the President's Commission on World Hunger. Denver wrote the song \"I Want to Live\" as the commission's theme song. In 1979, Denver performed \"Rhymes &amp; Reasons\" at the Music for UNICEF Concert. Royalties from the concert performances were donated to UNICEF.\nDenver's father taught him how to fly in the mid-1970s, which led to their reconciliation. In 1980, Denver and his father co-hosted an award-winning television special, \"The Higher We Fly: The History of Flight\". It won the Osborn Award from the Aviation/Space Writers' Association and was honored by the Houston Film Festival.\nPolitical views and activism.\nIn the mid-1970s, Denver became outspoken in politics. He expressed his ecological interests in the 1975 song \"Calypso\", an ode to the eponymous exploration ship used by Jacques Cousteau. Denver was a supporter of the Democratic Party and of a number of charitable causes for the environmental movement, the homeless, the poor, the hungry, and the African AIDS crisis. He founded the charitable Windstar Foundation in 1976 to promote sustainable living. Denver's dismay at the Chernobyl disaster led to precedent-setting concerts in parts of communist Asia and Europe.\nDuring the 1980s, Denver was critical of Ronald Reagan's administration and remained active in his campaign against hunger, for which Reagan awarded Denver the Presidential World Without Hunger Award in 1987. Denver's criticism of the conservative politics of the 1980s was expressed in his autobiographical folk-rock ballad \"Let Us Begin (What Are We Making Weapons For?)\". In an open letter to the media, Denver wrote that he opposed oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. He had battled to expand the refuge in the 1980s, and he praised President Bill Clinton for his opposition to the proposed drilling. The letter, which Denver wrote in the midst of the 1996 United States presidential election, was one of the last he ever wrote. In 1992, Denver and fellow singers Liza Minnelli and John Oates performed a benefit to fight the passage of Colorado Amendment 2, an anti-gay ballot measure approved by voters that prevented Colorado municipalities from enacting anti-discrimination protections. Denver was also on the National Space Society's board of governors for many years.\nLater years and humanitarian efforts.\nDenver's releases in the late 1970s did not match his earlier success. His songwriting had begun to focus more on humanitarian and sustainability causes than on the romantic themes of his earlier writing. Denver also founded the environmental group Plant-It 2020. His keen interest in solutions to world hunger led him to visit Africa during the 1980s and to witness firsthand the suffering caused by starvation.\nFrom 1973 to 1979, Denver performed annually at the fundraising picnic for the Aspen Camp School for the Deaf, raising half of the camp's annual operating budget. During the Aspen Valley Hospital's $1.7\u00a0million capital campaign in 1979, Denver was the largest single donor.\nIn 1983 and 1984, Denver hosted the annual Grammy Awards, as he had previously done in 1977, 1978, and 1979. In the 1983 finale, he was joined on stage by folk music legend Joan Baez, with whom Denver led group rendition of \"Blowin' in the Wind\" and \"Let the Sunshine In\", joined by several other prominent performers such as Jennifer Warnes, Donna Summer, and Rick James.\nIn 1984, ABC Sports president Roone Arledge asked Denver to compose and sing the theme song for the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo. Denver complied by writing and singing \"The Gold and Beyond\".\nIn 1985, Denver asked to participate in the singing of \"We Are the World\" but was rejected despite his previous commitment to charity work. According to producer Ken Kragen, Denver was overlooked because some industry professionals felt his image would hurt the credibility of the song as a pop-rock anthem. \"I didn't agree with this assessment,\" Kragen said, but he reluctantly turned Denver down anyway. Denver later wrote in his 1994 autobiography \"Take Me Home\" that the rejection \"...broke my heart not to be included.\"\nNonetheless, for Earth Day 1990, Denver was the on-camera narrator of the television program \"In Partnership With Earth\" with then-EPA Administrator William K. Reilly.\nDenver's love of flying attracted him to NASA, and he became dedicated to the United States' work in outer space. Denver worked to help bring into being the \"Citizens in Space\" program and in 1985 received the NASA Exceptional Public Service Medal for \"helping to increase awareness of space exploration by the peoples of the world.\" That same year, he passed NASA's physical exam and was a finalist for the first citizen's trip on the Space Shuttle in 1986. After the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster with teacher Christa McAuliffe aboard, Denver dedicated his song \"Flying for Me\" to all astronauts and continued to support NASA. He entered discussions with the Soviet space program about purchasing a flight aboard one of their rockets, but the talks fell through after the price tag was rumored to be as high as $20\u00a0million.\nDenver testified before the Senate Labor and Commerce Committee on the topic of censorship during a Parents Music Resource Center hearing in 1985. Denver openly stood with controversial witnesses like Dee Snider of the heavy metal band Twisted Sister and Frank Zappa in opposing the PMRC's objectives.\nDenver also toured Russia in 1985. His eleven concerts in the USSR were the first by any American artist in more than 10 years. Denver returned two years later to perform at a benefit concert for the victims of the Chernobyl disaster.\nIn October 1992, Denver undertook a multiple-city tour of the People's Republic of China. He also released a greatest-hits CD named \"Homegrown\" to raise money for homeless charities. In 1994, he published his autobiography \"Take Me Home\" in which he candidly spoke of his drug use, his marital infidelities, and his history of domestic violence.\nIn 1997, Denver filmed an episode for the television series \"Nature\" centering on the natural wonders that inspired many of his best-loved songs. His last song, \"Yellowstone, Coming Home\", composed while rafting along the Colorado River with his son and young daughter, is included. In the summer of 1997 shortly before his death, Denver recorded a children's train album for Sony Pictures Kids Zone, \"All Aboard!\", produced by longtime friend Roger Nichols. The album consisted of old-fashioned swing, big band, folk, bluegrass, and gospel music woven into a theme of railroad songs. It won a posthumous Best Musical Album for Children Grammy, Denver's only Grammy.\nIn 1996, Denver was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. His final concert was held in Corpus Christi, Texas, at the Selena Auditorium on October 5, 1997.\nPersonal life.\nDenver's first marriage, in 1967, was to Annie Martell of St. Peter, Minnesota. She was the subject of his song \"Annie's Song\", which he composed in 10 minutes as he sat on a Colorado ski lift. They lived in Edina, Minnesota, from 1968 to 1971. After the success of \"Rocky Mountain High\", inspired by a camping trip with Annie and some friends, Denver bought a residence in Aspen, Colorado. He lived in Aspen until his death.\nThe Denvers adopted a boy, Zachary John, and a girl, Anna Kate, who Denver said were \"meant to be\" theirs. Denver once said, \"I'll tell you the best thing about me. I'm some guy's dad; I'm some little gal's dad. When I die, Zachary John and Anna Kate's father, boy, that's enough for me to be remembered by. That's more than enough.\" Zachary was the subject of \"A Baby Just Like You\", a song that included the line \"Merry Christmas, little Zachary\" which he wrote for Frank Sinatra.\nDenver and Martell divorced in 1982. In a 1983 interview shown in the documentary \"John Denver: Country Boy\" (2013), Denver said that career demands drove them apart. Martell said they were too young and immature to deal with Denver's sudden success. To drive home the point that their assets were being split in the divorce, he cut their marital bed in half with a chainsaw.\nDenver married Australian actress Cassandra Delaney in 1988 after a two-year courtship. Settling at Denver's home in Aspen, the couple had a daughter, Jesse Belle. Denver and Delaney separated in 1991 and divorced in 1993. Of his second marriage, Denver said that \"before our short-lived marriage ended in divorce, she managed to make a fool of me from one end of the valley to the other.\"\nDriving under the influence charges.\nIn 1993, Denver pleaded guilty to a drunken driving charge and was placed on probation. In August 1994 while still on probation, he was again charged with misdemeanor driving under the influence after crashing his Porsche into a tree in Aspen.\nIn October 1995, following Denver's drunk-driving conviction, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) directed Denver to abstain from alcohol if he wished to continue flying airplanes. In 1996, the (FAA) determined that Denver was medically disqualified from operating an aircraft due to his failure to abstain from alcohol.\nAlthough a July 1997 trial resulted in a hung jury on the second DUI charge, prosecutors later decided to reopen the case, which was closed only after Denver died in October 1997.\nOther interests.\nBeyond music, Denver's artistic interests included painting, but because of his limiting schedule, Denver pursued photography, saying once, \"photography is a way to communicate a feeling.\" An exhibition of over 40 never-before-seen photographs taken by Denver debuted at the Leon Gallery in Denver, Colorado, in 2014.\nDenver was also an avid skier and golfer, but his principal interest was in flying. Denver's love of flying was second only to his love of music. In 1974, Denver bought a Learjet to fly himself to concerts. He was a collector of vintage biplanes and owned a Christen Eagle aerobatic plane, two Cessna 210 Centurion airplanes, and a 1997 amateur-built Rutan Long-EZ.\nOn April 21, 1989, Denver was in a plane accident while taxiing down the runway at Holbrook Municipal Airport near Holbrook, Arizona in his vintage 1931 biplane. Denver had stopped to refuel on a flight from Carefree, Arizona, to Santa Fe, New Mexico. Reports stated wind gusts caught the plane, causing it to spin around and sustain extensive damage. Denver was not harmed in the incident.\nDeath.\nDenver died on the afternoon of October 12, 1997, when his light homebuilt aircraft, a Rutan Long-EZ with registration number N555JD, crashed into Monterey Bay near Pacific Grove, California, while making a series of touch-and-go landings at the nearby Monterey Peninsula Airport. He was the plane's only occupant. The official cause of death was multiple blunt force trauma resulting from the crash.\nDenver was a pilot with more than 2,700 hours of experience. He had pilot ratings for single-engine land and sea, multi-engine land, glider and instrument. Denver also held a type rating in his Learjet. He had recently purchased the Long-EZ aircraft, made by someone else from a kit, and had taken a half-hour checkout flight with the aircraft the day before the crash.\nDenver was not legally permitted to fly at the time of the crash because of his previous arrests for driving under the influence of alcohol. In 1996, nearly a year before the crash, the FAA learned that Denver had failed to maintain sobriety by not refraining entirely from alcohol and revoked his medical certification. However, it was determined that the crash was not caused or influenced by alcohol use; an autopsy found no signs of alcohol or other drugs in Denver's body.\nThe post-crash investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) showed that the leading cause of the crash was Denver's inability to switch fuel tanks during flight. The quantity of fuel had been depleted during the plane's flight to Monterey and in several brief practice takeoffs and landings Denver performed at the airport immediately before the final flight. His newly purchased amateur-built Rutan aircraft had an unusual fuel tank selector valve handle configuration. The handle had originally been intended by the plane's designer to be between the pilot's legs. The builder instead put it behind the pilot's left shoulder. The fuel gauge was also placed behind the pilot's seat and was not visible to the person at the controls. An NTSB interview with the aircraft mechanic servicing Denver's plane revealed that he and Denver had discussed the inaccessibility of the cockpit fuel selector valve handle and its resistance to being turned.\nBefore the flight, Denver and the mechanic had attempted to extend the reach of the handle using a pair of Vise-Grip pliers, but this did not solve the problem, and the pilot still could not reach the handle while strapped into his seat. NTSB officials' post-crash investigation showed that because of the fuel selector valve's positioning, switching fuel tanks required the pilot to turn his body 90 degrees to reach the valve. This created a natural tendency to extend one's right foot against the right rudder pedal to support oneself while turning in the seat, which caused the aircraft to yaw nose right and pitch up.\nThe mechanic said that he told Denver that the fuel sight gauges were visible only to the rear cockpit occupant. Denver had asked how much fuel was shown. The mechanic responded that there was \"less than half in the right tank and less than a quarter in the left tank.\" He then provided Denver with an inspection mirror so as the pilot he could look over his shoulder at the fuel gauges. The mirror was later recovered from the wreckage. Denver said that he would use the autopilot in flight to hold the airplane level while he turned the fuel selector valve. Denver had turned down an offer to refuel the aircraft, saying that he would only be flying for about an hour.\nThe NTSB interviewed 20 witnesses about Denver's last flight. Six of them had seen the plane crash into the bay near Point Pinos. Four said the aircraft was originally heading west. Five said that they saw the plane in a steep bank, with four saying that the bank was to the right (north). Twelve described seeing the aircraft in a steep nose-down descent. Witnesses estimated the plane's altitude between when heading toward the shoreline. Eight said they heard a \"pop\" or \"backfire\" accompanied by a reduction in the engine noise level just before the plane crashed into the sea.\nIn addition to Denver's failing to refuel and his subsequent loss of control while attempting to switch fuel tanks, the NTSB determined other key factors that led to the crash. Foremost among these was his inadequate transition training on this type of aircraft and the builder's decision to put the fuel selector handle in a hard-to-reach place. The board issued recommendations on the requirement and enforcement of mandatory training standards for pilots operating home-built aircraft. It also emphasized the importance of mandatory ease of access to all controls, including fuel selectors and fuel gauges, in all aircraft.\nLegacy.\nUpon the announcement of Denver's death, Colorado Governor Roy Romer ordered all state flags to be lowered to half-staff in his honor. Funeral services were held at Faith Presbyterian Church in Aurora, Colorado, on October 17, 1997, officiated by Pastor Les Felker, a retired Air Force chaplain, after which Denver's remains were cremated and his ashes scattered in the Rocky Mountains. Further tributes were made at the following Grammy and Country Music Association Awards.\nIn 1998, Denver posthumously received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the World Folk Music Association, which also established a new award in his honor, the John Denver Memorial Award, in 1999.\nIn 2000, CBS aired the television biopic \"Take Me Home: The John Denver Story\" loosely based on his memoirs, starring Chad Lowe as Denver. The \"New York Post\" wrote, \"An overachiever like John Denver couldn't have been this boring.\"\n That same year on April 22, Hawk Mountain Sanctuary in Kempton, Pennsylvania dedicated a bench that was funded by donations as a tribute to his memory for that year's Earth Day. The bench sits on the South Lookout of the sanctuary.\nOn September 23, 2007, nearly 10 years after Denver's death, his brother Ron witnessed the dedication of a plaque placed near the crash site in Pacific Grove, California.\nCopies of DVDs of Denver's many television appearances are now sought-after collectibles, especially his one-hour specials from the 1970s and his six-part series for Britain's BBC, \"The John Denver Show\". An anthology musical featuring Denver's music, \"Back Home Again: A John Denver Holiday\", premiered at the Rubicon Theatre Company in 2006.\nOn March 12, 2007, the Colorado Senate passed a resolution to make Denver's trademark 1972 hit \"Rocky Mountain High\" one of the state's two official state songs, sharing the honor with its predecessor, \"Where the Columbines Grow\". The resolution passed 50\u201311 in the House, defeating an objection by Representative Debbie Stafford that the song reflected drug use, most specifically in the line \"friends around the campfire and everybody's high.\" Senator Bob Hagedorn, who sponsored the proposal, defended the song as having nothing to do with drugs but rather everything to do with sharing with friends the euphoria of experiencing the beauty of Colorado's mountain vistas. Senator Nancy Todd said, \"John Denver to me is an icon of what Colorado is.\"\nOn September 24, 2007, the California Friends of John Denver and The Windstar Foundation unveiled a bronze plaque near the spot where his plane went down. The site had been marked by a driftwood log carved by Jeffrey Pine with Denver's name, but fears that the memorial could be washed out to sea sparked the campaign for a more permanent memorial. Initially, the Pacific Grove Council denied permission for the memorial, fearing the place would attract ghoulish curiosity from extreme fans. Permission was finally granted in 1999, but the project was put on hold at the request of Denver's family. Eventually, over 100 friends and family attended the dedication of the plaque, which features a bas-relief of the singer's face and lines from his song \"Windsong\": \"So welcome the wind and the wisdom she offers. Follow her summons when she calls again.\"\nTo mark the 10th anniversary of his death, Denver's family released a set of previously unreleased recordings of his 1985 concert performances in the Soviet Union. This two-CD set, \"John Denver \u2013 Live in the USSR\", was produced by Roger Nichols and released by AAO Music. These digital recordings were made during eleven concerts and then rediscovered in 2002. Included in this set is a previously unreleased rendition of \"Annie's Song\" in Russian. The collection was released to the general public on November 6, 2007.\nOn October 13, 2009, a DVD box set of previously unreleased concert recordings from Denver's career was released by Eagle Rock Entertainment. \"Around the World Live\" is a 5-disc DVD set featuring three complete live performances with a full band from Australia in 1977, Japan in 1981, and England in 1986. These are complemented by a solo acoustic performance from Japan in 1984 and performances at Farm Aid from 1985, 1987, and 1990. The final disc has two-hour-long documentaries made by Denver.\nOn April 21, 2011, Denver became the first inductee into the Colorado Music Hall of Fame. A benefit concert was held at Broomfield's 1stBank Center and hosted by Olivia Newton-John. Other performers participating in the event included the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band, Lee Ann Womack, and John Oates. Both his ex-wives attended, and the award was presented to his three children.\nThe John Denver \"Spirit\" sculpture is a 2002 bronze sculpture statue by artist Sue DiCicco that was financed by Denver's fans. It is at the Colorado Music Hall of Fame at Red Rocks Amphitheatre.\nOn March 7, 2014, the West Virginia Legislature approved a resolution to make \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\" the official state song. Governor Earl Ray Tomblin signed the resolution into law on March 8. Denver is only the second person, along with Stephen Foster, to have written two state songs.\nOn October 24, 2014, Denver was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in Los Angeles, California.\nRelated artists.\nDenver began his recording career with The Mitchell Trio (the name \"Chad\" being legally dropped from the group's name upon the departure of its namesake founder); his distinctive voice can be heard where he sings solo on \"Violets of Dawn\", among other songs. He recorded three albums with the Trio, replacing Chad Mitchell as high tenor. Denver also wrote a number of songs that were covered by the group, such as his hits \"For Bobbi\", \"Leaving on a Jet Plane\", as well as \"Deal with The Ladies\" (later recorded on his 1988 album, \"Higher Ground\") and \"Stay With Me\". The group Denver, Boise, and Johnson, which had evolved from The Chad Mitchell Trio, released a single before he moved on to a solo career. The Trio also performed at college campuses across the United States.\nBill Danoff and Taffy Nivert, billed as Fat City and credited as co-writers of Denver's song \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\", were close friends of Denver and his family, appearing as singers and songwriters on many of Denver's albums until they formed the Starland Vocal Band in 1976. The band's albums were released on Denver's Windsong Records label, later known as Windstar Records.\nDenver's solo recording contract resulted in part from the recording by Peter, Paul, and Mary of his song \"Leaving on a Jet Plane\", which became the sole number-one hit single for the group. Denver recorded songs by Tom Paxton, Eric Andersen, John Prine, David Mallett, and many others in the folk scene. His record company, Windstar, is still an active record label today. Country singer John Berry considers Denver the greatest influence on his own music and has recorded Denver's hit \"Annie's Song\" with the original arrangement.\nOlivia Newton-John, an Australian singer whose across-the-board appeal to pop, middle-of-the-road, and country audiences in the mid-1970s was similar to Denver's, lent her distinctive backup vocals to Denver's 1975 single \"Fly Away\"; she performed the song with Denver on his 1975 \"Rocky Mountain Christmas\" special. She also covered his \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\", and had a hit in the United Kingdom (number 15 in 1973) and Japan (number 6 in a belated 1976 release) with it. In 1976, Denver and Newton-John appeared as guest stars on \"The Carpenters' First Television Special\", a one-hour special broadcast on the ABC Television network.\nAwards and recognition.\nAcademy of Country Music\nAmerican Music Awards\nCountry Music Association\nEmmy Awards\nGrammy Awards\nSongwriters Hall of Fame\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilmography.\nActing credits\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Alaska, the American Child\".\n\"Alaska, the American Child\" is a documentary by John Denver. The filmed was funded heavily by John Denver but received some assistance from ABC. The film was designed to gather support in Congress for H-39, which would have classified 95 million acres of federal-owned land in Alaska as parks and wildlife refuges.\nIn the documentary, he travels through the State, showcasing its natural beauty, and the people who call Alaska home including Alaska Natives and bush pilots. He starts the documentary off, and ends it, with the song \"American Child\". Two other songs of his are included in the documentary.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58587", "revid": "23342825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58587", "title": "Trusted Computing Platform Alliance", "text": ""}
{"id": "58588", "revid": "39152912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58588", "title": "Axe historique", "text": "Line of monuments, buildings, and thoroughfares in Paris, France\nThe Axe historique (; \"historical axis\") refers to a straightly aligned series of thoroughfare streets, squares, monuments and buildings that extend from the centre of Paris, France, to the west-northwest of the city. It is also known as the Voie Triomphale (; \"triumphal way\").\nHistory.\nThe \"Axe historique\" began with the creation of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, designed in the 17th century to create a vista to the west, extending the central axis of the gardens to the royal Tuileries Palace. Today the Tuileries Garden (\"Jardin des Tuileries\") remain, preserving their wide central pathway, though the palace was burned down during the Paris Commune, 1871.\nBetween the Tuileries Garden and the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es extension a jumble of buildings remained on the site of the Place de la Concorde until early in the reign of Louis XV, for whom the square was at first named. Then the garden axis could open through a grand gateway into the new royal square.\nTo the east, the Tuileries Palace faced an open square, the Place du Carrousel. There, by order of Napoleon, the Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel was centered on the palace (and so on the same axial line that was developing beyond the palace). Long-standing plans to link the Louvre Palace, as the disused palace was called, with the Tuileries, by sweeping away the intervening buildings, finally came to fruition in the early 19th century. Consequently, the older axis extending from the courtyard of the Louvre is slightly skewed to the rest of what has become the \"Axe historique,\" but the \"Arc du Carrousel\", at the fulcrum between the two, serves to disguise the discontinuity.\nTo the west, the completion of the Arc de Triomphe in 1836 on the Place de l'\u00c9toile at the western end of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es formed the far point of this line of perspective, which now starts at the equestrian statue of Louis XIV placed by I.M. Pei adjacent to his Louvre Pyramid in the Cour Napol\u00e9on of the Louvre.\nThe axis was extended again westwards along the Avenue de la Grande Arm\u00e9e, past the city boundary of Paris to La D\u00e9fense. This was originally a large junction, named for a statue commemorating the defence of Paris in the Franco-Prussian War.\nIn the 1950s, the area around La D\u00e9fense was marked out to become a new business district, and high-rise office buildings were built along the avenue. The axis found itself extended yet again, with ambitious projects for the western extremity of the modern plaza.\nIt was not until the 1980s, under president Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, that a project was initiated, with a modern 20th century version of the Arc de Triomphe. This is the work of Danish architect Johan Otto von Spreckelsen, La Grande Arche de la Fraternit\u00e9 (also known as simply La Grande Arche or L'Arche de la D\u00e9fense), a monument to humanity and humanitarian ideals rather than militaristic victories. It was inaugurated in 1989.\nThe network of railway lines and road tunnels beneath the elevated plaza of La D\u00e9fense prevented the pillars supporting the arch from being exactly in line with the axis: it is slightly out of line, bending the axis should it be extended further to the west. From the roof of the Grande Arche, a second axis can be seen: the Tour Montparnasse stands exactly behind the Eiffel Tower.\nThe \"Seine-Arche\" project is extending the historical axis to the west through the city of Nanterre, but with a slight curve.\nSolar alignment.\nAs a natural consequence of the nature of the line, the sun sets behind the Grande Arche twice per year, in a phenomenon dubbed \"Paris henge\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58589", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58589", "title": "Name change", "text": "Legal act by a person of adopting a different name\nName change is the legal act by a person of adopting a new name.\nThe procedures and ease of a name change vary between jurisdictions. In general, common law jurisdictions have looser procedures while civil law jurisdictions are more restrictive. While some civil law jurisdictions have loosened procedures, a few remain complicated.\nA pseudonym is a name used in addition to the original or true name. This does not require legal sanction. Pseudonyms may be adopted to conceal a person's identity, but may also be used for personal, social or ideological reasons.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe common law right to change one's name predates statutory regulation and finds its origins in ancient English custom. As early as the Norman Conquest (1066 AD), individuals possessed the inherent right to adopt aliases and surnames without formal legal process. This principle was recognized in the Year Books of Edward II and subsequent medieval legal authorities.\nBracton's De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae (c. 1235-1259), one of the earliest comprehensive treatises on English law, acknowledged the malleability of personal nomenclature, noting that individuals were commonly known by multiple appellations without legal impediment. This customary practice evolved into the doctrine of repute and usage, whereby a person's adopted name became legally effective through consistent use and community recognition.\nIn theory, anyone who is at least 16 and resident in the United Kingdom can call themselves whatever they wish. However, over the past hundred years or so, formal procedures that are recognised by record holders such as government departments, companies and organizations have evolved, which enable someone to change the name recorded on their passport, driving licence, tax and National Insurance records, bank and credit cards, etc., provided that \"documentary evidence\" of a change of name is provided. Documents such as birth, marriage and educational certificates cannot be changed because these documents are considered \"matters of fact\", which means that they were correct at the time they were issued. However, exceptions exist, such as holders of a Gender Recognition Certificate.\nDocumentary evidence of a change of name can be in a number of forms, such as a marriage certificate, decree absolute (proof of divorce), civil partnership certificate, statutory declaration or deed of change of name. Such documents are mere evidence that a change of name has occurred and they do not themselves operate to change a person's name. Deeds of change of name are by far the most commonly used method of providing evidence of a change of name other than changing a woman's surname after marriage. A deed poll is a legal document that binds a single person to a particular course of action (in this case, changing one's name for all purposes). The term 'deed' is common to signed, written agreements that have been shown to all concerned parties. 'Poll' is an old legal term referring to official documents that had cut edges (were polled) so that they were straight.\nEngland and Wales.\nPeople whose births are registered in England and Wales may, but are under no obligation to, have their deed poll enrolled at the Royal Courts of Justice in London.\nScotland.\nResidents of Scotland can change their name by deed poll or statutory declaration. Scottish-born/adopted people may optionally apply to the Registrar General for Scotland to have their birth certificate amended to show the new name and have the respective register updated. There is also an alternative route to changing one's name in Scotland, equivalent to enrolling a deed poll with the College of Arms; one may petition the Court of the Lord Lyon for a name change and subsequently receive a Certificate of Recognition of Change of Name.\nHistorical usage.\nFrom the medieval age to the 19th century, the era of family dynasties, name changes were frequently demanded of heirs in the last wills and testaments, legacies and bequests, of members of the gentry and nobility who were the last males of their bloodline. Such persons frequently selected a younger nephew or cousin as the heir to their estates, on condition that he should adopt the surname and armorials of the legator in lieu of his patronymic. Thus, the ancient family otherwise destined to extinction would appear to continue as a great dynasty in the making.\nSuch changes were also more rarely demanded by marriage settlements, for example where the father of a sole daughter and heiress demanded that as a condition of his daughter's dowry her husband should adopt his father-in-law's surname and arms. Thus the progeny of the marriage would continue the otherwise extinct family's name. Such name changes were generally only demanded of younger sons, where an elder brother was available to inherit the paternal estates under primogeniture and carry on the name and arms abandoned by the younger brother. Such name changes were effected by obtaining a private act of Parliament or by obtaining a royal licence.\nWell known examples are:\nA less radical procedure adopted from the 18th century onwards was for the legator or settlor to demand only that the legatee or beneficiary should adopt his surname \"in addition to\" his patronymic, not in place of it, which gave rise to the \"double-barrelled\", even the \"triple-barrelled\" name, frequently parodied in literature as epitomising the wealthy \"squirearchy\" with an embarrassment of inherited estates.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, name changes are handled through the vital statistics bureaux of the various provinces and territories, except in Nunavut, where they are handled by the Courts.\nAll Canadian provinces and territories allow their residents, whether Citizens, Permanent Residents or Temporary Residents, to obtain a name change, provided they fulfil the pertinent regulations (e.g. time lived in province). Quebec, a civil law jurisdiction, has historically had substantial differences from the common law jurisdictions comprising the rest of Canada in how it permits its residents to obtain a change of name\u2014for example, requiring them to be citizens, which was abolished on January 28, 2021, due to a Superior Court of Quebec decision.\nAll Canadian provinces except Quebec also recognize common law name changes\u2014i.e. by \"general usage\"\u2014even if not registered with the government or ordered by a court. Although a common law name change is still a legal name, formal processes may be required to obtain government-issued ID or change the name on accounts (like banks) that depend on government ID; this is one situation where a person may have more than one name.\nQuebec also historically had other strict regulations regarding name changes. For example, the transgender Quebecker Micheline Montreuil had to undergo a lengthy process to have her name legally changed. Initially, the Directeur de l'\u00e9tat civil refused to permit the change on the grounds that someone who was legally assigned male at birth could not bear a female name. According to Quebec law, Montreuil could not change her registered gender because that required proof of a completed gender confirmation surgery, which was not the case for her. On November 1, 1999, the provincial court of appeals ruled that nothing in the law prevented a person who was registered as male from legally adopting a woman's name.\nAnother issue specific to Quebec is married names. Because of the Quebec Charter of Rights, married women in Quebec have been unable to adopt their spouse's surname since 1976. Other provinces allow their residents to change their last name on the strength of their marriage certificate. The Directeur de l'\u00e9tat civil will amend a Quebec birth certificate if a name change certificate is issued by another province. Some have used that loophole to legally change their names by temporarily moving to another Canadian province or territory, which follow more permissive common law rules.\nAdditionally, Saskatchewan registers changes of name made outside its jurisdiction and issues a \"Registration of Change of Name Effected Outside the Province of Saskatchewan\".\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, state laws regulate name changes. Several federal court rulings have set precedents regarding both court decreed name changes and common law name changes (changing the name at will), including \"Lindon v. First National Bank\". In \"Christianson v. King County\", 239 U.S. 356 (1915), the Supreme Court accepted a name changed using the common law method as a legal name (more detail of the decision accepted by the Supreme Court is found at 196 F. 791 (1912)).\nUsually a person can adopt any name desired for any reason. As of 2009[ [update]], 46 states allow a person legally to change names by usage alone, with no paperwork, but a court order may be required for many institutions (such as banks or government institutions) to officially accept the change. Although the states (except Louisiana) follow common law, there are differences in acceptable requirements; usually a court order is the most efficient way to change names (which would be applied for in a state court), except at marriage, which has become a universally accepted reason for a name change.\nWhere a court process is used, it is necessary to plead that the name change is not for a fraudulent or other illegal purpose, such as evading a lien or debt or for defaming someone else. Applicants may be required to give a reasonable explanation for wanting to change their names. A fee is generally payable, and the applicant may be required to post legal notices in newspapers to announce the name change. Generally the judge has limited judicial discretion to deny a change of name: usually only if the name change is for fraudulent, frivolous or immoral purposes. In 2004, a Missouri man succeeded in changing his name to \"They\". The Minnesota Supreme Court ruled that a name change to \"1069\" could be denied, but that \"Ten Sixty-Nine\" was acceptable (\"Application of Dengler\", 1979); the North Dakota Supreme Court had denied the same request several years before (\"Petition of Dengler\", 1976).\nIn nearly all states, a person cannot choose a name that is intended to mislead (such as adopting a celebrity's name), that is intentionally confusing, or that incites violence; nor can one adopt, as a name, a racial slur, a threat, or an obscenity.\nSome examples of typically allowed reasons for name changes in the U.S. include:\nUnder U.S. nationality law, when immigrants apply for naturalization, they have the option of asking for their names to be changed upon the grant of citizenship with no additional fees. This allows them the opportunity to adopt more Americanized names. During the naturalization interview, a petition for a name change is prepared to be forwarded to a federal court. Applicants certify that they are not seeking a change of name for any unlawful purpose such as the avoidance of debt or evasion of law enforcement. Such a name change would become final if within their jurisdiction, once a federal court naturalizes an applicant.\nInformal methods of legal name change.\nAssumed name.\nThe \"open and notorious\" use of a name is often sufficient to allow one to use an assumed name. In some jurisdictions, a trade name distinct from one's legal name can be registered with a county clerk, secretary of state, or other similar government authority. Persons who wish to publish materials and not to be associated with them may publish under pseudonyms; such a right is protected under case law pursuant to the United States Constitution.\nUsage method.\nA common law name (i.e. one assumed without formality and for a non-fraudulent purpose) is a legal name. In most states, a statutory method, while quick and definitive, only supplements the common law method, unless the statute makes itself exclusive. A person may sue under a common law name.\nIn California the \"usage method\" (changing the name at will under common law) is sufficient to change the name. Not all jurisdictions require that the new name be used exclusively. Any fraudulent use or intent, such as changing the name to the same name as another person's name, may invalidate this type of name change.\nSpecifically in California, Code of Civil Procedure \u00a7 1279.5 and Family Code \u00a7 2082 regulate common law and court decreed name changes. Code of Civil Procedure \u00a7 1279.5 (a) reads, \"Except as provided in subdivision (b), (c), (d), or (e), nothing in this title shall be construed to abrogate the common law right of any person to change his or her name.\" Subdivisions b through e preclude one from changing their name by common law if they are in state prison, on probation, on parole, or have been convicted of a serious sex offense. If a person is not in any of these categories, then a common law name change is allowed. (Family Code \u00a7 2082 also contains some of the same wording.)\nPreferred name.\nMany universities, hospitals, and other institutions allow one to use a \"preferred name\" instead of one's legal name. This name can show up on class rosters, online learning platforms, and student ID cards.\nOfficial registration.\nThe legal name change process is usually different from simple usage and includes notifying various government agencies, each of which may require legal proof of the name change and that may or may not charge a fee. Important government agencies to be notified include the Social Security Administration (generally following statutory law, not common law), Bureau of Consular Affairs (for passports), the Federal Communications Commission, the Selective Service System and the Department of Motor Vehicles (for a new driver's license, learner permit, state identification card, or vehicular registration). Additionally the new name must be registered with other institutions such as employers, banks, doctors, mortgage, insurance and credit card companies. Online services are available to assist in this process either through direct legal assistance or automated form processing.\nMost states require name changes to be registered with their departments of motor vehicles (DMVs) within a certain amount of time, and some state motor vehicle departments require updated social security cards to make changes, by first registering a new name with the Social Security office.\nThe fees for registering a new name vary from state to state. The forms, along with the state-specific requirements, can generally be obtained for free.\nMany states will require reasons for wanting a name change. For example, in Florida, a court will not grant a petition for a change of name if it finds that (i) the petitioner has ulterior or illegal motives in seeking the name change, (ii) the petitioner's civil rights are suspended, or (iii) granting the name change will invade the property rights (e.g. intellectual property rights) of others.\nForcible name changes.\nIn 1887, the Dawes Act directed that Indigenous Americans adopt a surname. This forcible solidification of individual identities, in pursuance of Western legal and political orders, assisted in the federal government's efforts to remove their ownership of communally-held land.\nMore recently, recipients of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals have been forced to revert to the names on their birth registration documents by USCIS, even where this does not match the name they have been using all their life in the United States. This is especially true with DACA recipients from Spanish-speaking countries, whereby two last names appear on birth registration documents per Spanish naming customs. Even where the person has only ever used one surname (typically that of the father), USCIS forces them to revert to both surnames, creating a discrepancy in matters such as academic records and credit ratings.\nOther common law jurisdictions.\nAustralia.\nIndividuals may legally change their name through the state and territory governments of Australia according to state or territory laws and regulations via agencies generally titled \"Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages\". Exceptions exist for some states such as restricted persons (e.g. jail inmate) and in some states, changes may only be made once a year. A state/territory's RBDM typically has jurisdiction over changes of name for people born in that state or territory, and for people born overseas now residing in that state or territory. Residents born interstate must typically apply to the Registry of Births, Deaths, and Marriages (RBDM) of their birth jurisdiction for a change of name, though there are exceptions.\nIf a person's birth or adoption was registered in Australia, the change will also be noted (in most cases) on the person's birth or adoption registration, and in some states or territories, the name change can be evidenced either through a re-issued birth certificate if born in Australia and/or \"Change of Name Certificate\". Transgender residents born overseas may receive a recognised details certificate or identity acknowledgment certificate. These certificates are recognised secure identity documents and can be verified electronically through the Attorney-general of Australia's Document Verification Service.\nIndia.\nIn India, the person concerned submits a name change request to an appropriate authority, with supporting documents. Subsequently, an application must be made to the Government Printing Press, which issues an Official Gazette Notification certifying the change of name.\nIn India, name change legal process may be completed either publishing in State Government Gazette or Central Government Gazette. It is always preferred that one should opt for Central Govt. Gazette since it is valid all over world. Central Government Gazette process is explained here. There are four easy steps to complete the task. First, one has to make an affidavit on a Non-judicial stamp-paper. Get notarised. Second, publish in a newspaper about the change of name. Third, fill-in the required forms and attach affidavit and newspaper. Pay the government fee online. Attach the receipt also. Fourth and last step is submit the application. In certain States gazette application may be submitted online but most of the States and Central Government there is no online name change facility. One can either personally visit the concerned office and submit or may send by post. The Central Government Gazette office is located at Civil Lines, Near Delhi Metro Station, New Delhi. The office works from Monday to Friday only. For more details one can visit their website. After submission of application one can download the same from their website.\nHong Kong.\nIt is a common practice for ethnic Chinese residents of Hong Kong to adopt a western-style English name in addition to their transliterated Chinese name. As they often adopt western-style English names after being registered on the birth register, the fact that they want to include a western-style English name as part of their legal English name is regarded as a name change which usually requires a deed poll.\nHowever, the Immigration Department which is responsible for processing applications for name change allows applicants to submit such applications without deeds poll; anyone who has a phonetic English name only and wishes to include a western-style English name as part of his or her legal English name can apply to the Immigration Department without a deed poll. Only one application of this kind is allowed for each applicant; any application for subsequent change(s) must be made with a deed poll.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, a person earns their name by \"use and repute\". For most purposes it is enough to simply use the desired name and ask others to call you by that name. This was the traditional practice for a bride adopting her husband's surname. A change of name deed poll is not required, but provides documentary evidence of a name change. Resident non-EU nationals must apply to the Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service for a deed poll. The deed poll requires a witness affidavit, and may optionally be enrolled in the High Court upon payment of stamp duty. An enrolled deed poll is required for some administrative name changes, such as on a driving licence or when changing legal gender.\nThere is a second option using an 'unenrolled' deed poll, this is a regular deed poll that is signed by yourself in the presence of a witness over 18. This can be used to update your name in banks, schools and other non-governmental institutions. This is the long process as the Irish Passport Office and NDLS require two years of 'proof of usage' e.g bank statements in your new name dating back two years in order to change your name in comparison to a registered deed poll which allows you to change your name in the NDLS instantly along with DESAP.\nMalaysia.\nName changes in Malaysia are done at the local office of National Registration Department (JPN). Name changes for children require Malaysian identity cards (MyKad) of both parents, wedding certificates, birth certificate, and MyKid if exists. For name changes at will, a statutory declaration must be signed first, and the JPN.KP16 form is to be filled up at the JPN office.\nNew Zealand.\nFrom September 1995, New Zealanders can change their name by making a statutory declaration and, if approved, the new name is registered with the Births, Deaths and Marriages section of the Department of Internal Affairs (Identity Services). Prior to September 1995, they changed their name by deed poll.\nCivil law jurisdictions.\nIn general, unlike in common law countries, names cannot be changed at will in civil law jurisdictions. Usually, a name change requires government approval, though legal name changes have become more common in some jurisdictions over the last years. The reason given for this system is usually the public interest in the unique identifiability of a person, e.g. in governmental registers, although with the advent of personal identification numbers, that rationale may be in need of reconsideration.\nBelgium.\nChanges in law Aug 2018 changes first name and fee will fall under the authority of local town hall In Belgian law, a name is in principle considered fixed for life, but under exceptional circumstances, a person may apply to the Ministry of Justice for a name change. This requires a Royal Decree (French: \"Arr\u00eat\u00e9 royal\", Dutch: \"Koninklijk besluit\") for last names, but only a Ministerial Decree for first names. The new name must not cause confusion or cause damage to the bearer or others. Examples of requests that are usually considered favourably:\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, legal name changes are regulated by the Public Records Act (Law No. 6,015/1973) and can be requested by any person registered on a Brazilian civil registry office, through a court order or directly on a civil registry office, depending on the case.\nPeople over the age of majority (18 years) may change their given names without specifying a reason. The change of given name directly on a civil registry office can be done only once, and to revert the change, a court order is required.\nA person's surnames can be changed directly on a civil registry office, in the following circumstances:\nIndonesia.\nUnlike other countries, the legal procedures for name change in Indonesia are very complicated and costly. The photocopies of many personal documents are required, including a family register, an identity card, a marriage book, a diploma, a birth certificate, a land ownership certificate, a saving book, and a motor vehicle ownership book. Then, an order by local court is required to change the name. A minimum of two witnesses in the court are required. Changing a name in a birth certificate, especially of a minor, requires the photocopies of identity cards of both parents, and a letter of known birth.\nHowever, correcting one's name spelling (i.e. inconsistent) is much easier, it is only required to bring personal documents with the correct one to the civil registry.\nNetherlands.\nWhile name changes due to marriages performed in the Netherlands cannot be processed, it is certainly possible in the Netherlands to process name changes due to marriages performed outside the Netherlands, provided certain conditions are met: the marriage must be registered abroad, the application for name change abroad must be requested on the same date as the marriage date, the changed name must be recorded abroad on a certificate in accordance with the local rules of the foreign country, and the marriage and name change as well as proof of application as of the date of the marriage must be legalized/apostilled and provided to the Dutch consulate or Dutch municipality upon return to the Netherlands.\nThe reason is that international marriages are not necessarily governed by Dutch Law but by Private International Law which is codified in the Netherlands in the \"Commoner's Law Book\" (Burgerlijk Wetboek) Book No. 10, Private International Law, Title 2 \u2013 The Name, Article 24.\nNorway.\nAlthough it has always been relatively easy to change one's legal names in Norway, it used to require some kind of government approval. As late as 1830, local vicars were instructed to write both given (Christian) names, as well as last names, in the baptismal record. Earlier, only the given name of the child, birth date, baptismal date, and sex were written down, alongside the parents' names. It was not until the beginning of the 20th century, however, that the authorities required everyone to adopt a family surname. Until about 1980, the government still required that a name change applicant apply to the government regional representative (fylkesmann). The law has been replaced twice since then. Nowadays, the process is as easy as in common-law countries; the subject merely submits the names wanted (providing that the surname chosen is not in use or is not used by fewer than 200 persons) to the local authorities for the purposes of election rosters and census counts; there is no longer an application process.\nPhilippines.\n2001 RA 9048 amends Articles 376 and 412 of the Civil Code of the Philippines, which prohibit the change of name or surname of a person, or any correction or change of entry in a civil register without a judicial order. Administrative Order No. 1 Series of 2001, implemented the law. It authorizes the city or municipal civil registrar or the consul general to correct a clerical or typographical error in an entry or change the first name or nickname in the civil register without need of a judicial order.\nThe first name or nickname on the civil register may be changed under any of the following circumstances:\nName and gender change.\nIn case of controversial and substantial changes, Philippines jurisprudence requires full-blown court lawsuit, that must include the local civil registrar in the petition, since RA 9048 and Rule 108 (Cancellation or correction of entries in the Civil Registry) of the Rules of Court do not allow the change of sex in a birth certificate.\nThe only landmark case in the Philippines on name and legal sex change is the Jeff Cagandahan case. The Supreme Court of the Philippines Justice Leonardo Quisumbing on September 12, 2008, allowed Cagandahan, 27, who has congenital adrenal hyperplasia, to change the name on his birth certificate to read Jeff, and his legal gender to male.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth Africa, which uses a mixture of common law and civil Roman Dutch law, mostly uses common-law procedures with regard to name change. Name changes in South Africa are regulated by the Births and Deaths Registration Act (Act 51 of 1992, as amended). The personal information of all citizens and permanent residents is recorded on the Population Register, so any name changes must be registered.\nA person can change their forenames by submitting a form to the Department of Home Affairs. An individual's surname, or that of a family, may be changed by applying to the Department and providing a \"good and sufficient reason\" for the change.\nA married woman can change her surname to that of her husband or join her maiden name with her husband's surname, and a divorced woman may return to her previous surname, without applying or paying a fee; but she must notify the department so that the details in the Population Register can be changed. (It is possible that, if challenged, these provisions might be held to be unconstitutional because they apply only to women.)\nSouth Africa has officially recognized same sex marriages since 2006 and in doing so now allows one or both partners to change their surnames in the marriage register on the day of the marriage. A new passport and ID book can then be applied for with the new married surname as well.\nThe surnames of minor children can also be changed under various circumstances involving the marriage, divorce or death of a parent, children born out of wedlock, and guardianship.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, a name change requires the approval of the respective Cantonal government, if there are important reasons (\"wichtige Gr\u00fcnde\" / \"justes motifs\") for the change, according to article 30 of the Swiss Civil Code. When aliens apply for naturalization, they have the option of asking for their names to be changed upon the grants of citizenship with no additional fees. According to the case law of the Swiss Federal Supreme Court, such requests must be granted only if the petitioner shows that they suffer substantially from their present name, e.g. if it is the same as that of a notorious criminal.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, the \"Name Act\" bans changing one's legal name for some criminal reasons per https:// since 2015 (Article 12 since 2001). Otherwise, one may change the surname, given name, or both per Article 8, 9, or 10 since 2015 (Article 5, 6, or 7 since 1953, or Article 6, 7, or 8 since 2001).\nChanging the given name is allowed if:\nReplacing documents.\nDiplomas, work experience documents, licenses, permits, and other such documents shall use a person's legal name to avoid being deemed invalid, so those intending to change names have to note that:\nLicensed Taiwanese driver who legally changes the name without reporting to the competent traffic authority is fined 300 to 600 new Taiwan dollars and asked to re-register the legal name.\nTaiwan passports are to be replaced after having changed the names.\nRegistration of change in name of the right holder having been changed after a land right has been registered, shall be applied; the same shall apply to the change of the name of administrator.\nOverseas application.\nA national without household registration may apply for name change outside Taiwan at a Taiwanese diplomatic mission, but having had household registration in Taiwan may apply there only to forward a name change application to the Household Registration Office covering the last Taiwanese address of residency, which is a better method only if no risk of discrepancies among Taiwanese documents, so anyone having considerable Taiwanese documents should still change the name in person at Taiwanese Household Registration Office, to also replace the National Identification Card, healthcard card, driver license, etc.\nIsrael.\nIsraeli law determine that every adult over the age of 18 that does not have a guardianship can submit a request for a name change. A person who changed their name cannot change it again until 7 years passed unless they have a special approval from Minister of Interior. In case of adoption, the adopting family cannot change the child's name unless the court ruled otherwise. In case of marriage, a person can change their last name, change back to the maiden name or add their spouse's last name to theirs at any time. A minor whom parents changed their last name gets the new last name of their parents, and a minor that one of their parents changed their last name to match the other parent get the mutual last name, the minister is allowed to disapprove the new name if they believe the name may be misleading or offensive. The minister is not allowed to disapprove a name change if the name was chosen to accommodate Common-law marriage.\nIn case of a minor who want to change their first name, may do this with a detailed reason for the change of name, and a consent from both their parents and a verbal and written consent of the child, if the minor is under 10 years old the child doesn't need to come with the parents to change their name.\nAn adult convicted of a sex offense isn't allowed to change their name as part of \"the public protection law against committing sex offenses\".\nName change on religious conversion.\nAdherents of various religions change their name upon conversion or confirmation. The name adopted may not have any legal status but will represent their adopted religious beliefs.\nHinduism.\nThere is no formal concept of conversion in Hinduism but converts to Hinduism are accepted, usually after a small ceremony called Shudhikaran (purification). Individuals who attend a Shudhikaran ceremony to officially become Hindu may be optionally given a new Dharma (religious) name, which is usually based on Sanskrit or Indian name such as names based on Hindu deities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58590", "revid": "42999284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58590", "title": "Zutphen", "text": "Zutphen (; Dutch Low Saxon: \"Zutfent\") is a city and municipality located in the province of Gelderland, Netherlands. It lies some northeast of Arnhem, on the eastern bank of the river IJssel at the point where it is joined by the Berkel. First mentioned in the 11th century, the place-name appears to mean \"south fen\" ( in modern Dutch). In 2005, the municipality of Zutphen was merged with the municipality of Warnsveld, retaining its name. In 2021, the municipality had a population of .\nHistory.\nIn about 300 AD, a Germanic settlement was the first permanent town on a complex of the low river dunes. While many such settlements were abandoned in the early Middle Ages, Zutphen, on the strategic confluence of IJssel and Berkel, stayed. After the incorporation of the IJssel lands in Charlemagne's Francia, Zutphen became a local centre of governance under the Count of Zutphen. The Normans raided and ravaged it in 882. Afterwards, a circular fortress was built to protect the budding town against Viking attacks.\nIn the eleventh century, Zutphen was a royal residence for a number of years; a pfalz was built, together with a large chapter church, the predecessor of the present St. Walburgis. The counts of Zutphen acquired a lot of power until the line of counts became extinct in the twelfth century. After the death of her father and her brother, Ermengarde, the heiress of Zutphen married the count of Guelders; her son Henry I, Count of Guelders was the first to have both titles.\nThe settlement received town rights between 1191 and 1196, allowing it to self govern and have a judicial court. One of the oldest towns in the country, only Utrecht and Deventer preceded it in receiving town rights. Zutphen, in turn, became the mother town of several other towns in Guelders, such as Arnhem, Doetinchem, Doesburg, Lochem, Harderwijk, Venlo and Emmerich. It also became part of the Hanseatic League, a group of towns with great wealth; this league was the economic centre in that part of Europe.\nDuring the 12th century, coins were minted in Zutphen by the Counts of Guelders and Zutphen: Henry I (c.\u20091150\u20131181) and Otto I (1182\u20131207). Although the city had minting rights for a few centuries, this was only actively used during four periods: 1478\u20131480, 1582\u20131583, 1604\u20131605 and 1687\u20131692.\nThe largest and oldest church of the city is the St. Walburgis (Saint Walpurga) church, which originally dates from the eleventh century. The present Gothic building contains monuments of the former counts of Zutphen, a fourteenth-century candelabrum, an elaborate copper font (1527), and a monument to the Van Heeckeren family (1700). The chapter-house's library (Librije) contains a pre-Reformation collection, including some valuable manuscripts and incunabula. It is considered one of only five remaining medieval libraries in Europe (in England and Italy). This chained library's books are still chained to their ancient wooden desk \u2013 a custom from centuries ago, when the \"public library\" used chains to prevent theft.\nHaving been fortified, the town withstood several sieges, especially during the Eighty Years' War, the most celebrated fight under its walls being the Battle of Zutphen in September 1586 when Sir Philip Sidney was mortally wounded. Surrendered over the Spanish in 1587 by English defector Rowland York, Zutphen was recovered by Maurice, Prince of Orange, in the 1591 siege, and except for two short periods, one in 1672 and the other during the French Revolutionary Wars, it has since remained a part of the Netherlands. Its fortifications were dismantled in 1874. In World War II, the town was bombed several times by the allied forces because the bridge over the IJssel was vital to support the German troops at Arnhem after the Operation Market Garden. After two weeks of battle, the town was liberated on 14 April 1945. After the war, a renovation program started. Nowadays, Zutphen has one of the best-preserved medieval town centres of northwestern Europe, including the remains of the medieval town wall and a few hundred buildings dating from the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries.\nModern city.\nThe old center survived the Second World War almost in its entirety despite the bombing of Zutphen. However, some parts of the city were lost, especially the area around the railway station, in the northern part of the city centre, known as the (English: New City). The city center includes many monumental buildings dating back to the 14th and 15th centuries, and some even date back to the 13th century, such as a retirement home area. There are also remains of the old town walls in several places.\nToday, Zutphen is a modern small city. The urban area, which includes the village of Warnsveld, has about 51,000 inhabitants. Food shops are open from 8:30; Other stores are open from 9:30 to 18:00 on weekdays, on Friday evenings until 21:00 and on Saturdays until 17:00. Some stores open earlier, and the larger supermarkets usually stay open until 22:00.\nCulture.\nInteresting buildings and squares.\nBecause Zutphen contains many historical buildings with a tower, Zutphen is often called the tower city. As there are almost no modern high-rise buildings in the city centre, the historical tower spires are very visible and form the skyline. The title of 'tower city' is often used in advertising to draw tourists.\nReligious architecture.\nThe St Walburgis' Church was built as a Roman collegiate church around 1050 and initiated by the Bishop Burchard of Utrecht in 1105. After that, between 1200 and 1270, the church was rebuilt to a Romano-Gothic basilica. Later in the 14th century additional parts were added. After a fire in the belfry in 1446, the stone tower was remodelled between 1482\u20131484 where a large needle spire was added, resulting in a total height of 107.5 meters. Higher than the Dom Tower of Utrecht which was 104 meters at the time, though, after a lightning strike in 1600 which resulted in a destructive fire, the current tower is 76 meters tall after restorations in 1633. There are six bells in the tower, which are still rung by hand.\nSince 1561 a library called the Librije was added to the church. It was founded as a public library for the rich citizens of Zutphen. The library contains an important collection of 15th to 17th century books.\nThe Broederen (brothers) church is a largely early 14th-century monastery church of the Dominican order. Since 1983 the church has been used as the city's public library, and it has recently been extensively restored. On top of the church, a roof turret from 1771 contains the porter's bell. This bell is still rung every day between 9:50 and 22:00 the time at which, until 1853, the city gates would be closed.\nThe Nieuwstadt (new city) church houses the Catholic community. It was founded as a parish church around 1250. Since then, it has been expanded, remodelled and restored many times. It has four original medieval bells.\nCivic architecture.\nThe Drogenaps tower was built between 1444 and 1446 as a city gate. In 1465 the entrance was bricked up, after which it became known as a tower instead of a gate. City musician Tonis Drogenap lived there around 1555, and the tower's current name is derived from him. From 1888 to 1927, the tower was used as a water tower.\nThe Wijnhuis (Winery) Tower was built between 1618 and 1642 by the city master builder Emond Hellenraet, influenced by Hendrick de Keyser. In 1644 the brothers Pieter and Fran\u00e7ois Hemony made the world's first correctly tuned carillon for this tower. During the summer months, carillon concerts are regularly held.\nThe Bourgonje tower was a defensive turret built in 1457. It was built during the Gelderland-Burgundian war. In this tower, the Dutch theologian and philosopher Johannes Florentius Martinet wrote his \"Katechismus der Natuur\" (Catechism of Nature).\nThe Berkel gate is part of the city wall on the east side of the medieval city. This gate over the river Berkel connected the old and new cities. It was built in 1320. It also had a western counterpart, but that gate was demolished in 1772.\nOther interesting sights in Zutphen.\nThe city of Zutphen had almost 400 national monuments and over 500 local monuments. It is one of the most important and well-preserved historical city centers in the Netherlands. Zutphen has a great many medieval, especially 14th-century, houses. These houses, often with ornamental facades, can be seen throughout the city center. \nThere are several large 18th and 19th century buildings near the old city market that used to belong to well-to-do citizens and merchants.\nRegional center.\nJuridical center.\nZutphen, although relatively small, is a center for Dutch legal institutions. Zutphen houses one of the 13 Dutch courts, as well as the national training institution for judges and public prosecutors (SSR), the national police academy for senior police investigators, three prisons, and a large number of lawyers. The early emergence of Zutphen in the Middle Ages as the main town of a county explains its prominent position in the juridical system.\nBesides a 'normal' prison, the JPC de Sprengen penitentiary facility for boys is also located in Zutphen. There are several buildings: new institutions replacing the old facilities, but the old prisons remained open after the completion of the new facilities. Only the old prison called Lunette did not meet today's standards and closed in 2008.\nMedical centre.\nLocated in Zutphen is the \"Spittal\", location of the Gelre Ziekenhuizen (Gelre Hospitals) group. This regular hospital offers all common specialties (no cardio-thoracic or neurosurgery) and a 24/7 emergency department. It is located in the southeastern part of the town, in the district of Leesten. A sizable number of practitioners of alternative medicine are located in Zutphen.\nEducational centre.\nZutphen is home to several well-known schools for secondary education on all levels. These include the \"Het Stedelijk\" (Dalton plan education and bilingual education), \"Baudartius College\", \"Vrije School Zutphen\", (a \"Vrije School\" being a Waldorf School), and \"Isendoorn College\" (with bilingual education, located in Warnsveld). Students from a wide area around Zutphen learn at these schools.\nTransport.\nRail.\nZutphen railway station is an important regional railway centre. The main electrified lines, to Deventer and Zwolle in the north, and to Arnhem and Nijmegen in the south, are run by the national railway company Nederlandse Spoorwegen (NS). The secondary lines to Winterswijk and Apeldoorn are operated by Arriva. The secondary line to Hengelo is operated by Blauwnet (a division of Syntus). The regional rail service is run by a special subsidiary of the NS. All secondary lines run diesel trains. Zutphen's old station building (1863), upgraded in 1875, was partly destroyed during World War II. In the early 1950s a modern new station was built, a typical post-war building with concrete as its main material.\nHowever, in October 2007, the station building was designated as a State Monument. In 2006 and 2007, the railway station area was completely renovated: a new bus terminal and an underground bicycle parking lot were constructed, and the main road leading from the railway station to the town centre was turned into a road for pedestrians and cyclists only.\nRoad.\nZutphen lies 10 kilometers south of the A1 motorway, which can be entered where it passes Deventer. From there the A1 leads East to Hengelo and West past Apeldoorn to Amsterdam. Main roads are the N348 (Arnhem to Zutphen, Deventer and Ommen), N314 (Zutphen to Doetinchem), N319 (Zutphen to Vorden and Winterswijk), N345 (Zutphen to Lochem and Hengelo), N826 (Zutphen to Almen and Laren).\nBus.\nAlmost all buses in and around Zutphen are Arriva. There are three internal city bus lines, and regional lines to Doetinchem, Deventer, Almen-Laren and Vorden. The bus lines towards Apeldoorn and Dieren were canceled in the past; these towns and the destinations in between can now only be reached by car or by train.\nSister cities.\nUntil 2018, Zutphen was twinned with:\nDelegations including the mayors of the cities visited each other, and developmental aid programs were in place with Satu Mare, Tartu and Villa Sandino. However, Zutphen's authority decided in 2018 to sever official links with all of its sister cities on the grounds of cost.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58592", "revid": "32403627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58592", "title": "Louisville, Kentucky", "text": "Most populous city in Kentucky, United States\nLouisville is the most populous city in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, sixth-most populous city in the Southeast, and the 27th-most-populous city in the United States. By land area, it is the country's 24th-largest city; however, by population density, it is the 265th most dense city. Louisville is the historical county seat and, since 2003, the nominal seat of Jefferson County, on the Indiana state line.\nSince 2003, Louisville and Jefferson County have shared the same borders following a city-county merger. The consolidated government is officially called the Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, commonly known as Louisville Metro. The term \"Jefferson County\" is still used in some contexts, especially for incorporated cities outside the \"balance\" area that defines Louisville proper. The total population of the consolidated area was 782,969 at the 2020 census, while the balance area (excluding other incorporated cities) had a population of 633,045 and is often cited in national statistics. The Louisville metropolitan area, which includes 12 surrounding counties in Kentucky and Southern Indiana, has 1.39 million residents and is the 43rd-largest metropolitan area in the U.S.\nNamed after King Louis XVI of France, Louisville was founded in 1778 by George Rogers Clark, making it one of the oldest cities west of the Appalachians. With the nearby Falls of the Ohio as the only major obstruction to river traffic between the upper Ohio River and the Gulf of Mexico, the settlement first grew as a portage site. It was the founding city of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, which grew into a system across 13 states. Today, the city is known as the home of boxer Muhammad Ali, the Kentucky Derby, Kentucky Fried Chicken, the University of Louisville and its Cardinals, Louisville Slugger baseball bats, and \"Fortune\" 500 company Humana. Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport, the city's main commercial airport, hosts UPS's worldwide hub.\nPronunciation.\nThe correct pronunciation of the name of \"Louisville\" is hotly debated. The three most popular pronunciations are, in order:\nAll three are generally considered acceptable; the Louisville Visitor Center says that only the rare is completely unacceptable (though it is the correct pronunciation for the names of several minor cities with that name). There are also acceptable hybrid ways of saying the name, such as , a mixture of the first and second pronunciations.\nThe dominant local pronunciation, the pronunciation is widely practiced and accepted. Some even refer to it as the \"only\" correct way to pronounce the name of the city. , while respecting the proper pronunciation of the name of the French king who gave Louisville its name, is significantly less common among locals. It is, however, frequently used by those not from the area. In 2001, local journalist and historian George H. Yater noted that older natives tended toward the second pronunciation, and that both the first and second pronunciations were used equally in local radio and television broadcasting; however, new personalities were taught that the first one was \"correct\".\n is a less common, particularly rural way of saying the name. While it is considered acceptable, it is not as widely heard as the others.\nHistory.\nThe history of Louisville spans hundreds of years, and has been influenced by the area's geography and proximity to the Falls of the Ohio River.\nEarly history and founding.\nSince the Falls created a barrier to river travel, settlements grew at this portage point. The first European settlement in the vicinity of modern-day Louisville was on Corn Island in 1778 by Col. George Rogers Clark, credited as the founder of Louisville. Several landmarks in the community are named after him.\nTwo years later, in 1780, the Virginia General Assembly approved the town charter of Louisville. The city was named in honor of King Louis XVI of France, whose soldiers were then aiding Americans in the Revolutionary War. Early residents lived in forts to protect themselves from raids from the local indigenous population, but they moved out by the late 1780s. In 1803, explorers Meriwether Lewis and William Clark organized their expedition across America in the town of Clarksville, Indiana at the present-day Falls of the Ohio opposite Louisville, Kentucky.\n19th century.\nThe city's early growth was influenced by the fact that river boats had to be unloaded and moved downriver before reaching the falls. By 1828, the population had grown to 7,000 and Louisville became an incorporated city.\nEarly Louisville was a major shipping port and enslaved African Americans worked in a variety of associated trades. The city was often a point of escape for fugitive slaves to the north, as Indiana was a free state.\nDuring this point in the 1850s, the city was growing and vibrant, but that also came with negativity. It was the center of planning, supplies, recruiting, and transportation for numerous campaigns, especially in the Western Theater. Ethnic tensions rose, and on August 6, 1855, known as \"Bloody Monday\", Protestant mobs attacked German and Irish Catholic neighborhoods on election day, resulting in 22 deaths and widespread property damage. Then by 1861, the civil war had broken out. During the Civil War, Louisville was a major stronghold of Union forces, which kept Kentucky firmly in the Union. By the end of the war, the city of Louisville itself had not been attacked, although skirmishes and battles, including the battles of Perryville and Corydon, took place nearby. After the war, returning Confederate veterans largely took political control of the city, leading to the jibe that Louisville joined the Confederacy after the war was over.\nThe first Kentucky Derby was held on May 17, 1875, at the Louisville Jockey Club track (later renamed Churchill Downs). The Derby was originally shepherded by Meriwether Lewis Clark Jr., the grandson of William Clark of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, and grandnephew of the city's founder George Rogers Clark. Horse racing had a strong tradition in Kentucky, whose Inner Bluegrass Region had been a center of breeding high-quality livestock throughout the 19th century. Ten thousand spectators watched the first Derby, which Aristides won.\nOn March 27, 1890, the city was devastated and its downtown nearly destroyed when what scientists now estimate was an F4 tornado tore through as part of the middle Mississippi Valley tornado outbreak. It is estimated that between 74 and 120 people were killed and 200 were injured. The damage cost the city $2.5 million (equivalent to $69 million in 2019). Established in 1896, Neighborhood House Louisville was the first settlement movement house in the state.\n20th century.\nFollowing the Civil War and the Emancipation Proclamation, freed slaves settled in a neighborhood of Louisville called Little Africa, nicknamed \"the gateway to the South\", near the present neighborhood of Park DuValle. The neighborhood was described as a \"thriving community\" by the 1920s, and declined between the 1940s and 1950s.\nIn 1914, the city of Louisville passed a racially based residential zoning code, following Baltimore, Atlanta, and a handful of cities in the Carolinas. The NAACP challenged the ordinance in two cases. Two weeks after the ordinance was enacted, an African-American named Arthur Harris moved into a house on a block designated for whites. He was prosecuted and found guilty. The second case was planned to create a test case. William Warley, the president of the local chapter of the NAACP, tendered a purchase offer on a white block from Charles Buchanan, a white real estate agent. Warley also wrote a letter declaring his intention to build a house on that lot and reside there. With the understanding that the Louisville ordinance made it illegal for him to live there, Warley withheld payment, setting in motion a breach of contract suit by Buchanan. By 1917 the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the case of \"Buchanan v. Warley\". The court struck down the Louisville residential segregation ordinance, ruling that it violated the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause.\nIn 1917, shortly after the United States' entry into World War I, Louisville was selected as the site of Camp Zachary Taylor. Camp Taylor was one of the country's largest World War I training camps. It was home of the 84th Infantry Division and trained over 150,000 men by the end of war, including F. Scott Fitzgerald. The camp was closed in 1921. Many of the buildings and infrastructure in the Camp Taylor neighborhood of Louisville are there as a result of the training camp.\nIn 1929, Louisville completed the lock and dam in the Falls of the Ohio and the city began referring to itself as \"where Northern enterprise and Southern hospitality meet\". Between the industrial boom of that year and through the Great Depression, Louisville gained 15,000 new residents, about 3% of them black, most fleeing poverty in rural areas.\nThroughout January 1937, of rain fell in Louisville, and by January 27, the Ohio River crested at a record , almost above flood stage. These events triggered the \"Great Flood of 1937\", which lasted into early February. The flood submerged 60\u201370 percent of the city, caused complete loss of power for four days, and forced the evacuation of 175,000 or 230,000 residents, depending on sources. 90 people died as a result of the flood. This led to dramatic changes in where residents lived. After the flood, the areas of high elevation in the eastern part of the city had decades of residential growth. Today, the city is protected by numerous flood walls.\nLouisville was a center for factory war production during World War II. In May 1942, the U.S. government assigned the Curtiss-Wright Aircraft Company, a war plant located at Louisville's air field, for wartime aircraft production. The factory produced the C-46 Commando cargo plane, among other aircraft. In 1946, the factory was sold to International Harvester, which began large-scale production of tractors and agricultural equipment. In 1950, the Census Bureau reported Louisville's population as 84.3% white and 15.6% black.\nThroughout the 1940s, Louisville had more black police officers than any other Southern city, though they were allowed to patrol only black districts. This, in part, made Louisville seem like a more racially progressive city than other Southern cities, although only when black citizens accepted a lower status than white citizens. Many historians have referred to this \"veil\" of segregation as a \"polite\" racism. Historian George Wright stated that polite racism \"often deluded both blacks and well-meaning whites into believing that real progress was being made in their city\". For example, in the city Jim Crow practices were not maintained by law so much as by custom.\nSimilar to many other older American cities, Louisville began to experience a movement of people and businesses to the suburbs in the 1960s and 1970s. Middle class residents used newly built freeways and interstate highways to commute to work, moving into more distant but newer housing. Because of tax laws, businesses found it cheaper to build new rather than renovate older buildings. Economic changes included a decline in local manufacturing. The West End and older areas of the South End, in particular, began to decline economically as many local factories closed.\nIn 1974, a major (F4) tornado hit Louisville as part of the 1974 Super Outbreak of tornadoes that struck 13 states. It covered and destroyed several hundred homes in the Louisville area, causing two deaths.\nSince the 1980s, many of the city's urban neighborhoods have been revitalized into areas popular with young professionals and college students. The greatest change has occurred along the Bardstown Road/Baxter Avenue and Frankfort Avenue corridors as well as the Old Louisville neighborhood. In recent years, such change has also occurred in the East Market District (NuLu).\n21st century.\nSince the late 1990s, Downtown has experienced significant residential, tourist and retail growth. Major new sports complexes built include KFC Yum! Center (2010), Louisville Slugger Field (2000), and Lynn Family Stadium (2020). Further, the downtown area has seen the conversion of riverfront industrial sites into Waterfront Park, openings of varied museums (see Museums, galleries and interpretive centers below), and the refurbishing of the former Galleria into the entertainment complex Fourth Street Live!, which opened in 2004.\nOn March 13, 2020, four plainclothed officers from Louisville Metro Police Department executed a \"no-knock\" search warrant which led to the killing of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old African-American woman. For months afterward, Taylor's family, members of the local community, and people around the world protested to demand that officers involved in the shooting be fired and criminally charged. These protests and demonstrations coincided and intertwined with the international George Floyd protests, as well as the Black Lives Matter movement and a broader movement of racial unrest. As a result of the incident, the police chief was fired and four officers received federal charges, but no significant systemic changes were made.\nOn April 10, 2023, a mass shooting occurred at the Old National Bank, killing five people, and injuring nine others. The suspect, who was a bank employee and who officials said was livestreaming the rampage, was killed by the police after exchanging fire with them.\nOn November 4, 2025, a McDonnell Douglas MD-11 cargo plane operating as UPS Airlines Flight 2976 crashed shortly after takeoff from Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport, killing 14 people, injuring 15, and igniting a large fire. Several buildings near the airport, including a petroleum recycling center, were struck or set on fire. The cause of the crash is under investigation.\nGeography.\nLouisville and Jefferson County have a combined area of , of which is land and (4.33%) is covered by water.\nLouisville is southeasterly situated along the border between Kentucky and Indiana, the Ohio River, in north-central Kentucky at the Falls of the Ohio. Louisville is an Upper South city located in a Southern state that is influenced by both Southern and Midwestern culture. It is sometimes referred to as either one of the northernmost Southern cities or as one of the southernmost Northern cities in the United States.\nLouisville is located in Kentucky's outer Bluegrass region. Its development has been influenced by its location on the Ohio River, which spurred Louisville's growth from an isolated camp site into a major shipping port. Much of the city is located on a very wide and flat floodplain surrounded by hill country on all sides. Much of the area was swampland that had to be drained as the city grew. In the 1840s, most creeks were rerouted or placed in canals to prevent flooding and disease outbreaks.\nAreas generally east of I-65 are above the flood plain, and are composed of gently rolling hills. The southernmost parts of Jefferson County are in the scenic and largely undeveloped Knobs region, which is home to Jefferson Memorial Forest.\nThe Louisville-Jefferson County, KY-IN Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), the 43rd largest in the United States, includes the Kentucky county of Jefferson (coterminous with Louisville Metro), plus twelve outlying counties\u2014seven in Kentucky and five in Southern Indiana. Louisville's MSA is included in the Louisville\u2013Elizabethtown\u2013Madison, KY\u2013IN Combined Statistical Area (CSA), which also includes the Elizabethtown, KY MSA, as well as the Madison, IN Micropolitan Statistical Area.\nThe Louisville area is near several other urban areas, especially Frankfort, Kentucky (the state's capital); Cincinnati, Ohio (the two cities' metropolitan statistical areas almost border each other); Lexington, Kentucky; Bowling Green, Kentucky; Nashville, Tennessee; and the Indianapolis, Indiana area (especially Columbus, Indiana, to the north of Southern Indiana).\nCityscape.\nThe downtown business district of Louisville is located immediately south of the Ohio River and southeast of the Falls of the Ohio. Major roads extend outwards from the downtown area in all directions. The airport is about south of the downtown area. The industrial sections of town are to the south and west of the airport, while most of the residential areas of the city are to the southwest, south, and east of downtown. In 2010, the 22,000-seat KFC Yum! Center was completed. Twelve of the 15 buildings in Kentucky over are located in downtown Louisville.\nAnother primary business and industrial district is located in the suburban area east of the city on Hurstbourne Parkway.\nLouisville's late 19th- and early 20th-century development was spurred by three large suburban parks built at the edges of the city in 1890.\nThe city's architecture is a blend of old and new. The Old Louisville neighborhood is the largest historic preservation district solely featuring Victorian homes and buildings in the United States; it is also the third-largest district containing such architectural distinctions in the United States. Many modern skyscrapers are located downtown, as well as older preserved structures, such as the Southern National Bank building. The buildings of West Main Street in downtown Louisville have the largest collection of cast iron facades of anywhere outside of New York's SoHo neighborhood.\nSince the mid-20th century, Louisville has in some ways been divided into three sides of town: the West End, the South End, and the East End. In 2003, Bill Dakan, a University of Louisville geography professor, said that the West End, west of 7th Street and north of Algonquin Parkway, is \"a euphemism for the African American part of town\" although he points out that this belief is not entirely true, and most African Americans no longer live in areas where more than 80% of residents are black. Nevertheless, he says the perception is still strong. The South End has long had a reputation as a white, working-class part of town, while the East End has been seen as middle and upper class.\nAccording to the Greater Louisville Association of Realtors, the area with the lowest median home sales price is west of Interstate 65, in the West and South Ends. The middle range of home sales prices are between Interstates 64 and 65 in the South and East Ends, and the highest median home sales price are north of Interstate 64 in the East End. Immigrants from Southeast Asia tend to settle in the South End, while immigrants from Eastern Europe settle in the East End.\nClimate.\nLouisville has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\"), typical of the Upper South, and is located in USDA plant hardiness zone 7a. Springlike conditions typically begin in mid-to-late March, summer from mid-to-late-May to late September, with fall in the October\u2013November period. Seasonal extremes in both temperature and precipitation are not uncommon during early spring and late fall; severe weather is not uncommon, with occasional tornado outbreaks in the region. Winter typically brings a mix of rain, sleet, and snow, with occasional heavy snowfall and icing. Louisville averages 4.5 days with low temperatures dipping to ; the first and last freezes of the season on average fall on November2 and April5, respectively. Summer is typically hazy, hot, and humid with long periods of temperatures and drought conditions at times. Louisville averages 38 days a year with high temperatures at or above . The mean annual temperature is , with an average annual snowfall of and an average annual rainfall of .\nThe wettest seasons are spring and summer, although rainfall is fairly constant year round. During the winter, particularly in January and February, several days of snow can be expected. January is the coldest month, with a mean temperature of . July is the average hottest month with a mean of . The highest recorded temperature was , which last occurred on July 14, 1936, and the lowest recorded temperature was on January 19, 1994. In 2012, Louisville had the fourth-hottest summer on record, with the temperature rising up to in July and the June all-time monthly record high temperature being broken on two consecutive days. As the city exemplifies the urban heat island effect, temperatures in commercial areas and in the industrialized areas along interstates are often higher than in the suburbs, often as much as .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBetween 1970 and 2000, Louisville lost population each decade. As of the 2000 census, Louisville had a population of 256,231, down from the 1990 census population of 269,063. Due to the city-county merger that occurred in 2003, which expanded the city limits, the city's population increased to 597,337 at the 2010 census count.\n2020 Census.\nLouisville is the largest city in Kentucky, with 17.1% of the state's total population as of 2010; the balance's percentage was 13.8%.\nThe 2007 demographic breakdown for the entire Louisville Metro area was 74.8% White (71.7% non-Hispanic), 22.2% African American, 0.6% Native American, 2.0% Asian, 0.1% Hawaiian or Pacific islander, 1.4% other, and 1.6% multiracial. About 2.9% of the total population was identified as Hispanic of any race. During the same year, the area of premerger Louisville consisted 60.1% White, 35.2% African American, 1.9% Asian, 0.2% Native American, and 3.0% other, with 2.4% identified as Hispanic of any race.\nOf the 287,012 households, 29.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.2% were married couples living together, 14.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.2% were not families. About 30.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.97.\nThe age distribution is 24.3% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 30.4% from 25 to 44, 22.8% from 45 to 64, and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in 2017 was $51,960. For non-family households the median income was $32,446, and for family households was $67,965. In 2017, males had a median income of $36,326 while females had a median income of $30,464. The latest available data for per capita income comes from 2006, and was $23,304 for the county. About 9.5% of families and 15.1% of the population were below the poverty line in 2017, including 23.5% of those under age 18 and 8.2% of those ages 65 or over.\nAdditionally, around 60,000 Cuban Americans are said to live in the Louisville area, with Jefferson County ranking 12th nationally.\nReligion.\nLouisville hosts religious institutions of various faiths, including Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe 135,421 Roman Catholic Louisvillians are part of the Archdiocese of Louisville, covering 24 counties in central Kentucky, and consisting of 121 parishes and missions spread over . The Cathedral of the Assumption in downtown Louisville is the seat of the Archdiocese of Louisville. Our Lady of Gethsemani Abbey, the monastic home of Catholic writer Thomas Merton, is in nearby Bardstown, Kentucky, and also in the archdiocese. Most of Louisville's Roman Catholic population is of German descent, the result of large-scale 19th-century immigration.\nBellarmine University and Spalding University in Louisville are affiliated with the Roman Catholic Church.\nOne in three Louisvillians is Southern Baptist, belonging to one of 147 local congregations. This denomination increased in number when large numbers of people moved into Louisville in the early 20th century from rural Kentucky and Tennessee to work in the city's factories; some of these migrants also formed Holiness and Pentecostal churches and Churches of Christ.\nGerman immigrants in the 19th century brought not only a large Catholic population, but also the Lutheran and Evangelical faiths, which are represented today in Louisville by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod, and the United Church of Christ, respectively.\nThe largest Methodist Church in Kentucky, Christ Church United Methodist, is located in Louisville, and the city has boasted a large Methodist population since the cities founding.\nThe city is home to two megachurches. Southeast Christian Church, with its main campus in Middletown and three others in the surrounding region, is, as of 2023[ [update]], the eighth-largest church in the US by average weekend attendance. St. Stephen Church has the largest African American congregation in Kentucky.\nThe city is home to several religious institutions: the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Louisville Bible College, Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary, and the denominational headquarters of the Presbyterian Church (USA).\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints maintains a temple in suburban Crestwood.\nThe Jewish population of around 18,300 in the metro area (as of 2022[ [update]]) is served by five synagogues. Most Jewish families emigrated from Eastern Europe at the start of the 20th century; around 800 Soviet Jews have moved to Louisville since 1991. Jewish immigrants founded Jewish Hospital in what was once the center of the city's Jewish district. From 2005 to 2012, Jewish Hospital merged with two Kentucky-based Catholic healthcare systems to form KentuckyOne Health, which later in 2012 announced a partnership with the University of Louisville Hospital. A significant focal point for Louisville's Jewish community is located near Bowman Field, where there are two Orthodox synagogues (including Anshei Sfard, founded in 1893), the Jewish Community Center, Jewish Family and Career Services, and an affordable housing complex.\nMuslims in Louisville number around 10,000, both indigenous and immigrants who arrived in the early 1960s from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Iran, and Turkey. Immigrants from Afghanistan arrived in the early 1980s. Those from Iraq, Somalia, and Bosnia arrived in the 1990s, and the 2010s saw the arrival of immigrants from Kosovo. Many mosques and Islamic organizations exist in the metro area.\nSince 1996, every May, the Festival of Faiths, a five-day national interfaith gathering, is held featuring music, poetry, film, art, and dialogue. The festival is organized by the Center for Interfaith Relations and is held at Actors Theatre of Louisville.\nLouisville first welcomed the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in 1920. The Spiritual Assembly of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed of Louisville was formed in 1944 when their community reached the required amount of nine adult Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. The first Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed center opened in Louisville in 1967 in Crescent Hill. When the community outgrew the space in 1985, it was sold and another center opened in Buechel in 1998.\nCrime.\nIn a 2005 survey, Morgan Quitno Press ranked Louisville as the seventh safest large city in the United States. The 2006 edition of the survey ranked Louisville eighth.\nIn 2004, Louisville recorded 70 murders. The numbers for 2005 ranged from 55 to 59 (FBI says 55, LMPD says 59), which was down 16 percent from 2004. In 2006, Louisville-Jefferson County recorded 50 murders, which was significantly lower than previous years. In 2008, Louisville recorded 79 murders.\nThe Louisville Metro Area's overall violent crime rate was 412.6 per 100,000 residents in 2005. The Elizabethtown, Kentucky Metro Area, which is part of Louisville's Combined Statistical Area, was the 17th safest Metro in the U.S. Kentucky has the 5th lowest violent crime rate out of the 50 states.\nIn 2020, Louisville recorded 173 murders; and, in 2021, Louisville recorded 188 murders amidst an ongoing violent crime wave in the city.\nThe city has also been one of the hardest hit by the opioid epidemic. In 2021, Louisville broke the record for overdoses in the city. Heroin, fentanyl and other opioids have also attributed to an overall increase in violent crime, property crime and homelessness in the past decade.\nViolent crime is most concentrated west of downtown, especially in the Russell neighborhood. The West End, located north of Algonquin Parkway and West of 9th Street, had 32 of the city's 79 murders in 2007.\nEconomy.\nLouisville today is home to dozens of companies and organizations across several industrial classifications. However, the underpinning of the city's economy since its earliest days has been the shipping and cargo industries. Its strategic location at the Falls of the Ohio, as well as its unique position in the central United States (within one day's road travel to 60 percent of the cities in the continental U.S.) make it a practical location for the transfer of cargo along its route to other destinations. The Louisville and Portland Canal and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad were important links in water and rail transportation.\nLouisville's importance to the shipping industry continues today with the presence of the Worldport global air-freight hub for UPS at Louisville International Airport. Louisville's location at the crossroads of three major interstate highways (I\u201164, I\u201165, and I\u201171) also contributes to its modern-day strategic importance to the shipping and cargo industry. In addition, the Port of Louisville continues Louisville's river shipping presence at Jefferson Riverport International. As of 2003, Louisville ranks as the seventh-largest inland port in the United States.\nLouisville is a significant center of manufacturing, with two major Ford Motor Company plants, and the headquarters and major home appliance factory of GE Appliances (a subsidiary of Haier). The city is also a major center of the American whiskey industry, with about one-third of all bourbon whiskey coming from Louisville. Brown-Forman, one of the major makers of American whiskey, is headquartered in Louisville and operates a distillery in the Louisville suburb of Shively. The current primary distillery site operated by Heaven Hill, called the Bernheim distillery, is also located in Louisville near Brown-Forman's distillery. Other distilleries and related businesses can also be found in neighboring cities in Kentucky, such as Bardstown, Clermont, Lawrenceburg, and Loretto. Similar to the Kentucky Bourbon Trail that links these central Kentucky locations, Louisville offers tourists its own \"Urban Bourbon Trail\", where people can stop at nearly 20 \"area bars and restaurants, all offering at least 50 labels of America's only native spirit\".\nWhile the city is not typically known for high tech outside of the previously identified industries, Code Louisville, its public\u2013private partnership for teaching people entry level software development skills, received recognition in 2015 from then-President Barack Obama.\nOmega Mirror Products, which at the height of the disco era in the 1970s manufactured 90% of all mirror balls in the US, is based in Louisville.\nSeveral major motion pictures have been filmed in or near Louisville, including \"The Insider\", \"Goldfinger\", \"Stripes\", \"Lawn Dogs\", \"Elizabethtown\", and \"Secretariat\".\nTop employers.\nAs of the city's 2023 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, Louisville's top employers are:\nArts and culture.\nAnnual festivals and other events.\nLouisville is home to many annual cultural events. Perhaps most well known is the Kentucky Derby, held annually during the first Saturday of May. The Derby is preceded by a two-week-long Kentucky Derby Festival, which starts with the annual Thunder Over Louisville, the largest annual fireworks display in North America. The Kentucky Derby Festival also features notable events such as the Pegasus Parade, The Great Steamboat Race, Great Balloon Race, a combined marathon/mini marathon and about seventy events in total. Esquire magazine has called the Kentucky Derby \"the biggest party in the south\".\nThe summer season in Louisville also features a series of cultural events such as the Kentucky Shakespeare Festival (commonly called \"Shakespeare in Central Park\"), held every summer from May to August and presents free Shakespeare plays in Central Park in Old Louisville.\nBefore pausing in 2023, the Forecastle Festival during Memorial Day weekend drew 75,000 visitors (as of 2022[ [update]]) to Louisville Waterfront Park in celebration of the best in music, art and environmental activism. Past performers include The Black Keys, The Flaming Lips, Widespread Panic, The Smashing Pumpkins, The Avett Brothers, The Black Crowes and hundreds more. It was replaced in 2024 with the Gazebo Festival, co-headlined by Louisville's Jack Harlow and SZA.\nThe Kentucky State Fair is held every August at the Kentucky Exposition Center in Louisville as well, featuring an array of culture from all areas of Kentucky. In places, the African American community celebrates Juneteenth commemorating June 19, 1865, when enslaved African Americans in the western territories learned of their freedom.\nThe Jeffersontown neighborhood is also the home of the annual Gaslight Festival, a series of events spread over a week. Attendance is estimated at 200,000\u2013300,000 for the week.\nThe month of October features the St. James Court Art Show in Old Louisville. Thousands of artists gather on the streets and in the courtyard to exhibit and sell their wares, and the event is attended by many art collectors and enthusiasts. The show typically brings in a crowd of over 150,000 people and $3 million in sales.\nAnother art-related event that occurs every month is the First Friday Hop.\nIndie scene.\nA Louisville locale that highlights the city's indie scene is Bardstown Road, an area located in the heart of the Highlands. Bardstown Road is known for its cultural diversity and local trade. Though it is only about a mile (1.6\u00a0km) long, this strip of Bardstown Road constitutes much of the city's culture and diverse lifestyle, contributing to the unofficial \"Keep Louisville Weird\" slogan.\nIn downtown Louisville, 21c Museum Hotel, a hotel that showcases contemporary art installations and exhibitions throughout its public spaces, and features a red penguin on its roof, is, according to \"The New York Times\", \"an innovative concept with strong execution and prompt and enthusiastic service\".\nLouisville is home to a thriving indie music scene with bands such as Love Jones, Tantric, Squirrel Bait, CABIN, Slint, My Morning Jacket, Houndmouth, Young Widows and Wax Fang. Acclaimed singer-songwriters Will Oldham, who performs under the moniker \"Bonnie 'Prince' Billy\", is a resident, as was country/rock singer-songwriter Tim Krekel. Cellist Ben Sollee splits his time between Louisville and Lexington. Long running rock/jazz fusion band NRBQ also formed in Louisville in the late 1960s as well as 1980s psychobilly band Bodeco. Post-grunge band Days of the New, at one time including Nicole Scherzinger, formed in Louisville in the mid-1990s. Popular local singer Bryson Tiller paid homage to Louisville in his chart-topping \"T R A P S O U L\" with the song \"502 Come Up\", referencing the city's area code, and rapper Jack Harlow also calls the city home.\nEspecially catering to Louisville's music scene is 91.9 WFPK Radio Louisville, a local public radio station funded, in part, from local listeners.\nMuseums, galleries and interpretive centers.\nThe West Main District in downtown Louisville features what is locally known as \"Museum Row\". In this area is the Frazier History Museum, which opened in 2004 as an armaments museum but since has expanded its focus. It originally featured the only collection of Royal Armouries artifacts outside of the United Kingdom until remaining display items were returned in 2015.\nAlso nearby is the Kentucky Science Center, which is Kentucky's largest hands-on science center and features interactive exhibits, IMAX films, educational programs and technology networks. The Kentucky Museum of Art and Craft, opened in 1981, is a nonprofit organization. The Muhammad Ali Center opened November 2005 in \"Museum Row\" and features Louisville native Muhammad Ali's boxing memorabilia. \nThe National Society of the Sons of the American Revolution (SAR) is a patriotic, historical, and educational non-profit organization and a leading male lineage society that perpetuates the ideals of the American war for independence and the founding of the United States. The SAR opened its National Genealogical Research Library in 2010.\nThe Speed Art Museum opened in 1927 and is the oldest and largest art museum in Kentucky. The museum was closed for three years, re-opening in 2016 with 220,000 sq. ft. of renovations. Located adjacent to the University of Louisville, the museum features over 12,000 pieces of art in its permanent collection and hosts traveling exhibitions. Multiple art galleries are located in the city, but they are especially concentrated in the East Market District (NuLu), immediately to the east of downtown. This row of galleries, plus others in the West Main District, are prominently featured in the monthly First Friday Hop.\nSeveral local history museums are in the Louisville area. The most prominent among them is The Filson Historical Society, founded in 1884, which has holdings of over 1.5\u00a0million manuscript items and over 50,000 volumes in the library. The Filson's extensive collections focus on Kentucky, the Upper South and the Ohio River Valley, and contain a large collection of portraiture and over 10,000 museum artifacts. Other local history museums include the Portland Museum, Historic Locust Grove, Conrad-Caldwell House Museum, the Falls of the Ohio State Park interpretive center (Clarksville, Indiana), Howard Steamboat Museum (Jeffersonville, Indiana) and the Carnegie Center for Art and History (New Albany, Indiana). The Falls interpretive center, part of the Falls of the Ohio National Wildlife Conservation Area, also functions as a natural history museum, covering findings in the nearby exposed Devonian fossil bed.\nThere are also several historical properties and items of interest in the area, including the \"Belle of Louisville\", the oldest Mississippi-style steamboat in operation in the United States. The United States Marine Hospital of Louisville is considered by the National Park Service to be the best remaining antebellum hospital in the United States. It was designed by Robert Mills, who is best known as the designer of the Washington Monument. Fort Knox, spread out among Bullitt, Hardin and Meade Counties (two of which are in the Louisville metropolitan area), is home to the U.S. Bullion Depository and the General George Patton Museum. The previously mentioned Locust Grove, former home of Louisville Founder George Rogers Clark, portrays life in the early days of the city. Other notable properties include the Farmington Historic Plantation (home of the Speed family), Riverside, The Farnsley-Moremen Landing and the restored Union Station, which opened in 1891. The Louisville area is also home to the Waverly Hills Sanatorium, a turn-of-the-century (20th) hospital that was originally built to accommodate tuberculosis patients, and subsequently has been reported and sensationalized to be haunted. The Little Loomhouse maintains historical records of local spinning and weaving patterns and techniques.\nPerforming arts.\nThe Kentucky Center, dedicated in 1983, located in the downtown hotel and entertainment district, features a variety of plays and concerts. This is also the home of the Louisville Ballet, Louisville Orchestra, Bourbon Baroque, Actors Theatre of Louisville, StageOne Family Theatre, Kentucky Shakespeare Festival, which operates the oldest professional outdoor Shakespeare festival, and the Kentucky Opera, which is the twelfth oldest opera in the United States.\nActors Theatre of Louisville presents approximately 600 performances of about 30 productions annually. From 1976 to 2021, it hosted the Humana Festival of New American Plays, a month-long festival of plays in the spring; the last festival took place virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The event was discontinued after the festival's chief sponsor, the Humana Foundation, refocused its philanthropic endeavors to support health-based initiatives.\nThe Louisville Orchestra was founded in 1937 by conductor Robert Whitney. The orchestra today performs more than 125 concerts per year. The orchestra won the 2024 Grammy Award for \"Best Classical Instrumental Solo\".\nThe Palace Theatre is an ornate theatre in downtown Louisville's theatre district which shows films and hosts concerts.\nIroquois Park is the home of the renovated Iroquois Amphitheater, which hosts a variety of musical concerts in a partially covered outdoor setting.\nSports.\nCollege sports are popular in the Louisville area. The Louisville Cardinals have competed as members of the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC), since joining that league in July 2014.\nCollege basketball is particularly popular. The Louisville Cardinals's Freedom Hall averaged sellouts for 10 straight years and the Downtown KFC Yum! Center following suit with regular sellouts. The Cardinals ranked third nationally in attendance in 2012\u201313, the most recent of the program's three national championship seasons (1980, 1986, 2013). The Cardinals also hold the Big East conference women's basketball paid attendance record with nearly 17,000 attending the game against the Kentucky Wildcats in 2008.\nThe Louisville market has ranked first in ratings for the NCAA men's basketball tournament every year since 1999. The Kentucky Wildcats used to play an annual game in Freedom Hall.\nThe Louisville Cardinals football team has produced successful NFL players such as Lamar Jackson, Johnny Unitas, Deion Branch, Teddy Bridgewater, Sam Madison, David Akers, Joe Jacoby, DeVante Parker and Ray Buchanan. The Cardinals won the 1991 Fiesta Bowl, the 2007 Orange Bowl, and the 2013 Sugar Bowl. In 2016, sophomore quarterback Lamar Jackson took the football team to new heights. Lamar was the school's first Heisman Trophy winner, which is awarded to the most outstanding college football player nationwide during that season. He was also one of the youngest players to ever receive the award. The team also matched their highest ranking in school history at No. 3. The University of Louisville baseball team advanced to the College World Series in Omaha in 2007, 2013, 2014, 2017 and 2019 as one of the final eight teams to compete for the national championship.\nHorse racing is also a major attraction. Churchill Downs is home to the Kentucky Derby, the largest sporting event in the state, as well as the Kentucky Oaks which together cap the two-week-long Kentucky Derby Festival. Churchill Downs has also hosted the renowned Breeders' Cup on eight occasions, most recently in 2011.\nLouisville is also the home of Valhalla Golf Club which hosted the 1996, 2000, 2014, and 2024 PGA Championships, the 2004 Senior PGA Championship and the 2008 Ryder Cup. It is also home to David Armstrong Extreme Park (formerly Louisville Extreme Park), which skateboarder Tony Hawk has called one of his top five skate parks.\nLouisville has seven professional and semi-professional sports teams. The Louisville Bats are a baseball team playing in the International League as the Triple-A affiliate of the nearby Cincinnati Reds. The team plays at Louisville Slugger Field in downtown.\nLouisville City FC, a professional soccer team in the second-division USL Championship, began play in 2015 at Slugger Field and has since moved into their own soccer-specific stadium, Lynn Family Stadium, in 2020. The team was originally the reserve side for Orlando City SC of Major League Soccer, but the two organizations were separated in 2016. Racing Louisville FC, an expansion team in the National Women's Soccer League began play in 2021 at Lynn Family Stadium.\nLouisville had two professional American football teams in the National Football League: the Louisville Breckenridges (or Brecks for short) from 1921 to 1924 and the Louisville Colonels in 1926.\nBetween 1967 and 1976, Louisville was home to the Kentucky Colonels of the American Basketball Association. The Colonels was one of the ABA's most successful teams during its existence, winning four division titles and the 1975 ABA Championship, but was not invited to join the NBA when the two leagues merged in 1976, and subsequently folded.\nLouisville has the added distinction of being the only city in the world that is the birthplace of four heavyweight boxing champions: Marvin Hart, Muhammad Ali, Jimmy Ellis and Greg Page.\nParks and recreation.\nLouisville Metro has 122 city parks covering more than . Several of these parks were designed by Frederick Law Olmsted, who also designed New York City's Central Park as well as parks, parkways, college campuses and public facilities in many U.S. locations. The Louisville Waterfront Park is prominently located on the banks of the Ohio River near downtown and features large open areas, which often hold free concerts and other festivals. The Big Four Bridge, a former railroad bridge spanning but is now a pedestrian bridge connecting Waterfront Park with Jeffersonville, Indiana's waterfront park, fully opened in May 2014 with the completion of Jeffersonville's ramp. Cherokee Park, one of the most visited parks in the nation, features a mixed-use loop and many well-known landscaping and architectural features including the Hogan's Fountain Pavilion. Other notable parks in the system include Iroquois Park, Shawnee Park, Seneca Park and Central Park.\nFurther from the downtown area is the Jefferson Memorial Forest, which at is one of the largest municipal urban forests in the US. The forest is designated as a National Audubon Society wildlife refuge and offers nearly of hiking and equestrian trails.\nOtter Creek Outdoor Recreation Area, owned and operated by the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, is another large park in nearby Brandenburg, Kentucky. The park's namesake, Otter Creek, winds along the eastern side of the park. A scenic bend in the Ohio River, which divides Kentucky from Indiana, can be seen from northern overlooks within the park.\nOther outdoor points of interest in the Louisville area include Cave Hill Cemetery (the burial location of Col. Harland Sanders), Zachary Taylor National Cemetery (the burial location of President Zachary Taylor), the Louisville Zoo and the Falls of the Ohio National Wildlife Conservation Area.\nIn development is the City of Parks, a project to create a continuous paved pedestrian and biking trail called the Louisville Loop around Louisville Metro while also adding a large amount of park land. Current plans call for making approximately of the Floyds Fork flood plain in eastern Jefferson County into a new park system called The Parklands of Floyds Fork, expanding area in the Jefferson Memorial Forest, and adding riverfront land and wharfs along the Riverwalk and the Levee Trail, both completed segments of the Louisville Loop.\nGovernment.\nUntil 2015, Louisville was one of two cities in Kentucky designated by the state as first-class (along with Lexington, the state's second-largest). Since January 6, 2003, Louisville has merged its government with that of Jefferson County, forming coterminous borders. Louisville was the second and only other city in the state to merge with its county. (Lexington had merged with Fayette County in 1974.)\nLouisville Metro is governed by an executive called the Metro Mayor and a city legislature called the Metro Council. The third and current Metro Mayor is Craig Greenberg (D), who entered office on January 3, 2023.\nBefore merger, under the Kentucky Constitution and statutory law Louisville was designated as a first-class city in regard to local laws affecting public safety, alcohol beverage control, revenue options, and various other matters; as of 2014, it is the only such designated city in the state.\nThe Official Seal of the City of Louisville, no longer used following the merger, reflected its history and heritage in the fleur-de-lis representing French aid given during the Revolutionary War and the thirteen stars signifying the original colonies. The new Seal of Louisville Metro retains the fleur-de-lis, but has only two stars, one representing the city and the other the county.\nKentucky's 3rd congressional district encompasses most of Louisville Metro, and is represented by Rep. Morgan McGarvey (D). Far eastern portions of the county are part of the 2nd congressional district, which is represented by Brett Guthrie (R).\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe public school system, Jefferson County Public Schools, consists of more than 100,000 students in 173 schools. Dupont Manual High School ranks 30th in the nation overall for best high schools, and 13th in best magnet high schools. Due to Louisville's large Catholic population, there are 27 Catholic schools in the city. The Kentucky School for the Blind, for all of Kentucky's blind and visually impaired students, is located on Frankfort Avenue in the Clifton neighborhood.\nHigher education.\nLouisville is home to several institutions of higher learning. There are six four-year universities, the University of Louisville, Bellarmine University, Boyce College, Spalding University, Sullivan University and Simmons College of Kentucky; Louisville Bible College; a two-year community college, Jefferson Community and Technical College; and several other business or technical schools such as Spencerian College, Strayer University and Sullivan College of Technology and Design. Indiana University Southeast is located across the Ohio River in New Albany, Indiana.\nThe University of Louisville has had notable achievements including several hand transplants and the world's first self-contained artificial heart transplant.\nTwo major graduate-professional schools of religion are also located in Louisville. The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, with more than 5,300 students, is the flagship institution of the Southern Baptist Convention. It was founded in Greenville, South Carolina, in 1859 and moved to Louisville in 1877, occupying its present campus on Lexington Road in 1926. Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary, product of a 1901 merger of two predecessor schools founded at Danville, Kentucky in 1853 and in Louisville in 1893, occupied its present campus on Alta Vista Road in 1963.\nAccording to the U.S. census, of Louisville's population over 25, 21.3% (the national average is 24%) hold a bachelor's degree or higher and 76.1% (80% nationally) have a high school diploma or equivalent.\nLibraries.\nIn 1908, Louisville was home to the country's first public library in the South for African Americans housed in a Carnegie-funded facility. This public library still stands today as the Western Colored Branch Public Library known today as the Louisville Free Public Library, Western Branch. It took its place in history as the first in the nation to provide library services exclusively for the African American community, using only African American staff. African Americans in Louisville were among the leaders in a national struggle to address the injustices this system imposed. Albert Meyzeek, a black educator who over the years served as principal at several local schools was one of the leaders in the effort to build positive community infrastructures for purposes of racial uplift. During his three-year tenure as principal at the segregated Central High School, Meyzeek led the campaign to establish a black library, that being the Western Colors Branch Public Library.\nIn addition to establishing the first public library for African Americans in the South, two other members of Louisville's black middle class, Rev. Thomas Fountain Blue, the administrative head of the Western and Eastern Colored Branches, and Rachel Davis Harris, a children's library specialist and the chief assistant in charge of school and extensive work, worked to establish both branches as community social centers. In 1917, 498 meetings were held at both branches, with close to 12,000 in attendance. In 1912, Blue organized an apprenticeship librarian class, the only opportunity for formal training for prospective black librarians in the South at the time.\nMedia.\nLouisville's newspaper of record is the \"Courier Journal\". The alternative paper is the progressive alt-weekly \"Louisville Eccentric Observer\" (commonly called 'LEO'), which was founded by then-future, former 3rd district U.S. Representative John Yarmuth (D).\nWAVE 3, an NBC affiliate, was Kentucky's first TV station. Another prominent TV station is ABC affiliate WHAS 11, formerly owned by the (who also owned the \"Courier Journal\"), which hosts the regionally notable annual fundraiser, the WHAS Crusade for Children. Other television stations in the city include CBS affiliate WLKY 32 and Fox affiliate WDRB 41 (along with its dual The CW/MyNetworkTV affiliated sister station WBKI 58).\nThe most popular radio stations are WGZB-FM and 84 WHAS 840 AM. The latter was designated by the FCC as a clear-channel station, and was formerly owned by the Binghams (now iHeartMedia), and is a talk radio station that also broadcasts regional sports.\nLouisville Public Media operates three National Public Radio member stations in the city: news and talk WFPL, classical WUOL-FM, and adult album alternative WFPK.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nLouisville has inner and outer interstate beltways, I\u2011264 and I\u2011265 respectively. Interstates I\u201164 and I\u201165 pass through Louisville, and I-71 has its southern terminus in Louisville. Since all three of these highways intersect at virtually the same location on the east side of downtown, this spot has become known as \"Spaghetti Junction\". Three bridges carry I\u201164 and I\u201165 over the Ohio River, and a fourth automobile bridge carries non-interstate traffic, including bicyclists and pedestrians. Immediately east of downtown is the Big Four Bridge, a former railroad bridge that has been renovated into as a pedestrian bridge.\nThe Ohio River Bridges Project, a plan under consideration for decades to construct two new interstate bridges over the Ohio River to connect Louisville to Indiana, including a reconfiguration of Spaghetti Junction, began construction in 2012. One bridge, the Abraham Lincoln Bridge, is located downtown beside the existing Kennedy Bridge for relief of I\u201165 traffic. The other, named the Lewis and Clark Bridge, connects I\u2011265 between the portions located in southeast Clark County, Indiana and northeast Jefferson County, Kentucky (Louisville Metro). Both bridges and corresponding construction were finished in 2016.\nLouisville's main airport is the centrally located Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport, whose IATA Airport code (SDF) reflects its former name of Standiford Field. The airport is also home to UPS's Worldport global air hub. UPS operates its largest package-handling hub at Louisville International Airport and bases its UPS Airlines division there. Over 4.2\u00a0million passengers and over 4.7\u00a0billion pounds (2,350,000 t) of cargo pass through the airport each year. It is also the second busiest airport in the United States in terms of cargo traffic, and fourth busiest for such in the world. Only about 35 minutes from Fort Knox, the airport is also a major hub for armed services personnel. The historic but smaller Bowman Field is used mainly for general aviation while nearby Clark Regional Airport is used mostly by private jets.\nThe McAlpine Locks and Dam is located on the Kentucky side of the Ohio River, near the downtown area. The locks were constructed to allow shipping past the Falls of the Ohio.\nPublic transportation consists mainly of buses run by the Transit Authority of River City (TARC). The city buses serve all parts of downtown Louisville and Jefferson County, as well as Kentucky suburbs in Oldham County, Bullitt County, and the Indiana suburbs of Jeffersonville, Clarksville and New Albany. In addition to regular city buses, transit throughout the downtown hotel and shopping districts is served by a fleet of zero-emissions buses called LouLift. In late 2014, these vehicles replaced the series of motorized trolleys known as the \"Toonerville II Trolley\". A light rail system has been studied and proposed for the city, but no plan was in development as of 2007.\nLouisville has historically been a major center for railway traffic. The Louisville and Nashville Railroad was once headquartered here, before it was purchased by CSX Transportation. Today the city is served by two major freight railroads, CSX (with a major classification yard in the southern part of the metro area) and Norfolk Southern. Five major main lines connect Louisville to the rest of the region. Two regional railroads, the Paducah and Louisville Railway and the Louisville and Indiana Railroad, also serve the city. With the discontinuance of the stop in Louisville in 2003 for a more northerly route between New York and Chicago, the \"Kentucky Cardinal\" no longer serves the city; it is thus the fifth largest city in the country with no passenger rail service.\nIn 2016 Walk Score ranked Louisville 43rd \"most walkable\" of 141 U.S. cities with a population greater than 200,000.\nUtilities.\nElectricity is provided to the Louisville Metro area by Louisville Gas &amp; Electric.\nWater is provided by the Louisville Water Company, which provides water to more than 800,000 residents in Louisville as well as parts of Oldham and Bullitt counties. Additionally, they provide wholesale water to the outlying counties of Shelby, Spencer and Nelson.\nThe Ohio River provides for most of the city's source of drinking water. Water is drawn from the river at two points: the raw water pump station at Zorn Avenue and River Road, and the B.E. Payne Pump Station northeast of Harrods Creek. Water is also obtained from a riverbank infiltration well at the Payne Plant. There are also two water treatment plants serving the Louisville Metro area: The Crescent Hill Treatment Plant and the B.E. Payne Treatment Plant. In June 2008, the Louisville Water Company received the \"Best of the Best\" award from the American Water Works Association, citing it as the best-tasting drinking water in the country.\nPublic safety.\nThe primary law enforcement agencies are the Louisville Metro Police Department (LMPD) and the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office (JCSO). \"911\" emergency medical services are provided by the government as Louisville Metro EMS.\nFire protection is provided by 16 independent fire departments working in concert through mutual aid agreements. The only fire department operated by Metro Government is Louisville Fire &amp; Rescue, the successor to the pre-merger Louisville Division of Fire. The city of Shively in western Jefferson County possesses an independent fire department that uses the same dispatch and radio channels as Louisville Fire and Rescue.\nFirsts.\nImportant events occurring in the city include the second-largest American exhibition to date (1883), which had the largest to-date installation of light bulbs by their recent inventor and then-former resident Thomas Edison, as well as the first free public library in the US to be staffed by and provide services exclusively for African Americans (1905). Medical advances include the 1999 first human hand transplant in the US and the first self-contained artificial heart transplant in 2001.\nSister cities.\nLouisville's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLouisville was a sister city with Perm, Russia. However, this relationship was temporarily suspended by Mayor Greg Fischer in June 2022 in light of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nIn addition, Louisville has been recognized as a \"friendship city\". The two cities have engaged in many cultural exchange programs, particularly in the fields of nursing and law, and cooperated in several private business developments, including the Frazier History Museum.\nAlthough not a sister city, Louisville has friendly and cooperative relations with Chengdu, China.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58593", "revid": "50226035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58593", "title": "El (deity)", "text": "Northwest Semitic supreme deity\nEl is a Northwest Semitic word meaning 'god' or 'deity', or referring (as a proper name) to any one of multiple major ancient Near Eastern deities. A rarer form, \"'ila\", represents the predicate form in the Old Akkadian and Amorite languages. The word is derived from the Proto-Semitic *\u0294il-.\nOriginally a Canaanite deity known as \"'El\", \"'Al\" or \"'Il\" was the supreme god of the ancient Canaanite religion and the supreme god of East Semitic speakers in the Early Dynastic Period of Mesopotamia (c.\u20092900 \u2013 c.\u20092350 BCE). Among the Hittites, El was known as Elkunir\u0161a ( ). Although El gained different appearances and meanings in different languages over time, it continues to exist as \"El-\", \"-il\" or \"-el\" in compound proper noun phrases such as Elizabeth, Ishmael, Israel, Samuel, Daniel, Michael, Gabriel (Arabic: Jibra'il), and Bethel.\nEl is often described as the father of gods and creator of mankind. El had many epithets, including \"Bull El,\" \"El the King,\" and \"Father of Mankind,\" reflecting his authority, wisdom, and paternal role. Over time, in Israelite religion, Yahweh absorbed many of El\u2019s characteristics, gradually merging their identities through a process scholars call \"pantheon reduction\".\nIn Ugaritic and Levantine mythology, El presided over a council of gods and fathered major deities like Baal, Yam, and Mot. He was depicted as wise and kingly, yet occasionally vulnerable, complementing Baal's role as a sustaining warrior. Archaeological texts show El's association with eternity, creation, and divine authority, often with a consort similar to Asherah. Later sources, including Phoenician and Hellenistic writings, sometimes equated El with other deities such as Cronus or Poseidon.\nLinguistic forms and meanings.\nCognate forms of El are found throughout the Semitic languages. They include Ugaritic , pl. ; Phoenician pl. ; Hebrew , pl. ; Aramaic ; Akkadian , pl. .\nIn Northwest Semitic use, \"\u02bcel\" was a generic word for any god as well as the special name or title of a particular god who was distinguished from other gods as being \"the god\". El is listed at the head of many pantheons. In some Canaanite and Ugaritic sources, El played a role as father of the gods, of creation, or both.\nHowever, because the word \"el\" sometimes refers to a god other than the great god El, it is frequently ambiguous as to whether El followed by another name means the great god El with a particular epithet applied or refers to another god entirely. For example, in the Ugaritic texts, is understood to mean \"El the King\" but as \"the god Hadad\".\nThe Semitic root \"\u02belh\" (Arabic ', Aramaic , , Hebrew ) may be \"\u02bel\" with a parasitic h, and \"\u02bel\" may be an abbreviated form of \"\u02belh\". In Ugaritic the plural form meaning 'gods' is , equivalent to Hebrew 'powers'. In the Hebrew texts this word is interpreted as being semantically singular for \"god\" by biblical commentators. However, according to the documentary hypothesis, at least four different authors \u2013 the Jahwist (J), Elohist (E), Deuteronomist (D), and Priestly (P) sources \u2013 were responsible for editing stories from a polytheistic religion into those of a monotheistic religion. These sources were joined together at various points in time by a series of editors or \"redactors\". Inconsistencies that arise between monotheism and polytheism in the texts are reflective of this hypothesis.\nThe stem \"\u02bel\" is found prominently in the earliest strata of east Semitic, northwest Semitic, and south Semitic groups. Personal names including the stem \"\u02bel\" are found with similar patterns in both the Amorite and Sabaic languages.\nHistorical development.\nThere is evidence that the Canaanite/Phoenician and Aramaic conception of El is essentially the same as the Amorite conception of El, which was popularized in the 18th century\u00a0BCE but has origins in the pre-Sargonic period. Any \"changes\" in El's status can be explained by the randomness of available data. Tribal organizations in West Semitic culture also influenced El's portrayal as a \"treaty partner\" in covenants, where the clan is seen as the \"kin\" of the deity.\nEventually, El's cult became central to the ethnogenesis of Iron Age Israelites but so far, scholars are unable to determine how much of the population were El worshippers. It is more likely that different locales held different views of El.\nFrancesca Stavrakopoulou has argued that Yahweh was originally a storm\u2011warrior deity operating under the authority of the patriarch-god El, and traces how, through a process she terms \"pantheon reduction,\" Yahweh gradually assumed El\u2019s status and characteristics within Israelite religion, rather than immediately replacing him in a sudden shift to monotheism. Drawing on Near Eastern archaeological and textual parallels, Stavrakopoulou argues that the biblical Yahweh was originally depicted in early texts with a fully anthropomorphic, sexualised, and sometimes bull-horned body\u2014including feet, limbs, torso, face, and genitals\u2014before later Greek\u2011Platonic influence recast the deity as immaterial and disembodied. She further highlights inscriptions referencing \"Yahweh and his Asherah\", indicating a former divine consort akin to El's spouse\u2014an element later removed during proto\u2011monotheistic reforms.\nProto-Sinaitic, Phoenician, Aramaic, and Hittite texts.\nThe Egyptian god Ptah is given the title 'Lord of Gath' in a prism from Tel Lachish which has on its opposite face the name of Amenhotep II (c.\u20091435\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091420\u00a0BCE). The title is also found in Ser\u0101bit\u1e6d text 353. Frank Moore Cross points out that Ptah is often called \"the Lord (or one) of eternity\" and thinks it may be this identification of El with Ptah that lead to the epithet \"\u02bfolam\" 'eternal' being applied to El so early and so consistently. Yet another connection is seen with the Mandaean angel Ptahil, whose name combines both the terms Ptah and Il. Wyatt, however, notes that in Ugaritic texts, Ptah is seemingly identified with the craftsman god Kothar-wa-Khasis, not El.\nIn an inscription in the Proto-Sinaitic script, William F. Albright transcribed the phrase \"\u02beL \u1e0e \u02bfLM\", which he translated as the appellation \"El, (god) of eternity\".\nThe name Raphael or Rapha-El, meaning 'God has healed' in Ugarit, is attested to in approximately 1350\u00a0BCE in one of the Amarna Letters EA333, found in Tell-el-Hesi from the ruler of Lachish to 'The Great One'\nA Phoenician inscribed amulet of the 7th century\u00a0BCE from Arslan Tash may refer to El. The text was translated by Rosenthal as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, Cross translated the text as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn some inscriptions, the name \"\u02be\u0112l q\u014dne \u02bear\u1e63\" (Punic: ) meaning 'El creator of Earth' appears, even including a late inscription at Leptis Magna in Tripolitania dating to the 2nd century. In Hittite texts, the expression becomes the single name , this Ilkunirsa appearing as the husband of Asherdu (Asherah) and father of 77 or 88 sons.\nIn a Hurrian hymn to El (published in \"Ugaritica V\", text RS 24.278), he is called and , which Cross takes as 'El of the covenant' and 'El the judge' respectively.\nUgarit and the Levant.\nFor the Canaanites and the ancient Levantine region as a whole, \u02bc\u0112l or \u02bcIl was the supreme god, the father of mankind and all creatures. He also fathered many gods, most importantly Baal, Yam, and Mot, each sharing similar attributes to the Greco-Roman gods: Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades respectively.\nAs recorded on the clay tablets of Ugarit, El is the husband of the goddess Asherah.\nThree pantheon lists found at Ugarit (modern \u00a0\u2013 , Syria) begin with the four gods \"\u02beil-\u02beib\" (which according to Cross; is the name of a generic kind of deity, perhaps the divine ancestor of the people), El, Dagnu (that is Dagon), and Ba'l \u1e62ap\u0101n (that is the god Haddu or Hadad). Though Ugarit had a large temple dedicated to Dagon and another to Hadad, there was no temple dedicated to El.\nEl had a variety of epithets and forms. He is repeatedly referred to as \"\u1e6fr il\" ('Bull El' or 'the bull god') and \"\u02beil milk\" ('El the King'). He is \"bny bnwt\" ('Creator of creatures'), \"'ab\u016b ban\u012b 'ili\" ('father of the gods'), and \"\u02beab \u02beadm\" ('father of man'). The appellations of \"eternal\", \"creator\" and \"eternal\" or \"ancient creator\" are \"characteristic designations of 'El in Canaanite myths and liturgies\". He is \"\u1e25\u0101tikuka\" ('your patriarch'). El is the grey-bearded ancient one, full of wisdom, \"malku\" ('King'), \"\u02beab \u0161nm\" ('Father of years'), \"\u02beEl gibb\u014dr\" ('El the warrior'). He is also called \"l\u1e6dpn \u02beil d p\u02beid\" ('the Gracious One, the Benevolent God') and \"l\u1e6dpn wqd\u0161\" ('the Gracious and Holy One').\n\"El\" (Father of Heaven / Saturn) and his major son: \"Hadad\" (Father of Earth / Jupiter), are symbolized both by the bull, and both wear bull horns on their headdresses.\nThe Ugaritic text \"Shachar and Shalim\" tells how (perhaps near the beginning of all things) El came to shores of the sea and saw two women who bobbed up and down. El was sexually aroused and took the two with him, killed a bird by throwing a staff at it, and roasted it over a fire. He asked the women to tell him when the bird was fully cooked, and to then address him either as husband or as father, for he would thenceforward behave to them as they called him. They saluted him as husband. He then lay with them, and they gave birth to \"Shachar\" ('Dawn') and \"Shalim\" ('Dusk'). Again El lay with his wives and the wives gave birth to \"the gracious gods\", \"cleavers of the sea\", \"children of the sea\". The names of these wives are not explicitly provided, but some confusing rubrics at the beginning of the account mention the goddess Athirat, who is otherwise El's chief wife and the goddess Ra\u1e25mayyu ('the one of the womb').\nIn the Ugaritic Ba'al Cycle, El is introduced having an assembly of gods on Mount Lel (Lel possibly meaning \"Night\"), and dwelling on (or in) the fountains of the two rivers at the spring of the two deeps. He dwells in a tent according to some interpretations of the text which may explain why he had no temple in Ugarit. As to the rivers and the spring of the two deeps, these might refer to real streams, or to the mythological sources of the salt water ocean and the fresh water sources under the earth, or to the waters above the heavens and the waters beneath the earth. A few miles from the swamp from which the Litani (the classical Leontes) and the Asi (the upper Orontes) flow, Baalbek may be the same as the ('Source of the Two Rivers'), the abode of El in the Ugaritic Baal Cycle discovered in the 1920s and a separate serpent incantation.\nIn the episode of the \"Palace of Ba'al\", the god Ba'al Hadad invites the \"seventy sons of Athirat\" to a feast in his new palace. Presumably these sons have been fathered on Athirat by El; in following passages they seem to be the gods (\"\u02beilm\") in general or at least a large portion of them. The only sons of El named individually in the Ugaritic texts are Yamm ('Sea'), Mot ('Death'), and Ashtar, who may be the chief and leader of most of the sons of El. Ba'al Hadad is a few times called El's son rather than the son of Dagan as he is normally called, possibly because El is in the position of a clan-father to all the gods.\nThe fragmentary text R.S. 24.258 describes a Marz\u0113a\u1e25 banquet to which El invites the other gods and then disgraces himself by becoming outrageously drunk and passing out after confronting an otherwise unknown Hubbay, \"he with the horns and tail\". The text ends with an incantation for the cure for a hangover.\nEl's characterization in Ugarit texts is not always favorable. His authority is unquestioned, but sometimes exacted through threat or roundly mocked. He is \"both comical and pathetic\" in a \"role of impotence\". But this is arguably a misinterpretation since El had complementary relationships with other deities. Any \"differences\" they had pertained to function. For example, El and Baal were divine kings but El was the executive whilst Baal was the sustainer of the cosmos.\nTorah.\nOne scholarly position is that the identification of Yahweh with El is a later interpretation. Earlier Yahweh was thought of as one of many gods, separate from El. Theological interpretations of the Torah consider El as an alternative name for Yahweh. This is in contrast to the Elohist and Priestly traditions in which El is considered to be an earlier deity than Yahweh.\nMark Smith has argued that Yahweh and El were originally separate, but were considered synonymous from very early on. The name Yahweh is used in , while says that at that time, people began to \"call upon the name of the LORD\". El's title of \"El Shaddai\", which envisions him as the \"god of the steppe\", may also derive from the cultural beliefs of Upper Mesopotamian (i.e. Amurru) immigrants, who were ancestors of the Israelites.\nIn Deuteronomy 32, as preserved in the Septuagint and the Dead Sea Scrolls, Yahweh was described as a son of El.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Biblical researchers reveal that these verses in Deuteronomy 32 are presenting an etiological explanation for the origin and division of nations. The high mountain god and head of the pantheon, Elyon, divides the nations according to the number of his children, each getting a group of peoples to preside over. Yahweh, one of Elyon's sons, is given solely Israel as his inheritance.\nIn , Abraham accepted the blessing of El, when Melchizedek, the king of Salem and high priest of its deity, El Elyon, blessed him.\nAccording to \"The Oxford Companion to World Mythology\",\nIt seems almost certain that the God of the Jews evolved gradually from the Canaanite El, who was in all likelihood the \"God of Abraham\" ... If El was the high God of Abraham\u2014Elohim, the prototype of Yahveh\u2014Asherah was his wife, and there are archaeological indications that she was perceived as such before she was in effect \"divorced\" in the context of emerging Judaism of the 7th century\u00a0BCE. (See .)\nIn some instances, such as in Psalm 29, Yahweh is envisioned as a storm god, something not true for El. It is Yahweh who is prophesied to one day battle Leviathan the serpent, and slay the dragon in the sea in . The slaying of the serpent in myth is a deed attributed to both Ba'al Hadad and 'Anat in the Ugaritic texts, but not to El.\nSuch mythological motifs are variously seen as late survivals from a period when Yahweh held a place in theology comparable to that of Hadad at Ugarit; or as late henotheistic and monotheistic applications to Yahweh of deeds more commonly attributed to Hadad; or simply as examples of eclectic application of the same motifs and imagery to various different gods. Similarly, it is argued inconclusively whether \u0112l Shadd\u0101i, \u0112l '\u00d4l\u0101m, \u0112l 'Ely\u00f4n, and so forth, were originally understood as separate divinities. Albrecht Alt presented his theories on the original differences of such gods in \"Der Gott der V\u00e4ter\" in 1929.\nBut others have argued that from patriarchal times, these different names were generally understood to refer to the same single great god, El. This is the position of Frank Moore Cross (1973). What is certain is that the form 'El does appear in Israelite names from every period including the name (\"Israel\"), meaning 'El strives'. There are verses where El and Yahweh are unambiguously conflated () but some scholars believe this is an attempt to portray El as a warrior god, as Israelite society grew and evolved into a nation-state.\nJewish interpretation.\nThe Hebrew form appears in Latin letters in Standard Hebrew transcription as El and in Tiberian Hebrew transcription as \u02be\u0112l. is a generic word for \"god\" that could be used for any god, including Hadad, Moloch, or Yahweh.\nIn the Tanakh, \"Elohim\" () is the normal word for a god or the great God (or gods, given that the suffix makes a word plural in Hebrew). But the form also appears, mostly in poetic passages and in the patriarchal narratives attributed to the Priestly source of the documentary hypothesis. It occurs 217 times in the Masoretic Text: 73 times in the Psalms and 55 times in the Book of Job, and otherwise mostly in poetic passages or passages written in elevated prose. It occasionally appears with the definite article as 'the god' (for example in ).\nThe theological position of the Tanakh is that the names and , when used in the singular to mean the supreme god, refer to Yahweh, while the plural is interpreted to refer to other unspecified heavenly beings, such as angels.\nSanchuniathon.\nPhilo of Byblos (c. 64\u2013141\u00a0AD) was a Greek writer whose account \"Sanchuniathon\" survives in quotation by Eusebius and may contain the major surviving traces of Phoenician mythology. El (rendered or called by his standard Greek counterpart Cronus) is not the creator god or first god. El is rather the son of Sky (Uranus) and Earth (Ge). Sky and Earth are themselves children of 'Ely\u00f4n 'Most High'. El is brother to the God Bethel, to Dagon and to an unknown god, equated with the Greek Atlas and to the goddesses Aphrodite/'Ashtart, Rhea (presumably Asherah), and Dione (equated with Ba'alat Gebal). El is the father of Persephone and of Athena (presumably the goddess 'Anat).\nSky and Earth have separated from one another in hostility, but Sky insists on continuing to force himself on Earth and attempts to destroy the children born of such unions. At last, with the advice of his daughter Athena and the god Hermes Trismegistus (perhaps Thoth), El successfully attacks his father Sky with a sickle and spear of iron. He and his military allies the \"Eloim\" gain Sky's kingdom.\nIn a later passage it is explained that El castrated Sky. One of Sky's concubines (who was given to El's brother Dagon) was already pregnant by Sky. The son who is born of the union, called Demar\u00fbs or Zeus, but once called Adodus, is obviously Hadad, the Ba'al of the Ugaritic texts who now becomes an ally of his grandfather Sky and begins to make war on El.\nEl has three wives, his sisters or half-sisters Aphrodite/Astarte ('Ashtart), Rhea (presumably Asherah), and Dione (identified by Sanchuniathon with Ba'alat Gebal the tutelary goddess of Byblos, a city which Sanchuniathon says that El founded).\nEl is depicted primarily as a warrior; in Ugaritic sources Baal has the warrior role and El is peaceful, and it may be that the \"Sanchuniathon\" depicts an earlier tradition that was more preserved in the southern regions of Canaan.\nEusebius, through whom the \"Sanchuniathon\" is preserved, is not interested in setting the work forth completely or in order. But we are told that El slew his own son Sadidus (a name that some commentators think might be a corruption of \"Shaddai\", one of the epithets of the Biblical El) and that El also beheaded one of his daughters. Later, perhaps referring to this same death of Sadidus we are told:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But on the occurrence of a pestilence and mortality Cronus offers his only begotten son as a whole burnt-offering to his father Sky and circumcises himself, compelling his allies also to do the same.\nA fuller account of the sacrifice appears later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a custom of the ancients in great crises of danger for the rulers of a city or nation, in order to avert the common ruin, to give up the most beloved of their children for sacrifice as a ransom to the avenging daemons; and those who were thus given up were sacrificed with mystic rites. Cronus then, whom the Phoenicians call Elus, who was king of the country and subsequently, after his decease, was deified as the star Saturn, had by a nymph of the country named Anobret an only begotten son, whom they on this account called Iedud, the only begotten being still so called among the Phoenicians; and when very great dangers from war had beset the country, he arrayed his son in royal apparel, and prepared an altar, and sacrificed him.\nThe account also relates that Thoth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;also devised for Cronus as insignia of royalty four eyes in front and behind ... but two of them quietly closed, and upon his shoulders four wings, two as spread for flying, and two as folded. And the symbol meant that Cronus could see when asleep, and sleep while waking: and similarly in the case of the wings, that he flew while at rest, and was at rest when flying. But to each of the other gods he gave two wings upon the shoulders, as meaning that they accompanied Cronus in his flight. And to Cronus himself again he gave two wings upon his head, one representing the all-ruling mind, and one sensation.\nThis is the form under which El/Cronus appears on coins from Byblos from the reign of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175\u2013164\u00a0BCE) four spread wings and two folded wings, leaning on a staff. Such images continued to appear on coins until after the time of Augustus.\nPoseidon.\nA bilingual inscription from Palmyra dated to the 1st century equates \"El-Creator-of-the-Earth\" with the Greek god Poseidon. Going back to the 8th century\u00a0BCE, the bilingual inscription at Karatepe in the Taurus Mountains equates \"El-Creator-of-the-Earth\" to Luwian hieroglyphs read as \"da-a-\u015b\", this being the Luwian form of the name of the Babylonian water god Ea, lord of the abyss of water under the earth. (This inscription lists El in second place in the local pantheon, following Ba'al Sham\u00eem and preceding the \"Eternal Sun\".)\nPoseidon is known to have been worshipped in Beirut, his image appearing on coins from that city. Poseidon of Beirut was also worshipped at Delos where there was an association of merchants, shipmasters, and warehousemen called the Poseidoniastae of Berytus founded in 110 or 109\u00a0BCE. Three of the four chapels at its headquarters on the hill northwest of the Sacred Lake were dedicated to Poseidon, the Tyche of the city equated with Astarte (that is 'Ashtart), and to Eshmun.\nAlso at Delos, that association of Tyrians, though mostly devoted to Heracles-Melqart, elected a member to bear a crown every year when sacrifices to Poseidon took place. A banker named Philostratus donated two altars, one to Palaistine Aphrodite Urania ('Ashtart) and one to Poseidon \"of Ascalon\".\nThough Sanchuniathon distinguishes Poseidon from his Elus/Cronus, this might be a splitting off of a particular aspect of El in a euhemeristic account. Identification of an aspect of El with Poseidon rather than with Cronus might have been felt to better fit with Hellenistic religious practice, if indeed this Phoenician Poseidon really is the El who dwells at the source of the two deeps in Ugaritic texts. More information is needed to be certain.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58594", "revid": "48682252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58594", "title": "Worcester", "text": "Worcester may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58595", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58595", "title": "HP", "text": "HP may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
