{"id": "69594", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69594", "title": "Charles III, Duke of Savoy", "text": "Duke of Savoy from 1504 to 1553\nCharles III of Savoy (10 October 1486 \u2013 17 August 1553), often called Charles the Good, was Duke of Savoy from 1504 to 1553, although most of his lands were ruled by the French between 1536 and his death. Ruling for nearly 49 years, he is the third longest reigning Savoyard monarch, behind Charles Emmanuel I and Victor Amadeus II.\nBiography.\nHe was a younger son of Philip (Filippo) the Landless, an aged younger son of the ducal family, and his second wife Claudine de Brosse of the family that unsuccessfully claimed the Duchy of Brittany. His grandparents were Duke Louis of Savoy and Anne of Cyprus. As a child, there were next to no expectations for him to succeed to any monarchy. He was christened as a namesake of the then-reigning Duke, Charles I of Savoy, the Warrior, his first cousin.\nHowever, when he was ten years old, his father unexpectedly succeeded his grandnephew Charles II of Savoy as duke and head of the Savoy dynasty, which had now also received the titles of the kingdoms of Cyprus, Jerusalem and Armenia. However, Charles's father was not the heir general of the deceased duke, only the male heir. Jerusalem, Cyprus and certain other claims and possessions could go to a different heir, and they did, in principle, going to Charles II's sister Yolande Louise. Charles's father was not ready to relinquish those, and he took such titles to his own titulary, staking a claim. He also had Yolande marry his son, Philibert the Handsome, in 1496, to ensure the male line of succession.\nIn 1497, Charles's half-brother Philibert succeeded their father as Duke of Savoy, etc. Philibert however died childless in 1504, surprisingly, and now Charles succeeded, at age eighteen.\nCharles faced down challenges to his authority, including from Philibert Berthelier.\nAfter Yolande's death in 1499, the \"de jure\" rights of Jerusalem and Cyprus were lost to the Savoy family. Charles however, as some sort of heir-male, took those titles, which his successors also used. In 1713, Charles's great-great-great-grandson Victor Amadeus II of Savoy received confirmation to that title from the Kings of Spain and France, who also claimed it. The rights, according to succession of heirs general, i.e. not excluding female lines, had gone, until Charles's death, to the House of La Tr\u00e9moille, the French lords of La Tremoille, Princes of Talmond and Taranto.\nIn response to the riots between Catholic and Protestants within Geneva, Charles launched a surprise attack in July 1534, but his army was beaten back. A second siege in October 1535 was attempted, and again Charles's army was defeated when forces from Berne arrived to assist Geneva. Charles was allied with the Habsburg camp in Western European politics, where Francis I of France and Emperor Charles V battled for ascendancy. France invaded Savoy in 1536, and held almost all of Charles's possessions. He spent the rest of his life practically in exile, at the mercy of relatives. He died in 1553 and was succeeded by his only surviving child, Emanuele Filiberto.\nHe was the duke who imprisoned Fran\u00e7ois Bonivard, the \"prisoner of Chillon\" in 1530.\nIssue.\nCharles married the rich, beautiful and ambitious Infanta Beatrice of Portugal (1504\u20131538), daughter of the richest monarch in Europe at the time, Manuel I of Portugal, and Maria of Aragon. Beatrice was both first cousin and sister-in-law of Emperor Charles V. They had nine children, but only one child, Emmanuel Philibert, would reach adulthood:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69595", "revid": "38814303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69595", "title": "Politics of the Gambia", "text": "Politics of The Gambia takes place within the framework of a presidential republic, whereby the President of The Gambia is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliaments.\nThe 1970 constitution of The Gambia, which divided the government into independent executive, legislative, and judicial branches, was suspended after the 1994 military coup. As part of the transition process, the Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council (AFPRC) established the Constitution Review Commission (CRC) through decree in March 1995. In accordance with the timetable for the transition to a democratically elected government, the commission drafted a new constitution for The Gambia which was approved by referendum in August 1996. The constitution provides for a presidential system, a unicameral legislature, an independent judiciary, and the protection of human rights.\nHistorically, The Gambia was one of Africa's most stable democracies. The 1994 military coup led to the semi-authoritarian regime of Yahya Jammeh who held power until he was defeated during the 2016 Gambian presidential election. \nPolitical conditions.\nBefore the coup d'\u00e9tat in July 1994, The Gambia was one of the oldest existing multi-party democracies in Africa. It had conducted freely contested elections every 5 years since independence. The coup led to the start of the semi-authoritarian Yahya Jammeh regime After the military coup, politicians from deposed President Jawara's People's Progressive Party (PPP) and other senior government officials were banned from participating in politics until July 2001. \nThe People's Progressive Party (PPP) project preparation plan, headed by former president Jawara, had dominated Gambian politics for nearly 30 years. The last elections under the PPP regime were held in April 1992.\nFollowing the coup, a presidential election took place in September 1996, in which retired Col. Yahya A.J.J. Jammeh won 56% of the vote. The legislative elections held in January 1997 were dominated by the Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction (APRC, the new incarnation of AFPRC), which captured 33 out of 45 seats. In July 2001, the ban on Jawara-era political parties and politicians was lifted. Four registered opposition parties participated in the 18 October 2001 presidential election, which the incumbent, President Yahya Jammeh, won with almost 53% of the votes. The APRC maintained its strong majority in the National Assembly in legislative elections held in January 2002, particularly after the main opposition United Democratic Party (UDP) boycotted the legislative elections.\nIn 2005 the political scenario was changed, as five opposition parties united under the umbrella of the National Alliance for Democracy and Development (NADD). NADD thus represented virtually all political opposition forces in the country. Following the registration of NADD, the High Court ruled that dual party membership was unconstitutional, and as NADD had been registered as a political party all four opposition MPs were dismissed from the National Assembly. By-elections were held on 29 September, in which NADD retained three of the four seats. On 15 November the same year, three high-ranking NADD leaders (including the Leader of Opposition in the National Assembly, Halifa Sallah) were arrested on the grounds of subversion.\nOn 21 and 22 March 2006, amid tensions preceding the 2006 presidential elections, an alleged planned military coup was uncovered. President Yahya Jammeh was forced to return from a trip to Mauritania, many suspected army officials were arrested, and prominent army officials, including the army chief of staff, fled the country.\nThere are claims circulating that this whole event was fabricated by the President incumbent for his own devious purposes\u2014however, the veracity of these claims is not known, as no corroborating evidence has as yet been brought forward. It is doubtful whether the full truth will ever be known, however, as anyone with any evidence would not be likely to come forward with it in light of the poor human rights record of the National Intelligence Agency, and their well-known penchant for torturing and detaining indefinitely anyone who speaks up against the Government.\nThe next presidential election took place on 22 September 2006. The nominations for party presidential candidates were held on 28 August 2006, amid reports of the Government intimidating and unfairly detaining Opposition members and sympathisers, and of using the machinery of state (including the national media arm of the Government, GRTS), to gain an unfair advantage during political campaigns. These reports follow a widely publicised signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Government and Opposition parties, initiated by the Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo during a recent visit to the country. Incumbent president, Yahya Jammeh, was reelected.\nOn 31 December 2014, a coup was attempted when a military deserter along with supporters attacked the presidential palace. The coup failed and the alleged ringleader, Lamin Sanneh, was amongst those killed by forces loyal to Jammeh.\nFollowing the 1 December 2016 elections, the elections commission declared Adama Barrow as the elected president who won the presidential election to take over the Nation from the former president. Jammeh, who had ruled for 22 years, first announced he would step down after losing the 2016 election before declaring the results void and calling for a new vote, sparking a constitutional crisis and leading to an invasion by an ECOWAS coalition. On 20 January 2017, Jammeh announced that he had agreed to step down and would leave the country allowing Barrow to take up office.\nOn 4 December 2021, Gambian President Adama Barrow won re-election in the presidential election. Opposition candidates rejected the results because of unspecified irregularities.\nExecutive branch.\n \nThe President is elected by popular vote for a five-year term; the number of terms is not restricted. The President appoints the members of the Cabinet.\nLegislative branch.\nThe National Assembly has 53 members, 48 members elected for a five-year term, and 4 members appointed.\nThe Gambia was effectively a one party dominant state when the Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction was in power. Opposition parties were allowed but were widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.\nJudicial branch.\nSupreme Court of the Gambia (since 1998).\nUntil 1998, there was a right of appeal from the Court of Appeal of The Gambia to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London.\nThe last case from The Gambia to be decided by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council was 'West Coast Air Limited v. Gambia Civil Aviation Authority and Others U.K.P.C. 39 (15 September 1998). West Coast Air Limited contested the Gambia Civil Aviation Authority's rulings in this matter, claiming that several of the decisions were illegal and harmful to their company's operations. A pivotal point in The Gambia's legal history occurred before the nation eliminated appeals to the Privy Council when the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, which at the time was the country's highest court of appeal, rendered a decision on the case. This case emphasizes the intricate relationship that exists between corporate interests and regulatory bodies, as well as the value of judicial supervision in guaranteeing the impartiality and constitutionality of administrative decisions.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nPresidential elections.\nSummary of the 1 December 2016 Gambian presidential election results\nAdministrative divisions.\nLocal government in The Gambia varies. The capital city, Banjul, has an elected town council. Outside of the capital, five rural regions exist (Lower River, Central River, North Bank, Upper River, Western), each with their own elected council. Each regional council has its own treasury and is responsible for local government services. Tribal chiefs retain traditional powers authorised by customary law in some instances.\nInternational organisation participation.\nThe Gambia is a member of these international organisations:\nACP, \nAfDB, \nCommonwealth of Nations\nCCC, \nECA, \nECOWAS, \nFAO, \nG-77, \nIBRD, \nICAO, \nICFTU, \nICRM, \nIDA, \nIDB, \nIFAD, \nIFC, \nIFRCS, \nILO, \nIMF, \nIMO, \nIntelsat (nonsignatory user), \nInterpol, \nIOC, \nITU, \nNAM, \nShelter Afrique-A regional housing institution owned by 42 African Countries \nOAU, (Now replaced by the African Union abbreviated AU)\nOIC, \nOPCW, \nUN, \nUNCTAD, \nUNESCO, \nUNIDO, \nUPU, \nWCL, \nWFTU, \nWHO, \nWIPO, \nWMO, \nWToO, \nWTrO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69596", "revid": "464614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69596", "title": "Pharisees", "text": "Jewish social movement and school of thought\nThe Pharisees (; ) were a Jewish social movement and school of thought in the Levant during the time of Second Temple Judaism. Following the destruction of the Second Temple in 70\u00a0AD, Pharisaic beliefs became the foundational, liturgical, and ritualistic basis for Rabbinic Judaism. Although the group no longer exists, their traditions are of great importance for the manifold Jewish religious movements.\nConflicts between Pharisees and Sadducees took place in the context of much broader and longstanding social and religious conflicts amongst Jews (exacerbated by the Roman conquest). One conflict was cultural, between those who favored Hellenization (the Sadducees) and those who resisted it (the Pharisees). Another was juridical-religious, between those who emphasized the importance of the Temple with its rites and services, and those who emphasized the importance of other Mosaic Laws. A specifically religious point of conflict involved different interpretations of the Torah and how to apply it to Jewish life: Sadducees recognized only the Written Torah (), rejecting Prophets, Writings, and doctrines such as the Oral Torah and the resurrection of the dead.\nThe contemporary Jewish historian Josephus, believed by many historians to have been a Pharisee, estimated there were around 6,000 adherents to the Pharisee movement before the fall of the Second Temple. He said that Pharisee influence over the common people was so great that anything they said against the king or the high priest was believed, apparently in contrast to the more elite Sadducees, who were the upper class. Pharisees claimed Mosaic authority for their interpretation of Jewish religious law, while Sadducees represented the authority of the priestly privileges and prerogatives established since the days of Solomon, when Zadok, their ancestor, officiated as high priest.\nEtymology.\n\"Pharisee\" is derived from Ancient Greek (), from Aramaic (), plural (), meaning \"set apart, separated\", related to Hebrew (), plural (), the Qal passive participle of the verb (). It may refer to their separation from Gentiles, sources of ritual impurity, or from irreligious Jews.Alternatively, it may have a particular political meaning as \"separatists\", due to their division from the Sadducee elite: Yitzhak Isaac Halevi characterizes the Sadducees and Pharisees as political rather than religious sects. Scholar Thomas Walter Manson and Talmud expert Louis Finkelstein suggest that \"Pharisee\" derives from the Aramaic words or , meaning \"Persian\" or \"Persianizer\", based on the demonym , meaning 'Persian' in the Persian language, and further akin to and . Harvard University scholar Shaye J. D. Cohen denies this, stating: \"Practically all scholars now agree that the name \"Pharisee\" derives from the Hebrew and Aramaic or .\"\nSources.\nThe first historical mention of the Pharisees and their beliefs comes in the four gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, in which both their meticulous adherence to their interpretation of the Torah as well as their eschatological views are described. A later historical mention of the Pharisees comes from the Jewish-Roman historian Josephus in a description of the \"four schools of thought\", or \"four sects\", into which he divides the Jews in the 1st century AD. (The other schools were the Essenes, who were generally apolitical, and may have emerged as a sect of dissident priests who rejected either the Seleucid-appointed or the Hasmonean high priests as illegitimate; the Sadducees, who were the main antagonists of the Pharisees; and the Zealots.) Other sects may have emerged at this time, such as the early Christians in Jerusalem and the Therapeutae in Egypt. However, their status as Jews is unclear.\nThe Books of the Maccabees\u2014two deuterocanonical books in the Bible\u2014focus on the Maccabean Revolt against the Seleucids under King Antiochus IV Epiphanes, and concludes with the defeat of General Nicanor in 161\u00a0BC by Judas Maccabeus, the hero of the work. It includes several theological points: prayer for the dead, the last judgment, intercession of saints, and martyrology. The New Testament apocrypha, known as the Gospel of Peter, also alludes to the Pharisees.\nJudah ha-Nasi redacted the Mishnah, an authoritative codification of Pharisaic interpretations, around 200\u00a0AD. Most of the authorities quoted in the Mishnah lived after the destruction of the Temple in 70\u00a0AD; consequently, it marked the beginning of the transition from Pharisaic to Rabbinic Judaism. The Mishnah was important because it compiled the oral interpretations and traditions of the Pharisees (and later the rabbis) into a single authoritative text, thus allowing oral tradition in Judaism to survive the destruction of the Second Temple. However, none of the rabbinic sources include identifiable eyewitness accounts of the Pharisees and their teachings.\nHistory.\nFrom c.\u2009600 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009160\u00a0BC.\nThe deportation and exile of an unknown number of Jews of the Kingdom of Judah to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar II\u2014starting with the first deportation in 597\u00a0BC, and continuing after the fall of Jerusalem and destruction of the Temple in 587\u00a0BC\u2014resulted in dramatic changes to Jewish culture and religion. During the 70-year exile in Babylon, Jewish houses of assembly (known in Hebrew as a , or in Greek as a \"synagogue\") and houses of prayer (Hebrew ; Greek , ) were the primary meeting places for prayer, and the house of study () was the counterpart for the synagogue.\nIn 539\u00a0BC, the Persians conquered Babylon, and in 537\u00a0BC, Cyrus the Great allowed Jews to return to Judea and rebuild the Temple. He did not, however, allow the restoration of the Judean monarchy, which left the Judean priests as the dominant authority. Without the constraining power of the monarchy, the authority of the Temple in civic life was amplified. It was around this time that the Sadducee party emerged as the party of priests and allied elites. However, the Second Temple, which was completed in 515\u00a0BC, had been constructed under the auspices of a foreign power, and there were lingering questions about its legitimacy. This provided the condition for the development of various sects or \"schools of thought\", each of which claimed exclusive authority to represent \"Judaism\", and which typically shunned social intercourse, especially marriage, with members of other sects.\nThe Temple was no longer the only institution for Jewish religious life. After the building of the Second Temple in the time of Ezra, the houses of study and worship remained important secondary institutions in Jewish life. Outside Judea, the synagogue was often called a house of prayer. While most Jews could not regularly attend the Temple service, they could meet at the synagogue for morning, afternoon, and evening prayers. On Mondays, Thursdays, and Shabbat, a weekly Torah portion was read publicly in the synagogues, following the tradition of public Torah readings instituted by Ezra. Although priests controlled the rituals of the Temple, the scribes and sages, later called \"rabbis\" (Hebrew for \"Teacher/master\"), dominated the study of the Torah. These men maintained an oral tradition that they believed had originated at Mount Sinai alongside the Torah of Moses; a God-given interpretation of the Torah.\nThe Hellenistic period of Jewish history began when Alexander the Great conquered Persia in 332\u00a0BC. The rift between the priests and the sages developed during this time, when Jews faced new political and cultural struggles. This created a sort of schism in the Jewish community. After Alexander's death in 323\u00a0BC, Judea was ruled by the Egyptian-Hellenic Ptolemies until 198\u00a0BC, when the Syrian-Hellenic Seleucid Empire, under Antiochus III, seized control. In 167\u00a0BC, the Seleucid King Antiochus IV invaded Judea, entered the Temple, and stripped it of money and ceremonial objects. He imposed a program of forced Hellenization, requiring Jews to abandon their own laws and customs, thus precipitating the Maccabean Revolt. Jerusalem was liberated in 165\u00a0BC, and the Temple was restored. In 141\u00a0BC, an assembly of priests and others affirmed Simon Maccabeus as high priest and leader, in effect establishing the Hasmonean dynasty.\nEmergence of the Pharisees.\nAfter defeating the Seleucid forces, Judas Maccabaeus's nephew, John Hyrcanus, established a new monarchy in the form of the priestly Hasmonean dynasty in 152\u00a0BC, thus establishing priests as both political and religious authorities. Although the Hasmoneans were considered heroes for resisting the Seleucids, their reign lacked the legitimacy conferred by descent from the Davidic dynasty of the First Temple era.\nThe Pharisees emerged largely out of the group of scribes and sages. Some scholars observe some Idumean influences in the development of Pharisaical Judaism. The Pharisees, among other Jewish sects, were active from the middle of the 2nd century BC until the destruction of the Temple in 70\u00a0AD. Josephus first mentions them in connection with Jonathan Apphus, the successor of Judas Maccabeus. One of the factors that distinguished the Pharisees from other groups prior to the destruction of the Temple was their belief that all Jews had to observe the purity laws (which applied to the Temple service) outside the Temple. The major difference, however, was the continued adherence of the Pharisees to the laws and traditions of the Jewish people in the face of assimilation. As Josephus notes, the Pharisees were considered the most expert and accurate expositors of Jewish law.\nJosephus indicates that the Pharisees received the backing and good-will of the common people, apparently in contrast to the more elite Sadducees associated with the ruling classes. In general, whereas the Sadducees were aristocratic monarchists, the Pharisees were eclectic, popular, and more democratic. The Pharisaic position is exemplified by the assertion that \"A learned takes precedence over an ignorant High Priest.\" (A \u2014literally \"bastard\", according to the Pharisaic definition\u2014is an outcast child born of a forbidden relationship, such as adultery or incest, in which marriage of the parents could not lawfully occur. The word is often but incorrectly translated as \"illegitimate\".)\nSadducees rejected the Pharisaic tenet of an Oral Torah, creating two Jewish understandings of the Torah. An example of this differing approach is the interpretation of \"an eye in place of an eye\". The Pharisaic understanding was that the value of an eye was to be paid by the perpetrator. In the Sadducees' view, the words were given a more literal interpretation, in which the offender's eye would be removed.\nThe sages of the Talmud saw a direct link between themselves and the Pharisees, and historians generally consider Pharisaic Judaism to be the progenitor of Rabbinic Judaism, that is normative, mainstream Judaism after the destruction of the Second Temple. All mainstream forms of Judaism today consider themselves heirs of Rabbinic Judaism and, ultimately, the Pharisees.\nHasmonean period.\nAlthough the Pharisees did not support the wars of expansion of the Hasmoneans and the forced conversions of the Idumeans, the political rift between them became wider when a Pharisee named Eleazar insulted the Hasmonean ethnarch John Hyrcanus at his own table, suggesting that he should abandon his role as High Priest due to a rumour (probably untrue) that he had been conceived while his mother was a prisoner of war. In response, he distanced himself from the Pharisees.\nAfter the death of John Hyrcanus, his younger son, Alexander Jannaeus, made himself king, and openly sided with the Sadducees by adopting their rites in the Temple. His actions caused a riot in the Temple, and led to a brief civil war that ended with a bloody repression of the Pharisees. However, on his deathbed, Jannaeus advised his widow, Salome Alexandra, to seek reconciliation with the Pharisees. Her brother was Shimon ben Shetach, a leading Pharisee. Josephus attests that Salome was favorably inclined toward the Pharisees, and their political influence grew tremendously under her reign, especially in the Sanhedrin or Jewish Council, which they came to dominate.\nFollowing Salome\u2019s death, her elder son, Hyrcanus II, was generally supported by the Pharisees. Her younger son, Aristobulus II, was in conflict with Hyrcanus and tried to seize power. The Pharisees seemed to be in a vulnerable position at this time. The conflict between the two sons culminated in a civil war that ended when the Roman general Pompey intervened and captured Jerusalem in 63\u00a0BC. Josephus' account may overstate the role of the Pharisees. He reports elsewhere that the Pharisees did not grow to power until the reign of Salome. As Josephus was a Pharisee, his account may represent a historical creation meant to elevate the status of the Pharisees during the height of the Hasmonean dynasty.\nLater texts, like the Mishnah and the Talmud, record a host of rulings by rabbis, some of whom are believed to be from among the Pharisees, concerning sacrifices and other ritual practices in the Temple, torts, criminal law, and governance. In their day, the influence of the Pharisees over the lives of the common people was strong, and their rulings on Jewish law were deemed authoritative by many.\nRoman period.\nAccording to Josephus, the Pharisees appeared before Pompey, asking him to interfere and restore the old priesthood, while abolishing the royalty of the Hasmoneans altogether. The Pharisees also opened Jerusalem's gates to the Romans, and actively supported them against the Sadducean faction. When the Romans finally broke the entrance to Jerusalem's Temple, the Pharisees killed the priests who were officiating the Temple services on Sabbath. They regarded Pompey's defilement of the Temple in Jerusalem as a divine punishment of Sadducean misrule. Pompey ended the monarchy in 63\u00a0BC, and named Hyrcanus II high priest and ethnarch (a lesser title than \"king\"). Six years later, Hyrcanus was deprived of the remainder of political authority, and ultimate jurisdiction was given to the proconsul of Syria, who ruled through Hyrcanus's Idumaean associate, Antipater, and later, Antipater's two sons, Phasael (military governor of Judea) and Herod (military governor of Galilee). In 40\u00a0BC, Aristobulus's son, Antigonus, overthrew Hyrcanus, and named himself king and high priest, whereafter Herod fled to Rome.\nIn Rome, Herod sought the support of Mark Antony and Octavian, and secured recognition by the Roman Senate as king, confirming the termination of the Hasmonean dynasty. According to Josephus, Sadducean opposition to Herod led him to treat the Pharisees favorably. Herod was an unpopular ruler, perceived as a Roman puppet. Despite his restoration and expansion of the Second Temple, Herod's notorious treatment of his own family and of the last Hasmonaeans further eroded his popularity. According to Josephus, the Pharisees ultimately opposed him, and thus fell victims (4\u00a0BC) to his bloodthirstiness. The family of Boethus, whom Herod had raised to the high-priesthood, revived the spirit of the Sadducees, and thenceforth the Pharisees again had them as antagonists.\nWhile it stood, the Second Temple remained the center of Jewish ritual life. Jews were required to travel to Jerusalem and offer sacrifices at the Temple three times per year: Pesach (Passover), Shavuot (the Feast of Weeks), and Sukkot (the Feast of Tabernacles). The Pharisees, like the Sadducees, were politically quiescent, and studied, taught, and worshiped in their own way. At this time, serious theological differences emerged between the Sadducees and Pharisees. The notion that the sacred could exist outside the Temple, a view central to the Essenes, was shared and elevated by the Pharisees.\nFrom Pharisees to rabbis.\nFollowing the Jewish\u2013Roman wars, revolutionaries like the Zealots had been crushed by the Romans, and had little credibility (the last Zealots died at Masada in 73\u00a0AD). Similarly, the Sadducees, whose teachings were closely connected to the Temple, disappeared with the destruction of the Second Temple in 70\u00a0AD. The Essenes also disappeared, perhaps because their teachings so diverged from the concerns of the times, or perhaps because they were sacked by the Romans at Qumran. Of all the major Second Temple sects, only the Pharisees remained. Their vision of Jewish law as a means by which ordinary people could engage with the sacred in their daily lives was a position meaningful to the majority of Jews. Such teachings extended beyond ritual practices. According to the classic midrash in \"Avot D'Rabbi Nathan\" (4:5):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Temple is destroyed. We never witnessed its glory. But Rabbi Joshua did. And when he looked at the Temple ruins one day, he burst into tears. \"Alas for us! The place which atoned for the sins of all the people Israel lies in ruins!\" Then Rabbi Yohannan ben Zakkai spoke to him these words of comfort: \"Be not grieved, my son. There is another way of gaining ritual atonement, even though the Temple is destroyed. We must now gain ritual atonement through deeds of loving-kindness.\"\nFollowing the destruction of the Temple, Rome governed Judea through a procurator at Caesarea and a Jewish patriarch, and additionally levied the Fiscus Judaicus. Yohanan ben Zakkai, a leading Pharisee, was appointed the first patriarch (the Hebrew word \"nasi\" also means prince or president), and he reestablished the Sanhedrin at Yavneh (see the related Council of Jamnia) under Pharisee control. Instead of giving tithes to the priests and sacrificing offerings at the destroyed Temple, the rabbis instructed Jews to give charity. Moreover, they argued that all Jews should study in local synagogues, because the Torah is \"the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob\" (Deuteronomy 33:4).\nAfter the destruction of the First Temple, Jews believed that God would forgive them and enable them to rebuild the Temple\u2014an event that actually occurred within three generations. After the destruction of the Second Temple, Jews wondered whether this would happen again. When the Emperor Hadrian threatened to rebuild Jerusalem as a pagan city dedicated to Jupiter in 132 AD, some of the leading sages of the Sanhedrin supported a rebellion led by Simon Bar Kosiba (later known as Bar Kokhba), who established a short-lived independent state that was conquered by the Romans in 135\u00a0AD. With this defeat, the Jews' hopes that the Temple would be rebuilt were crushed. Nonetheless, belief in a Third Temple remains a cornerstone of Jewish belief.\nRomans forbade Jews to enter Jerusalem (except for the day of Tisha B'Av), and prohibited any plan to rebuild the Temple. Instead, it took over the Province of Judea directly, renaming it Syria Palaestina, and renaming Jerusalem Aelia Capitolina. Romans did eventually reconstitute the Sanhedrin under the leadership of Judah haNasi (who claimed to be a descendant of King David). They conferred the title of \"nasi\" as hereditary, and Judah's sons served both as patriarch and as heads of the Sanhedrin.\nPost-Temple developments.\nAccording to historian Shaye Cohen, by the time three generations had passed after the destruction of the Second Temple, most Jews concluded that the Temple would not be rebuilt during their lives nor in the foreseeable future. Jews were now confronted with difficult and far-reaching questions:\nRegardless of the importance they gave to the Temple, and despite their support of Bar Koseba's revolt, the Pharisees' vision of Jewish law as a means by which ordinary people could engage with the sacred in their daily lives provided them with a position from which to respond to all four challenges in a way meaningful to the vast majority of Jews. Their responses would constitute Rabbinic Judaism.\nAfter the destruction of the Second Temple, the sectarian divisions ended. The rabbis avoided the term \"Pharisee\", perhaps because it was a term more often used by non-Pharisees, but also because the term was explicitly sectarian. The rabbis claimed leadership over all Jews, and added to the Amidah the , a prayer which in part exclaims, \"Praised are You O Lord, who breaks enemies and defeats the wicked\", and which is understood as a rejection of sectarians and sectarianism. This shift by no means resolved conflicts over the interpretation of the Torah; rather, it relocated debates between sects to debates within Rabbinic Judaism. The Pharisaic commitment to scholarly debate as a value in and of itself, rather than merely a byproduct of sectarianism, emerged as a defining feature of Rabbinic Judaism.\nThus, as the Pharisees argued that all Israel should act as priests, the rabbis argued that all Israel should act as rabbis: \"The rabbis furthermore want to transform the entire Jewish community into an academy where the whole Torah is studied and kept ... redemption depends on the \"rabbinization\" of all Israel, that is, upon the attainment of all Jewry of a full and complete embodiment of revelation or Torah, thus achieving a perfect replica of heaven.\" Rabbinic Judaism, at this time and afterwards, contained the idea of the Heavenly Academy, a heavenly institute where God taught scripture.\nThe rabbinic era is divided into two periods. The first period was that of the Tannaim (from the Aramaic word for \"repeat;\" the Aramaic root TNY is equivalent to the Hebrew root SNY, which is the basis for \"Mishnah\". Thus, Tannaim are \"Mishnah teachers\"), the sages who repeated and thus passed down the Oral Torah. During this period, rabbis finalized the canonization of the Tanakh, and in 200\u00a0AD, Judah haNasi edited together Tannaitic judgements and traditions into the Mishnah, considered by the rabbis to be the definitive expression of the Oral Torah (although some of the sages mentioned in the Mishnah are Pharisees who lived prior to the destruction of the Second Temple, or prior to the Bar Kozeba revolt, most of the sages mentioned lived after the revolt).\nThe second period is that of the \"Amoraim\" (from the Aramaic word for \"speaker\") rabbis and their students, who continued to debate legal matters and discuss the meaning of the books of the Bible. In Judea, these discussions occurred at academies at Tiberias, Caesarea, and Sepphoris. In Babylonia, these discussions largely occurred at academies that had been established at Nehardea, Pumpeditha, and Sura. This tradition of study and debate reached its fullest expression in the development of the Talmudim, elaborations of the Mishnah and records of Rabbinic debates, stories, and judgements, compiled around 400\u00a0AD in Judea and around 500\u00a0AD in Babylon.\nRabbinic Judaism eventually emerged as normative Judaism, and in fact, many today refer to Rabbinic Judaism simply as \"Judaism.\" Rabbinic scholar Jacob Neusner, however, stated that the Amoraim had no ultimate power in their communities. They lived at a time when Jews were subjects of either the Roman or Iranian (Parthian and Persian) empires. These empires left the day-to-day governance in the hands of the Jewish authorities: in Roman Palestine, through the hereditary office of patriarch (also simultaneously the head of the Sanhedrin); in Babylonia, through the hereditary office of the \"Reish Galuta\", the \"Head of the Exile\" or \"Exilarch\" (who ratified the appointment of the heads of Rabbinical academies.) According to Jacob Neusner:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Neusner's view, the rabbinic project, as acted out in the Talmud, reflected not the world as it was, but the world as rabbis dreamed it should be.\nAccording to historian Salo Baron, however, there existed \"a general willingness of the people to follow its self-imposed Rabbinic rulership.\" Although the rabbis lacked authority to impose capital punishment, \"Flagellation and heavy fines, combined with an extensive system of excommunication, were more than enough to uphold the authority of the courts.\" In fact, the rabbis took over more and more power from the Reish Galuta, until eventually, R' Ashi assumed the title rabbana, heretofore assumed by the exilarch, and appeared together with two other rabbis as an official delegation \"at the gate of King Yazdegard's court.\" The Amorah (and Tanna) Rav was a personal friend of Parthian King Artabenus IV, and Shmuel was close to King Shapur I of Persia. Thus, the rabbis had significant means of \"coercion\", and the people seemed to have followed the rabbinic rulership.\nBeliefs.\nAt first, the values of the Pharisees developed through their sectarian debates with the Sadducees; then, they developed through internal, non-sectarian debates over the law as an adaptation to life without the Temple, and life in exile, and eventually, to a more limited degree, life in conflict with Christianity. These shifts mark the transformation of Pharisaic to Rabbinic Judaism.\nNo single tractate of the key rabbinic texts, the Mishnah and the Talmud, is devoted to theological issues; these texts are concerned primarily with interpretations of Jewish law, and anecdotes about the sages and their values. Only one chapter of the Mishnah deals with theological issues; it asserts that three kinds of people will have no share in \"the world to come:\" those who deny the resurrection of the dead, those who deny the divinity of the Torah, and Epicureans (who deny divine supervision of human affairs). Another passage suggests a different set of core principles: normally, a Jew may violate any law to save a life, but in Sanhedrin 74a, a ruling orders Jews to accept martyrdom rather than violate the laws against idolatry, murder, or adultery. (Judah ha-Nasi, however, said that Jews must \"be meticulous in small religious duties as well as large ones, because you do not know what sort of reward is coming for any of the religious duties\", suggesting that all laws are of equal importance).\nMonotheism.\nOne belief central to the Pharisees which was shared by all Jews of the time is monotheism. This is evident in the practice of reciting the , a prayer composed of select verses from the Torah (Deuteronomy 6:4), at the Temple and in synagogues; the begins with the verses, \"Hear O Israel, the Lord is our God; the Lord is one.\" According to the Mishna, these passages were recited in the Temple, along with the twice-daily offering; Jews in the diaspora, who did not have access to the Temple, recited these passages in their houses of assembly. According to the Mishnah and Talmud, the men of the Great Assembly instituted the requirement that Jews both in Judea and in the diaspora pray three times per day (morning, afternoon, and evening), and include in their prayers a recitation of these passages in the morning () and evening () prayers.\nWisdom.\nPharisaic wisdom was compiled in one book of the Mishna, . The Pharisaic attitude is perhaps best exemplified by a story about the sages Hillel the Elder and Shammai, who both lived in the latter half of the 1st century BC. A gentile once challenged Shammai to teach him the wisdom of the Torah while he stood on one foot. Shammai drove him away. The same gentile approached Hillel and asked of him the same thing. Hillel chastised him gently by saying, \"That which is hateful to you do not do to another; that is the entire Torah, and the rest is its interpretation. Go study.\"\nFree will and predestination.\nAccording to Josephus, whereas the Sadducees believed that people have total free will and the Essenes believed that all of a person's life is predestined, the Pharisees believed that people have free will, but that God also has foreknowledge of human destiny. This also accords with the statement in 3:19, \"Rabbi Akiva said: All is foreseen, but freedom of choice is given.\"\nAfterlife.\nUnlike the Sadducees, who are generally held to have rejected any existence after death, the sources vary on the beliefs of the Pharisees on the afterlife. According to the New Testament, the Pharisees believed in the resurrection of the dead. According to Josephus, the Pharisees held that only the soul was immortal, and the souls of good people would be resurrected or reincarnated and \"pass into other bodies\", while \"the souls of the wicked will suffer eternal punishment.\" Paul the Apostle declared himself to be a Pharisee, even after his belief in Jesus.\nPractices.\nA kingdom of priests.\nFundamentally, the Pharisees continued a form of Judaism that extended beyond the Temple, applying Jewish law to mundane activities in order to sanctify the everyday world. This was monumental as a practice during this era, as it helped the Jews of the time to truly align themselves with the law, applying even to the mundanities of life. This was a more participatory (or \"democratic\") form of Judaism, in which rituals were not monopolized by an inherited priesthood, but rather could be performed by all adult Jews individually or collectively, whose leaders were not determined by birth but by scholarly achievement.\nMany, including some scholars, have characterized the Sadducees as a sect that interpreted the Torah literally, and the Pharisees as interpreting the Torah liberally. R' Yitzhak Isaac Halevi suggests that this was not, in fact, a matter of religion. He claims that the complete rejection of Judaism would not have been tolerated under the Hasmonean rule, and therefore Hellenists maintained that they were rejecting not Judaism but Rabbinic law. Thus, the Sadducees were in fact a political party, not a religious sect. However, according to Neusner, this view is a distortion. He suggests that two things fundamentally distinguished the Pharisaic from the Sadducean approach to the Torah. First, Pharisees believed in a broad and literal interpretation of Exodus (19:3\u20136), \"you shall be my own possession among all peoples; for all the earth is mine, and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation,\" and the words of 2 Maccabees (2:17): \"God gave all the people the heritage, the kingdom, the priesthood, and the holiness.\"\nThe Pharisees believed that the idea that all of the children of Israel were to be like priests was expressed elsewhere in the Torah, for example, when the Law was transferred from the sphere of the priesthood to every man in Israel. Moreover, the Torah already provided ways for all Jews to lead a priestly life: the laws of kosher animals were perhaps intended originally for the priests, but were extended to the whole people; similarly, the prohibition of cutting the flesh in mourning for the dead. The Pharisees believed that all Jews in their ordinary life, and not just the Temple priesthood or Jews visiting the Temple, should observe rules and rituals concerning purification.\nOral Torah.\nThe standard view is that the Pharisees differed from Sadducees in the sense that they accepted the Oral Torah in addition to the Scripture. Theology professor Anthony J. Saldarini argued that this assumption has neither implicit nor explicit evidence. A critique of the ancient interpretations of the Bible are distant from what modern scholars consider literal. Saldarini stated that the Oral Torah did not come about until the 3rd century AD, although there was an unstated idea about it in existence. In a way, every Jewish community possessed their own version of the Oral Torah which governed their religious practices. Josephus states that the Sadducees only followed literal interpretations of the Torah. To Saldarini, this only meant that the Sadducees followed their own way of Judaism, and rejected the Pharisaic version of Judaism. To Rosemary Ruether, the Pharisaic proclamation of the Oral Torah was their way of freeing Judaism from the clutches of Aaronite priesthood, represented by the Sadducees. The Oral Torah was to remain oral but was later given a written form. It did not refer to the Torah in a status as a commentary, rather had its own separate existence which allowed Pharisaic innovations.\nThe sages of the Talmud believed that the Oral law was simultaneously revealed to Moses at Mount Sinai, and the product of debates among rabbis. Thus, one may conceive of the \"Oral Torah\" as both based on the fixed text and as an ongoing process of analysis and argument in which God is actively involved; it was this ongoing process that was revealed at Mount Sinai along with the scripture, and by participating in this ongoing process rabbis and their students are actively participating in God's ongoing act of revelation.\nAs Neusner explains, the schools of the Pharisees and rabbis were and are holy:\n\"...because there men achieve sainthood through study of Torah and imitation of the conduct of the masters. In doing so, they conform to the heavenly paradigm, the Torah believed to have been created by God \"in his image,\" revealed at Sinai, and handed down to their own teachers ... If the masters and disciples obey the divine teaching of Moses, \"our rabbi,\" then their society, the school, replicates on earth the heavenly academy, just as the disciple incarnates the heavenly model of Moses, \"our rabbi.\" The rabbis believe that Moses was (and the Messiah will be) a rabbi, God dons phylacteries, and the heavenly court studies Torah precisely as does the earthly one, even arguing about the same questions. These beliefs today may seem as projections of rabbinical values onto heaven, but the rabbis believe that they themselves are projections of heavenly values onto earth. The rabbis thus conceive that on earth they study Torah just as God, the angels, and Moses, \"our rabbi,\" do in heaven. The heavenly schoolmen are even aware of Babylonian scholastic discussions, so they require a rabbi's information about an aspect of purity taboos.\nThe commitment to relate religion to daily life through the law has led some (notably, Saint Paul and Martin Luther) to infer that the Pharisees were more legalistic than other sects in the Second Temple Era. The authors of the Gospels present Jesus as speaking harshly against some Pharisees (Josephus does claim that the Pharisees were the \"strictest\" observers of the law). Yet, as Neusner has observed, Pharisaism was but one of many \"Judaisms\" in its day, and its legal interpretation are what set it apart from the other sects of Judaism.\nInnovators or preservers.\nThe Mishna in the beginning of Avot and (in more detail) Maimonides in his Introduction to records a chain of tradition () from Moses at Mount Sinai down to R' Ashi, redactor of the Talmud and last of the Amoraim. This chain of tradition includes the interpretation of unclear statements in the Bible (e.g. that the \"fruit of a beautiful tree\" refers to a citron as opposed to any other fruit), the methods of textual exegesis (the disagreements recorded in the Mishna and Talmud generally focus on methods of exegesis), and Laws with Mosaic authority that cannot be derived from the Biblical text (these include measurements (e.g. what amount of a non-kosher food must one eat to be liable), the amount and order of the scrolls to be placed in the phylacteries, etc.).\nThe Pharisees were also innovators in that they enacted specific laws as they saw necessary according to the needs of the time. These included prohibitions to prevent an infringement of a biblical prohibition (e.g. one does not take a Lulav on Shabbat \"Lest one carry it in the public domain\") called , among others. The commandment to read the (Book of Esther) on Purim and to light the Menorah on Hanukkah are Rabbinic innovations. Much of the legal system is based on \"what the sages constructed via logical reasoning and from established practice\". Also, the blessings before meals and the wording of the Amidah. These are known as Takanot. The Pharisees based their authority to innovate on the verses: \"...according to the word they tell you... according to all they instruct you. According to the law they instruct you and according to the judgment they say to you, you shall do; you shall not divert from the word they tell you, either right or left\" (Deuteronomy 17:10\u201311) (see \"Encyclopedia Talmudit\" entry \"Divrei Soferim\").\nIn an interesting twist, Abraham Geiger posits that the Sadducees were the more hidebound adherents to an ancient Halacha whereas the Pharisees were more willing to develop Halacha as the times required. See however, Bernard Revel's \"Karaite Halacha\" which rejects many of Geiger's proofs.\nSignificance of debate and study of the law.\nJust as important as (if not more important than) any particular law was the value the rabbis placed on legal study and debate. The sages of the Talmud believed that when they taught the Oral Torah to their students, they were imitating Moses, who taught the law to the children of Israel. Moreover, the rabbis believed that \"the heavenly court studies Torah precisely as does the earthly one, even arguing about the same questions.\" Thus, in debating and disagreeing over the meaning of the Torah or how best to put it into practice, no rabbi felt that he (or his opponent) was rejecting God or threatening Judaism; on the contrary, it was precisely through such arguments that the rabbis imitated and honored God.\nOne sign of the Pharisaic emphasis on debate and differences of opinion is that the Mishnah and Talmud mark different generations of scholars in terms of different pairs of contending schools. In the first century, for example, the two major Pharisaic schools were those of Hillel and Shammai. After Hillel died in 10\u00a0AD, Shammai assumed the office of president of the Sanhedrin until he died in 30\u00a0AD. Followers of these two sages dominated scholarly debate over the following decades. Although the Talmud records the arguments and positions of the school of Shammai, the teachings of the school of Hillel were ultimately taken as authoritative.\nRelations with Christianity.\nThe Pharisees appear in the New Testament, engaging in conflicts with John the Baptist and with Jesus, and because Nicodemus the Pharisee (John 3:1) with Joseph of Arimathea entombed Jesus' body at great personal risk. Gamaliel, the highly respected rabbi and, according to Christianity, defender of the apostles, was also a Pharisee, and according to some Christian traditions secretly converted to Christianity.\nThere are several references in the New Testament to Paul the Apostle being a Pharisee before converting to Christianity, and other members of the Pharisee sect are known from Acts 15:5 to have become Christian believers. It was some members of his group who argued that gentile converts must be circumcised and obliged to follow the Mosaic law, leading to a dispute within the early Church addressed at the Apostolic Council in Jerusalem in 50 CE.\nThe New Testament, particularly the Synoptic Gospels, presents especially the leadership of the Pharisees as obsessed with man-made rules (especially concerning purity) whereas Jesus is more concerned with God's love; the Pharisees scorn sinners whereas Jesus seeks them out. (The Gospel of John, which is the only gospel where Nicodemus is mentioned, particularly portrays the sect as divided and willing to debate.) Because of the New Testament's frequent depictions of Pharisees as self-righteous rule-followers (see also Woes of the Pharisees and Legalism), the word \"pharisee\" (and its derivatives: \"pharisaical\", etc.) has come into semi-common usage in English to describe a hypocritical and arrogant person who places the letter of the law above its spirit. Jews today typically find this insulting and some consider the use of the word to be anti-Semitic.\nHyam Maccoby speculates that Jesus was a Pharisee and that his arguments with Pharisees is a sign of inclusion rather than fundamental conflict (disputation being the dominant narrative mode employed in the Talmud as a search for truth, and not necessarily a sign of opposition). However, Maccoby's views have been widely rejected by scholars.\nExamples of passages include the story of Jesus declaring the sins of a paralytic man forgiven and the Pharisees calling the action blasphemy. In the story, Jesus counters the accusation that he does not have the power to forgive sins by pronouncing forgiveness of sins and then healing the man. The account of the Paralytic Man and Jesus's performance of miracles on the Sabbath are often interpreted as oppositional and at times antagonistic to that of the Pharisees' teachings.\nHowever, according to E. P. Sanders, Jesus' actions are actually similar to and consistent with Jewish beliefs and practices of the time, as recorded by the rabbis, that commonly associate illness with sin and healing with forgiveness. Jews (according to Sanders) reject the New Testament suggestion that the healing would have been critical of, or criticized by, the Pharisees as no surviving rabbinic source questions or criticizes this practice, and the notion that Pharisees believed that \"God alone\" could forgive sins is more of a rhetorical device than historical fact. Another argument from Sanders is that, according to the New Testament, Pharisees wanted to punish Jesus for healing a man's withered hand on Sabbath. Despite the Mishna and Gemara being replete with restrictions on healing on the Sabbath (for example, Mishna Shabbat, 22:6), Sanders states that no Rabbinic rule has been found according to which Jesus would have violated Sabbath.\nAccording to Chris Keith, there have been many scholars on both sides who were either highly critical of the historicity of the controversy narratives between Jesus and the scribes and Pharisees or found the stories to be historically credible. Some of the former went as far as to claim that these narratives tried to hide the truth that Jesus in actuality was a Pharisee. Keith agrees with the latter and agrees that conflicts between Jesus and the literate interpreters of the text happened as the Gospels say and can be traced back to the historical Jesus, disputing Sanders in particular. While he acknowledges that the Gospels' stories are a \"product of the time(s) in which they were formed\" and were affected by later struggles between Christians and Jews, he argues that such symbolism that drapes the Gospel narratives does not mean they are not historical and that there are convincing arguments Jesus did have such debates.\nPaula Frederiksen and Michael J. Cook believe that those passages of the New Testament that are seemingly most hostile to the Pharisees were written sometime after the destruction of the Temple in 70\u00a0AD. Only Christianity and Pharisaism survived the destruction of the Temple, and the two competed for a short time until the Pharisees emerged as the dominant form of Judaism. When many Jews did not convert, Christians sought converts from among the Gentiles. Some scholars have found evidence of continuous interactions between Jewish-Christian and rabbinic movements from the mid to late 2nd century to the 4th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69597", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69597", "title": "Catherine Wheel (band)", "text": "English alternative rock band, 1990\u20132000\nCatherine Wheel were an English alternative rock band from Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft. The band was active from 1990 to 2000, releasing five full-length albums in their career, embarking on many lengthy tours and experiencing fluctuating levels of commercial success. Their early music was associated with the shoegazing scene, but gradually evolved to a more aggressive style influenced by hard rock and metal. Initially receiving attention and success after releasing their debut album \"Ferment\" in 1992, the band achieved peak success with the release of \"Crank\" and their album \"Chrome\" in 1993. The band also achieved minor success with other albums, including \"Happy Days\", which featured a popular song \"Judy Staring at the Sun\" as a collaboration with Tanya Donelly. Catherine Wheel also scored heavy rotation on MTV and performed there several times. Despite never having any albums or songs that achieved major success in their homeland, Catherine Wheel continue to be popular among alternative rock and shoegaze fans and critics.\nHistory.\nCatherine Wheel formed in 1990, comprising singer-guitarist Rob Dickinson (cousin of Iron Maiden's Bruce Dickinson), guitarist Brian Futter, bassist Dave Hawes, and drummer Neil Sims. Hawes had previously played in a Joy Division-influenced band called Eternal. They took their moniker from the firework known as the Catherine wheel, which in turn had taken its name from the medieval torture device of the same name. The band was sometimes included in the shoegazing scene, characterized by bands that made extensive use of guitar feedback and droning washes of noise, as well as their continuous interaction with extensive numbers of effects pedals on the stage floor.\nThe band performed a Peel session in early 1991 while still unsigned; two 12\" vinyl EPs were released on the Norwich-based Wilde Club Records, named after the regular weekly Wilde Club gigs run by Barry Newman at Norwich Arts Centre. They signed to major-label Fontana Records after being courted by both Creation Records and the Brian Eno-run label Opal Records. The band's debut album, 1991/92's \"Ferment\", made an immediate impression on the music press and introduced Catherine Wheel's second-biggest US hit, \"Black Metallic\", as well as the moderate hit \"I Want to Touch You\". The album features re-recorded versions of some of the Wilde Club-issued EPs. \"Black Metallic\" was later featured in the film \"S. Darko\".\nThe more aggressive \"Chrome\" followed in 1993, produced by Gil Norton. With this album, the band began to shed its original shoegazing tag, while still making skillful use of atmospherics, such as on the song \"Fripp\". In a 2007 interview, Rob Dickinson said that members of Death Cab for Cutie and Interpol told him that without this album, their bands \"wouldn't exist.\"\n1995's \"Happy Days\" saw the band delving further into metallic hard rock, which alienated a portion of their fanbase, even as it increased their exposure in the United States during the post-grunge era. The single \"Waydown\", and especially its plane-crash themed video, received heavy play in the US. A more sedate strain of rock known as Britpop was taking over in the UK, causing Catherine Wheel to continue to have greater success abroad than at home.\nThe B-sides and outtakes collection, \"Like Cats and Dogs\", came out the following year, revealing a quieter, more contemplative side of the band, spanning the previous five years. This carried over into \"Adam and Eve\" in 1997, wherein the band scaled back the sonic force of their sound from its \"Happy Days\" levels, with clean playing on some songs that featured extensive use of keyboards and acoustic guitars. Alternately, songs like \"Satellite\" and \"Here Comes the Fat Controller\" were lush and orchestral in scope.\nIn 2000, Catherine Wheel re-emerged with a new record label, a new bassist (Ben Ellis); a modified name (\"The\" Catherine Wheel); and a new album, \"Wishville\". After mixed reviews, record company turmoil and lacklustre sales, the band went on a hiatus. In January 2022, the band began updating a new Instagram account, suggesting that the band had reformed in some capacity.\nIn March 2010, \"Ferment\" was re-released, containing bonus tracks and extensive sleeve notes.\nPost-Catherine Wheel work.\nFutter and Sims have an ongoing project called 50\u00a0ft Monster. Ellis was in a band called Serafin, and went on to play with Iggy Pop. After working with/ playing live with Tracy Bonham for several years, Dickinson released a solo album in 2005 called \"Fresh Wine for the Horses\". Dickinson retired from recording and founded a Porsche restoration company called Singer Vehicle Design in 2009.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nEPs\nCompilation albums\nSingles\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69598", "revid": "41636538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69598", "title": "Rounders", "text": "Bat-and-ball team sport originating in England\nRounders is a bat-and-ball game played between two teams. Rounders is a batting and fielding team game that involves hitting a small, hard, leather-cased ball with a wooden, plastic, or metal bat that has a cylindrical end. The players score by running around the four bases on the field.\nPlayed in England since Tudor times, it is referenced in 1744 in the children's book \"A Little Pretty Pocket-Book\" where it was called Base-Ball. The name baseball was superseded by the name rounders in England, while other modifications of the game played elsewhere retained the name baseball. The game is popular among British and Irish school children, particularly among girls. As of 2015[ [update]], rounders is played by an estimated seven million children in the UK.\nGameplay centres on a number of innings, in which teams alternate at batting and fielding. Points (known as 'rounders') are scored by the batting team when one of their players completes a circuit past four bases without being put 'out'. The batter must strike at a good ball and attempt to run a rounder in an anti-clockwise direction around the first, second, and third base and home to the fourth, though they may stay at any of the first three. A batter is out if the ball is caught; if the base to which they are running is touched with the ball; or if, while running, they are touched with the ball by a fielder.\nHistory.\nThe game of rounders has been played in England since Tudor times, with the earliest reference being in 1744 in \"A Little Pretty Pocket-Book\" where it was called base-ball. In 1828, William Clarke in London published the second edition of \"The Boy's Own Book\", which included the rules of rounders and also the first printed description in English of a bat and ball base-running game played on a diamond. The following year, the book was published in Boston, Massachusetts.\nThe first nationally formalised rules were drawn up by the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) in Ireland in 1884. The game is still regulated in Ireland by the GAA, through the GAA Rounders National Council (). In Great Britain it is regulated by Rounders England, which was formed in 1943. While the two associations are distinct, they share similar elements of game play and culture. Competitions are held between teams from both traditions.\nAfter the rules of rounders were formalised in Ireland, associations were established in Liverpool, England; and Scotland in 1889. Both the 'New York game' and the now-defunct 'Massachusetts game' versions of baseball, as well as softball, share the same historical roots as rounders and bear a resemblance to the GAA version of the game. Rounders is linked to British baseball, which is still played in Liverpool, Cardiff and Newport. Although rounders is assumed to be older than baseball, literary references to early forms of 'base-ball' in England pre-date use of the term \"rounders\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe satisfying \u2018thwack\u2019 as heavy ball meets wooden bat; the lush green field dotted with coloured cones, shining under the British summer sun; the grass-stained knees as you slide valiantly past fourth base.\n\u2014 Claire Cohen of \"The Telegraph\" on the gameplay of rounders having played it as a girl. \nThe game is popular game among British and Irish school children, especially among girls, and is played up to international level. It is played by seven million children in the UK.\nRules.\nGameplay comprises a number of innings, in which teams alternate at batting and fielding. Nine players constitute a team, with the fielding side consisting of the bowler, the catcher, a player on each of the four bases, and three deep fielders. Points (known as 'rounders') are scored by the batting team when one of their players completes a circuit past four bases without being put 'out'. The batter must strike at a good ball and attempt to run a rounder in an anti-clockwise direction around the first, second, and third base and home to the fourth, though they may rest at any of the first three.\nWhile there are differences between the rules set by Rounders England and by the GAA, they share much in common. The bowler, or 'feeder', bowls the ball with an underarm pendulum action to the batter. According to Rounders England rules, the ball is deemed a 'good' ball if it passes within reach on the striking side between the batter's knees and the top of the head. Otherwise, it is called a 'no-ball' or 'bad' ball. The ball is also regarded as bad if it is thrown into the batter's body or wide of the batting box. A batter may try to hit a bad ball but is not required to do so. A player is not out if a no-ball is caught and cannot be called out on first base.\nWhen a batter leaves the post, each runner on a base may run to the next and succeeding base. A post runner cannot be declared out when standing at a base. The batter must keep in contact with the base to avoid being declared out. A rounder is scored if one of the batting team completes a circuit without being out. The Rounders England rules state that a half rounder is scored if half a circuit is completed by a player without being put out, or if the batter has not hit the ball but makes it all the way to the fourth base. A batter is out if a fielder catches the ball cleanly; the batter reaches a base that had been 'stumped' (touched while holding the ball) by a fielder; the bat is dropped whilst the batter is running; the batter leaves the base before the bowler has bowled the ball; or the batter is 'run out' (overtaken) by the next batter.\nRounders England-specific rules.\nIn the UK, the rules of rounders are regulated by Rounders England. Games played under these rules use smaller bats and balls and are played on a smaller pitch compared to GAA games. The bases are marked with posts, which batters must keep in contact with and fielders must 'stump', and only one 'good' ball needs to be thrown before a batter must run. 'Half-rounders' are also counted in scoring.\nThe fielding team must field a minimum of six players (one on each base plus bowler and catcher). The total number of players on a team is limited to nine.\nThe ball circumference must be between and and the bat no more than in length and in diameter. Rounders England place a weight-limit of on the bat. The bases are laid out in a manner similar to a baseball diamond, except that batters run to a separate fourth base, at right-angles to third base and the batsman's base. Each base is marked with poles, which must be able to support themselves and stand at a minimum of .\nIf a ball is delivered well, batters must try to hit the ball and must run regardless of whether the ball is hit. If the ball is hit into the backward area, the batter may not pass first post until the ball is returned to the forward area. A batter that hits a no-ball may not be caught out or stumped at the first post. Batters may run on 'no-balls' but do not have to. Each batter, except the last in each inning, is entitled to receive one good ball: the last batter is entitled to receive three good balls unless he or she is caught out.\nOne rounder is gained if the player hits the ball, then reaches the fourth post and touches it before the next ball is bowled and is not caught out and hit by the ball. A half rounder is gained if: the player reaches the fourth post having missed the ball; the player reaches the second post having hit the ball; if a batter is obstructed by a fielder whilst running; or if the same batter has two consecutive no balls.\nA batter is out if a fielder catches the ball after it has been hit and before it touches the ground, a fielder touches the post of the base halfway up (or higher) with the ball while the batter is running to it, the batter deliberately drops or throws the bat, or another batter runs to the same base or overtakes a batter, in which case both batters are out.\nTwo innings constitute a game. Each batting team's innings continues until nine outs are made or the numbered innings is over.\nGAA-specific rules.\nIn Ireland, the rules of rounders () are laid down by the Gaelic Athletic Association. The GAA rules are the earliest nationally organised rules of play, being formalised in 1884. It is played on a larger pitch compared to the Rounders England game and consequently uses larger bats and slightly larger balls. A GAA rounders pitch is a square field and bases are apart, compared to for the Rounders England game. Foul ground runs along two adjacent sides of the pitch with a home base at the intersection of these sides.\nFive substitutes may be made to the list of nine players at any time during play. A maximum of nine players are allowed to field at one time. Once one team has fielded, then they take their turn at batting following a pre given batting order.\nThe ball (or ) circumference is and bats may be long and up to in diameter. There is no limit on bat weight. Bases and pitchers stand are normally marked with temporary square mats 64\u00a0cm (28\") square.\nEach batter is entitled to three good balls. A good ball is one that travels the whole way across home base and between the batters knee and shoulder. A batter can try to hit any good balls that are pitched but need not run once hitting the ball or the first two good balls.\nA batter can run on any hit ball that lands in good ground or which is made good by touching a fielder then landing in foul ground. On a third good ball a batter has to run (move from batters box) whether they hit it or not.\nBatters may run, but if the sliotar lands in foul ground then the referee calls them back as no play can happen on a foul ball.\nA batter is out if:\nBatters must run in straight lines between bases and fielders must not obstruct their way or stand on bases. Disobeying this rule is considered unsporting behaviour and may result in up to two bases being awarded to the batting team or a batter being sent out. Normally, one batter may not overtake another while running between bases, although there are exceptions to this rule.\nFive innings constitute a game, depending on the level of the match. Each batting team's inning continues until three outs are made.\nComparison with softball and baseball.\nThe GAA version of rounders is very similar to softball, the main difference being that the game is played with baseball-sized bats, balls and field. However, baseball-style gloves are not allowed. The main differences between baseball and the English version of the game are that the rounders bat is much shorter and is usually swung one-handed; misses or strikes are not called, so there are no walks or strike-outs; each batter receives only one good ball and must run whether they hit it or not. Other differences include the posts for marking the bases, which should be wooden, and are preferably encased in plastic sheaths, the layout of the pitch, especially the location of the last base; and the bowler's arm motion, which is an underarm pendulum action, as in softball.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69599", "revid": "27706643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69599", "title": "Sif", "text": "Norse goddess, wife of Thor\nIn Norse mythology, Sif is a golden-haired goddess associated with earth. Sif is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and in the poetry of skalds. In both the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\", she is known for her golden hair and is married to the thunder god Thor.\nThe \"Prose Edda\" recounts that Sif once had her hair shorn by Loki, and that Thor forced Loki to have a golden headpiece made for Sif, resulting in not only Sif's golden tresses but also five other objects for other gods. Sif is also named in the \"Prose Edda\" as the mother of \u00der\u00fa\u00f0r (by Thor) and Ullr.\nScholars have proposed that Sif's hair may represent fields of golden wheat, that she may be associated with fertility, family, wedlock and/or that she is connected to rowan, and that there may be an allusion to her role or possibly her name in the Old English poem \"Beowulf\".\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Sif\" is the singular form of the plural Old Norse word . only appears in singular form when referring to the goddess as a proper noun. is cognate to the Old English and modern English (meaning \"affinity, connection, by marriage\") and in other Germanic languages: Gothic (), Old High German , and modern German . appears not only in ancient poetry and records of law, but also in compounds ( means \"to marry\"). Using this etymology, scholar John Lindow gives the meanings \"in-law-relationship\", scholar Andy Orchard provides \"relation\", and scholar Rudolf Simek gives \"relation by marriage\".\nAttestations.\nPoetic Edda.\nIn stanza 48 of the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"H\u00e1rbar\u00f0slj\u00f3\u00f0\", H\u00e1rbar\u00f0r (Odin, father of Thor, in disguise) meets Thor at an inlet of a gulf. The two engage in flyting, and H\u00e1rbar\u00f0r refuses to ferry Thor across the bay. Among numerous other insults, H\u00e1rbar\u00f0r claims that Sif has a lover at home. In response, Thor says that H\u00e1rbar\u00f0r is speaking carelessly \"of what seems worst to me\" and also lying.\nIn stanzas 53 and 54 of the poem \"Lokasenna\", after pouring Loki a crystal cup of mead during his series of insults towards the gods, Sif states that there is nothing Loki can say only in regard to her. In response, Loki claims that Sif has had an affair with him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSif does not respond, and the exchange turns to Beyla. Sif is additionally mentioned in two kennings found in poems collected in the \"Poetic Edda\"; \"Hymiskvi\u00f0a\" (where Thor is referred to as the \"Husband of Sif\" thrice), and \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\" (where Thor is once referred to as \"Husband of Sif\").\nProse Edda.\nIn the \"Prose Edda\", Sif is mentioned once in the Prologue, in chapter 31 of \"Gylfaginning\", and in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" as a guest at \u00c6gir's feast, the subject of a j\u00f6tunn's desire, as having her hair shorn by Loki, and in various kennings.\nSif is introduced in chapter three of the Prologue section of the \"Prose Edda\"; Snorri's euhemerized account of the origins of Norse mythology. Snorri states that Thor married Sif, and that she is known as \"a prophetess called Sibyl, though we know her as Sif\". Sif is further described as \"the loveliest of women\" and with hair of gold. Although he lists her own ancestors as unknown, Snorri writes that Thor and Sif produced a son by the name of L\u00f3ri\u00f0i, who \"took after his father\".\nIn chapter 31 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\", Ullr is referred to as a son of Sif and a stepson of Thor (though his father is not mentioned):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs reported in the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Thor once engages in a duel with Hrungnir, there described as the strongest of the j\u00f6tnar. Prior to this, Hrungnir had been drunkenly boasting of his desire to, amongst other things, kill all of the gods except Freyja and Sif, whom he wanted to take home with him. However, at the duel, Hrungnir is quickly killed by the enraged Thor.\nFurther in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Snorri relates a story where Loki cuts off Sif's hair as a prank. When Thor discovers this, he grabs hold of Loki, resulting in Loki swearing to have a headpiece made of gold to replace Sif's locks. Loki fulfills this promise by having a headpiece made by dwarfs, the Sons of Ivaldi. Along with the headpiece, the dwarfs produced Odin's spear, Gungnir. As the story progresses, the incident leads to the creation of the ship Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir and the boar Gullinbursti for Freyr, the multiplying ring Draupnir for Odin, and the mighty hammer Mj\u00f6llnir for Thor.\nSif also appears in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" listed as a heiti for \"earth\", appears in a kenning for a gold-keeping woman, and once for Hildr. Poetic means of referring to Sif calling her \"wife of Thor\", \"mother of Ullr\", \"the fair-haired deity\", \"rival of J\u00e1rnsaxa\", and as \"mother of \u00der\u00fa\u00f0r\".\nSwedish folklore.\n19th-century scholar Jacob Grimm records that in his time residents of V\u00e4rmland, Sweden \"call[ed] Thor's wife \"godmor\", good mother.\"\nTheories.\n\"Beowulf\".\nIn Old English, \"sib\" (\"family\") is cognate with Old Norse \"Sif\" and \"sif\". In the Old English poem \"Beowulf\" (lines 2016 to 2018), Hro\u00f0gar's wife, Wealh\u00feeow, moves through the hall serving mead to the warriors and defusing conflict. Various scholars beginning with Magnus Olsen have pointed to the similarity with what Sif does at the feast described in \"Lokasenna\". Richard North further notes that unusually, \"sib\" is personified here and in lines 2599 to 2661, and suggests they may be references to Sif in Danish religion: \"Both instances may indicate that the poet of \"Beowulf\" was in a position to imagine a sixth-century Scandinavia on the basis of his knowledge of contemporary Danish legends.\"\nHair as wheat and potential cognates.\n19th-century scholar Jacob Grimm proposes a reconstruction of a Germanic deity cognate to Sif in other Germanic cultures and proposes a similar nature to that of the goddesses Frigg and Freyja:\nThe Goth. , OHG. , , AS. gen. , denote peace, friendship, kindred; from these I infer a divinity \"Sibja\", \"Sippia\", \"Sib\", corresponding to ON. gen. , the wife of Th\u00f4rr, for the ON. too has a pl. meaning cognatio, sifi amicus (OHG. , ), sift genus, cognatio. By this sense of the word, \"Sif\" would appear to be, like Frigg and Freyja, a goddess of loveliness and love; as attributes of O\u00f0inn and Th\u00f4rr agree, their wives Frigg and Sif have also a common signification.\nGrimm connects Eddic references to Sif's golden hair (gold is referred to as ; Sif's hair) with the herb name (\"Polytrichum aureum\"). Grimm says that \"expositors see in this the golden fruits of the Earth burnt up by fire and growing again, they liken Sif to Ceres\", and Grimm says that \"with it agrees the fact that O. Slav. is a gloss on \" but cites etymological problems between the potential cognate. Grimm says that Thor's mother was the earth, and not his wife, yet \"we do find the simple \"Sif\" standing for earth.\" Grimm adds that he is inconclusive regarding Sif and that, \"we ought to have fuller details about Sif, and these are wholly wanting in our mythology. Nowhere amongst us is the mystic relation of the seed-corn of Demeter, whose poignant grief for her daughter threatens to bring famine on mankind (Hymn to Cer. 305\u2013306), nor anything like it, recorded.\"\nCiting the etymology of her name, 19th century scholar Gu\u00f0brandur Vigf\u00fasson theorizes that Sif \"betokens mother earth with her golden sheaves of grain; she was the goddess of the sanctity of the family and wedlock\".\nScholar Rudolf Simek theorizes that Sif likely originated as a complement to Thor through his fertility associations, and that the name \"Sif\" (Simek provides the etymology \"relation by marriage\") may have originally simply meant \"the wife (of Thor)\". Simek rejects notions of a \"vegetation cult\" venerating Sif, says that Sif does not appear to have a function, dismisses theories proposing connections between Sif's hair and grain as \"over-zealous interpretation[s]\", and theorizes that Snorri invented the story of Sif's shorn locks in attempt to explain the attributes of various gods.\nScholar H. R. Ellis Davidson states that Sif may have been an ancient fertility goddess, agreeing with a link between her lustrous hair and fields of golden wheat. Regarding Sif, Thor, and fertility, Davidson says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The cult of Thor was linked up with men's habitation and possessions, and with well-being of the family and community. This included the fruitfulness of the fields, and Thor, although pictured primarily as a storm god in the myths, was also concerned with the fertility and preservation of the seasonal round. In our own times, little stone axes from the distant past have been used as fertility symbols and placed by the farmer in the holes made by the drill to receive the first seed of spring. Thor's marriage with Sif of the golden hair, about which we hear little in the myths, seems to be a memory of the ancient symbol of divine marriage between sky god and earth goddess, when he comes to earth in the thunderstorm and the storm brings the rain which makes the fields fertile. In this way Thor, as well as Odin, may be seen to continue the cult of the sky god which was known in the Bronze Age.\nScholar John Lindow proposes that a potentially understated mythological importance of Sif's role in the story of her sheared hair exists; her headpiece is created along with the most important and powerful items in Norse mythology. Lindow further states that it may be easy to lose sight of the central role Sif plays in the creation of these objects.\nRowan.\nSif has been linked with Ravdna, the consort of the Sami thunder god Horagalles. Red berries of rowan were holy to Ravdna and the name \"Ravdna\" resembles the North Germanic words for the tree (for example, Old Norse \"reynir\"). According to \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", the rowan is called \"the salvation of Thor\" because Thor once saved himself by clinging to it. It has been theorized that Sif was once conceived in the form of a rowan to which Thor clung.\" Uno Harva has raised doubts about goddess Ravdna, as while the word does mean rowan in S\u00e1mi, she is only mentioned by Jacob Fellman, who referred to Horagalles as the Finnish Ukko and might've then been simply trying to find a S\u00e1mi equivalent for Rauni.\n\"Lokasenna\" accusations.\nRegarding the accusations that Loki makes to Sif in \"Lokasenna\", Carolyne Larrington says that Sif is not elsewhere attested as unfaithful, though notes that Odin makes a similar accusation in \"H\u00e1rbar\u00f0slj\u00f3\u00f0\", and theorizes a potential connection between the story of Loki cutting off Sif's hair with these references. Larrington says \"how he got close enough to carry this out might be explained by this verse.\"\nIdentity of Sif's first husband.\nSeveral identities have been suggested for Sif's first husband, the father of Ullr, but since neither \"Edda\" names this husband, most scholars continue to consider him unidentified. N. A. Nielsen suggests that she was married to Njord before the \u00c6sir\u2013Vanir War, an interpretation which depends on considering Ullr identical with Freyr, which Rudolf Simek characterizes as \"very precarious.\"\nModern influence.\nSif has inspired the name of a volcano on the planet Venus (Sif Mons).\nSif's characterization in modern media tends to be much more martial than in the original sources. The Marvel Comics character, Sif, is based on the Sif of Norse myth and is portrayed by Jaimie Alexander in the Marvel Studios film \"Thor\", its , the \"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.\" television series, and the \"Loki\" streaming series episode \"The Nexus Event\", where the hair shearing incident has loosely been adapted.\nLady Sif appears in Santa Monica Studio's 2022 video game \"God of War Ragnar\u00f6k\", where she is voiced by Emily Rose.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "69601", "revid": "16163452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69601", "title": "Tribes of Israel", "text": ""}
{"id": "69602", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69602", "title": "Snotra", "text": "Norse deity\nIn Norse mythology, Snotra (Old Norse: , \"clever\") is a goddess associated with wisdom. Snotra is attested in the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson. Scholars have proposed theories about the implications of the goddess.\nA character named Snotra also appears in a darkly comedic tale at the start of \"Gautreks saga\", in which she is a human woman, the youngest daughter in a family of foolish farmers. Her parents in this story are called Skafn\u00f6rtungr ('Skinflint') and T\u00f6tra ('Tatters'), and she has three brothers (Fjolmod, Imsigull, and Gilling) and two sisters (Hjotra and Fjotra). The family is visited by King Gauti of West Gotaland, the eponymous ancestor of the Geats and Goths, by whom Snotra becomes pregnant with Gautrek.\nAttestations.\nIn chapter 35 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\", High provides brief descriptions of 16 \u00e1synjur. High lists Snotra thirteenth, and says that Snotra \"is wise and courteous\". In addition, High adds that, after Snotra's name, a wise man or woman can be called \"snotr\". In the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Snotra is included among a list of 27 \u00e1synjur names. Apart from these two sources, Snotra is otherwise unattested.\nReception.\nAndy Orchard and Rudolf Simek state that, as Snotra is unattested beyond the \"Prose Edda\", Snotra may be an invention of Snorri's. Orchard theorizes that, otherwise, Snorri may have had access to a lost source, and that the little information Snorri presents may be derived from the meaning of her name.\nSimek says that Snorri may have invented Snotra from the Old Norse word \"snotr\" (\"clever\") and \"placed [her] next to other insignificant goddesses.\" However, Simek also writes that the goddesses Snotra, S\u00e1ga, Hl\u00edn, Sj\u00f6fn, V\u00e1r, and V\u00f6r should be considered vaguely defined figures who \"should be seen as female protective goddesses\" that are all responsible for \"specific areas of the private sphere, and yet clear differences were made between them so that they are in many ways similar to matrons.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69603", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69603", "title": "Alfonso I of Asturias", "text": "Alfonso I of Asturias, called the Catholic (\"el Cat\u00f3lico\"), (c.\u2009693 \u2013 757) was the third king of Asturias, reigning from 739 to his death in 757. His reign saw a great extension of the Christian domain of Asturias, reconquering Galicia and Le\u00f3n.\nHe succeeded his brother-in-law Favila, and was succeeded by his son, Fruela I. Alfonso's illegitimate son, Mauregatus, also became king, and his daughter Adosinda was consort to King Silo of Asturias. The dynasty started by Alfonso was known in contemporary Al-Andalus as the Astur-Leonese dynasty.\nBiography.\nAs the son of Duke Peter of Cantabria, Alfonso held many lands in that region. He is said to have married Ermesinda, daughter of Pelagius. His father-in-law founded Asturias after the Battle of Covadonga in which he reversed the Moorish conquest of the region. He succeeded Pelagius' son, his brother-in-law, Favila, on the throne after the latter's premature death.\nWhether Pelagius or Favila were ever considered kings in their own lifetime is debatable, but Alfonso certainly was. He began a lifelong war against the Moors. In 740, he took advantage of the Berber Revolt and expanded his domain. The cities of Lugo and Tuy in Galicia, who had remained unoccupied by Muslim forces joined his domain and, in 754, he conquered the City of Le\u00f3n. He went as far as La Rioja. However, the few urban populations of these frontier regions fled to his northern dominions, leaving a depopulated buffer between the Christian and Muslim states.\nThis created the so-called \"Desert of the Duero\", an empty region between the River Duero and the Asturian Mountains. Alfonso intended it this way; he wished to create an area in which any invading army would find survival difficult. Besides the martial aspects, the demographic and cultural effects of this policy on later Asturian, Spanish and Portuguese history is large. It was over a hundred years before the region was repopulated (an event known as the \"\").\nThe Arab writers speak of the kings of the northwest of Iberia as the \"Beni Alfons\" (descendants or House of Alfonso), and appear to recognize them as a Galician royal stock derived from Alfonso I. Alfonso is credited with establishing the shrine of Our Lady of Covadonga, in commemoration of his father in law's victory at the Battle of Covadonga. He and his queen are interred there. Their epitaph reads:\n \"AQVI YAZE EL CATOLICO Y SANTO REI DON ALONSO EL PRIMERO I SV MVJER DO\u00d1A ERMENISINDA ERMANA DE DON FAVILA A QVIEN SVCEDIO. GANO ESTE REY MVCHAS VITORIAS \u00c0 LOS MOROS. FALLECIO EN CANGAS A\u00d1O DE 757.\"\n \"Here lies the Catholic and Holy King Don Alfonso the First and his wife Do\u00f1a Ermesinda, sister of Don Favila whom he succeeded. This king won many victories against the Moors. He died in Cangas in the year 757.\"\nFamily.\nAlfonso had four children. Three were through his marriage to Ermesinda, and one, Mauregatus, was born to a Muslim slave, Sisalda.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69604", "revid": "35599429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69604", "title": "Perseverance of the saints", "text": "Calvinist doctrine\nPerseverance of the saints, also known as the preservation of the saints, is a Calvinist doctrine that asserts the elect will persevere in faith and ultimately attain salvation. This concept was initially developed by Augustine of Hippo in the early 5th century, based on the idea of predestination by predeterminism. In the 16th century, John Calvin and other reformers incorporated this idea into their theological framework. The doctrine of the perseverance of the saints is rooted in this specific understanding of predestination and remains a central tenet of Reformed theology today.\nDefinition and terminology.\nDefinition.\nThe doctrine of perseverance of the saints asserts that the elect will persevere in faith until the end of their lives and ultimately achieve salvation. Those who are truly born again are the elect who will persevere to the end.\nTerminology.\nThe alternative term \"preservation of the saints\" emphasizes God's role in determining the elect's perseverance. Conversely, \"perseverance of the saints\" highlights the human act of perseverance, which is a consequence of God's preservation. However, \"preservation of the saints\" is a broader concept that can describe how God preserves the elect, whether deterministically or not. The non-deterministic view, known as \"conditional preservation,\" refers to God protecting the believer\u2019s relationship with Him from external forces, contingent upon the believer\u2019s continued faith.\nBecause one practical interpretation of the Calvinist doctrine of \"perseverance of the saints\" leads to \"eternal security\", over time, the term became synonymous with the doctrine itself. By the early 20th century, \"eternal security\" was used as a strict synonym for \"perseverance of the saints\". However, given the theological significance of the term \"eternal security\" in common usage, it's important to distinguish them. Indeed, some Calvinist theologians reject the use of \"eternal security\" for their doctrine of perseverance, as do proponents of non-Calvinist forms of eternal security.\nHistory.\nAugustine's doctrine of perseverance.\nBefore his conversion to Christianity in 387, Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430), adhered to three deterministic philosophies: Stoicism, Neoplatonism and Manichaeism. After his conversion, he taught traditional Christian theology against forms of theological determinism until 412.\nDuring his conflict with the Pelagians, however Augustine seemed to reintroduce certain Manichean principles into his thought, a shift notably influenced by the controversy over infant baptism. His early exposure to Stoicism, with its emphasis on meticulous divine predeterminism, also shaped his views. According to Manichean doctrine, unborn and unbaptized infants were condemned to hell due to their physical bodies. Augustine asserted that God predetermined parents to seek baptism for their newborns, linking water baptism to regeneration, and ultimately predetermining which infants are damned and which are justified.\nAugustine had to explain why some baptized individuals continued in the faith while others fell away and lived immoral lives. He taught that among those regenerated through baptism, some receive an additional gift of perseverance () enabling them to maintain their faith and preventing them from falling away. Without this second gift, a baptized Christian with the Holy Spirit would not persevere and ultimately would not be saved. Augustine developed this doctrine of perseverance in (c.\u2009426\u2013427). While this doctrine theoretically gives security to the elect who receive the gift of perseverance, individuals cannot ascertain whether they have received it.\nProponents of Augustinian soteriology before the Reformation.\nBetween the 5th century and the Reformation in the 16th century, theologians who upheld Augustinian soteriology, included: Gottschalk (c. 808\u2013868), Ratramnus (died 868), Thomas Bradwardine (1300\u20131349), Gregory of Rimini (1300\u20131358), John Wycliffe (1320s \u2013 1384), Johann Ruchrat von Wesel (died 1481), Girolamo Savonarola (1452\u20131498) and Johannes von Staupitz (1460\u20131524).\nDevelopment of the Calvinist doctrine of perseverance.\nJohn Calvin (1509\u20131564) among other Reformers, was deeply influenced by Augustinian soteriology. The soteriology of Calvin was further shaped and systematized by Theodore Beza and other theologians. It was then articulated during the Second Synod of Dort (1618\u20131619) in response to the opposing \"Five Articles of Remonstrance\". The Calvinist doctrine of perseverance is present in Reformed confessions of faith such as the Lambeth Articles (1595), the Canons of Dort (1618-1619) and the Westminster Confession of Faith (1646).\nDoctrine.\nA consequence of the Calvinist doctrine of predestination.\nOrthodox forms of Calvinism view God's providence as expressed through theological determinism. This means that every event in the world is determined by God. As the Westminster Confession of Faith put it: \"God, from all eternity, did, by the most wise and holy counsel of His own will, freely, and unchangeably ordain whatever comes to pass.\"\nConcerning salvation, Calvin expressly taught that it is God's sovereign decision to determine whether an individual is saved or damned. He writes \"By predestination we mean the eternal decree of God, by which he determined with himself whatever he wished to happen with regard to every man. All are not created on equal terms, but some are preordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation; and, accordingly, as each has been created for one or other of these ends, we say that he has been predestinated to life or to death.\" Indeed, human actions leading to this end are also predetermined by God. In accordance, Calvin held to the doctrine of perseverance of the saints, contending for the unconditional preservation of the elect.\nPractical interpretations of the doctrine of perseverance of the saints.\nPractical interpretation rejecting an absolute assurance of salvation.\nAccording to Calvinism, apostasy is not possible for those who are true Christians. However, being a true Christian is only demonstrated by perseverance to the end. This arises because there are instances where individuals appear to come to God but later display definitive apostasy. To address this phenomenon, Calvinist theologians have postulated that common grace might include effects that cannot be distinguished from effectual calling and subsequent irresistible grace. About that issue, Calvin formulated the concept of a temporary grace (sometimes called \"evanescent grace\") that appears and works for only a while in the reprobate but then to disappears. According to this concept, the Holy Spirit can create in some people effects which are indistinguishable from those of the irresistible grace of God, producing also a visible \"fruit\" in their life. Temporary grace was also supported by later Calvinist theologians such as Theodore Beza, William Perkins, John Owen, A. W. Pink and Loraine Boettner. This suggests that the knowledge of being a true Christian is theoretically not accessible during life. Thus a first interpretation of the doctrine of perseverance of the saints acknowledges explanations of apparent apostasy like \"evanescent grace,\" which avoids offering to the believer absolute assurance of salvation during life. Several Reformed theologians have expressed a non-absolute assurance of salvation view.\nPractical interpretation supporting an absolute assurance of salvation.\nCalvin heavily drew upon Augustinian soteriology. However, both Augustine and Luther, an Augustinian friar, held that believers, based on their own understanding, cannot definitively know if they are among the \"elect to perseverance.\" Despite Calvin's inability to offer a clear rationale, he was more optimistic than Luther regarding this possibility. Calvin suggested that some assurance of being an elect might be possible. This possibility of assurance, based on personal introspection, was also expressed by later Calvinist theologians. It was mentioned in the Heidelberg Catechism (1563) and the Westminster Confession of Faith (1646). In the 18th century, Hyper-Calvinism encouraged introspection as a means for adherents to determine their election. The concept persisted into the 19th century. This assurance forms the foundation of unconditional eternal security within Calvinist circles.\nThe process leading to eternal security unfolds as follows: Initially, the believer must embrace the Calvinist system, emphasizing unconditional election and irresistible grace. Subsequently, through self-examination, they must discern the spiritual influence of the Holy Spirit. This introspection may lead to a faith in their own predetermined election. In this context, the concept of the perseverance of the saints may prompt the believer to believe in their irresistible perseverance.\nBecause this practical interpretation of the doctrine of \"perseverance of the saints\" leads to \"eternal security\", within Reformed Christianity, the term has become synonymous with the doctrine itself over time. By the early 20th century, \"eternal security\" was used as a strict synonym for \"perseverance of the saints\". However, in broader Protestantism, \"eternal security\" often carries a distinct meaning. It's then important to differentiate the two due to their respective theological significance.\nGroups such as the Primitive Baptists, originating in Georgia in the early 20th century, officially embraced this form of eternal security due to their strong Calvinist beliefs. \nHistorical acknowledgment of the interpretations.\nIn Calvinist circles, thus, two practical interpretations emerge regarding \"perseverance of the saints\": One interpretation accept explanations of apparent apostasy such as \"evanescent grace,\" which does not offer believers absolute assurance of salvation during life. The other interpretation rejects these explanations, asserting that believers, through introspection, can know with absolute certainty that they are elect, thus allowing belief in eternal security. These two perspectives were already observed in the 16th century. Jacobus Arminius, (1560-1609), a pastor of the Reformed Church, encountered both perspectives stemming from the doctrine of perseverance of the saints. He labeled the first perspective \"despair\" () and the second \"security\" (). This \"eternal security\" interpretation of perseverance of the saints was also explicitly condemned by the Council of Trent (1545-1563).\nObjections.\nPerseverance of the saints hinders assurance of salvation.\nThe doctrine of perseverance of the saints can suggest that a believer have some assurance of final salvation. However, this interpretation faces criticism for its perceived inconsistency. In orthodox Calvinism, while the elect will persevere to the end, believers cannot know they are elect until they persevere to the end. This reality, regardless of explanations for definitive apostasy, undermines the practical utility of \"perseverance of the saints,\" hindering assurance of salvation. This critique has been advanced by various non-Calvinist sources, including proponents of free grace theology, and advocates of conditional preservation of the saints, such as Arminians.\nInconsistencies in explaining definitive apostasy.\nWithin the perseverance of the saints framework, the phenomenon of definitive apostasy is generally explained by Calvinist theologians by the \"evanescent grace\" concept. This concept implies that the Holy Spirit voluntarily gives temporary faith and related \"fruits\". Non-Calvinist Christians find this explanation contrary to the revealed character of God and inconsistent with the overall revelation.\nThe eternal security interpretation introduces a tension in the subject of faith.\nThe \"eternal security\" practical interpretation of perseverance of the saints asserts that an individual can believe he is an elect and will thus irresistibly persevere. Arminians often highlight a tension in this view between present faith in Jesus and faith in a past event, namely, election. They argue that such faith in a past event is given equal significance in ensuring final salvation as present faith in Jesus. Arminians contend that genuine faith should be unique and focused solely on Jesus.\nThe eternal security interpretation can lead to antinominianism.\nThe \"eternal security\" practical interpretation of perseverance of the saints asserts that an individual can believe he is an elect and will thus irresistibly persevere. Such an interpretation can lead an individual to abandon a dynamic understanding of sanctification in favor of a static, antinomian perspective.\nDebated exegetical aspects.\nWarning passages of the book of Hebrews.\nSeveral warning passages in the book of Hebrews, especially and seem to contradict the Calvinistic doctrine of the unconditional preservation of the elect. The debate over these passages centers around the identity of the persons in question, with the following main interpretations proposed:\nThere are several less common interpretations. One suggests that the warnings do not refer to a loss of salvation but rather a loss of eternal rewards. Another posits that the warnings could refer to Jewish Christians reverting to Judaism.\nHebrew 6:4-6 interpretations supporting Calvinist unconditional preservation.\n\"Hypothetical view\": Hebrews 6:4-6 can describe those who temporarily backslide in their faith but does not address the issue of permanent loss of faith. This interpretation has faced strong criticism from non-Calvinists.\n\"Phenomenological-false believer view\": Hebrews 6:4-6 does not refer to regenerated individuals, but to unbelievers who have received God's gifts and benefited from His grace yet remained skeptics. This view has also been strongly criticized by non-Calvinists.\nHebrew 6:4-6 interpretation contradicting Calvinist unconditional preservation.\n\"Phenomenological-true believer view\": Oropeza asserts that the recipients of the letter to the Hebrews had faced persecutions, and the author acknowledges that some members had become apostates despite their genuine conversion experiences. The author warns the current audience that despite their past benefits and experiences confirming their faith, they too could fall away if they continue in their state of malaise and neglect, with dire consequences for apostasy. While some argue for an irremediable apostasy interpretation, others, contend that apostasy by a regenerated Christian is possible but not systematically irremediable as long as they are alive. According to this view, McKnight suggests that the author of Hebrews describes an apostasy that exceeds the grace period given by God, which is irremediable, not the remediable apostasy that can occur during a person's life.\nDiffering Protestant views.\nAnabaptist view.\nAnabaptist theology traditionally teaches conditional preservation of the saints.\nLutheran view.\nLutherans believe that a true Christian can lose his or her salvation.\nArminian view.\nArminians teaches conditional preservation of the saints.\nFree Grace view.\nFree grace advocates believe that believers are promised eternal security, but not guaranteed perseverance. Those who do not persevere will face temporal discipline and loss of rewards.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69605", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69605", "title": "Cantabria", "text": "Autonomous community and province of Spain\nCantabria (, ; ) is an autonomous community and province in northern Spain with Santander as its capital city. It is called a , a historic community, in its current Statute of Autonomy. It is bordered on the east by the Basque Country (province of Biscay), on the south by Castile and Le\u00f3n (provinces of Le\u00f3n, Palencia and Burgos), on the west by Asturias, and on the north by the Cantabrian Sea, which forms part of the Bay of Biscay.\nCantabria belongs to Green Spain, the name given to the strip of land between the Bay of Biscay and the Cantabrian Mountains, so called because of its particularly lush vegetation, due to the wet and temperate oceanic climate. The climate is strongly influenced by Atlantic Ocean winds trapped by the mountains; the average annual precipitation is about .\nCantabria has archaeological sites from the Upper Paleolithic period, although the first signs of human occupation date from the Lower Paleolithic. The most significant site for cave paintings is in the cave of Altamira, dating from about 37,000 BCE and declared, along with nine other Cantabrian caves, as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO. It corresponds geographically to the area called Cantabria in the ancient period, but from the late Middle Ages to the early 19th century, the name Cantabria also referred to the territory of the Basques, especially the lordship of Biscay.\nThe modern province of Cantabria was constituted on 28 July 1778 at Puente San Miguel, Reoc\u00edn. This event is celebrated yearly on July 28, known as the Day of the Institutions. The Organic Law of the Autonomy Statute of Cantabria, approved on 30 December 1981, gave the region its own institutions of self-government.\nEtymology and usage.\nNumerous authors, including Isidore of Seville, Julio Caro Baroja, Aureliano Fern\u00e1ndez Guerra and Adolf Schulten, have explored the etymology of the name \"Cantabria\", yet its origins remain uncertain. The \"Online Etymology Dictionary\" states the root \"cant-\" is said to come from the Celtic for 'rock' or 'rocky', while \"-abr\" was a common suffix used in Celtic regions. Thus, \"Cantabrian\" could mean 'people who live in the rocks' or 'highlanders', a reference to the steep and mountainous territory of Cantabria.\nThe name \"Cantabria\" could also be related to the Celtic root \"kant\" or \"cant\" meaning 'edge' or 'rim' and thus 'coastal district' or 'corner-land', 'land on the edge', thus having the same probable derivation as the name of the English county of Kent and Canterbury, one of its major cities.\nDuring the Spanish liberal regimes of the 19th century, the term came to be increasingly associated to the province of Santander. However, in late medieval and modern literature, \"Cantabria\" and \"Cantabrians\" refer to the Basque Country, especially the lordship of Biscay, and the Basques.\nGeography.\nRelief.\nCantabria is a mountainous and coastal region, with important natural resources. It has two distinct areas which are well differentiated morphologically:\nTowards the south are higher mountains, the tops of which form the watershed between the drainage basins of the Rivers Ebro, Duero and the rivers that flow into the Bay of Biscay. These peaks generally exceed from the Pass of San Glorio in the west to the Pass of Los Tornos in the eastern part: Pe\u00f1a Labra, Castro Valnera and the mountain passes of Sejos, El Escudo and La S\u00eda. The great limestone masses of Picos de Europa also stand out in the southwest of the region: most of their summits exceed , and their topography is shaped by the former presence of glaciers.\nClimate.\nDue to the Gulf Stream, Cantabria, as well as the rest of \"Green Spain\", has a much more temperate climate than might be expected for its latitude. The region has a humid oceanic climate, with warm summers and mild winters. Annual precipitation is around at the coasts and higher in the mountains. The mean temperature is about . Snow is frequent in the higher zones of Cantabria between the months of October and March. Some zones of Picos de Europa, over high, have an alpine climate with snow persisting year-round. The driest months are July and August. The mountainous relief of Cantabria has a dominant effect on local microclimate in Cantabria. It is the main cause of the peculiar meteorologic situations like the so-called \"suradas\" (\u00c1brego wind), due to the foehn effect: the southerly wind coming down from the mountains blows strongly and dry, increasing the temperature closer to the coast. This causes a decrease in air humidity and rainfall. These conditions are more frequent in autumn and winter, and the temperatures are commonly higher than . Fires are often helped by this type of wind: one example is the fire that destroyed part of the city of Santander in the winter of 1941. In these specific cases in the southern part of the mountain range the dry adiabatic gradient produces different conditions to the rest of the region: the wind there is fresher and more humid, and there is more rain.\nHydrology.\nThe rivers of Cantabria are short and rapid, descending steeply because the sea is so close to their source in the Cantabrian Mountains. They flow perpendicular to the coastline, except for the Ebro. They also generally flow year round due to constant rainfall. Nevertheless, the rate of flow is modest (20 m3/s annual average) compared to the other rivers of the Iberian Peninsula. The rapidness of their waters, caused by their steep descents, gives them great erosive power, creating the narrow V-shaped valleys characteristic of Green Spain. The environmental condition of the rivers is generally good, although increasing human activity due to rising population in the valleys continues to pose a challenge.\nThe main rivers of the region, sorted by drainage basin, are:\nCantabria is the only autonomous community whose rivers flow into every one of the seas which surround the Iberian Peninsula: the Cantabrian Sea, the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea.\nVegetation.\nThe variation in the altitude of the region, which in a short distance ranges from sea level to 2,600 meters in the mountains, leads to a great deal of diversity in vegetation and a large number of biomes. Cantabria has vegetation typical of the Atlantic side of the Iberian Peninsula. It is characterized by forests of leafy deciduous trees such as oak and European beech. Nevertheless, human intervention dating back to ancient times has favored the creation of pastures, allowing the existence of large areas of grassland and prairies suitable for grazing cattle. These grasslands are mingled with plantations of eucalyptus and native oak. The southern part of Cantabria, including the \"comarca\" of Campoo the fringes of the Castilian plateau, is characterized by the transition to drier vegetation. Another diversifying factor which contributes to local variation within the region is the Mediterranean ecotone, giving rise to species unique to the region, such as the holm oak and arbutus trees, which are found in poor limestone soils with little moisture.\nIn Cantabria there are several zones of plant life:\nDuring the last two decades of the 20th century, and due mainly to European agricultural policies (CAP), many farmers substituted forestry for livestock farming, so as to avoid unemployment and poverty. This provoked a surge of eucalyptus \u2013 \u2013 plantations (and to a less extent of pines) which often hid the illegal destruction of native forests, just as the spread of livestock farming had done in the past by the endemic conversion of forest into prairie. These acts have been laxly controlled by the local councils or the central governments, in a process that clearly follows the saying: \"Pan para hoy, hambre para ma\u00f1ana\" (which translates as 'Bread for today, hunger for tomorrow'; i.e., \"short-term gain, long-term pain\").\nThe plantation of pines has given way in the last decades to that of eucalyptus because this non-indigenous species has no natural attacker within the European ecosystem (while pines are highly vulnerable to the pine processionary).\nBoth in relative and absolute terms the use of woods for forestry has increased in Cantabria, and is now almost 70% of all woods in the region.\nAlong with these characteristics it would also be necessary to mention peculiarities of the \"comarca\" of Li\u00e9bana, which has a microclimate very similar to the Mediterranean, allowing to grow cork oaks, vines and olives, and which is still very well conserved from human activity.\nThe other remarkable \"comarca\" is Campoo, in southern Cantabria, with its Pyrenean oak.\nNatural parks.\nThere are seven natural areas in this autonomous community designated as Natural or national parks:\nThe most important of these is the Picos de Europa National Park, which affects Castile and Le\u00f3n and Asturias in addition to Cantabria, the three autonomous communities sharing its management. Santo\u00f1a, Victoria and Joyel marshes are also Special Protection Areas for the birds (ZEPA).\nFurthermore, nine Sites of Community Importance (LIC) have been declared: Western Mountain, Eastern Mountain, Western Rias and Oyambre Dunes, Dunes of Liencres and Estuary of the Pas, El Puntal Dunes and Estuary of the Miera, Ria de Ajo, Marshes of Noja-Santo\u00f1a, Escudo de Cabu\u00e9rniga Range and several caves with important bat colonies.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, the region has a population of 590,851, which constitutes 1.22% of the population of Spain, with the population density numbering 111.0 people per square kilometer. The average life expectancy for male inhabitants is 75 years; for female inhabitants, it is 83 years. Eight years later in 2017 the population has fallen to 581,477 according to INE.\nIn relative contrast to other regions of Spain, Cantabria has not experienced much immigration. In 2007, only 4.7% of the population were immigrants. The predominant countries of origin for immigrants to Cantabria are Colombia, Romania, Ecuador, Peru, Moldova, and Morocco.\nThe majority of the population resides in the coastal area, particularly in two cities: Santander, with 183,000 people, and Torrelavega, the second largest urban and industrial centre in Cantabria, having a population of around 60,000. These two cities form a conurbation known as the Santander-Torrelavega metropolitan area. Castro Urdiales has an official population of 28,542, making it the fourth largest in the region because of its proximity to the Bilbao metropolitan area, there are a large number of people not registered in Castro Urdiales, and the true count may be double the official figure.\nThe most populated municipalities of Cantabria as of 2018 are the following:\nHistory.\nRoman Empire.\nThe first written reference to the name Cantabria emerges around 195 BC, in which the historian Cato the Elder speaks in his book \"Origines\" about the source of the Ebro River in the country of the Cantabri:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...The Ebro River starts in the land of the Cantabri, large and beautiful, with abundant fish...\u2014\u200a\nThere are about 150 references to Cantabria or the Cantabri in surviving Greek and Latin texts. The Cantabri were used as mercenaries in various conflicts, both within the Iberian Peninsula and elsewhere. It is certain that they participated in the Second Punic War, from references by Silius Italicus and Horace. When C. Hostilius Mancinus was besieging Numantia, he withdrew upon learning that Cantabri and Vaccaei were present among his auxiliaries. The Cantabrian Wars began in 29 BC. They were defeated by Agrippa with great slaughter in 19 BC, but they revolted again under Tiberius and were never entirely subdued.\nIn older geographers, the term Cantabria referred to an expansive country bounded by the Cantabrian Sea (the Bay of Biscay), the western side of the Sella valley in Asturias, the hillfort of Pe\u00f1a Amaya in Burgos, and along the Aguera River almost as far as Castro Urdiales. It thus included areas of Asturias, Santander, Biscay, and Guipuzcoa. Following the Roman conquest of Spain, however, it was restricted to the area of Santander and eastern Asturias, forming a part of Hispania Tarraconensis (\"Tarragonan Spain\"). The principal tribes of the area were the Pleutauri, the Varduli, the Autrigones, the Tuisi, and the Conisci or Concaui, who were known for feeding on their horses' blood. The area was well settled, with the largest city being Juliobriga, and the local mountains exploited for lead mines.\nMiddle Ages.\nFollowing the collapse of the Roman Empire, Cantabria regained its independence from the rule of the Visigoths. In 574, King Liuvigild attacked Cantabria and managed to capture the south of the country, including the city of Amaya, where he established a Visigothic province called the Duchy of Cantabria (see picture), which would serve as a limes or frontier zone to contain the Cantabri as well as their neighbors the Vascones. To the north of this cordon, however, the Cantabri continued to live independently until the Arab invasion. In 714, a mixed Arab/Berber army of Muslim Moors invaded the upper valleys of the Ebro and succeeded in capturing Amaya, the Cantabrian capital, forcing the Cantabrians back to their traditional frontiers, where they joined forces with the Kingdom of Asturias. In the first chronicles of the Reconquista, Cantabria still appears to be acknowledged as a region. In the \"Albendense Chronicle\", when speaking of Alfonso I, it says, \"This was the son of Peter, the duke of Cantabria\".\nDuring the 9th century, on mentioning the monastery of Saint Zacharias, in a letter sent to Wiliesind, bishop of Pamplona, Eulogius of C\u00f3rdoba pinpoints it in \"Seburim\" (maybe Zubiri) on the river Arga, \"waters all of Cantabria\", suggesting a region stretching out far into the east. From this period on, source documents barely reference Cantabria by name, with \"Asturias\" featuring in names of the \"comarcas\" called \"Asturias de Santillana\", \"Asturias de Trasmiera\" and \"Asturias de Laredo\".\nFrom a central core formed by the \"Hermandad de las Cuatro Villas\" (\"Brotherhood of the Four Cities\") (Santander, Laredo, Castro Urdiales and San Vicente de la Barquera), the \"Hermandad de las Marismas\" (\"Brotherhood of the Marshes\") was created, thereby uniting all the important seaports to the East of Asturias. During the period of the Reconquista, the Four Cities actively participated in the re-settling of Andalusia, dispatching men and ships. The coastal port cities of C\u00e1diz and El Puerto de Santa Mar\u00eda were settled by families from the Cantabrian Sea ports. Ships from the Four Cities took part in the taking of Seville, destroying the ship bridge linking Triana and Sevilla, a victory that is represented by the Carrack and the Torre del Oro of Sevilla in the coat of arms of Santander, Coat of arms of Cantabria and Avil\u00e9s (Asturias).\n16th to 18th centuries.\nIn the 16th century, the name \"La Monta\u00f1a\" (\"The Mountain\") was widespread in popular usage and in literature, as a designation of the Ancient Cantabria, as opposed to Castile, which referred solely to the Central Plateau. This distinction has survived into modern times.\nWith the rise of the Catholic Monarchs, the Brethren of the Marshes disappeared, leaving the Coregiment of the Four Villas, which included the whole area of influence of the old Brethren of the Four Villas (almost all of Cantabria). During the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\", the greatest jurisdictional lordships of Cantabria were mainly under the control of three of the Grandee families of Spain: that of Mendoza (Dukes of Infantado, Marquises of Santillana), of Manrique de Lara (Marquises of Aguilar de Campoo, Counts of Casta\u00f1eda), and to a lesser extent that of Velasco (Dukes of Fr\u00edas, Constables of Castile).\nFrom the 16th century on, there was renewed interest in studying Cantabria and the Cantabri, particularly concerning the precise location of the territory that this people had occupied. It was not until the 18th century that the debate about the location and size of Ancient Cantabria was settled in a series of works which described the history of the region such as \"La Cantabria\" by the Augustinian father and historian Enrique Fl\u00f3rez de Seti\u00e9n. Concurrent with the resurgence of this interest in the Cantabrians and the clarification of the aforementioned polemic, many institutions, organizations and jurisdictions in the mountainous territory received the name of \"Cantabrian\" or \"of Cantabria\".\nIn 1727, the first attempt to unify what would later become the province of Cantabria occurred. Despite this, the high level of autonomy that the small entities of the fractured estate of Cantabria enjoyed, combined with a lack of resources, continued to be the main reason for Cantabria's weakness, aggravated by the progressive advance of the Bourbonic centralism and its administrative efficiency. The latter continually emphasised the impossibility of the smaller territories facing a multitude of problems on their own: from communications to the exercise of justice, from putting aside adequate reserves for hard times to the indiscriminate levees for soldiers, and above all the progression of fiscal impositions. All of this led to an acceleration of contact between villas, valleys and jurisdictions, which tended to focus on the Assemblies of the provinces of the Nine Valleys, led by the deputies elected by the traditional entities of self-government.\nThere were two events that triggered the culmination of the integration process in this second attempt:\nIn this General Assembly a framework was established and formal steps began to be taken, leading to administrative and legal unity in 1778. This all culminated in the success of the Assembly held in the Assembly House of \"Puente San Miguel\" on 28 July 1778, where the province of Cantabria was constituted. It was achieved by passing the common ordinances which had been developed to that end, and which had been discussed and approved previously in councils of all the villas, valleys and subscribed jurisdictions. They were, in addition to the Nine Valleys: Rivadedeva, Pe\u00f1amellera, the province of Li\u00e9bana, Pe\u00f1arrubia, Lamas\u00f3n, Rionansa, the Villa of San Vicente de la Barquera, Coto de Estrada, Vald\u00e1liga, the Villa of Santillana del Mar, Lugar de Vi\u00e9rnoles, the Villa of Cartes and environs, the Valley of Buelna, the Valley of Cieza, the Valley of Igu\u00f1a with the Villas of San Vicente and Los Llares, the Villa of Pujayo, the Villa of Pie de Concha y B\u00e1rcena, the Valley of Anievas, and the Valley of Toranzo.\nHaving learned lessons from the failed attempt of 1727, the first objective of the new entity was to obtain approval from King Charles III for the union of all the Cantabrian jurisdictions into one province. The royal ratification was granted on 22 November 1779.\nThe 28 jurisdictions that initially comprised the province of Cantabria were clear in their intention that all the other jurisdictions that formed the \"Party and Baton of the Four Villas of the Coast\" should be included in the new province. To this end they set out the steps needed for this to happen as soon as those jurisdictions should request it. They would have to abide by the ordinances, having the same rights and duties as the founders, all on an equal footing. Thus, the following joined in quick succession: the Abbey of Santillana, the Valleys of Tudanca, Polaciones, Herrer\u00edas, Casta\u00f1eda, the Villa of Torrelavega and environs, Val de San Vicente, Valle de Carriedo, Tresviso, and the Pasiegan Villas of La Vega, San Roque and San Pedro, as well as the city of Santander with its abbey.\nCompetition between the townships of Laredo and Santander led to the latter, having initially allowed the name of Cantabria for the province created at the beginning of the 19th century, later retracting its consent and demanding that it bear the name of Santander, so there would be no doubt as to which was the capital. When in 1821 the Provincial Council presented before the constitutional Courts its definitive plan for the provincial borders and legal entities, it proposed the name of province of Cantabria, to which the Township of Santander replied that \"this province must retain the name of Santander\". However, many newspapers still showed in their headings the name of Cantabria, or Cantabrian.\n19th century.\nDuring the War of Independence (1808\u20131814), Bishop Rafael Tom\u00e1s Men\u00e9ndez de Luarca, a strong defender of absolutism, promoted himself as the \"Regent of Cantabria\" and established the \"Cantabrian Armaments\" in Santander, a section of the army whose purpose was to travel to all the mountain passes from the Central Plateau to detain any French troop.\nAlthough defeated, he managed later to regroup in Li\u00e9bana under the command of General Juan D\u00edaz Porlier, calling his forces the \"Cantabrian Division\", in which there were various regiments and battalions, such as the \"Hussars of Cantabria\" (cavalry) or the \"Shooters of Cantabria\" (infantry). During the Carlist wars they formed a unit called the \"Cantabrian Brigade\".\n20th century.\nThe use of terms with ancestral resonance through the 18th and 19th centuries continued during the 20th century, taking on a political tone that was distinctly regionalist, until 1936. In fact, the \"Republican Federal Party\" produced an autonomy statute for a Cantabrian-Castilian Federal State that year, which would include present-day Cantabria and any neighbouring areas from Castile and Asturias willing to join it. It could not be passed because of the Civil War. Following the war and the subsequent marginalization of such efforts under the Francoists regime, the use of the name of Cantabria decreased, to the point that for official purposes it was relegated to sports associations, the only arena in which Cantabria was noted as a region.\nIn 1963, the president of the Provincial Council, Pedro Escalante y Huidobro, proposed reapplying the name of Cantabria to the Province of Santander, as suggested in an academic report written by the historian Tom\u00e1s Maza Solano. Although further steps were taken and many of the townships were in favour of the move, the petition did not succeed, mostly due to the opposition of Santander City Council. On 30 December 1981, a process that had been started in April 1979 by the Council of Cabez\u00f3n de la Sal, under the presidency of Ambrosio Calzada Hern\u00e1ndez, culminated in the granting of self-rule to Cantabria, outlined in Article 143 of the Spanish Constitution.\nCantabria based its claim to autonomy on the constitutional precept that made provision for self-government for \"provinces with a historic regional character\".\nA Mixed Assembly formed out of provincial deputies and national members of parliament began the task of drawing up an Autonomy Statute on 10 September 1979. Following the approval of the General Courts on 15 December 1981, the King of Spain signed the corresponding Organic Law of Autonomy Statute for Cantabria on 30 December of the same year. Thus, the province of Santander broke its link to Castile, and left the former region of Castile and Le\u00f3n to which it had belonged up to that time, together with the provinces of \u00c1vila, Burgos, Le\u00f3n, Logro\u00f1o, Palencia, Salamanca, Segovia, Soria, Valladolid and Zamora.\nOn 20 February 1982, the first Regional Assembly (now Parliament) was formed, with provisional status. From this time, the former province of Santander has been known as Cantabria and has thereby regained its historic name. The first home-rule elections were held in May 1983. The 4th Legislature (1995\u20131999) brought into effect the first great reform of the Autonomy Statute of Cantabria, approved by all the parliamentary groups.\nGovernment and administration.\nThe Autonomy Statute of Cantabria of 30 December 1981, established that Cantabria has in its institutions the desire to respect fundamental rights and public freedom, at the same time as consolidating and stimulating regional development through democratic channels. This document gathers all competences of the Autonomous Community that were transferred from the Government of Spain. As in other Autonomous Communities, some competences were not transferred, for example, Justice. The Statute also defines the symbols that should represent the region: The flag, the coat of arms and the anthem of Cantabria.\nThe Parliament of Cantabria is the principal self-government institution of the Autonomous Community, being the representative body of the Cantabrians. Presently it is constituted by thirty-nine deputies elected by universal, equal, free, direct and secret suffrage. The primary functions of the Parliament are: to exercise the legislative power, to approve the budgets of the Autonomous Community, to motivate and control the actions of the government, and to develop the rest of the competences that the Spanish Constitution, the Autonomy Statute and the rest of the legal order bestow on it. The President of the Autonomous Community holds the highest representation of the Community and ordinary representation of the Country in Cantabria, and presides over the Government, coordinating its activities.\nThe Government of Cantabria is the body in charge of directing the political activities and exercising the executive and regulatory powers according to the Constitution, the Statute and the laws. The Government is made up of the President, the Vicepresident (in which the President can delegate his executive functions and representations) and the Councillors, who are appointed and ceased by the President.\nAfter several legislatures presided by the Partido Popular or by Juan Hormaechea's UPCA, the Regional Government of Cantabria was directed by a coalition of the Regionalist Party of Cantabria and Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) from year 2003 until 2011. The President was Miguel \u00c1ngel Revilla of Partido Regionalista de Cantabria (PRC), and the Vice President was Dolores Gorostiaga of the PSOE. As a result of the absolute majority of the Partido Popular in the regional elections of 2011, the president from 2011 to 2015 was Ignacio Diego Palacios, and the Vice President was also the healthcare Councillor, Maria Jos\u00e9 S\u00e1enz de Buruaga. After the 2015 regional elections, Miguel \u00c1ngel Revilla of Partido Regionalista de Cantabria (PRC) was invested president for a third tenure with the support of PSOE.\nTerritorial organization.\nThe autonomous community of Cantabria is structured in \"municipios\" (municipalities) and \"comarcas\" (regions).\nMunicipalities.\nThere are 102 municipalities in Cantabria generally comprising several townships, and from these, several districts. A number of municipalities bear the name of one of their townships (be it its capital or not), but not all them do. Each municipality is governed by its own city or municipal council, and two of them, Tresviso and Pesquera, did it by \"concejo abierto\" (\"open council\") until 2011, having fewer than 250 inhabitants.\nThe Mancomunidad Campoo-Cabu\u00e9rniga is not a municipality, but a communal property, singular for its size and characteristics, of shared management between the municipalities of Hermandad de Campoo de Suso, Cabu\u00e9rniga, Los Tojos and Ruente. This mountain estate is used as a grazing ground for Tudanca cattle and also for horses in less amount, in its \"bra\u00f1as\" or grass prairies, and even nowadays transhumant cattle farming traditions survive in this region.\nSee also:\n\"Comarcas\" (regions).\nThe Cantabrian legislation divides the autonomous community in administrative regions called \"comarcas\", but traditionally, other subdivisions of the territory have been used.\n\"Law 8/1999 of \"Comarcas\" of the Autonomous Community of Cantabria\" of 28 April 1999 establishes that the comarca is a necessary entity, integral in the territorial organization of the region. This law opens the development of the \"comarcalization\" in Cantabria promoting the creation of \"comarcal\" entities, which have barely begun to appear. The law establishes that the creation of comarcas will not become mandatory for the whole territory until at least the 70% of it had not been \"comarcalized\" by its own will. It also adds that Santander will not ruled by comarcalization and should establish its own metropolitan area instead.\n\"Comarcas\" in Cantabria have not reached administrative nature and barely have definite borders. Only Li\u00e9bana for its geographic position in Picos de Europa, Trasmiera and Campoo, in the Ebro basin are established are clearly defined \"comarcas\" in the region. Nevertheless, functional differences in the territory can be distinguished, dividing it in the following areas: Santander Bay, of industrial and urban nature; Besaya, also industrial; Saja-Nansa, eminently rural; Western Coast, which has urban character; Eastern Coast, vacational; the traditionally renowned Trasmiera; rural Pas-Miera; As\u00f3n-Ag\u00fcera, also mainly rural; the very well defined Li\u00e9bana, and Campoo-Los Valles, rural and industrial by regions.\nUntil the 13th century, Cantabria was organized in valleys, as was typical in all of northern Spain. From then on, it was substituted by the organization in cities, towns or historic \"comarcas\" that grouped several valleys.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Cantabria has a primary sector, now in decline, employing 5.8% of the active population in the industries of cattle farming, traditional dairy farming, and meat production; agriculture, especially corn, potatoes, vegetables, and roughage; maritime fishing; and the mining of zinc and quarries.\nThe secondary sector which employs 30.3% of the active population is the sector with the most productivity in recent years due to construction; that of ironworking (Reinosa being the most important city), food service (milk, meat, vegetables and seafood), chemistry (Solvay, Sniace), paper production (Sinace, Papelera del Besaya), textile fabrication (Textil Santanderina in Cabez\u00f3n de la Sal), pharmacy (Moehs in Requejada), industrial groups and transport, etc. The service sector employs 63.8% of the active population and is increasing, given that large concentrations of the population live in the urban centers and the importance that tourism has acquired in the recent years. As of July 2014, the unemployment rate in Cantabria is 19.3%, compared to 24.47% in Spain; while as of April 2010 its purchasing power parity was \u20ac25,326, compared to \u20ac26,100 in Spain and \u20ac25,100 in the EU25. In 2007, Cantabria's growth of real GDP was 4.1%, compared to a 3.9% average for Spain. The Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 13.8 billion \u20ac in 2018. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac25,500 or 84% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nTransportation and communications.\nThe most significant consequence of the strong relief of the Cantabrian territory is the existence of topographic barriers that condition decisively the courses of the linking infrastructures, as much in the north\u2013south orientation in the accesses to the Castilian Mesa, as in the east\u2013west in the communication between valleys. Moreover, the cost of their construction and maintenance is much higher than average.\nThe main communications infrastructures of the region are:\nMass media and public opinion.\nIn Cantabria, there are two daily regional newspapers in addition to the national ones: \"El Diario Monta\u00f1\u00e9s\" and \"Alerta\", as well as many weekly, fortnightly and monthly publications. The main national radio stations have transmitter stations in places like Santander, Torrelavega, Castro-Urdiales, or Reinosa. There are also numerous local and regional stations. For the moment, there is no Cantabrian autonomic television with public financing, although some local channels exist (including Canal 8 DM, TeleBah\u00eda, Telecabarga, Localia TV Cantabria, etc.). In recent years, the Internet has allowed new informative proposals to emerge in the shape of digital diaries or blogs, which contribute to enrich the mediatic panorama of the region.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nSpanish is the official language of Cantabria. The eastern part of Cantabria contributed to the origins of Medieval Spanish in a significant way. In western areas, there are remnants of the Cantabrian language, also called \"monta\u00f1\u00e9s\", and it is also somewhat preserved in parts of the Pas and Soba valleys in its eastern zone. Cantabrian can be viewed as a dialect of the wider Astur-Leonese language continuum, and is mutually intelligible with varieties in neighbouring Asturias.\nFairs and festivals.\nRegarding the fairs, understood as big markets of products periodically celebrated, it is remarkable the \"Livestock Fair of Torrelavega\" taking place in the National Livestock Market \"Jes\u00fas Collado Soto\", the third biggest of Spain, that groups the buy and sell of all kinds of cattle in the region itself and the adjacent ones, being the bovine the main product. All over the region cattle and typical products fairs are celebrated weekly, monthly, or annually to gather the neighbours of the land. There are many different festivities in Cantabria, some of them limited just to small villages, but there are also festivals that attract tourism from all over the country. The most important are the following:\nThe following festivals are also remarkable in modern Cantabrian culture: Santander International Festival (Arts festival), Santander Summer Festival (Music festival), Sotocine (Film festival)\nMythology.\nThe north of the Spanish state is a rich area for mythology. From Galicia to the Basque Country, passing by Asturias and Cantabria, there are rites, stories and imaginary or impossible beings.\nCantabrian lore turns its forests and mountains into magical places where the myths, beliefs and legends have been present as an essential part of the Cantabrian culture, either because they have been living in the popular heritage through the oral tradition transmitted from father to son, or because they have been recovered by scholars (Manuel Llano and others) who have worried about preserving the cultural heritage.\nIts mythology and superstitions present a great Celtic influence that has diluted with the pass of time, being romanized or Christianized in many cases.\nThere is a heavy presence of fabulous beings of giant proportions and Cyclopean features (the \"oj\u00e1ncanos\"), fantastic animals (\"culebres\", \"caballucos del diablu\" (lit. horses of the devil, damselflies), \"ramidrejus\", etc.), f\u00e6ries (\"anjanas\", \"ijanas\" of Aras), duendes (\"nuberos, ventolines, trentis, trasgus, trastolillos, musgosu, tentiruju\"), anthropomorphic characters (the \"sirenuca\" (little mermaid), the fish-man, the cuegle, the wife-bear of Andara, the \"guajona\"), etc.\nThe livestock farming reputation of the region and its climatological conditions favouring cattle breeding allowed the European Union to pass the \"Meats of Cantabria\" denomination as a \"Protected Geographic Denomination\" for the beef of certain kinds of native races (\"Tudanca\", \"Monchina\") and others adapted to the environment or integrated by assimilation (\"Brown Alpine\").\nSports.\nThe traditional sport of Cantabria is the game of \"bolos\" (skittles) in its four forms: \"bolo palma\", \"pasabolo tabl\u00f3n\", \"pasabolo losa\" and \"bolo pasiego\". The first one is the most widespread, exceeding regional nature and reaching the eastern zone of Asturias and also being the most complex in its game rules. The existence of \"boleras\" or skittle rings is important in every Cantabrian township, often being near the church or the village pub. Since the late 1980s, skittle play has consolidated with the reinforcement of skittle schools, revamped by different town councils and Cantabrian institutions, various competitions, and media coverage.\nThe remo (rowing) is a very traditional sport in the coastal towns. The origins of rowing in Cantabria go back many centuries, when several \"traineras\" (traditional fishing longboats) competed for the selling of the caught fish, which was reserved for the first ship to arrive to the fish market. At the end of the 19th century, work became sport and people started to celebrate regattas between Cantabrian townships. The sport clubs of Cantabria, especially the Astillero, Castro Urdiales, and the Pedre\u00f1a belong to the most prize-winning teams of the history of this sport, and nowadays they are having one of the best moments after a decades-long period of trophy drought.\nThe Pasiegan jump is another of the outstanding rural sports of the region and a clear example of how the use of a work skill that disappears with the pass of time, gives rise to games and competition. Similar to other forms, like the Canarian shepherd jump, in the beginning this technique was used in the Pasiegan valleys to cross the stone walls, the fences, the creeks or the ravines that bordered the fields and obstructed the pass in the abrupt geography of the highland areas of Cantabria.\nReferring to mass sports, Cantabria is present in national and international competitions through teams such as the \"Racing de Santander\", the \"RS Gimn\u00e1stica de Torrelavega\" and the Cantabria autonomous football team in football or the \"Independiente RC\" in rugby union. The \"Club Balonmano Cantabria\" that won Leagues and King's Cups as well as IHF Super Globe, EHF Champions League, EHF Cup Winners' Cup and EHF Cup in handball or the Cantabria Lobos that played in the ACB in basketball represented the highest level of the Cantabrian sport in the recent past.\nNotable Cantabrians.\nCantabria has been the birthplace of exceptional and notable individuals in fields such as literature, arts, sciences, etc. Many of them have played a decisive role, not only in the history and events of the region, but also on the national and international levels. These include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69607", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69607", "title": "Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Castile", "text": "King of Le\u00f3n (1065\u20131109), Castile (1072\u20131109), and Galicia (1071\u20131109)\nAlfonso VI (c.\u20091040/1041\u00a0\u2013 1 July 1109), nicknamed the Brave (\"El Bravo\") or the Valiant, was king of Le\u00f3n (1065\u20131109), Galicia (1071\u20131109), and Castile (1072\u20131109).\nAfter the conquest of Toledo in 1085, Alfonso proclaimed himself (most victorious king of Toledo, and of Spain and Galicia). This conquest, along with El Cid's taking of Valencia would greatly expand the territory and influence of the Leonese/Castilian realm, but also provoked an Almoravid invasion that Alfonso would spend the remainder of his reign resisting. The Leonese and Castilian armies suffered decisive defeats in the battles of Sagrajas (1086), Consuegra (1097) and Ucl\u00e9s (1108), in the latter of which his only son and heir, Sancho Alf\u00f3nsez, died, and Valencia was abandoned but Toledo remained part of an expanded realm that he passed to his daughter.\nLife.\nBirth and early years.\nThe son of Ferdinand I, King of Le\u00f3n and Count of Castile and his wife, Queen Sancha, Alfonso was a \"Leonese \"infante\" [prince] with Navarrese and Castilian blood\". His paternal grandparents were Sancho Garc\u00e9s III, king of Pamplona and his wife Muniadona of Castile, and his maternal grandparents were Alfonso V of Le\u00f3n (after whom he was probably named) and his first wife Elvira Men\u00e9ndez.\nThe year of Alfonso's birth is not recorded in the medieval documentation. According to one of the authors of the \"Anonymous Chronicle of Sahag\u00fan\", who met the monarch and was present at his death, he died at age 62 after reigning 44 years. This indicates that he was born in the second half of 1047 or in the first half of 1048. Pelagius of Oviedo wrote that Alfonso was 79 when he died, but that would place his birth around 1030, before his parents' marriage.\nAccording to the \"Historia silense\", the eldest child of Ferdinand I and Sancha, a daughter called Urraca, was born when her parents were still Count and Countess of Castile, so her birth could be placed in 1033\u201334. The second child and eldest son, Sancho, must have been born in the second half of 1038 or in 1039. The third child and second daughter, Elvira, may have been born in 1039\u201340, followed by Alfonso in 1040\u201341, and finally the youngest of the siblings, Garc\u00eda, sometime between 1041 and 24 April 1043, the date on which King Ferdinand I, in a donation to the Abbey of San Andr\u00e9s de Espinareda, mentions his five children. All of them except Elvira signed a document in the monastery of San Juan Bautista de Corias on 26 April 1046.\nAll the children of King Ferdinand I, according to the \"Historia silense\", were educated in the liberal arts, and the sons were also trained in arms, the \"art of running horses in the Spanish usage\", and hunting. The cleric Raimundo was in charge of Alfonso's early education. Once king, Alfonso appointed him Bishop of Palencia and referred to him as \"magistro nostro, viro nobile et Deum timenti\" (\"our master, a noble man who fears God\"). Alfonso probably spent long periods in Tierra de Campos, where, along with Pedro Ans\u00farez, the son of Ansur D\u00edaz and nephew of Count G\u00f3mez D\u00edaz de Salda\u00f1a (both members of the Banu G\u00f3mez lineage), he learned the art of war and what was expected of a knight.\nAscension to the throne.\nAs the second son of the king of Le\u00f3n and count of Castile, Alfonso would not have been entitled to inherit the throne. At the end of 1063, probably on 22 December, taking advantage of the fact that numerous magnates had gathered in Le\u00f3n, capital of the kingdom, for the consecration of the Bas\u00edlica of San Isidoro, Ferdinand I summoned a \"Curia Regia\" to make known his testamentary dispositions, under which he decided to distribute his patrimony among his children, a distribution that would not become effective until the death of the monarch in order to prevent any disputes arising after his death:\nThe historian Alfonso S\u00e1nchez Candeira suggests that the reasons leading King Ferdinand I to divide the kingdom (with Alfonso VI inheriting the royal title) are unknown, but the distribution was probably made because the king considered it proper that each son should inherit the region where he had been educated and spent his early years.\nReign.\nConsolidation of the throne (1065\u20131072).\nAfter his coronation in the city of Le\u00f3n in January 1066, Alfonso VI had to confront the expansionist desires (although Alfonso would prove himself as having the same or more so) of his brother Sancho II, who, as the eldest son, considered himself the sole legitimate heir of all the kingdoms of their father. The conflicts began after the death of their mother Queen Sancha on 7 November 1067, leading to seven years of war among the three brothers. The first skirmish was the Battle of Llantada, a trial by ordeal in which both brothers agreed that the one who was victorious would obtain the kingdom of the defeated brother. Although Sancho II was the winner, Alfonso VI did not comply with the agreement; even so, relations between them remained cordial as evidenced by the fact that Alfonso was present at the wedding of Sancho II to an English noblewoman named Alberta on 26 May 1069. This was the same event where both decided to join forces to divide between themselves the Kingdom of Galicia that had been assigned to their younger brother Garc\u00eda II. In the wake of the fratricidal war waged between the successors of al-Muzaffar, ruler of the taifa of Badajoz, upon the latter's death in 1068, Alfonso managed to exploit the situation in order to extract economic profit, even though the taifa nominally fell under Garc\u00eda's sphere of influence.\nWith the complicity of Alfonso VI, Sancho II invaded Galicia in 1071, defeating their brother Garc\u00eda II who was arrested in Santar\u00e9m and imprisoned in Burgos until he was exiled to the Taifa of Seville, then under the rule of Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad. After eliminating their brother, Alfonso VI and Sancho II titled themselves kings of Galicia and signed a truce.\nThe truce was broken with the Battle of Golpejera on 12 January 1072. Although Sancho II's troops were victorious, he decided not to persecute his brother Alfonso, who was imprisoned in Burgos and later transferred to the monastery of Sahag\u00fan, where his head was shaved and he was forced to wear a chasuble. Thanks to the intercession of their sister Urraca, Sancho and Alfonso reached an agreement under which Alfonso VI was able to take refuge in the Taifa of Toledo under the protection of his vassal Al-Mamun, accompanied by his childhood friend, the faithful Pedro Ans\u00farez and his two brothers Gonzalo and Fernando.\nAlfonso VI, from his exile in Toledo, obtained the support of the Leonese nobility and his sister Urraca, who remained strong in the city of Zamora, a lordship that Ferdinand I had granted her previously. When Urraca refused to exchange Zamora for other cities that Sancho had offered her in an effort to control the fortress of Zamora, \"key to the future expansion south of the Duero\", Sancho besieged the city. However, during the siege, Sancho II was murdered. According to tradition, during the siege a nobleman named Vellido Dolfos appeared before the king, claiming to have changed his loyalty from Urraca to Sancho. Under the pretense of showing him the weak parts of the city's walls, Dolfos separated the king from his guard and killed him with a spear. Although there is no clear evidence that Sancho II's death was due to treason rather than deceit, since Dolfos was Sancho II's enemy, his murder occurred in a warlike attack during the siege, not near the city walls, but rather in a nearby forest where Dolfos lured the Castilian king away from his armed protection. The violent death of Sancho II, who had no descendants, allowed Alfonso VI to reclaim his throne as well as Sancho's and Garcia's original inheritances of Castile and Galicia, respectively.\nAlthough Rodrigo D\u00edaz de Vivar (El Cid), the standard-bearer and confidant of King Sancho II, was present at the siege of Zamora, the role he played in this event is not known. Neither can Sancho II's death be blamed on Alfonso VI, who, when his brother was killed, was in exile far from the events. However, this did nothing to prevent speculation that Alfonso was somehow involved in Sancho's murder; despite a paucity of evidence, \"minstrels and ballads filled this void with beautiful literary creations devoid of any historical reality\".\nThe lingering suspicion over this event would later become part of the \"Leyenda de Carde\u00f1a\", a set of legendary narrative materials concerning El Cid which began to develop in the 13th century.\nAccording to legend, Alfonso VI was forced by El Cid to take an oath denying that he had been involved in his brother's death, thus giving rise to mutual distrust between the two men, despite Alfonso VI's efforts at rapprochement by offering his kinswoman Jimena D\u00edaz to El Cid in marriage as well as the immunity of his patrimony. These events and their consequences would eventually come to be considered historical by many later chroniclers and historians; however, most modern historians deny that such an event ever took place.\nThanks to Sancho II's death, Garc\u00eda II could regain his own throne of Galicia; however, the following year, on 13 February 1073, Alfonso summoned Garc\u00eda to a meeting, whereupon he imprisoned his younger brother. Garcia was held at the castle of Luna for seventeen years, where he eventually died on 22 March 1090. With his two brothers out of the way, Alfonso VI was able to secure the loyalty of both the high clergy and the nobility of his territories with ease; to confirm this, he spent the next two years visiting them.\nTerritorial expansion (1072\u20131086).\nNow established on the Leonese throne, and with the title of \"Emperor\", a relic of the Gothic tradition, Alfonso VI spent the following fourteen years of his reign expanding his territories through conquests such as that of Ucl\u00e9s and the lands of the Banu Di-l-Nun family. In 1072 he entitled himself \"rex Spanie\".\nIn 1074, in alliance with Al-Mamun, ruler of the Taifa of Toledo, Alfonso waged an offensive against the Zirid ruler of the Taifa of Granada, Abd All\u00e2h, taking the strategic fortress of Alcal\u00e1 la Real.\nFollowing the assassination of Sancho IV of Navarre in 1076, leaving only minor sons, the local Navarrese nobility divided over the succession to the Navareese crown. Alfonso VI had immediately taken possession of Calahorra and Najera, and also received the support of the nobility of Vizcaya-\u00c1lava and La Rioja, while the eastern nobility supported Sancho Ram\u00edrez of Aragon, who moved into the remainder of the kingdom. After the two kings reached an accord, Sancho Ram\u00edrez was recognized as king of Navarre and Alfonso VI annexed the territories of \u00c1lava, Vizcaya, part of Guip\u00fazcoa and La Bureba, adopting in 1077 the title of \"Imperator totius Hispaniae\" (\"Emperor of all Spain\").\nHis great territorial expansion came at the expense of the Taifa Muslim kingdoms. Alfonso VI continued their economic exploitation by means of the system of \"parias\", and succeeded in subduing most of the Taifa kingdoms as his tributaries, enforced by the threat of military intervention. In 1074, he probably recovered payment of the \"parias\" of Toledo, and the same year, helped by troops of that city, he cut down trees on the lands of the Taifa of Granada, which consequently also began to pay him taxes. In 1076, the Emir of Zaragoza, who wished to seize Valencia without being disturbed by Alfonso VI, agreed to resume payment of the \"parias\". In 1079, he conquered Coria.\nOne of the initiatives of these years, known as the \"Treason of Rueda\", ended in failure. It took place in 1083 in the castle of Rueda de Jal\u00f3n, when Alfonso VI received news that the governor of that stronghold, which belonged to the Taifa of Zaragoza, intended to surrender it to the Leonese king. The king's troops were ambushed when they entered the castle and several of the most important magnates of the kingdom were killed.\nIn 1074, Alfonso VI's vassal and friend Al-Mamun, king of the Taifa of Toledo died of poisoning in C\u00f3rdoba, and was succeeded by his grandson Al-Q\u00e1dir, who asked for help from the Leonese monarch to end an uprising against him. Alfonso VI took advantage of this request to besiege Toledo, which finally fell on 25 May 1085. After losing his throne, Al-Q\u00e1dir was sent by Alfonso VI as king of the Taifa of Valencia under the protection of \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez. To facilitate this operation and to recover payment of the \"parias\" owed by the city, which had failed to pay him since the previous year, Alfonso VI besieged Zaragoza in the spring of 1086. In early March, Valencia accepted the rule of Al-Q\u00e1dir; X\u00e0tiva resisted requesting the aid of the rulers of Tortosa and L\u00e9rida until he was forced to do so. Their raid of the region failed, and they withdrew under harassment by the troops of F\u00e1\u00f1ez.\nAfter this important conquest, Alfonso VI was entitled \"al-Imbra\u0163\u016br dh\u012b-l-Millatayn\" (\"Emperor of the Two Religions\") and as a gesture to the important Muslim population of the city, he promised them, in addition to respecting their properties, the right to use the main mosque. This decision was later revoked by the newly appointed archbishop of Toledo, Bernard of S\u00e9dirac, who took advantage of the king's absence from Toledo and with the support of Queen Constance.\nThe occupation of Toledo\u2014which allowed Alfonso VI to incorporate the title of King of Toledo with those he already used ()\u2014led to the taking of cities such as Talavera and fortresses including the castle of Aledo. He also occupied Mayrit (now Madrid) in 1085 without resistance, probably by capitulation. The incorporation of the territory situated between the Sistema Central and the Tajo river would serve as the base of operations for the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n, from where he could launch more attacks against the Taifas of Cordoba, Seville, Badajoz and Granada.\nAlmoravid invasions (1086\u20131109).\nThe conquest of the extensive and strategic Taifa of Toledo, the control of Valencia and the possession of Aledo, which isolated Murcia from the rest of Al-Andalus, worried the Muslim sovereigns of the Iberian Peninsula. The military and economic pressure on the Taifa kingdoms led the rulers of the Taifas of Seville, Granada, Badajoz, and Almeria to seek help from Yusuf ibn Tashfin, the Almoravid Emir who ruled the Maghreb. At the end of July 1086, Almoravid troops crossed the Strait of Gibraltar and landed in Algeciras.\nIn Seville, the Almoravid army joined the troops of the Taifa kingdoms, and together they marched to Extremadura. There, on 23 October 1086, they faced the troops of Alfonso VI (who had to abandon the siege of Zaragoza) in the Battle of Sagrajas. \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez, who had been called from Valencia, came and joined the king's forces. The battle ended with the defeat of the Christian troops, who returned to Toledo to defend themselves. The Emir, however, did not take advantage of the victory since he had to rush back to Africa because of the death of his son. The defeat marked the beginning of a new era in the Iberian Peninsula that lasted about three decades, in which the military initiative was taken by the Almoravids and Alfonso VI had to remain on the defensive. Nevertheless, he was able to retain Toledo, the main target of the Almoravid attacks.\nAlfonso VI asked the Christian kingdoms of Europe to organize a Crusade against the Almoravids, who had recovered almost all the territories he had conquered, with the exception of Toledo, where the king remained strong. To reinforce his position, he reconciled with El Cid, who came to Toledo in late 1086 or early 1087. As a consequence of the serious defeat, the Andalusian taifas stopped paying the \"parias\". The Cid, however, succeeded in re-subjugating the rebel Taifas over next two years.\nEven though the crusade did not finally materialize, a large number of foreign knights came to the Iberian Peninsula. They included Raymond and Henry of Burgundy, who married Alfonso VI's daughters Urraca (1090) and Teresa (1094), respectively, which led to the establishment of the Anscarid and Capetian dynasties in the peninsular kingdoms. Some of the crusaders unsuccessfully besieged Tudela in the winter of 1087, before withdrawing. That same year, the king crushed a revolt in Galicia aimed at releasing his brother Garc\u00eda II.\nIn 1088 Yusuf ibn Tashfin crossed the Strait of Gibraltar for the second time, but was defeated at the siege of Aledo and suffered the desertion of many of the rulers of the taifas. When the emir came again to the peninsula, he decided to depose all the taifa rulers and became the sole king of the entire Al-Andalus territory. Thanks to the Muslim defeat in Aledo, Alfonso VI had been able to resume the collection of the \"parias\" by threatening the ruler of the city that he would chop all the trees in the territory of Granada and then went to Seville to subjugate the city again. Abdallah ibn Buluggin of Granada had distanced himself definitively from Yusuf ibn Tashfin and Alfonso VI promised to help him in exchange for his submission.\nIn June 1090, the Almoravids launched a third attack, deposed the king of Granada, defeated the governor of C\u00f3rdoba, and after the Battle of Almod\u00f3var del R\u00edo, entered Seville and sent King al-Mutamid into exile. In the second half of the year, all the southern taifas had been conquered by the Almoravids and Alfonso was not able to fulfill his promise to help the king of Seville. The king suffered setbacks on all fronts: in the east he failed to seize Tortosa due to the late arrival of the Genoese fleet that was to take part in its capture; further south, Al-Q\u00e1dir was deposed in a revolt; in the south, his relation with Zaida, daughter-in-law of the king of Seville failed to enhance his image as the champion of the Muslims of the peninsula against the Almoravids; and, finally, in the west, the alliance with the king of Badajoz did not stop the North Africans from conquering this territory. As the price for this alliance, Alfonso VI had obtained Lisbon, Sintra, and Santar\u00e9m, but lost them in November 1094 when his son-in-law Raymond of Burgundy, responsible for defending these cities, was defeated by the Almoravid army that had taken Badajoz shortly before. The only good news for Alfonso VI was the recovery of Valencia in June by El Cid, who had defeated the Almoravid army that had advanced against him in the Battle of Cuarte on 21 October. This victory set the eastern border for about a decade.\nAccording to some historians, Alfonso VI later defeated a conspiracy of his sons-in-law Raymond and Henry who had plotted to divide the kingdom at his death. To turn them against each other, he gave Henry and Teresa the government of the County of Portugal, until then ruled by Raymond, which comprised the lands from the Minho river to Santar\u00e9m, while the government of Raymond was limited to Galicia. Other scholars, however, have shown that the pact could not have been made before 1103, suggesting instead that Henry's appointment was made in response to the military defeat of 1094.\nIn 1097, there was a fourth Almoravid invasion. Alfonso received the news when he was on his way to Zaragoza to assist his vassal Al-Mustain II in his confrontation with King Peter I of Aragon and Navarre. Once again, the Almoravid objective was Toledo, and they defeated the Christian forces at the Battle of Consuegra on 15 August, thus confirming the decline of the reign of Alfonso VI that had begun in 1086 with the defeat at Sagrajas.\nIn 1099, the Almoravids conquered a large number of the castles that defended Toledo and the surrounding areas and, in the following year, they tried unsuccessfully to seize the city. Henry of Burgundy, Alfonso's son-in-law, was in charge of defending Toledo since the king, at that time, was in Valencia inspecting its defenses. El Cid had died the previous year and his widow, Jimena, was governing the city.\nIn 1102, Alfonso VI sent troops to help Valencia against the Almoravid threat. The battle took place in Cullera and ended without a clear winner, although Valencia fell into Almoravid hands regardless because Alfonso decided it was too expensive to defend. Alfonso VI supervised the evacuation of Valencia in March and April and set fire to it before leaving; in May, the Almoravids took possession of the remains. The same year, he undertook the repopulation of Salamanca, which protected Coria, and \u00c1vila, which defended the mountain pass that was more accessible from Guadarrama, trying to prepare for an eventual loss of Toledo. To protect the area from the east, in 1104 he besieged and conquered Medinaceli, a key location from which the region of Toledo could be attacked from the east along the valley of the Jal\u00f3n River. In 1104, 1105, and 1106, the king made several incursions into Andalusian territory, reaching M\u00e1laga in 1106, and returned with many Mozarabs, who settled in his kingdom.\nIn 1108 the troops of the Almoravid Tamim, governor of C\u00f3rdoba and son of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, attacked Christian territories, but this time the chosen city was not Toledo but Ucl\u00e9s. Alfonso VI was in Sahag\u00fan, recently married, elderly and with an old wound that prevented him from riding. \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez, governor of the lands of the Banu Di-l-Nun, was the commander of the army. He was accompanied by Sancho Alf\u00f3nsez, the king's only son and heir. The armies clashed in the Battle of Ucl\u00e9s on 29 May 1108 and the Christian troops suffered another defeat. The young Sancho Alf\u00f3nsez, heir to the throne, was killed in battle. As a consequence, the \"reconquista\" came to a 30-year standstill, and the County of Portugal eventually became an independent kingdom. The military situation was also serious since the Almoravids almost immediately seized the entire defensive border of the Tagus valley from Aranjuez to Zorita and there were uprisings of the Muslim population in this region.\nSuccession crisis.\nAlfonso VI, already old, had to deal with the problem of his succession. Berta had died without giving him an heir at the end of 1099; shortly after, Alfonso married Isabel who gave him two daughters, but no sons. To further complicate the situation, in March 1105 his grandson Alfonso Raim\u00fandez, son of Urraca and Raymond of Burgundy, was born, a possible contender to the throne in detriment to Sancho Alf\u00f3nsez, the king's son with Zaida. Montenegro thinks that Alfonso VI legitimized Sancho probably coinciding with the meeting of a council in Carri\u00f3n de los Condes in January 1103 because from that date onwards, Sancho began to confirm royal charters before his brothers-in-law Raymond and Henry of Burgundy. In May 1107, Alfonso imposed the recognition of Sancho as heir, despite the probable opposition of his daughters and sons-in-law, in the course of a \"Curia Regia\" held in Le\u00f3n. The situation improved for the king with the death of Raymond of Burgundy in September and the agreement with Urraca so that she remained as sovereign Lady of Galicia, except in the case of remarrying since, in that case, Galicia would pass to her son.\nThe death of Sancho in the Battle of Ucl\u00e9s on 29 May 1108 left Alfonso VI without his only male heir. He then chose his eldest legitimate daughter Urraca as his successor, but decided to marry her to his rival and famous warrior King Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre in the autumn of 1108. Although the marriage was celebrated at the end of the following year, it did not lead to the expected stability, but to a long civil war that lasted eight years.\nDeath and burial.\nAlfonso VI died in Toledo on 1 July 1109. The king had come to the city to try to defend it from an imminent Almoravid attack. His body was taken to the locality of Sahag\u00fan, and was buried in the Royal Monastery of San Benito, thus fulfilling the wishes of the monarch. The mortal remains of the king were deposited in a stone sepulchre, which was placed at the feet of the church of the Royal Monastery, until the reign of Sancho IV, who deemed it unseemly that his ancestor was buried at the foot of the temple and ordered the tomb to be moved inside and placed in the church's transept, near the tomb of Beatriz, Dowager Lady of Los Cameros and daughter of Infante Frederick of Castile who had been executed by orders of his brother, King Alfonso X the Wise in 1277.\nThe sepulchre that contained the remains of the king, now having disappeared, was supported on alabaster lions, and was a large ark of white marble, eight feet long and four wide and tall, being covered by a smooth black lid. The tomb was usually covered by a silk tapestry, woven in Flanders, bearing the image of the king crowned and armed, with the representation of the arms of Castile and Le\u00f3n on the sides, and a crucifix at the head of the tomb.\nThe tomb that contained the remains of Alfonso VI was destroyed in 1810, during the fire at the Royal Monastery of San Benito. The mortal remains of the king and those of several of his wives were collected and preserved in the abbey chamber until 1821, when the monks were expelled, and were then deposited by the abbot Ram\u00f3n Alegr\u00edas in a box, which was placed in the southern wall of the chapel of the Crucifix until January 1835, when the remains were collected again and placed in another box and taken to the archive where the remains of the wives of the sovereign were at that time. The purpose was to place all the royal remains in a new sanctuary that was being built at that time. However, when the Royal Monastery of San Benito was dissolved in 1835, the monks delivered the two boxes with the royal remains to a relative of one of them, who kept it hidden until 1902, when these were discovered by Rodrigo Fern\u00e1ndez N\u00fa\u00f1ez, a professor at the Institute of Zamora Rodrigo.\nThe mortal remains of Alfonso VI are now in the Monastery of the Benedictine nuns of Sahag\u00fan, at the foot of the temple, in a smooth stone ark and with a cover of modern marble, and in a nearby sepulchre, equally smooth, lie the remains of several of the king's wives.\nWives, concubines and issue.\nAccording to Bishop Pelagius of Oviedo, contemporary of the king, in his \"Chronicon regum Legionensium\" (\"Chronicle of the Kings of Le\u00f3n\"), Alfonso VI had five wives and two concubines \"nobilissimas\" (most noble). The wives were, according to the bishop, Agnes, Constance, Berta, Isabel, and Beatrice and the concubines Jimena Mu\u00f1oz and Zaida. Some chroniclers from north of the Pyrenees report an earlier espousal, to a daughter of William the Conqueror, King of England and Duke of Normandy named Agatha.\nAgatha of Normandy (?).\nSeveral northern sources report that Alfonso was affianced to Agatha, the daughter of William the Conqueror, King of England and Duke of Normandy, an arrangement negotiated in 1067. She is said to have been sent to Iberia, but to have died before the marriage could take place. There is scholarly dispute over whether Alfonso was the Iberian king involved, and if so, whether the daughter of William involved was Agatha or a different daughter, Adelaide.\nAgnes of Aquitaine.\nIn 1069, the betrothal with Agnes, daughter of Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, was signed. At the time, she was barely 10 years old and so it was necessary to wait until she reached age 14 for the official wedding, which took place in late 1073 or early 1074. She appears in royal diplomas until 22 May 1077; from that date, the king appears alone in the documentation.\nAgnes is said to have died on 6 June 1078, On the other hand, Orderic Vitalis, an English chronicler of the 12th century, said that the marriage of Agnes and Alfonso VI had been annulled in 1080 for reasons of consanguinity, and that Agnes was remarried in 1109 to Count Elias I of Maine.\nReilly suggests that the marriage had been annulled in 1077, probably because of the lack of children. However, Gambra disagrees and believes that there are no reliable sources to support this assertion. In addition to being implied by Orderic, the alleged repudiation appears only in a volume of \"L'art de v\u00e9rifier les dates\" and, according to Gambra, \"it is impossible, in the absence of better references, to grant credit to the assertion of Agnes' repudiation\". In addition, he indicates that Lucas de Tuy, in his \"Chronicon mundi\", indicates that the Queen was buried in Sahag\u00fan. Finally, he points out that \"If such an important event had taken place, it would not make much sense [...] that Alfonso VI immediately married another princess who was a member of Agnes' family\". Agnes and the king's next wife, Constance, were cousins in the third degree, both of them descendants of William III, Duke of Aquitaine. Salazar y Acha concludes that Orderic is in error, and that it was Beatrice, the last wife of Alfonso VI, who as his widow married the Count of Maine.\nJimena Mu\u00f1oz.\nAfter the death of Agnes, the king had an extra-marital relationship with Jimena Mu\u00f1oz, \"most noble\" (\"nobilissima\") concubine \"derived from royalty\" (\"real generacion\"), according to Bishop Pelagius of Oviedo. They had two illegitimate daughters born between 1078 and 1080:\nConstance of Burgundy.\nAt the end of 1079 Alfonso VI married Constance of Burgundy, with whom he appears for the first time in royal charters on 8 May 1080. She was the childless widow of Count Hugues III of Chalon-sur-Sa\u00f4ne and daughter of Duke Robert I of Burgundy and his first wife, H\u00e9lie de Semur-en-Brionnais, and great-granddaughter of King Hugh Capet of France. She was also the niece of Abbot Hugh of Cluny and aunt of Henry of Burgundy. From this union, which lasted until Constance's death in 1093, six children were born, but only one reached adulthood:\nZaida.\nBishop Pelagius of Oviedo mentions Zaida as one of the king's two concubines and says that she was the daughter of Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad, ruler of the Taifa of Seville. In fact, she was his daughter-in-law, married to his son Abu Nasr Al-Fath al-Ma'mun, ruler of the Taifa of C\u00f3rdoba. In March 1091, the Almoravid army besieged the city of C\u00f3rdoba. Zaida's husband, who died during the siege on 26\u201327 March, sent his wife and children to Almod\u00f3var del R\u00edo as a precautionary measure. After becoming a widow, Zaida sought protection at the court of the Leonese king and she and her children converted to Christianity; she was baptized with the name \"Isabel\" and became the king's concubine. They had one son:\nIn the chronicle \"De rebus Hispaniae\", by the Archbishop of Toledo, Rodrigo Jim\u00e9nez de Rada, Zaida is counted among the wives of Alfonso VI, but the \"Chronica Naierensis\" and the \"Chronicon mundi\" indicate that Zaida was a concubine and not the wife of Alfonso VI.\nAccording to Jaime de Salazar y Acha, followed by other authors, among them, Gonzalo Mart\u00ednez Diez, they married in 1100, and with this ceremony their son was legitimised and declared heir of the Kingdoms of Le\u00f3n and Castile. For Salazar y Acha, Zaida and the fourth wife of Alfonso VI, Isabel, are the same person, \"despite of the impotent efforts of later historians to try to prove that she was not the Moor Zaida\", and, accordingly, she would also be the mother of Elvira and Sancha Alf\u00f3nsez. He supports this based on several arguments, including the turnaround time between the last appearance of Bertha and Isabel's first charter as Alfonso's wife, much shorter than the interval preceding his other remarriages presumed to have involved international diplomacy, which Salazar y Acha argues indicates that Isabel was ready to hand rather than being a foreign princess. Likewise, he argues, shortly after the marriage of the king with Isabel his son Sancho begins to confirm royal charters and, if Isabel and Zaida were not the same person, the new queen would not have allowed the new protagonism of Sancho in detriment of her possible future sons. He also cites a charter from the cathedral of Astorga dated 14 April 1107 where Alfonso VI grants some fueros and acts \"cum uxore mea Elisabet et filio nostro Sancio\" (with my wife Isabel and our son Sancho). This is the only document where Sancho is referred to as \"our son\", since in others he only appears as the king's son even though Queen Isabel also confirms the charters.\nReilly follows Bishop Pelagius in distinguishing the mistress Zaida (baptized Isabel) from the Isabel whom Alfonso married in 1100, but argues that to reinforce the position of his son Sancho, the king annulled his marriage to Queen Isabel in March 1106 and remarried to the boy's mother Zaida/Isabel. The hypothesis that Alfonso VI had married Zaida was rejected by Men\u00e9ndez Pidal and L\u00e9vi-Proven\u00e7al.\nOn 27 March 1106, Alfonso VI confirmed a donation to the monastery of Lorenzana: \"(...) \", an unusual formula that confirms a legitimate marriage. Salazar y Acha and Reilly interpret this quote as proof that the king had married Zaida, thus legitimising their son and the relationship of concubinage. Gambra, however, disagrees and says that it is \"an extremely weak argument, starting with the documentary reference, which is scarcely significant. Its character is rather ornamental and literary.\" Montaner Frutos also says that this hypothesis is \"unlikely and problematic\" since it was not necessary for the king to marry Zaida to legitimize his son and that, furthermore, the French Isabel died in 1107 according to her epitaph. Montaner Frutos also mentions a donation from Queen Urraca years later, in 1115, when she donated properties to Toledo Cathedral and only mentions one Isabel as the king's wife.\nBerta.\nOn 25 November 1093 Alfonso VI contracted a third marriage with Berta, although in a document dated 13 April 1094 she is not mentioned as would have been the custom at that time. For onomastic reasons, the genealogist Szabolcs de Vajay suggested that she was a member of the House of Savoy, daughter of Count Amadeus II of Savoy, niece of Bertha of Savoy (wife of Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor), great-granddaughter of Bertha of Milan and first-cousin of another Bertha (who married King Peter I of Aragon and Navarre). Her presence in court was first recorded on 28 April 1095. She died between 17 November 1099, when she confirms a royal diploma for the last time, and 15 January 1100 when the king appears alone in a donation to the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela. On 25 January 1100, the king made a donation to the monastery of Sahag\u00fan in memory of his deceased wife. There was no issue from this marriage.\nIsabel.\nAlfonso VI's penultimate marriage was in early 1100 to Isabel and \"the cause of controversy during centuries has been whether this Isabel was the same person as the Arab Muslim Princess Zaida or a different individual\". Alfonso and Isabel appear together for the first time on 14 May 1100 although the diploma is considered suspicious, and the second time in that same year at an unspecified date. Isabel's last mention in royal diplomas was on 8 and 14 May 1107 and she probably died in the middle of that year. She is, according to Salazar y Acha, Zaida, who after her baptism was called Isabel. If not identical to Zaida, her origin is uncertain. Bishop Pelagius of Oviedo does not refer to her origin nor does he draw any link between mistress Zaida and wife Isabel. Lucas de Tuy in the 13th century, based on the epitaph of Isabel, makes her daughter of King Louis of France, who at that time would have to be Louis VI although this seems to be chronologically impossible. Reilly considers that she was probably of Burgundian origin, although this does not appear in the documentation. Two daughters were born from this union:\nBeatrice.\nAlfonso VI married his fifth wife, Beatrice, probably in the first months of 1108. Both appear together for the first time on 28 May 1108 in Astorga Cathedral and then in two other royal charters: on 1 January 1109 in the Cathedral of Le\u00f3n and for the last time on 25 April of the same year in Oviedo Cathedral, about three months before the death of the king. According to Bishop Pelagius of Oviedo, once a widow, Beatrice returned to her homeland. Salazar y Acha suggests that she was the daughter of William VIII, Duke of Aquitaine and his third wife Hildegarde of Burgundy, and that she remarried Elias I, Count of Maine.\nLegacy.\nIn the cultural field, Alfonso VI promoted the safety of the Camino de Santiago and promoted the Cluniac Reforms in the monasteries of Galicia, Le\u00f3n and Castile. In the spring of 1073, he made the first concession of a Leonese monastery to the Order of Cluny.\nThe monarch replaced the Mozarabic or Toledan rite with the Roman one. In this respect it is a common legend that Alfonso VI took Mozarabic and Roman breviaries and threw them into the fire. When only the Roman breviary burned, the king threw the Mozarabic one into the fire, thus imposing the Roman rite.\nAlfonso VI, the conqueror of Toledo, the great Europeanizing monarch, saw in the last years of his reign how the great political work that he had carried started to be dismantled due to Almoravid attacks and internal weaknesses. Alfonso VI had fully assumed the imperial idea of Le\u00f3n and his openness to European influence had made him aware of the feudal political practices which, in the France of his time, reached their most complete expression. In the conjunction of these two elements, Claudio S\u00e1nchez-Albornoz sees the explanation of the grant of the \"iure hereditario\" (sharing the kingdom between the two daughters and the son instead of bequeathing all to the only son, more typical of Navarrese-Aragonese tradition) of the Counties of Galicia and Portugal to her two Burgundian sons-in-law, Raymond and Henry. After a few years, that decision led to the independence of Portugal and the possibility of an independent Galicia under Alfonso Raim\u00fandez, which ultimately did not materialize when the \"infante\" became King Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69608", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69608", "title": "V\u00f6r", "text": "Norse deity\nIn Norse mythology, V\u00f6r (Old Norse: \"V\u01ebr\", possibly \"the careful one,\" or \"aware, careful\") is a goddess associated with wisdom. V\u00f6r is attested in the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson; and twice in kennings employed in skaldic poetry. Scholars have proposed theories about the implications of the goddess.\nAttestations.\nIn chapter 35 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\", High provides brief descriptions of 16 \u00e1synjur. High lists V\u00f6r tenth, and says that V\u00f6r is \"wise and inquiring, so that nothing can be concealed from her.\" High adds that a saying exists where \"a woman becomes aware (\"vor\") of something when she finds it out.\" In chapter 75 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" V\u00f6r appears within a list of 27 \u00e1synjur names.\nTheories.\nRudolf Simek says that it is uncertain whether or not V\u00f6r was a goddess as attested in the \"Prose Edda\" and if the etymological connection presented there (between \"V\u00f6r\" and Old Norse \"v\u00f6rr\", meaning \"careful\") is correct. In the same work, Simek writes that the goddesses S\u00e1ga, Hl\u00edn, Sj\u00f6fn, Snotra, V\u00e1r, and V\u00f6r should be considered vaguely defined figures who \"should be seen as female protective goddesses\" that are all responsible for \"specific areas of the private sphere, and yet clear differences were made between them so that they are in many ways similar to matrons.\" Simek notes that the second part of the valkyrie name \"Geirav\u00f6r\" may be identical with the name of the goddess \"V\u00f6r\" (and would therefore mean \"spear-goddess\"), or simply be identical with a frequently found suffix appearing in personal names.\nAndy Orchard comments \"Snorri's etymologizing interpretation is scarcely profound, and may imply that he had no access to further material\" and notes that references to V\u00f6r are otherwise rare.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69609", "revid": "46992266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69609", "title": "Var (department)", "text": "Department in Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur, France\nVar (; ) is a department in the Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur region in southeastern France. It is bordered on the east by the Alpes-Maritimes department; to the west by Bouches-du-Rh\u00f4ne; to the north of the river Verdon by the Alpes-de-Haute-Provence department; and to the south by the Mediterranean Sea. It had a population of 1,076,711 in 2019.\nThe Var department takes its name from the river Var, which flowed along its eastern boundary, until the boundary was moved in 1860 and the department is no longer associated with the river. It is part of the French Riviera, a major touristic area of the country.\nToulon is Var's largest city and administrative capital, known as the prefecture. Other important towns in Var include Fr\u00e9jus, Saint-Rapha\u00ebl, Draguignan, Brignoles, Hy\u00e8res and La Seyne-sur-Mer. Var is known for the harbour of Toulon, the main port of the French Navy, for its seaside resorts, the most famous of which is Saint-Tropez, for some fine examples of Romanesque and other medieval architecture, such as Le Thoronet Abbey and the Fr\u00e9jus Cathedral, for its wines, particularly the wines of Bandol, as well as for its motorsport race track Circuit Paul Ricard, located in Le Castellet.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe department of Var was one of the 83 original departments created at the time of the French Revolution, on 4 March 1790, from a portion of the former royal province of Provence.\nIts capital was originally Toulon, but this was moved to Grasse in 1793 to punish the Toulonnais for yielding the town to the British in 1793. Subsequently, the capital was moved to Brignoles in 1795, then to Draguignan in 1797. It was not returned to Toulon until 1974.\n19th century.\nIn 1815, following the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo the department was occupied by Austrian troops until November 1818. In 1854 the first railroad reached Toulon.\nWith the creation of the new department of Alpes-Maritimes in 1860 and following the annexation by France of Nice, the eastern part of the department, corresponding to the arrondissement of Grasse, was moved to the new department. This move also shifted the river Var, which had given the department its name, to the new department.\nIn 1884 a cholera epidemic struck Toulon. The leader of the fight against the epidemic was Georges Clemenceau, a doctor and a member of the National Assembly for the Seine department. He was later elected a member of the Chamber of Deputies for the Var department from 1888 to 1893 and Senator from 1902 to 1920, during which time he also served as Prime Minister of France.\nRecent times.\nThe First World War (1914\u20131918) stimulated growth in shipyards and military industries in the region, but weakened the agricultural and food industries. In 1942 the German Army moved from Occupied France into the \"zone libre\", which included the Var department. The French Fleet was sabotaged in Toulon Harbour to keep it from falling into German hands. The Maquis Vallier, a group of maquis resistance fighters, was active. On 15 August 1944 American and Free French forces land at Saint-Tropez, Sainte-Maxime and Saint-Rapha\u00ebl. The Free French fleet arrived at Toulon on 13 September.\nIn the 1960s about 100,000 French citizens were repatriated from Algeria following the Algerian War of Independence and settled in the Var department. In 2014, Fr\u00e9jus Mayor David Rachline became the first Senator from Var elected under the National Front (later National Rally) banner; alongside St\u00e9phane Ravier from neighbouring Bouches-du-Rh\u00f4ne, the two became the first National Front members of the Senate under the Fifth Republic.\nGeography.\nThe Var department has a surface area of 6,032\u00a0km2. It has 420\u00a0km of coastline, including the offshore islands. 56% of its surface area is covered with forest. Its geological formations are divided into two regions: one composed of limestone to the northwest of a line between Toulon and Draguignan and of crystalline rock (quartz) to the southeast.\nThe department is in the foothills of the French Alps and largely mountainous. Major mountains include:\nThe plateau of Canjuers (French: \"Plan de Canjuers\") in the northeast of Var gradually rises from 500 to 1,000 metres. In the south and west there are several plateaus, such as the plateau of Siou Blanc to the north of Toulon, which rise from 400 to 700 metres in altitude. \nClimate.\nThe department of Var has a Mediterranean climate, slightly warmer, drier and sunnier than Nice and the Alpes-Maritimes, but is also less sheltered from the wind. Toulon has an average of 2899.3 hours of sunshine each year. The average maximum daily temperature in August is 29.1\u00a0\u00b0C, and the average daily minimum temperature in January is 5.8\u00a0\u00b0C. The average annual rainfall is 665\u00a0mm. Winds exceeding 16\u00a0m/s (57.6\u00a0km/h) blow an average of 116 days per year in Toulon, compared with 77 days per year at Fr\u00e9jus further east.\nDemographics.\nPopulation development since 1801:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrincipal towns.\nIn 2019, the population of Var was 1,076,711, of whom 51% live in the agglomeration (urban unit) of Toulon, the prefecture and most populous commune. As of 2019, there are nine communes with more than 20,000 inhabitants:\nPolitics.\nIn the 2017 French presidential election, Marine Le Pen of the National Front won a majority of the vote in Var in the first round, with Fran\u00e7ois Fillon of The Republicans placing second. Emmanuel Macron of En Marche! won a majority in the second round.\nIn the 2022 French presidential election, Le Pen of the National Rally (formerly National Front) won a majority in Var in both rounds.\nDepartmental Council of Var.\nThe Departmental Council of Var comprises 46 seats. In the 2021 departmental election, 26 seats were won by The Republicans (LR), 13 by miscellaneous right candidates, 3 by the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI), 2 by the National Rally (RN) and 2 by miscellaneous centre candidates. Var currently has no left-wing departmental councillors.\nSince 2022, La Garde Mayor Jean-Louis Masson (LR) has been President of the Departmental Council of Var. His governing majority comprises all councillors except the two elected under the National Rally banner, who form the opposition.\nRepresentation in Paris.\nMembers of the National Assembly.\nIn the 2024 legislative election, Var elected the following representatives to the National Assembly:\nMembers of the Senate.\nIn the 2020 Senate election, Jean Bacci, Michel Bonnus, Fran\u00e7oise Dumont and Andr\u00e9 Guiol were elected from Var. All sit with the Senate Republicans group, except Guiol who sits with the European Democratic and Social Rally group.\nEconomy.\nThe principal industry of Var is tourism, thanks largely to the big summer influx of tourists to the South of France and the Mediterranean coast in particular, but also inland to the Verdon River Canyon and hilltop villages and vineyards.\nTourism.\nPopular tourist attractions in Var include: \nIndustry.\nThe construction industry employs 28,000 workers in the Var of which 4,000 work alone and 4,500 companies employ the remaining 24,000 salaried workers. Industry generates an annual turnover of \u20ac2.5\u00a0billion. Of this, \u20ac500\u00a0million is derived from public works.\nAgriculture.\n800\u00a0km2 or 13% of the total area is dedicated to agriculture, on which 40,000 people (14% of the Var working population) depend for their livelihoods. The department also has 10\u00a0km2 of horticultural land (of which 4\u00a0km2 are covered). Var is France's largest grower of cut flowers, producing some 500\u00a0million stems a year. Livestock farming is mainly sheep (50,000) and goats (4,200). Vines and viticultural related activities account for 345\u00a0km2 of farmland. The 450 \"domaines\" or \"coop\u00e9ratives\" and the 4 AOCs (\"appellation d'origine contr\u00f4l\u00e9e\") produce 150\u00a0million litres of wine a year. Var leads the world in the production of ros\u00e9 wine.\nOther important agricultural products include olives (cultivated on 42\u00a0km2 of land\u2014a quarter of all French olive groves\u2014and processed in 40 mills), figs (the Var produces 80% of France's figs), and honey (800 tonnes per year). There are also 9\u00a0km2 of market gardens.\nAgricultural turnover in Var is \u20ac610\u00a0million per year, of which 45% is sales of wines and 42% of horticultural products.\nIn 2008 the Var department received approximately \u20ac15 million in farm subsidies under the EU Common Agriculture Policy, an average of about \u20ac6,000 per recipient farm. This compares with an average across France as a whole of over \u20ac18,000 per farm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69610", "revid": "119438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69610", "title": "Perizzites (version 2)", "text": ""}
{"id": "69611", "revid": "3378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69611", "title": "Alphonso VIII of Castile", "text": ""}
{"id": "69612", "revid": "16163452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69612", "title": "Twelve tribes of Israel", "text": ""}
{"id": "69613", "revid": "13218164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69613", "title": "List of Castilian monarchs", "text": "Rulers of the Kingdom of Castile\nThis is a list of kings regnant and queens regnant of the Kingdom and Crown of Castile. For their predecessors, see List of Castilian counts.\nKings and Queens of Castile.\nHouse of Ivrea / Burgundy.\nThe following dynasts are descendants, in the male line, of Urraca's first husband, Raymond of Burgundy.\nCivil War.\nIn 1366, Peter's conduct led to an uprising by his illegitimate half-brother Henry with support from France and Aragon. After three years, Henry triumphed in 1369, and personally executed Peter.\nHouse of Trast\u00e1mara.\nHenry II, the founder of the Trast\u00e1mara dynasty was installed after victory in the Castilian Civil War.\nHouse of Bourbon.\nThe Crown of Castile existed in its own right within the Spanish crown and with its own law until the arrival of the Bourbon dynasty after the War of Spanish Succession."}
{"id": "69615", "revid": "6534950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69615", "title": "Pergamos", "text": ""}
{"id": "69618", "revid": "4118222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69618", "title": "Tribe of Manasseh", "text": "One of the two Half-Tribes of Joseph\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Tribe of Manasseh (; Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e9\u05b5\u05c1\u05d1\u05b6\u05d8 \u05de\u05b0\u05e0\u05b7\u05e9\u05b6\u05bc\u05c1\u05d4\u200e\u200e \"\u0160evet M\u0259na\u0161\u0161e,\" Tiberian: \"\u0160\u0113\u1e07e\u1e6d M\u0103na\u0161\u0161e\") was one of the twelve tribes of Israel. After the Assyrian invasion of 720 BCE, it is counted as one of the ten lost tribes. Together with the Tribe of Ephraim, Manasseh also formed the House of Joseph.\nSymbols.\nTheir banner is a black flag with an embroidered unicorn.\nBiblical narrative.\nAccording to the Tanakh, the Tribe of Manasseh was a part of a loose confederation of Israelite tribes from after the conquest of the land by Joshua until the formation of the first Kingdom of Israel in c. 1050 BC. No central government existed, and in times of crisis the people were led by ad hoc leaders known as Judges (see Book of Judges). With the growth of the threat from Philistine incursions, the Israelite tribes decided to form a strong centralised monarchy to meet the challenge, and the Tribe of Manasseh joined the new kingdom with Saul as the first king. After the death of Saul, all the tribes other than Judah remained loyal to the House of Saul, but after the death of Ish-bosheth, Saul's son who succeeded him to the throne of Israel, the Tribe of Manasseh joined the other northern Israelite tribes in making Judah's king David the king of a re-united Kingdom of Israel. However, on the accession of David's grandson Rehoboam, in c. 930 BC the northern tribes split from the House of David and from Saul's tribe Benjamin to reform Israel as the Northern Kingdom. Manasseh was a member of the Northern Kingdom until the kingdom was conquered by Assyria in c. 723 BC and the population deported.\nFrom that time, the Tribe of Manasseh has been counted as one of the ten lost tribes of Israel.\nTribal territory.\nThe Bible narrates that following the completion of the conquest of Canaan by the Israelite tribes, Joshua allocated the land among the twelve tribes. According to biblical scholar Kenneth Kitchen, this conquest should be dated slightly after 1200 BCE. Some modern scholars argue that the conquest of Joshua, as described in the Book of Joshua, never occurred. \"Besides the rejection of the Albrightian 'conquest' model, the general consensus among OT scholars is that the Book of Joshua has no value in the historical reconstruction. They see the book as an ideological retrojection from a later period\u2014either as early as the reign of Josiah or as late as the Hasmonean period.\" \"It behooves us to ask, in spite of the fact that the overwhelming consensus of modern scholarship is that Joshua is a pious fiction composed by the deuteronomistic school, how does and how has the Jewish community dealt with these foundational narratives, saturated as they are with acts of violence against others?\" Recent decades, for example, have seen a remarkable reevaluation of evidence concerning the conquest of the land of Canaan by Joshua. As more sites have been excavated, there has been a growing consensus that the main story of Joshua, that of a speedy and complete conquest (e.g. Josh. 11.23: 'Thus Joshua conquered the whole country, just as the LORD had promised Moses') is contradicted by the archaeological record, though there are indications of \"some\" destruction at the appropriate time.\nIn the Book of Joshua, it is claimed that at its height, the territory Manasseh occupied spanned the Jordan River, forming two \"half-tribes\", one on each side; the eastern half-tribe was, by most accounts, almost entirely discontiguous with the western half-tribe, only slightly touching at one corner\u2014the southwest of East Manasseh and the northeast of West Manasseh.\nWest Manasseh occupied the land to the immediate north of Ephraim, thus just north of centre of western Canaan, between the Jordan and the coast, with the northwest corner at Mount Carmel, and neighbored on the north by tribes Asher and Issachar. East Manasseh was the northernmost Israelite group east of the Jordan until the siege of Laish farther north by the tribe of Dan; other neighboring tribes were Gad on the south and Naphtali and Issachar on the west. East Manasseh occupied the land from the Mahanaim in the south to Mount Hermon in the north, and including within it the whole of Bashan. These territories abounded in water, a precious commodity in Canaan, thus constituting one of the most valuable parts of the country; additionally, Manasseh's geographic situation enabled it to defend two important mountain passes\u2014Esdraelon on the west of the Jordan and Hauran on the east.\nThe half-tribe of Manasseh had the land from Jordan to the city Dora; but its breadth was at Bethshan, which is now called Scythopolis.\nIn c. 732 BCE, Pekah, king of Israel (Samaria) allied with Rezin, king of Aram, and threatened Jerusalem. Ahaz, king of Judah, appealed to Tiglath-Pileser III, the king of Assyria, for help. After receiving tribute from Ahaz, Tiglath-Pileser sacked Damascus and Israel, annexing Aram and the territory east of the Jordan (tribes of Reuben, Gad and East Manasseh in Gilead), including the desert outposts of Jetur, Naphish and Nodab. The population of these territories were taken captive and resettled in Assyria, in the region of the Khabur River system. ( and ) The diminished kingdom of Israel was again invaded by Assyria in 723 BCE and the rest of the population deported.\nThe riverine gulch, \"na\u1e25al \u1e32anah\" , divided Ephraim's territory in the south from Manasseh's territory in the north. The modern Israeli settlement of Karnei Shomron is built near this gulch, which runs in an easterly-westerly direction.\nOrigin.\nAccording to the Torah, the tribe consisted of descendants of Manasseh, a son of Joseph, from whom it took its name. Some critics, however, view this as a postdiction, an eponymous metaphor providing an aetiology of the connectedness of the tribe to others in the Israelite confederation In the Biblical account, Joseph is one of the two children of Rachel and Jacob, a brother to Benjamin, and father to both Ephraim, and his first son, Manasseh; Ephraim received the blessing of the firstborn, although Manasseh was the eldest, because Jacob foresaw that Ephraim's descendants would be greater than his brother's. Here the blessing of the first son was conferred by a grandfather rather than by the father, despite prevailing custom (great patriarchs supersede custom).\nThough the biblical descriptions of the geographic boundary of the House of Joseph are fairly consistent, the descriptions of the boundaries between Manasseh and Ephraim are not, and each is portrayed as having exclaves within the territory of the other. Furthermore, in the Blessing of Jacob, and elsewhere ascribed by textual scholars to a similar or earlier time period, (e.g., ) Ephraim and Manasseh are treated as a single tribe, with \"Joseph\" appearing in their place. From this it is regarded that originally Ephraim and Manasseh were considered one tribe\u2014that of \"Joseph\".\nFate.\nAs part of the Kingdom of Israel, the territory of Manasseh was conquered by the Assyrians in the 720's BC, and many members of the tribe were exiled; others fled south to the Kingdom of Judah. Either way, the manner of their exile and dispersal led to their further history being lost. However, several modern day groups claim descent, with varying levels of academic and rabbinical support. Both the Bnei Menashe and the Samaritans claim that some of their adherents are descended from this tribe.\nAccording to Biblical criticism.\nAlthough Machir and Gilead, as individuals, are described in biblical genealogies as father and son, and as son and grandson of Manasseh, in the view of some critical scholars Machir and Gilead are treated as the names of tribes which are different from one another in the Song of Deborah. (Tradition regards these as region names with the region Gilead being named so, long before the grandson of Manasseh.) Additionally, Manasseh is absent from the poem; in the Elohist texts Manasseh is also frequently absent, while Machir is mentioned. Additionally, Machir is described as settling on the east of the Jordan River, leaving the absence of the western half of Manasseh in these passages still unaccounted for. Critical scholars argue that the two sections had different origins, noting that in the First Book of Chronicles separate tribal rulers were named for the western \"half tribe\" and the eastern \"half tribe\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69619", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69619", "title": "Perga", "text": "Ancient Greek city\nPerga or Perge (Hittite: \"Parha\", \"Perge\", ) was originally an ancient Lycian settlement that later became a Greek city in Pamphylia. It was the capital of the Roman province of Pamphylia Secunda, now located in Antalya Province on the southwestern Mediterranean coast of Turkey. Today its ruins lie east of Antalya.\nIt was the birthplace of Apollonius of Perga, one of the most notable ancient Greek mathematicians for his work on conic sections. A unique and prominent feature for a Roman city was the long central water channel in the centre of the main street which contained a series of cascading pools and which would have been remarkable even today in a semi-arid area where summer temperatures reach over 30 degrees Celsius.\nHistory.\nPerge was situated on the coastal plain between the Rivers Catarrhactes (D\u00fcden Nehri) and Cestrus (Aksu), about 11\u00a0km from the mouth of the latter.\nEarly Bronze.\nThe history of the city dates back to the Late Chalcolitic Era or Early Bronze Age. Excavations in the original settlement on the acropolis date it to the early Bronze Age, 4000-3000 BC. Pottery found in the Perga Acropolis is linked to the Early Bronze Age pottery traditions in Western Anatolia.\nLate Bronze.\nFrom a bronze tablet discovered in 1986 in Hattusas, a treaty between the Hittite Great King Tudhaliya IV and his vassal, the king of Tarhuntassa, defined the latter's western border at the city \"Parha\" and the \"Kastaraya River\". The river is assumed to be the classical Cestrus. West of Parha were the \"Lukka Lands\". Parha likely spoke a late Luwian dialect like Lycian and that of the neo-Hittite kingdoms.\nIron Age.\nThe settlement probably became a Greek colony of Rhodes in the 7th c. BC. Perge was later a Pamphylian Greek city, and came under successive rule by Persians, Athenians, and Persians again.\nIn 540 BC Perga, along with the other cities in Pamphylia was captured by the Achaemenid Empire. During the reign of Darius I, it was a part of the Satrapy of Ionia. There is no archeological evidence that shows the Achaemenid rule over Pamphylia but some classical sources do exist. Herodotus mentions that Pamphlyians sent aid to the military campaign of Xerxes against the Greeks, so it must have been under the control of the Achaemenids. According to Diodorus Siculus, Perge was one of the cities that rebelled against the Achaemenid rule during the Great Satraps' Revolt in 360 BC.\nAlexander the Great, after taking Phaselis, was welcomed in Perge with his army in 334 BC. Alexander's rule was followed by the Diadochi empire of the Seleucids. The walls around the lower city were built in the period starting from 223 BC. In the 2nd century BC the city became prosperous and started minting its own coins with the image of Artemis and her temple. Perge became renowned for the worship of Artemis, whose temple stood on a hill outside the town, and in whose honour annual festivals were celebrated.\nFollowing the defeat of the Seleucids by the Romans in 188 BC, the wider area was gifted by the Romans to the Attalid kingdom. When its last king died without heirs in 133 BC, he bequeathed his kingdom, including Perga, to the Roman Republic. After 25 BC, the Romans built the Via Sebaste linking Pisidian Antioch in Galatia with Perge. When the Romans first incorporated Perga into the Empire, the city was a part of the Province of Galatia. After the Flavian Dynasty was founded by Emperor Vespasian, the city became a part of the Lycia et Pamphylia province. Vespasian also granted the city the rank of neocorate which made the city in charge of the imperial cult.\nDuring the 2nd century AD there was a construction boom in the city, fueled by Pax Romana and excessive wealth. The city center was expanded to the South side of the city and new monuments were erected. Perga also had many philanthropists during the Roman Empire period who financed the construction of monumental structures.\nUnder the Romans from the 1st to the 3rd century AD the town became a magnificent city with many impressive buildings. It became one of the most beautiful towns in Anatolia, competing with Side for the status of most important town in Pamphylia. Plancia Magna (d. 122), daughter of the governor Marcus Plancius Varus, was the greatest benefactor and instigator of public buildings and was honoured with statues erected by the town council. In 46 AD, according to the Acts of the Apostles, St. Paul journeyed to Perga. Paul and Barnabas came to Perge during their first missionary journey, but probably stayed there only a short time, and do not seem to have preached there; it was there that John Mark left Paul to return to Jerusalem. On his return from Pisidia, Paul preached at Perge.\nAs the Cestrus silted up over the late Roman era, Perga declined as a secular city. In the first half of the 4th century, during the reign of Constantine the Great (324-337), Perga became an important centre of Christianity, which soon became the official religion of the Roman Empire. The city retained its status as a Christian centre in the 5th and 6th centuries.\nSt. Matrona of Perge of the 6th century was a female saint known for temporarily cross-dressing to avoid her abusive husband. She also is known for opposing the Monophysite policy of the emperor Anastasios I. Matrona hid in the monastery of St. Bassion as the enuch Babylos. Once revealed, she was sent to a woman's monastery where she was head of the convent. She was famous for her miraculous gift of healing. She went on to found a nunnery in Constantinople. St Matrona died at the age of 100. Her life was told through a \"vita prima\" whose author and exact time period remains a mystery.\nThe Greek \"Notitiae episcopatuum\" mentions the city as metropolis of Pamphylia Secunda until the 13th century. Le Quien gives the names of 11 of its bishops: Epidaurus, present at the Council of Ancyra in 312; Callicles at the First Council of Nicaea in 325; Berenianus, at Constantinople (426); Epiphanius at the Second Council of Ephesus (449), at the First Council of Chalcedon (451), and a signatory of the letter from the bishops of the province to Emperor Leo (458); Hilarianus, at a council at Constantinople in 536; Eulogius, at the Second Council of Constantinople in 553; Apergius, condemned as a Monothelite at the Third Council of Constantinople in 680; John, at the Trullan council in 692; Sisinnius Pastillas about 754 (an iconoclast who was condemned at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787); Constans, at the same council of that condemned his predecessor; John, at the Council of Constantinople of 869\u201370.\nNo longer a residential, the bishopric is included in the Catholic Church's list of titular sees.\nPerga remained inhabited until the foundation of the Seljuk Empire in roughly 1100.\nCity monuments.\nExcavations started in 1946 and have uncovered many monumental buildings: a theatre, a stadium, palaestra, a temple of Artemis and two churches. The temple of Artemis was located outside the town. Many of the coins struck in the city portrayed both the goddess and her sanctuary.\nThe Hellenistic walls date from the 3rd c. BC and had 3 gates. The south gate is particularly monumental and includes 2 towers 3 storeys high with conical roofs and a horseshoe-shaped square behind. Under Hadrian in 121 AD, a triumphal arch was inserted into the northern wall of the courtyard and the facades were covered in precious marbles and decorated with columns and statues.\nOne of the most impressive monuments is the theatre which lies outside the walls near the stadium. It is larger than those of Myra and Patara.\nThe south baths created in the 1st c. AD is one of the best preserved buildings and is noteworthy for its size and monumentality, and for the large collection of sculptures found there.\nPerge has been dubbed as \u201cTurkey\u2019s second Zeugma\u201d for the alluring appearance of the mosaics that have been unearthed so far. In 2003 archaeologists discovered well-preserved Greek mosaics showing Oceanus and Medusa. In 2017 a mosaic depicting the sacrifice of Iphigenia was discovered.\nThe city was eventually supplied in the Roman era by 2 aqueducts. The Kursunlu aqueduct was 11\u00a0km long and probably built to supply baths from close to the Kursunlu waterfall. A later aqueduct of 21\u00a0km length used a greater flow from the Duden river near the Dudenbasi waterfall.\nPerge had at least 6 nymphaea, the most striking being the northern, or \"Hadrian's\", nymphaeum (about 122 AD) and the southern nymphaeum in the square of Septimius Severus (end 2nd to early 3rd c. AD). Hadrian's nymphaeum was beautifully decorated with numerous sculptures including the river god Cestrus under whom water cascaded. It is located at the edge of the acropolis to capture the outflow of the abundant water supply and from there fed the channel that flowed through the city. The southern nymphaeum faces the courtyard of Septimius Severus and is next to the propylon (monumental entrance) of the southern baths whose hydraulic system provided it with water.\nA full-body statue of a dressed female was revealed by archaeologists headed by Sedef Cokay Kep\u00e7e in 2020. The statue, believed to have been made during the Roman Empire, will be on display at the Antalya Museum.\nNotable people.\nPerga's most celebrated ancient inhabitant was the mathematician Apollonius (c.262\u00a0BC \u2013 c.190\u00a0BC). He wrote a series of eight books describing a family of curves known as conic sections, comprising the circle, ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69620", "revid": "39004729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69620", "title": "Peor", "text": "Topics referred to by the same term\nPeor (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0, \"Pa\u0121or\") meaning \"opening\", may refer to:\nSource.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "69621", "revid": "47496819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69621", "title": "Penuel", "text": "Biblical place\nPenuel () is a place described in the Hebrew Bible as being not far from Sukkot on the east of the Jordan River, south of the Zarqa in Jordan.\nPenuel is mentioned in the Book of Genesis as the site of Jacob's struggle with the angel. In 1 Kings, it is mentioned as a capital for Jeroboam, the first king of the Kingdom of Israel (Samaria), which he fortified.\nBiblical narrative.\nAccording to the Biblical narrative, the site was named \"Peniel\" (\"Face of God\") by Jacob:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is because I saw God face to face, and yet my life was spared.\u2014\u200a\nHere Jacob wrestled with El \"till the break of day.\" El changed Jacob's name to \"Israel\" in Genesis 32:28, explained as \"he who strives with God\", (literally, \"God strives\").\nPenuel is later mentioned in the Book of Judges. The men of this place refused to give bread to Gideon and his three hundred men when they were in pursuit of the Midianites in Judges 8:1-21. On his return, Gideon tore down the tower there and killed all the men of the city.\nAccording to the Bible, Jeroboam, King of Israel-Samaria, established his capital in Shechem. A short time later, he left Shechem and fortified Penuel, declaring it as his new capital in 1 Kings 12:25. He and his son, Nadab, ruled there until Baasha seized the throne in 909 BCE and moved the capital to Tirzah in 1 Kings 15:25-34. In the scriptures, it is identified as both a site for the worship of El and Yahweh.\nSome scholars consider that the material of Genesis 32\u201335, including the account of Jacob being renamed Israel at Penuel, may be a later addition that introduces a new power structure centered around the establishment of sacral places in the North (Penuel, Shechem and Bethel).\nIdentification.\nUp until 1970, biblical scholars identified Penuel with the twin peaks of Tulul adh-Dhahab in modern-day Jordan. Based on the account given in Genesis, scholars believed Penuel to be the location of a sacred sanctuary, and presumed that there must have been a temple from Iron Age I or earlier on one of the peaks. Since such a structure has not been found, this identification was questioned.\nContemporary Israeli archaeologist Israel Finkelstein suggested to see the twin peaks as two distinct sites that probably featured distinct names during antiquity. He suggested identifying the western, larger, Tell el-Dhahab al-Gharbi with Mahanaim and the eastern one, Tell edh-Dhahab el-Sharqi, with Penuel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "69624", "revid": "15244483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69624", "title": "List of biblical names", "text": "This page deals with biblical proper names, both toponyms and personal names.\nPersonal names.\nPersonal names play a variety of roles in the Bible. They sometimes relate to the nominee's role in a biblical narrative, as in the case of Nabal, a foolish man whose name means \"fool\". Names in the Bible can represent human hopes, divine revelations, or are used to illustrate prophecies.\nThe titles given to characters, locations, and entities in the Bible can differ across various English translations. In a study conducted by the BibleAsk team in 2024, a comprehensive catalog of names found in the King James Version was compiled and organized into categories such as individuals, geographical locations, national groups, and miscellaneous designations.\nThe team discovered that within the King James Version Bible, a total of 3,418 distinct names were identified. Among these, 1,940 names pertain to individuals, 1,072 names refer to places, 317 names denote collective entities or nations, and 66 names are allocated to miscellaneous items such as months, rivers, or pagan deities. There are instances of overlap, where the same name may be used across multiple categories (e.g., as both a personal name and a geographical location).\nMost popular names in ancient Judaea.\nBased on a database of 3000 names documented from written sources dating from 330 BC \u2013 AD 200 (from Alexander's conquest through the Hasmonean kingdom and most of the Roman period), the most common twelve male names among Palestinian Jews were:\nDuring this period, the most common twelve female names were:\nLists of toponyms and personal names.\nLists of biblical proper names, both toponyms and personal names.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "69625", "revid": "46624289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69625", "title": "The Ladykillers (1955 film)", "text": "1955 comedy film by Alexander Mackendrick\nThe Ladykillers is a 1955 British black comedy crime film directed by Alexander Mackendrick for Ealing Studios. It stars Alec Guinness, Cecil Parker, Herbert Lom, Peter Sellers, Danny Green, Jack Warner, and Katie Johnson as the old lady, Mrs. Wilberforce.\nWilliam Rose wrote the screenplay, for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay and won the BAFTA Award for Best British Screenplay. He claimed to have dreamt the entire film and merely had to remember the details when he awoke.\nPlot.\nMrs. Wilberforce is a sweet and eccentric old widow who lives alone in a gradually subsiding house, built over the entrance to a railway tunnel in Kings Cross, London. With nothing to occupy her time and an active imagination, she is a frequent visitor to the local police station where she reports fanciful suspicions regarding neighbourhood activities. The officers there humour her but give her reports no credence whatsoever.\nShe is approached by a sly and sinister character, \"Professor\" Marcus, who wants to rent rooms in her house. Mrs Wilberforce is not aware that Marcus has assembled a gang of hardened criminals for a sophisticated security van robbery at the nearby railway station, who plan to use Mrs. Wilberforce's house as a base of operations. The gang includes the jittery and gentlemanly con-man Major Courtney, the Cockney spiv Harry Robinson, the punch-drunk ex-boxer 'One-Round' Lawson and the cruel and vicious continental gangster Louis Harvey. As a cover, Marcus convinces the naive Mrs. Wilberforce that the group is an amateur string quintet using the rooms for rehearsal space. To maintain the deception, the gang members carry musical instruments and play records of Boccherini and Haydn during their planning sessions.\nThe criminals successfully carry out the heist, and trick Mrs. Wilberforce into retrieving the disguised money from the railway station herself. As the gang departs her house with the loot, One-Round accidentally gets his cello case full of banknotes trapped in the front door. As he pulls the case free, banknotes spill forth while Mrs. Wilberforce looks on. After she learns from a visiting friend that a robbery has taken place nearby, Mrs. Wilberforce finally sees the gang's true colours and informs Marcus that she is going to the police.\nStalling, the gangsters try to convince Mrs. Wilberforce that she will be considered an accomplice for holding the cash. Marcus asserts that the heist was a victimless crime as insurance will cover all the losses and the police will probably not even accept the money back. Mrs. Wilberforce wavers, but eventually she rallies, and the criminals decide they must kill her. No one wants to do it, so they draw lots using matchsticks. The Major loses, but he tries to make a run for it with the cash.\nWhile Mrs. Wilberforce dozes off, the criminals double-cross each other and end up killing one another in rapid succession. The Major falls off the roof of the house after being chased by Louis, Harry attempts to escape with the money, but he is killed by One-Round, and One-Round is killed by Louis after he leaves his gun's safety catch on and fails to shoot Louis and Marcus. Marcus kills Louis by luring him down a ladder by the bridge overlooking the railway and dislodging it, causing Louis to fall into a passing railway wagon. Before falling into the carriage, Louis fires a last shot at Marcus which nearly hits him. Within moments, Marcus himself is struck on the head by a changing railway signal, and his body drops into another wagon. All the other bodies have been dumped into railway wagons passing behind the house and are now far away.\nMrs. Wilberforce is now left alone with the plunder. She goes to the police station, but they do not believe her story. They humour her, telling her to \"keep the money\". She is puzzled but finally relents and returns home. Along the way, she leaves a banknote of large denomination with a perplexed starving artist.\nCast.\nAlec Guinness is thought to have based his performance of Professor Marcus on the actor Alastair Sim, as he believed that the role was made for Sim; although critic Philip French wrote in 2015 that \"there\u2019s another possible source for the appearance of Marcus, with his prominent teeth and pale, cadaverous features, and that is the self-publicising critic and man of the theatre Kenneth Tynan, who had written a monograph on Guinness and been an assistant on the disastrous 1951 Festival of Britain production of \"Hamlet\" starring Guinness.\"\nRobinson was the first major film role for Peter Sellers; he would later appear with Lom in five of \"The Pink Panther\" films.\nSellers and Guinness would appear together again in \"Murder By Death\" (1976).\nProduction.\n\"The Ladykillers\" was the last Technicolor three-strip movie filmed in the UK, although \"The Feminine Touch\" was the last feature to be filmed in this process and released three months later, in 1956.&lt;ref name=\"vcF/tlk\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n\"When Alec, as the Professor, is killed by a railway signal falling onto his head, the production crew made sure that this would not in fact happen by placing a metal pin half an inch above the level of Alec's head. Lines were drawn in chalk to mark where he should stand for the shot. When it came to the take, however, the signal sheared the metal pin and tore the back of Alec's jacket. He had been standing an inch or two in front of the chalk mark \u2013 a mistake that saved his life.\"&lt;ref name=\"ppr/AG\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"sF/end\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \u2013 Piers Paul Read\nWilliam Rose left the production midway, following arguments with director Alexander Mackendrick and associate producer Seth Holt, leaving them to complete the script from his notes.&lt;ref name=\"sO/441533\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMany of the filming locations used in the movie were in the vicinity of King's Cross railway station in London. The interior of the station appears in several scenes. In addition, scenes filmed of the cast walking and to and from Mrs. Wilberforce's house were shot on Argyle Street at the intersection of St Chad's Street in London.\nReception.\nBox office.\nAccording to the National Film Finance Corporation, the film made a comfortable profit. It was the last financially successful Ealing film made under its association with Rank.\nCritical response.\nThe film received critical acclaim from critics. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a rare approval rating of 100% based on 31 reviews, with an average score of 8.7/10. The website's consensus reads, \"\"The Ladykillers\" is a macabre slow-burn with quirky performances of even quirkier characters.\" On Metacritic, the film received a score of 91 based on 7 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nThe British Film Institute ranked \"The Ladykillers\" the 13th greatest British film of all time. In 2017 a poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers and critics for \"Time Out\" magazine saw it ranked the 29th best British film ever.\nReputation.\nIn 2000, readers of \"Total Film\" magazine voted \"The Ladykillers\" the 36th greatest comedy film of all time, and \"The Guardian\" labelled it the 5th greatest comedy of all time in 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69627", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69627", "title": "Pelethites", "text": ""}
{"id": "69628", "revid": "48328727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69628", "title": "Alveolar consonant", "text": "Consonants articulated with the tongue against or close to the superior alveolar ridge\nAlveolar consonants (; UK also ) are articulated with the tongue against or close to the superior alveolar ridge, which is called that because it contains the alveoli (the sockets) of the upper teeth. Alveolar consonants may be articulated with the tip of the tongue (the apical consonants), as in English, or with the flat of the tongue just above the tip (the \"blade\" of the tongue; called laminal consonants), as in French and Spanish.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) does not have separate symbols for the alveolar consonants. Rather, the same symbol is used for all coronal places of articulation that are not palatalized like English palato-alveolar \"sh\", or retroflex. To disambiguate, the \"bridge\" (, \"etc.\") may be used for a dental consonant, or the under-bar (, \"etc.\") may be used for the postalveolars. differs from dental in that the former is a sibilant and the latter is not. differs from postalveolar in being unpalatalized.\nThe bare letters , etc. cannot be assumed to specifically represent alveolars. The language may not make such distinctions, such that two or more coronal places of articulation are found allophonically, or the transcription may simply be too broad to distinguish dental from alveolar. If it is necessary to specify a consonant as alveolar, a diacritic from the Extended IPA may be used: , \"etc.\", though that could also mean extra-retracted. The letters \u27e8s, t, n, l\u27e9 are frequently called 'alveolar', and the language examples below are all alveolar sounds.\nIn IPA.\nAlveolar consonants are transcribed in the IPA as follows:\nLack of alveolars.\nNorthwest Mekeo lacks coronal consonants entirely. A few languages on Bougainville Island and around Puget Sound, such as Makah, lack nasals and therefore but have . Colloquial Samoan, however, lacks both and but has a lateral alveolar approximant . (Samoan words written with \"t\" and \"n\" are pronounced with and in colloquial speech.) In Standard Hawaiian, is an allophone of , but and exist.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Labioalveolar consonants.\nIn labioalveolars, the lower lip contacts the alveolar ridge. Such sounds are typically the result of a severe overbite. In the Extensions to the IPA for disordered speech, they are transcribed with the alveolar diacritic on labial letters: \u27e8\u27e9.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69632", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69632", "title": "RNA World", "text": ""}
{"id": "69633", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69633", "title": "Pekah", "text": "18th and penultimate king of Israel\nPekah (, \"Peqa\u1e25\"; \"Paqa\u1e2ba\" [\"pa-qa-\u1e2ba\"]; ) was the eighteenth and penultimate king of Israel. He was a captain in the army of king Pekahiah of Israel, whom he killed to become king. Pekah was the son of Remaliah.\nPekah became king in the fifty-second and last year of Uzziah, king of Judah. \nWilliam F. Albright has dated his reign to 737\u2013732 BC, while E. R. Thiele, following H. J. Cook and Carl Lederer, held that Pekah set up in Gilead a rival reign to Menahem's Samaria-based kingdom in Nisan of 752 BC, becoming sole ruler on his assassination of Menahem's son Pekahiah in 740/739 BC and dying in 732/731 BC. This explanation is consistent with evidence of the Assyrian chronicles, which agree with Menahem being king in 743 BC or 742 BC and Hoshea being king from 732 BC.\nWhen Pekah allied with Rezin, king of Aram, to attack Ahaz, the king of Judah, Ahaz appealed to Tiglath-Pileser III, the king of Assyria, for help. While the Assyrian king obliged, Judah would become a tributary of Assyria.\nReign.\nWith the aid of a band of Gileadites, from whose home territory he probably originally came, he slew Pekahiah and assumed the throne.\nIn c. 732 BC, Pekah allied with Rezin, king of Aram and threatened Jerusalem. The prime reason for such a league was probably to protect their respective countries from another incursion of Tiglath-pileser III., who had compelled Menahem, in 738 B.C., to pay a large tribute. The two kings united their armies and attempted to coerce Ahaz of Judah into joining them. Pekah raided Judah and carried to Samaria a number of captives; but, rebuked by the prophet Oded and by some of the prominent men, the Israelite soldiers released them and sent them back. The united forces of Israel and Syria appeared before the walls of Jerusalem to demand its surrender. At this juncture Isaiah the prophet came to the support of Judah and her king. The allies had proposed to set upon the throne of Judah a son of Tabeel, probably one favorable to the alliance. Ahaz, however, knowing that Tiglath-pileser was within call, appealed to him for help. Ahaz's \"dread\" of Rezin and Pekah, \"Son of Remaliah\" is recorded in the Immanuel prophecy in where the birth of a son (possibly Hezekiah) is a sign of the defeat of both kings by the King of Assyria before the child is old enough to eat curds and honey and distinguish right from wrong. After Ahaz paid tribute to Tiglath-Pileser, the Assyrians sacked Damascus and annexed Aram. According to , the population of Aram was deported and Rezin executed. According to , Tiglath-Pileser also attacked Israel and \"took Ijon, Abel Beth Maacah, Janoah, Kedesh and Hazor. He took Gilead and Galilee, including all the land of Naphtali, and deported the people to Assyria.\" Tiglath-Pileser also records this act in one of his inscriptions.\nSoon afterwards, this Pekah was assassinated by Hoshea ben Elah (that is, Hoshea the son of Elah), a captain from Pekah's own army, who then took the throne. Tiglath-Pileser in an inscription mentions the slaying of Pekah by his fellow Israelites. The inference here is that the people, seeing the inevitable outcome of the contest with Assyria, put out of the way their fighting king, and then yielded submission to the conqueror, Tiglath-pileser III. He is supposed by some to have been the \"shepherd\" mentioned in .\nChronology.\nControversy.\nThe data given for Pekah's reign in the biblical sources have generated considerable discussion. His ending date can be established fairly firmly as 732/731 BC.\nBut two conflicting systems of reckoning seem to be used for his reign. One system gives him a long reign of twenty years (), which puts his starting date in 752 BC. This date is consistent with the statement that Jotham began to reign in Pekah's second year, 750 BC (), and that Jotham's successor Ahaz began to reign in his 17th year, 735 BC ().\nHowever, a shorter reign is indicated by , which says that Pekah began to reign in the 52nd year of Azariah (Uzziah) of Judah, i.e. in 740 BC. Also, Pekah assassinated Pekahiah to assume the throne (), and Pekahiah's two-year reign () was preceded by his father Menahem's ten-year reign (). Menahem gave tribute to Tiglath-Pileser III, as is recorded in (where Pul = Tiglath-Pileser) and also in Tiglath-Pileser's inscriptions. Since Tiglath-Pileser came to the throne in 745 BC, Menahem's tribute would have to be in 745 or later, yet the \"longer\" chronology gave Pekah, successor to Menahem and Pekahiah, a twenty-year reign that started before this, in 752. These apparent inconsistencies led many scholars to reject all or part of the biblical sources concerning Pekah. D. M. Beegle has maintained that it is impossible to reconcile a twenty-year reign for Pekah with other biblical or with Assyrian history, using this as one of his arguments that the doctrine of the inerrancy of all Scripture cannot be true.\nC. Lederer and H. J. Cook: a rival reign in Gilead.\nIn 1887, Carl Lederer proposed that the existence of two apparently contradictory sets of text for Pekah could be explained if there really were two systems in use for reckoning the reign of Pekah, and these were the consequence of a rivalry between Pekah and Menahem. The rivalry began when Menahem slew Shallum, putting an end to Shallum's one-month reign (). This assumption accounted for all the chronological texts that related four kings of Judah (Uzziah through Hezekiah) to three kings of Israel (Menahem, Pekahiah, and Pekah), but it apparently was largely ignored by the scholarly community. Then in 1954, H. J. Cook added new considerations to support Lederer's thesis, beyond just the pragmatic. Cook maintained that although the Scriptures did not explicitly state the existence of two rival kingdoms in the north in the latter half of the eighth century BC, their existence could be inferred from passages of the book of Hosea that was written about the time of Pekah and Menahem. Cook showed that although \"Ephraim\" is sometimes used in Scripture to designate all of the northern kingdom, in various passages of Hosea such as Hosea 5:5, \"Israel\" and \"Ephraim\" are not synonymous but refer to separate entities. Cook's thesis in this regard was strengthened when Rodger Young pointed out that the Hebrew of Hosea 5:5 has a \"vav\" before Israel and then another \"vav\" before Ephraim, which is the Hebrew method of expressing \"both... and,\" implying a distinction in this passage between Israel and Ephraim. All translations which have rendered this in some sense as \"Israel, even Ephraim\" are therefore incorrect (the Holman Study Bible renders the verse correctly, as did the ancient Septuagint). Others who have accepted the Lederer/Cook explanation of the two methods of dating for the time of Pekah are Thiele in his second edition of \"Mysterious Numbers\" and later, Leslie McFall, Francis Andersen and David Noel Freedman in their commentary on Hosea in the Anchor Bible Series, T. C. Mitchell, in the \"Cambridge Ancient History\", and Jack Finegan in his \"Handbook of Biblical Chronology\".\nAssyrian references.\nLooking at this from the Assyrian side, Stanley Rosenbaum maintains that the records of Tiglath-Pileser III demonstrate that the Assyrian king distinguished between two kingdoms in the north of Israel. Tiglath-Pileser says he united the northern part (restored as Naphthali in the text) with Assyria, whereas for the southern part, he wrote, \"Israel (\"bit-Humria\")\u0085 overthrew their king Pekah and I placed Hoshea as king over them.\" Cook thinks that Menahem's tribute to Assyria in 2 Kings 15:19 also suggests the existence of a rival to Menahem's kingdom:\nWhen Tiglath-Pileser III appeared in the west, Menahem took the opportunity to enlist his support by sending tribute of a thousand talents of silver, with the idea\u2014as 2 Kings xv 19 puts it\u2014'that he might help him to confirm his hold of the royal power'. This expression may simply indicate Menahem's sense of insecurity in the presence of Assyrian power; but it may equally well indicate the presence of a rival. \nIsaiah 7:1,2 speaks of a league between Pekah and King Rezin of Aram that was a threat to Ahaz of Judah. Ahaz and Menahem of Israel (Ephraim) followed a pro-Assyrian policy and were therefore aligned against the coalition of Pekah and the Arameans that sought to withstand Assyria, thus explaining why Menahem felt insecure and sought to buy the support of Assyria.\nPekah as commander under Pekahiah.\nA major objection to the idea that Pekah headed a kingdom that was rival to Menahem's reign in Samaria is that he is listed as a commander (\"shalish\") of Pekahaiah, Menahem's son, whom he slew (2 Kings 15:25). Young remarks,\nThe objections to Pekah being a rival to Menahem usually center on Pekah\u2019s position as an officer in the army of Pekahiah, Menahem\u2019s son and successor (2 Kgs 15:25). But there is nothing inherently unreasonable about two rivals reaching a d\u00e9tente under which one contender accepts a subordinate position, and he then bides his time until the opportunity comes to slay his rival (or his rival\u2019s son) in a coup. Once the rivalry had begun, the external threat (Assyria) provided compelling reasons for a d\u00e9tente.\nAny rivalry between Menahem and Pekah could only appear more and more foolish in light of the growing menace of Assyria. In 733, Tiglath-Pileser campaigned against Damascus, the capital of the Arameans, Pekah's erstwhile ally, and he returned to destroy the city in 732. Pekah must have seen the handwriting on the wall in 733 or earlier, and any feeling for \"Realpolitik\" would dictate that it was time for the two rivals to put aside their differences under some sort of accommodation. But \"Realpolitik\" would also suggest that this accommodation should not include giving your potential rival a position of leadership in the army, which Pekahiah learned too late.\nThis is based on inference from the political situation of the time. Gleason Archer showed how inference is used to reconstruct a rivalry in the neighboring kingdom of Egypt that has striking parallels to the Pekah/Menahem rivalry. When Thutmose II died, the intended heir was his son Thutmose III, who was still a boy. However, some time not long after the death of her husband (Thutmose II), Hatshepsut assumed the royal regalia and the title of pharaoh, reigning for 21 years. As he grew older, Thutmose III was given the position of commander of the army, similar to Pekah's position as commander, but still under his aunt and stepmother Hatshepsut. After Hatshepsut died, Thutmose, in an inscription describing his first campaign, said it was in his 22nd year of reign, thereby counting his regnal years from the time his father died, not from the death of Hatshepsut. Thutmose left no explanation for modern historians that his 22nd year was really the first year of sole reign, any more than Pekah or the historian of 2 Kings left an explanation that Pekah's 12th year, the year in which he slew Pekahiah, was really his first year of sole reign. Modern historians rely on a comparison of inscriptions and chronological considerations to reconstruct the chronology of Thutmose III, and there is unanimity among Egyptologists that he counted as his own years the 21 years that Hatshepsut was on the throne, even though no inscription has ever been found explicitly stating this fact. Commenting on the fact that Egyptologists have no problem in reconstructing history using inference of this sort, whereas critics will sometimes not allow the same historical method to be applied to the Bible, Young writes, \"Do those who reject the Menahem/Pekah rivalry as improbable also reject as improbable this reconstruction from Egypt's Eighteenth Dynasty that Egyptologists use to explain the regnal dates of Thutmose III? How do they explain Hosea 5:5?\"\nChronological note.\nThe calendars for reckoning the years of kings in Judah and Israel were offset by six months, that of Judah starting in Tishri (in the fall) and that of Israel in Nisan (in the spring). Cross-synchronizations between the two kingdoms therefore often allow narrowing of the beginning and/or ending dates of a king to within a six-month range. A study of the relevant texts in Scripture allows the narrowing of the start of the Pekah/Menahem rivalry on the death of Shallum to the month of Nisan, 752 BC, as Thiele showed in the second edition of \"Mysterious Numbers\", pp.\u00a087\u201388. In order to simplify things for the reader, Thiele, in the third edition, omitted the logic that allows this accuracy. The third edition also frequently fails to make explicit the six-month narrowing of dates that is possible from the Biblical data, settling instead on a somewhat inexact notation like \"931/930 BC\" or even simply \"931 BC.\" For Pekah, synchronisms with the kings of Judah show that he assassinated Pekahiah sometime between Tishri 1 of 740 BC and the day before Nisan 1 of 739 BC. He was slain by Hoshea sometime between Tishri 1 of 732 BC and the day before Nisan 1 of 731 BC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "69634", "revid": "23736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69634", "title": "Ben Johnson", "text": "Ben, Benjamin or Benny Johnson may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "69635", "revid": "111996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69635", "title": "Parting of the Red Sea", "text": "Part of the biblical narrative of the Exodus\nThe Parting of the Red Sea or Crossing of the Red Sea (, lit. \"parting of the sea of reeds\") is an episode in The Exodus, a foundational story in the Hebrew Bible.\nIt tells of the escape of the Israelites, led by Moses, from the pursuing Egyptians, as recounted in the Book of Exodus. Moses holds out his staff and God parts the waters of the Yam Suph, which is traditionally presumed to be the Red Sea, although other interpretations have arisen. With the water dispersed, the Israelites were able to walk on dry ground and cross the sea, followed by the Egyptian army. Once the Israelites have safely crossed, Moses drops his staff, closing the sea, and drowning the pursuing Egyptians.\nBiblical narrative.\nAfter the Plagues of Egypt, the Pharaoh agrees to let the Israelites go, and they travel from Ramesses to Succoth. Ramesses is generally identified with modern Qantir, the site of the 19th dynasty capital Pi-Ramesses, and Succoth with Tell el-Maskhuta in Wadi Tumilat, the biblical Land of Goshen. From Succoth, the Israelites travel to Etham \"on the edge of the desert\", led by a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night. There God tells Moses to turn back and camp by the sea at Pi-HaHiroth, between Migdol and the sea, directly opposite Baal-zephon. None of these latter locations have been identified with certainty.\nGod causes the Pharaoh to pursue the Israelites with chariots, and the pharaoh overtakes them at Pi-hahiroth. When the Israelites see the Egyptian army they are afraid, but the pillar of fire and the cloud separates the Israelites and the Egyptians. At God's command, Moses held his Staff out over the water, water parted, and the Israelites walked through on dry land with a wall of water on either side (Exodus 14:21&amp;22). The Egyptians pursued them, but at daybreak God clogged their chariot-wheels and threw them into a panic, and with the return of the water, the pharaoh and his entire army are destroyed. When the Israelites saw the power of God, they put their faith in God and in Moses, and sang a song of praise to the Lord for the crossing of the sea and the destruction of their enemies. (This song, at , is called the Song of the Sea).\nAccording to Soggin's documentary hypothesis, the narrative contains at least three and possibly four layers. In the first layer (the oldest), God blows the sea back with a strong east wind, allowing the Israelites to cross on dry land; in the second, Moses stretches out his hand and the waters part into two walls; in the third, God clogs the chariot wheels of the Egyptians and they flee (in this version the Egyptians do not even enter the water); and in the fourth, the Song of the Sea, God casts the Egyptians into \"tehomot\", the oceanic depths or mythical abyss.\nIn Islam.\nThe incident of the Egyptian tyrant Pharaoh chasing down Moses and the Israelites, followed by the drowning in the sea, is mentioned in several places in the Quran. As per God's command, Moses came to the court of Pharaoh to warn him for his transgressions. M\u016bs\u0101 clearly manifested the proof of prophethood and claimed to let Israelites go with him. The Magicians of Pharaoh's cities, whom he gathered to prove to the people that the person claiming to be prophet is a magician; eventually they all believed in Moses. This enraged Pharaoh. But he couldn't frighten them in any way. Later they were pursued by Pharaoh and his army at sunrise. But God revealed to Moses beforehand to leave with His servants at night, for they will be pursued. The Quranic account about the moment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the two groups came face to face, the companions of Moses cried out, \"We are overtaken for sure.\" [Moses] said, \"No! Indeed, with me is my Lord; He will guide me.\" So We inspired Moses: \"Strike the sea with your staff,\" and the sea was split, each part was like a huge mountain.\u2014\u200a\nMiraculously, God divided the waters of the sea leaving a dry path in the middle, which the Children of Israel immediately followed. Pharaoh and his soldiers went so audacious as to chase the Children of Israel into the sea. Nevertheless, this miracle did not suffice to convince Pharaoh. Together with his soldiers who took him as a deity (by obeying him against the prophet of God), he blindly entered the path that divided the sea. However, after the Children of Israel had safely crossed to the other side, the waters suddenly began to close in on Pharaoh and his soldiers and they all drowned. Though, at the last moment Pharaoh tried to repent but Jibreel put mud in his mouth and his repentance was not accepted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We brought the tribe of Israel across the sea and Pharaoh and his troops pursued them out of tyranny and enmity. Then, when he was on the point of drowning, he (Pharaoh) said, \"I believe that there is no god but Him in Whom the tribe of Israel believe. I am one of the Muslims (those who submit to God's will).\" What, now! When previously you rebelled and were one of the corrupters? Today We will preserve your body so you can be a Sign for people who come after you. Surely many people are heedless of Our Signs.\u2014\u200a\nLegacy.\nThe theme of Moses crossing the Red Sea was taken up by the panegyrists of Constantine the Great and applied to the battle of the Milvian Bridge (312). The theme enjoyed a vogue during the fourth century on carved sarcophagi: at least twenty-nine have survived in full or in fragments. Eusebius of Caesarea cast Maxentius, drowned in the Tiber, in the role of Pharaoh, both in his \"Ecclesiastical History\" and in his eulogistic \"Life of Constantine\".\nEvery year, Muslims fast two days in the month of Muharram commemorating the event.\nTheories and historicity.\nNo clear archaeological evidence has been found that directly supports the story of Exodus, other than the biblical account. Zahi Hawass, an Egyptian archaeologist and formerly Egypt's Minister of State for Antiquities Affairs, says: \"Really, it's a myth... Sometimes as archaeologists we have to say that never happened because there is no historical evidence.\" Despite the lack of evidence, some have created theories as to what may have inspired the biblical authors' narrative, providing natural explanations.\nCrossing location.\nThe Hebrew term for the body of water that the Israelites crossed is \"Yam Suph\". In Exodus 2:3-5, Isaiah 19:6-7, and Jonah 2:5, \"suph\" is translated as reeds, rushes, marshes, or weeds. A fair rendering of the Hebrew would therefore be \"sea/lake of reeds\". This literal translation is attested by Coptic Bohairic translations, Aramaic Targums, Martin Luther, John Calvin, and C. F. Keil, although it has been challenged by Bernard Batto. In the Septuagint, Jews who lived in Alexandria, Egypt, during the 3rd century BC, translated \"Yam Suph\" in Exodus as the Greek \u1f18\u03c1\u03c5\u03b8\u03c1\u1f70 \u03b8\u03ac\u03bb\u03b1\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1 (\"Eruthra Thalassa\" or Erythraean Sea), where \"Eruthra\" literally means \"Red\". This is a historicized translation, not a direct translation, as \"suph\" in Hebrew does not mean \"red\". The Septuagint mainly translates \"yam suph\" as the Erythraean Sea, but exceptions include I Kings 9:26 (\"\u1f10\u03c3\u03c7\u03ac\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \u03b8\u03b1\u03bb\u03ac\u03c3\u03c3\u03b7\u03c2\", \"esch\u00e1tis thal\u00e1ssis\" or \"the end of the sea\"), Jeremiah 49:21 (\"thalassi\"'), and Judges 11:16 (\"thalasses siph\"). The Erythraean Sea is translated in the Latin Vulgate and modern English translations as the Red Sea, but in classical sources the Erythraean Sea often referred to the northwestern part of the Indian Ocean in general, including the modern Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Aqaba, the Arabian Sea, and sometimes the Persian Gulf. Most maps depicted these bodies of water with grossly distorted proportions, omitting gulfs and other features altogether, and Greco-Roman writers used only imprecise allusions. The salt-water reeds suggested by \"yam suf\" flourished in many shallow lakes and marshes around these areas. Snaith suggests that these are vague terms and Hoffmeier concludes one should be cautious in relying on them to settle the crossing location. The modern Red Sea as crossing site of the Israelites is especially popular among believers in the miraculous nature of the Exodus. Biblical literalist Ken Ham states \"there is no need to come up with a naturalistic explanation of a supernatural event. The Bible gives us a record from the ultimate Eyewitness, the God of Creation. [...] We must be careful to avoid limiting our faith to only those acts of God that we can explain according to the laws of the physical world. He miraculously created those physical laws, and He can miraculously use them or override them as He chooses.\"\nMany sites have been proposed. In 1896, Haynes proposed that the body of water crossed was Lake Timsah, a salt lake north of the Gulf of Suez, and the nearest large body of water after Wadi Tumilat. Lake Timsah was connected to Pithom in Gesem at various times by a canal, and a late 1st millennium text refers to Migdol Baal Zephon as a fort on the canal. Schleiden and Brugsch proposed Sirbonis Lake. Kenneth Kitchen and James Hoffmeier support the isthmus of Suez north to the Mediterranean Sea. Hoffmeier equates \"yam suf\" with the Egyptian term \"pa-tjufy\" (also written \"p3 twfy\") from the Ramesside period, which refers to lakes in the eastern Nile Delta. He also describes references to \"p3 twfy\" in the context of the Island of Amun, thought to be modern Tell el-Balamun, the most northerly city of Pharaonic Egypt, located about 29\u00a0km southwest of Damietta. Drews objects that the isthmus is oriented primarily north-south, and consequently, a wind setdown effect with an east wind is not possible. Naum Volzinger and Alexei Androsov believe that a reef running from Egypt to the north side of the Red Sea used to be much closer to the surface at approximately 1500 BC and therefore a crossing in the northern part of the Gulf of Suez is plausible.\nAlan Gardiner proposes the northeast Nile Delta, in the \"marshy and watery region that now comprises the southern extremity of [Lake] Menzaleh\". Carl Drews propose that the Israelites crossed a 3-4 km land bridge along the Lake of Tanis, in the Nile delta. Circa 1250 BC, this lake would have been a shallow, reed-filled brackish lagoon. Ron Wyatt, Lennart Mueller, Bob Cornuke, and Glen Fritz propose Nuweiba Beach in the Gulf of Aqaba. Sir Colin Humphries proposes Elat. Steven Rudd proposes the Straits of Tiran.\nVolcanic eruption.\nThe Minoan eruption was a catastrophic volcanic eruption known to have devastated the Santorini island circa 1600 BC. There was likely another eruption in the South Aegean Volcanic Arc sometime around 1450 BC. Geologist Barbara J. Sivertsen has proposed a link between these eruptions and the Exodus. The pillar of fire and cloud described in Exodus could easily be a volcanic eruption column, smoky by day and fiery by night. A BBC documentary, \"Moses\", suggested that the Minoan eruption could have triggered a 600ft-high tsunami, travelling at about 400 miles an hour, which would have been 6ft high and a hundred miles long when it reached the Egyptian delta.\nWind setdown.\nThe Biblical narrative describes a strong east wind. Several researchers have proposed that the land path the Israelites walked on was created by a wind setdown.\nMirage effects.\nFraser has proposed that the waters that \"were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left\" could have been a fata morgana mirage, magnifying and blurring the water on either side of a narrow strip of land and causing it to appear as a solid wall projected in the air. The occurrence of a fata morgana is dependent on a precise combination of winds and temperatures, but could have lasted for the duration of the Israelites' journey through a body of water. Katzper objects that the Egyptians drowned \"upon the sea-shore in the sight of Israel\", and therefore the crossing cannot be explained solely by optics. McKeighen objects that the crossing occurred during the night, and therefore a mirage would have been difficult to observe. Also, a strong east wind could be incompatible with the exact temperature profile needed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69637", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69637", "title": "Pashhur", "text": "Characters in the Book of Jeremiah\nPashur or Pashhur () was the name of at least two priests contemporary with the prophet Jeremiah and who are mentioned in the Book of Jeremiah. The name is of Egyptian origin, P\u0161-\u1e24r.\nPashur ben Immer.\nPashhur the son of Immer (possibly the same as Amariah, Nehemiah ; ), was deputy chief priest (\"https:// https://\") of the temple (, ). (At this time, the nagid \"governor\" of the temple would have been Seraiah - 1 Chronicles ). Enraged at the plainness with which Jeremiah uttered his solemn warnings of coming judgements because of the abounding iniquity of the times, \"Pashhur thereupon had Jeremiah flogged and put in the cell at the Upper Benjamin Gate in the House of GOD.\" in . Upon being set free in the morning, Jeremiah went to Pashhur and announced, \"GOD has named you not Pashhur, but Magor-missabib,\" i.e., \"terror on every side\", and that he would be later carried captive to Babylon and die there ().\nPashur ben Malchiah.\nPashhur, the son of Malchiah, was another priest who was sent by King Zedekiah to Jeremiah to inquire of the Lord regarding the impending attack of Nebuchadnezzar II of the Neo-Babylonian Empire in . In \u2013, Pashhur was also one of four men who advised Zedekiah to put Jeremiah to death for his prophecies of doom but who ended up throwing him into a cistern.\nGedaliah ben Pashur.\nPashhur, the father of Gedaliah in is possibly the same Pashhur. Gedaliah was another of the four men who threw Jeremiah into the cistern.\nHistoricity.\nThe pottery shards of the Tel Arad ostraca unearthed in the 1970s written in Paleo-Hebrew mention a Pashhur.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "69639", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69639", "title": "Parlour", "text": "Reception room\nA parlour (or parlor) is a reception room or public space. In medieval Christian Europe, the \"outer parlour\" was the room where the monks or nuns conducted business with those outside the monastery and the \"inner parlour\" was used for necessary conversation between resident members. In the English-speaking world of the 18th and 19th century, having a parlour room was evidence of social status. \nEtymology.\nIn the early 13th century, parlor originally referred to a room where monks could go to talk, derived from the Old French word \"parloir\" or \"parler\" (\"to speak\"), it entered the English language around the turn of the 16th century.\nHistory.\nThe first known use of the word to denote a room was in medieval Christian Europe, when it designated the two rooms in a monastery where clergy, constrained by vow or regulation from speaking otherwise in the cloister, were allowed to converse without disturbing their fellows. The \"outer parlour\" was the room where the monks or nuns conducted business with those outside the monastery. It was generally located in the west range of the buildings of the cloister, close to the main entrance. The \"inner parlour\" was located off the cloister next to the chapter house in the east range of the monastery and was used for necessary conversation between resident members.\nIt was the function of the \"outer parlour\" as the public antechamber of the monastery that was adapted into domestic architecture. In the early modern period homes became larger and concepts of privacy evolved as material prosperity was more widely shared. Rooms were increasingly set aside for the reception of guests and other visitors, screening them from the rest of the home. Although aristocratic homes might have state rooms, the frequent name for this reception room among the emerging middle classes (not likely to host state functions or royalty) was the \"parlour\".\nIn the English-speaking world of the 18th and 19th century, having a parlour room was evidence of social status. It was proof that one had risen above those who lived in one or two rooms. As the parlour was the room in which the larger world encountered the private sphere of middle class life (the family's face to the world) it was invariably the best room (it was often colloquially called that) in the home. The parlour frequently displayed a family's best furnishings, works of art and other status symbols. \n\"Chamaedorea elegans\", parlour palm, was one of several houseplants regularly grown in a parlour due to its ability to cope with low light and cooler temperatures.\nThe parlour was used for receptions on formal family occasions such as weddings, births and funerals. Some tradespeople used the parlour of their houses (or later houses bought specifically for business) in the service of their businesses. Hence, funeral parlours (for those who wished to lay out their deceased in a grander style than their own home), beauty parlours, and the like.\nIn the 20th century, the increasing use of the telephone and automobiles, as well as the increasing casualness of society, led to the decline of formal reception rooms in domestic architecture in English-speaking countries. The secondary functions of the parlour for entertaining and display were taken up by various kinds of sitting rooms, such as the living room in North American usage and the drawing room in British countries.\nDespite its decline in domestic architecture, the term parlour continues to have an afterlife in its second meaning as nomenclature for various commercial enterprises. In addition to \"funeral parlour\" and \"beauty parlour\" (mentioned above), it is also common to say \"betting parlour\", \"billiard parlour\", \"ice cream parlor\", \"pizza parlour\", \"massage parlour\", \"tattoo parlour\" and \"cafe parlor\". Less common uses include \"beer parlour\", \"wine parlour\", \"spaghetti parlour\", and \"coffee parlour\".\nThe dialect-specific usage of this English term instead of another (i.e., as opposed to \"ice cream shoppe\" or \"pizzeria\") varies by region.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69641", "revid": "1316962122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69641", "title": "Nicolas Steno", "text": "Danish scientist and Catholic bishop (1638 \u2013 1686)\nNiels Steensen (; Latinized to Nicolas Steno or Nicolaus Stenonius; 1 January 1638\u00a0\u2013 25 November 1686 [NS: 11 January 1638 \u2013 5 December 1686]) was a Danish scientist, a pioneer in both anatomy and geology who became a Catholic bishop in his later years. He has been beatified by the Catholic Church.\nSteensen was trained in the classical texts on science; however, by 1659 he seriously questioned accepted knowledge of the natural world. Importantly he questioned explanations for tear production, the idea that fossils grew in the ground and explanations of rock formation. His investigations and his subsequent conclusions on fossils and rock formation have led scholars to consider him one of the founders of modern stratigraphy and modern geology. The importance of Steensen's foundational contributions to geology may be gauged from the fact that half of the twenty papers in a 2009 miscellany volume on \"The Revolution in Geology from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment\" focus on Steensen, the \"preeminent Baroque polymath and founder of modern geologic thought\".\nBorn to a Lutheran family, Steensen converted to Catholicism in 1667. After his conversion, his interest in the natural sciences rapidly waned giving way to his interest in theology. At the beginning of 1675, he decided to become a priest. Four months later, he was ordained in the Catholic clergy on Easter Sunday in 1675. As a clergyman, he was later appointed Vicar Apostolic of Nordic Missions and Titular Bishop of Titopolis by Pope Innocent XI. Steensen played an active role in the Counter-Reformation in Northern Germany.\nHis canonization process began in 1938 and Pope John Paul II beatified Steensen in 1988.\nEarly life and career.\nNiels Steensen was born in Copenhagen on New Year's Day 1638 (Julian calendar), the son of a Lutheran goldsmith who worked regularly for King Christian IV of Denmark. He became ill at age three, suffering from an unknown disease, and grew up in isolation during his childhood. In 1644 his father died, after which his mother married another goldsmith. In 1654\u20131655, 240 pupils of his school died due to the plague. Across the street lived Peder Schumacher (who would offer Steensen a post as professor in Copenhagen in 1671). At the age of 19, Steensen entered the University of Copenhagen to pursue medical studies. After completing his university education, Steensen set out to travel through Europe; in fact, he would be on the move for the rest of his life. In the Netherlands, France, Italy and Germany he came into contact with prominent physicians and scientists. These influences led him to use his own powers of observation to make important scientific discoveries.\nAt the urging of Thomas Bartholin, Steensen first travelled to Rostock, then to Amsterdam, where he studied anatomy under and lodged with Gerard Blasius, focusing on the lymphatic system. Within a few months Steensen moved to Leiden, where he met the students Jan Swammerdam, Frederik Ruysch, Reinier de Graaf, Franciscus de le Boe Sylvius, a famous professor, and Baruch Spinoza. Steensen doubted Descartes's recently published explanation of the origin of tears as produced by the brain. Invited to Paris by Henri Louis Habert de Montmor and Pierre Bourdelot, he there met Ole Borch and Melchis\u00e9dech Th\u00e9venot who were interested in new research and in demonstrations of his skills. In 1665 Steensen travelled to Saumur, Bordeaux and Montpellier, where he met Martin Lister and William Croone, who introduced Steensen's work to the Royal Society.\nAfter travelling through France, he settled in Italy in 1666 \u2013 at first as professor of anatomy at the University of Padua and then in Florence as in-house physician of Grand Duke of Tuscany Ferdinando II de' Medici, who supported arts and science and whom Steensen had met in Pisa. Steensen was invited to live in the Palazzo Vecchio; in return he had to gather a cabinet of curiosities. Steensen went to Rome and met Pope Alexander VII and Marcello Malpighi, whom he admired. On his way back he watched a Corpus Christi procession in Livorno and wondered if he had the right belief.\nScientific contributions.\nAnatomy.\nDuring his stay in Amsterdam, Steensen discovered a previously undescribed structure, the \"ductus Stenonis\" (the duct of the parotid salivary gland) in sheep, dog and rabbit heads. A dispute with Blasius over credit for the discovery arose, but Steensen's name remained associated with this structure known today as the Stensen's duct. In Leiden, Steensen studied the boiled heart of a cow, and determined that it was an ordinary muscle. and not the center of warmth as Galenus and Descartes believed. In Florence, Steensen focused on the muscular system and the nature of muscle contraction. He became a member of Accademia del Cimento and had long discussions with Francesco Redi. Like Vincenzo Viviani, Steensen proposed a geometrical model of muscles to show that a contracting muscle changes its shape but not its volume.\n Steensen was the first to describe the lateral line system in fish.\nPaleontology.\nIn October 1666, two fishermen caught a huge female shark near the town of Livorno, and Ferdinando II de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, ordered its head to be sent to Steensen. Steensen dissected the head and published his findings in 1667. He noted that the shark's teeth bore a striking resemblance to certain stony objects, found embedded within rock formations, that his learned contemporaries were calling \"glossopetrae\" or \"tongue stones\". Ancient authorities, such as the Roman author Pliny the Elder, in his \"Naturalis Historia\", had suggested that these stones fell from the sky or from the Moon. Others were of the opinion, also following ancient authors, that fossils naturally grew in the rocks. Steensen's contemporary Athanasius Kircher, for example, attributed fossils to a \"lapidifying virtue diffused through the whole body of the geocosm\", considered an inherent characteristic of the earth \u2013 an Aristotelian approach. Fabio Colonna, however, had already shown by burning the material to show that \"glossopetrae\" were organic matter (limestone) rather than soil minerals, in his treatise \"De glossopetris dissertatio\" published in 1616. Steensen added to Colonna's theory a discussion on the differences in composition between glossopetrae and living sharks' teeth, arguing that the chemical composition of fossils could be altered without changing their form, using the contemporary corpuscular theory of matter.\nSteensen's work on shark teeth led him to the question of how any solid object could come to be found inside another solid object, such as a rock or a layer of rock. The \"solid bodies within solids\" that attracted Steensen's interest included not only fossils, as we would define them today, but minerals, crystals, encrustations, veins, and even entire rock layers or strata. He published his geologic studies in \"De solido intra solidum naturaliter contento dissertationis prodromus\", or \"Preliminary discourse to a dissertation on a solid body naturally contained within a solid\" in 1669. This book was his last scientific work of note. Steensen was not the first to identify fossils as being from living organisms; his contemporary Robert Hooke also argued that fossils were the remains of once-living organisms.\nGeology and stratigraphy.\nSteensen, in his \"Dissertationis prodromus\" of 1669 is credited with four of the defining principles of the science of stratigraphy. His words were:\nThese principles were applied and extended in 1772 by Jean-Baptiste L. Rom\u00e9 de l'Isle. Steensen's ideas still form the basis of stratigraphy and were key in the development of James Hutton's theory of infinitely repeating cycles of seabed deposition, uplifting, erosion, and submersion.\nCrystallography.\nSteensen gave the first accurate observations on a type of crystal in his 1669 book \"De solido intra solidum naturaliter contento\" (the \"Dissertationis prodromus\"). The principle in crystallography, known simply as \"Steensen's law\", or the law of constancy of interfacial angles or the \"first law of crystallography\", states that the angles between corresponding faces on crystals are the same for all specimens of the same mineral. Steensen's seminal work paved the way for the law of rational indices of French mineralogist Ren\u00e9-Just Ha\u00fcy in 1801. This fundamental breakthrough formed the basis of all subsequent inquiries into crystal structure.\nConversion and priesthood.\nSteensen's questioning mind also influenced his religious views. Having been brought up in the Lutheran faith, he nevertheless questioned its teachings, something which became a burning issue when confronted with Catholicism while studying in Florence. After making comparative theological studies, including reading the Church Fathers and by using his natural observational skills, he decided that Catholicism, rather than Lutheranism, provided more sustenance for his constant inquisitiveness. In 1667, Steensen converted to Catholicism on All Souls' Day, influenced, among others, by Lavinia Cenami Arnolfini, a noblewoman of Lucca.\nSteensen traveled to Hungary, Austria and in Spring 1670 he arrived in Amsterdam. There he met with old friends Jan Swammerdam and Reinier de Graaf. With Anna Maria van Schurman and Antoinette Bourignon he discussed scientific and religious topics. The following quote is from a 1673 speech:\n\"Fair is what we see, Fairer what we have perceived, Fairest what is still in veil\".\nIt is not clear if he met Nicolaes Witsen, but he did read Witsen's book on shipbuilding. In 1671 he accepted the post of professor of anatomy in the University of Copenhagen, but promised Cosimo III de' Medici he would return when he was appointed tutor to Ferdinando III de' Medici.\nAt the beginning of 1675, Steensen decided to continue his theological studies, which he had begun even before his conversion, toward his ordination to the priesthood. After only 4 months, he was ordained priest and celebrated his first Mass on 13 April 1675 in the Basilica of the Santissima Annunziata in Florence at the age of 37. Athanasius Kircher expressly asked what were the reasons why he decided to become priest. Steensen had left natural sciences for education and theology and became one of the leading figures in the Counter-Reformation. Upon request of Duke Johann Friedrich of Hanover, Pope Innocent XI made him Vicar Apostolic for the Nordic Missions on 21 August 1677. He was consecrated titular bishop of Titiopolis on 19 September by Cardinal Gregorio Barbarigo and moved to the Lutheran North.\nIn the year after he was made bishop, he was probably involved in the banning of publications by Baruch Spinoza. There he had talks with Gottfried Leibniz, the librarian; the two argued about Spinoza and his letter to Albert Burgh, then Steensen's pupil. Leibniz recommended a reunification of the churches. Steensen worked at the city of Hannover until 1680.\nAfter John Frederick death's, Prince-Bishop of Paderborn Ferdinand of F\u00fcrstenberg appointed him as Auxiliary Bishop of M\u00fcnster (Church Saint Liudger) on 7 October 1680. The new prince-elector Ernest Augustus, Elector of Hanover was a Protestant. Earlier, Augustus' wife, Sophia of Hanover, had made fun of Steensen's piousness; he had sold his bishop's ring and cross to help the needy. He continued zealously the work of counter reform begun by Bernhard von Galen.\nDeath.\nIn 1683, Steensen resigned as auxiliary bishop after an argument about the election of the new bishop, Maximilian Henry of Bavaria and moved in 1684 to Hamburg. There Steensen became involved again in the study of the brain and the nerve system with an old friend Dirck Kerckring. Steensen was invited to Schwerin, when it became clear he was not accepted in Hamburg. Steensen dressed like a poor man in an old cloak. He drove in an open carriage in snow and rain. Living four days a week on bread and beer, he became emaciated. When Steensen had fulfilled his mission, some years of difficult tasks, he wanted to go back to Italy.\nBefore he could return, Steensen became severely ill, his belly swelling day by day. Steensen died in Germany, after much suffering. His corpse was shipped to Florence by Kerckring upon request of Cosimo III de' Medici and buried in the Basilica of San Lorenzo close to his protectors, the De' Medici family. In 1946 his grave was opened, and the corpse was reburied after a procession through the streets of the city.\nBeatification.\nAfter his death in 1686, Steensen was venerated as a saint in the diocese of Hildesheim. Steensen's piety and virtue have been evaluated with a view to an eventual canonization. His canonization process was begun in Osnabr\u00fcck in 1938. In 1953 his grave in the crypt of the church of San Lorenzo was opened as part of the beatification process. His corpse was transferred to a fourth-century Christian sarcophagus found in the river Arno donated by the Italian state. His remains were placed in a lateral chapel of the church that received the name of \"Capella Stenoniana\". He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1988. His feast day is 5 December.\nLegacy.\nSteensen's life and work has been studied, in particular in relation to the developments in geology in the late nineteenth century.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69643", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69643", "title": "Palm tree", "text": ""}
{"id": "69645", "revid": "119438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69645", "title": "Ox goad", "text": ""}
{"id": "69646", "revid": "15962732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69646", "title": "Gastrology", "text": ""}
{"id": "69649", "revid": "11072438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69649", "title": "Othniel Ben Kenaz", "text": ""}
{"id": "69650", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69650", "title": "Philistine", "text": ""}
{"id": "69651", "revid": "47496819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69651", "title": "Ophrah", "text": "Ophrah (), ( or ) is a name in the Hebrew Bible meaning \"a fawn\" given to: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "69653", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69653", "title": "Lille, France", "text": ""}
{"id": "69654", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69654", "title": "Ophir", "text": "Biblical port famous for its wealth\nOphir (; Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0) is a port or region mentioned in the Bible, famous for its wealth. Its existence is attested to by an inscribed pottery shard found at Tell Qasile (in modern-day Tel Aviv) in 1946, dating to the eighth century BC, which reads \"gold of Ophir to/for Beth-Horon [...] 30 shekels\". The location of Ophir is unknown, though the find confirms it as a real place which exported gold.\nBiblical references.\nOphir in Genesis 10 (the Table of Nations) is said to be the name of one of the sons of Joktan. The Books of Kings and Chronicles tell of a joint expedition to Ophir by King Solomon and the Tyrian king Hiram I from Ezion-Geber, a port on the Red Sea, that brought back large amounts of gold, precious stones and 'algum wood' and of a later failed expedition by king Jehoshaphat of Judah. The famous 'gold of Ophir' is referenced in several other books of the Hebrew Bible.\nIn the Septuagint, other variants of the name are mentioned: \"\u014cphe\u00edr\", \"S\u014dph\u00edr\", \"S\u014dphe\u00edr\" and \"Souph\u00edr\".\nThe New Testament apocrypha book \"Cave of Treasures\" contains a passage: \"And the children of Ophir, that is, Send, appointed to be their king Lophoron, who built Ophir with stones of gold; now, all the stones that are in Ophir are of gold.\"\nTheorized locations.\nPossible ancient trade routes.\nSumatra and Malay Peninsula.\nThe 1st-century historian Josephus, in his \"Antiquities of the Jews\" (8.6.4), identified Ophir as \"the Aurea Chersonesus, which belongs to India.\" \"Aurea Chersonesus\" () is Grecolatin for \"Golden Peninsula.\" At that time, India was thought to comprise, not just the Indian subcontinent, but also Indochina, and Indonesia. Hence, in his Geography, the nearly contemporaneous geographer Ptolemy lists these additional lands within the province of \"India beyond the Ganges.\" Ptolemy therein identifies exactly where this Golden Peninsula is, centering it in Malaysia, perhaps also extending somewhat into Sumatra. In particular, Ptolemy mentions a \"golden river\" () somewhat south of the archaeological site of the Bujang Valley (), and in the vicinity of the \"Palandos river\" () (the modern Pahang region, also common in the derived toponyms surrounding Kuala Lumpur). These areas are indeed famous for gold. Indeed, the longest-lasting name for Sumatra, , which also means \"gold,\" may have derived directly from the word Ophir, by a means similar to the Classical Greek pronunciation displayed in the Septuagint: \"Soophaara\"/\"Souphir\" (/).\nEuropeans, arriving later, consequently renamed mythologically-famous 'golden' Mount Ledang near Malacca, Malaysia, as Mount Ophir.\nSri Lanka.\nThe 10th-century lexicographer David ben Abraham al-Fasi identified Ophir with Serendip, the old Persian name for Sri Lanka (aka Ceylon). Moreover, as mentioned above, \"A Dictionary of the Bible\" by Sir William Smith notes the Hebrew word for parrot \"Thukki\", derived from the Classical Tamil for peacock \"Thogkai\" or Sinhalese \"tokei\".\nIndia.\n\"A Dictionary of the Bible\" by Sir William Smith, published in 1863, notes the Hebrew word for parrot \"Thukki\", derived from the Classical Tamil for peacock \"Thogkai\" and Sinhalese \"tokei\", joins other Classical Tamil words for ivory, cotton-cloth and apes preserved in the Hebrew Bible. This theory of Ophir's location in Uvari in Tamil Nadu is further supported by other historians. \nThe most likely location on the coast of Kerala conjectured to be Ophir is Poovar in Thiruvananthapuram District (though some Indian scholars also suggest Beypore as a possible location).\nEarlier in the 19th century, Max M\u00fcller and other scholars identified Ophir with Abhira, near the Indus River in modern-day state of Gujarat, India. According to Benjamin Walker Ophir is said to have been a town of the Abhira tribe.\nIn Jewish tradition, Ophir is often associated with Uvari, a place in the Indian subcontinent, named for one of the sons of Joktan. Ibn Sa'd says in his \"Kitab at-Tabaqat al-Kabir\" that the Indians, the Sindhis and the Bindis are the descendants of Yufir (Ophir).\nRyukyu Islands.\nIn Tomo III (1519\u20131522), pages 112\u2013138, of the book \"Colecci\u00f3n general de documentos relativos a las Islas Filipinas existentes en el Archivo de Indias de Sevilla\", found in the General Archive of the Indies in Spain, Document No. 98 describes how to locate the land of Ophir. The navigational guide starts from the Cape of Good Hope in Africa to India, Burma, Sumatra, the Maluku Islands, Borneo, Sulu, China, then finally Ophir, which is the Ryukyu Islands. These directions were misrepresented by Lone District of Santa Rosa Representative Danilo Fernandez in 2023, who suggested Ophir as the desirable name for the Philippines.\nAfrica.\nBiblical scholars, archaeologists and others have tried to determine the exact location of Ophir. Vasco da Gama's companion Tom\u00e9 Lopes reasoned that Ophir would have been the ancient name for Great Zimbabwe in Zimbabwe, the main center of southern African trade in gold in the Renaissance period \u2014 though the ruins at Great Zimbabwe are now dated to the medieval era, long after Solomon is said to have lived. The identification of Ophir with Sofala in Mozambique was mentioned by Milton in \"Paradise Lost\" (11:399-401), among many other works of literature and science.\nAnother, more serious, possibility is the African shore of the Red Sea, Gulf of Aden or Somali Sea, with the name perhaps being derived from the ancient city of Opone in modern day Somalia or from Afar people living in the Danakil desert (Ethiopia, Eritrea) between Adulis and Djibouti.\nAfri was a Latin name used to refer to the Carthaginians, who dwelt in North Africa, in modern-day Tunisia. This name, that later gave the rich Roman province of Africa and the subsequent medieval Ifriqiya, from which the name of the continent Africa is ultimately derived, seems to have referred to a native Libyan tribe originally, however, see Terence for discussion. The name is usually connected with Phoenician \"afar\", \"dust\", but a 1981 hypothesis has asserted that it stems from the Berber word \"ifri\" (plural \"ifran\") meaning \"cave\", in reference to cave dwellers. This is proposed to be the origin of \"Ophir\" as well.\nMahd adh Dhahab, Arabia.\nIn 1976, the United States Department of Interior announced that a team formed by the United States Geological Survey together with experts from Saudi Arabia believes it has \"a fairly airtight case\u201d that Mahd adh Dhahab, or Cradle of Gold, in Saudi Arabia is the biblical Ophir. As evidence, the team states that \"there are huge quantities of waste rock left behind by ancient miners, approximately a million tons, and that it has an average gold content of sixteenths of an ounce per ton, indicating that the mined ore must have been richer. From sampling old slopes and from production figures during the 1939 to 1954 period when the mine was reactivated to extract gold and silver, the geological survey scientists estimated that in biblical times much gold must have been found at or near the surface.\" Moreover, Mahd adh Dhahab is \"within range of Israel's transport capability,\" and it \"could easily have been known to Solomon or his advisers because it lies on a north\u2010south trade route that has run to Aqaba for some 4,000 years.\" Their conclusion is that \"Mand adh Dhahab [sic] could have produced 34 tons of gold in ancient times and was the biblical Ophir.\"\nInspiration or named after.\nAmericas.\nIn a letter written in May 1500, Peter Martyr claimed that Christopher Columbus identified Hispaniola with Ophir.\nThe theologian Benito Arias Montano (1571) proposed finding Ophir in the name of Peru, reasoning that the native Peruvians were thus descendants of Ophir and Shem.\nThe California Gold Rush boomtown, Ophir, was renamed after \"the biblical source of Solomon's treasure.\"\nOphir, Oregon, is an unincorporated community on the coast in Curry County.\nSolomon Islands.\nAfter their discovery by Europeans in 1568 by Spanish navigator \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a, the Solomon Islands were subsequently referred to as \"Islas Salom\u00f3n\" (Solomon Islands) by others following reports of his voyage optimistically conflated with stories of King Solomon, believing them to be Ophir.\nMars.\nOphir Chasma, named after the biblical Ophir, is a canyon making up part of the Valles Marineris canyon system on Mars.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nFor many references and a comprehensive outline of the products exported from Muziris, Ariake &amp;c. cf. George Menachery ed. The St. Thomas Christian Encyclopaedia of India, 1973, 1982, 2009."}
{"id": "69655", "revid": "38863111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69655", "title": "Rijsel", "text": ""}
{"id": "69656", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69656", "title": "Reactive armour", "text": "Type of vehicle armour\nReactive armour is a type of vehicle armour used in protecting vehicles, especially modern tanks, against shaped charges and hardened kinetic energy penetrators. The most common type is \"explosive reactive armour\" (ERA), but variants include \"self-limiting explosive reactive armour\" (SLERA), \"non-energetic reactive armour\" (NERA), \"non-explosive reactive armour\" (NxRA), and electric armour. NERA and NxRA modules can withstand multiple hits, unlike ERA and SLERA. \nWhen a shaped charge strikes the upper plate of the armour, it detonates the inner explosive, releasing blunt damage that the tank can absorb.\nReactive armour is intended to counteract anti-tank munitions that work by piercing the armour and then either killing the crew inside, disabling vital mechanical systems, or creating spalling that disables the crew\u2014or all three.\nReactive armour can be defeated with multiple hits in the same place, as by tandem-charge weapons, which fire two or more shaped charges in rapid succession. Without tandem charges, hitting precisely the same spot twice is much more difficult.\nHistory.\nThe Australians were the first recorded to have conceptualized and developed methods to disrupt and spread the jet of a hollow charge shell to reduce its penetrating power. In a June 1944 report from the Explosives Manufacturing Practices Laboratory of the Defence Explosive Factory Maribyrnong, an operational requirement for the defence against shaped charges was laid out. The focus was in regard to Japanese 75 mm hollow charge shells used against Allied tanks in the Pacific. The destructive effect of the shaped charge was identified as caused by a jet moving at high velocities, consisting of particles from the liner. The two methods developed were to destroy the jet by forcing it to act through a layer of explosives, disrupting the jet, and to make it act through a layer of oxidiser, destroying the jet by burning it with oxidising agents. \nThe earliest trials were done with small charges able to defeat 2 inch of steel plate which were readily defeated by a layer of explosive (Baratol, R.D.X., Cordite, etc.) or a vigorous oxidising medium. Subsequent trials with British No.68 and American M9A1 grenades were carried out. However trials were done in few numbers which caused varied results. A mixture of Sodium and Potassium Nitrates explosives was seen as the most practical option due to their casting properties. The mixture acted as an oxidiser which may explode when dispersed and heated. The Explosives Manufacturing Practices Laboratory seemingly developed a more middle road between chemical armor and explosive reactive armor concepts to counter the hollow charge threat.\nThe idea of counterexplosion (\"kontrvzryv\" in Russian) in armour was proposed in the USSR by the Scientific Research Institute of Steel (NII Stali) in 1949 by academician Bogdan Vjacheslavovich Voitsekhovsky. The first pre-production models were produced during the 1960s. However, insufficient theoretical analysis during one of the tests resulted in all of the prototype elements being detonated. For a number of reasons, including the aforementioned accident and a belief that Soviet tanks had sufficient armour, the research was ended. No more research was conducted until 1974, when the Ministry of the Defensive Industry announced a contest to find the best tank protection.\nPicatinny Arsenal, an American military research and manufacturing facility experimented with testing linear cutting charges against anti-tank ammunition in the 1950s, and concluded that they may be effective with an adequate sensing and triggering mechanism, but noted \"tactical limitations\"; the report was declassified in 1980.\nA West German researcher, Manfred Held, carried out similar work with the IDF in 1967\u20131969. Reactive armour created on the basis of the joint research was first installed on Israeli tanks during the 1982 Lebanon war and was judged very effective.\nExplosive reactive armour.\nAn element of explosive reactive armour (ERA) is made of either a sheet or slab of high explosive sandwiched between two metal plates, or multiple \"banana shaped\" rods filled with high explosive which are referred to as shaped charges. On attack by a penetrating weapon, the explosive detonates, forcibly driving the metal plates apart to damage the penetrator. The shaped charges, in contrast, each detonate individually, launching one spike-shaped plate each, meant to deflect, detonate or cut the incoming projectile.\nThe disruption is attributed to two mechanisms. First, the moving plates change the effective velocity and angle of impact of the shaped charge jet, reducing the angle of incidence and increasing the effective jet velocity versus the plate element. Second, since the plates are angled compared to the usual impact direction of shaped charge warheads, as the plates move outwards the impact point on the plate moves over time, requiring the jet to cut through fresh plates of material. This second effect greatly increases the effective plate thickness during the impact.\nTo be effective against kinetic energy projectiles, ERA must use much thicker and heavier plates and a correspondingly thicker explosive layer. Such \"heavy ERA\", such as the Soviet-developed Kontakt-5, can break apart a penetrating rod that is longer than the ERA is deep, again reducing penetration capability. Such ERA is ineffective against modern armor-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) projectiles, however, due to their depleted uranium construction.\nAn important aspect of ERA is the brisance, or detonation speed of its explosive element. A more brisant explosive and greater plate velocity will result in more plate material being fed into the path of the oncoming jet, greatly increasing the plate's effective thickness. This effect is especially pronounced in the rear plate receding away from the jet, which triples in effective thickness with double the velocity.\nERA also counters explosively forged projectiles, as produced by a shaped charge. The counter-explosion must disrupt the incoming projectile so that its momentum is distributed in all directions rather than toward the target, greatly reducing its effectiveness.\nExplosive reactive armour has been valued by the Soviet Union and its now-independent component states since the 1980s, and almost every tank in the eastern-European military inventory today has either been manufactured to use ERA or had ERA tiles added to it, including even the T-55 and T-62 tanks built forty to fifty years ago, but still used today by reserve units. The U.S. Army uses reactive armour on its Abrams tanks as part of the TUSK (Tank Urban Survivability Kit) package and on Bradley vehicles and the Israelis use it frequently on their American built M60 tanks.\nERA tiles are used as add-on (or \"appliqu\u00e9\") armour to the portions of an armoured fighting vehicle that are most likely to be hit, typically the front (glacis) of the hull and the front and sides of the turret. Their use requires that a vehicle be fairly heavily armoured to protect itself and its crew from the exploding ERA.\nA further complication to the use of ERA is the inherent danger to anyone near the tank when a plate detonates, though a high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) warhead explosion would already cause great danger to anyone near the tank. Although ERA plates are intended only to bulge following detonation, the combined energy of the ERA explosive, coupled with the kinetic or explosive energy of the projectile, will frequently cause the plate to explode, creating shrapnel that risks injuring or killing bystanders. Thus, infantry must operate some distance from vehicles protected by ERA in combined arms operations.\nSensitivity.\nERA is insensitive to impact by kinetic projectiles up to 30\u00a0mm in caliber. A 20\u00a0mm APIT autocannon round penetrates a Serbian ERA sample but fails to detonate it. However, computer simulations indicate that a small caliber (30\u00a0mm) HEAT projectile will detonate an ERA, as would larger shape charges and APFSDS penetrators.\nNon-explosive and non-energetic reactive armour.\nNERA and NxRA operate similarly to explosive reactive armour, but without the explosive liner. Two metal plates sandwich an inert liner, such as rubber. When struck by a shaped charge's metal jet, some of the impact energy is dissipated into the inert liner layer, and the resulting high pressure causes a localized bending or bulging of the plates in the area of the impact. As the plates bulge, the point of jet impact shifts with the plate bulging, increasing the effective thickness of the armour. This is almost the same as the second mechanism that explosive reactive armour uses, but it uses energy from the shaped charge jet rather than from explosives.\nSince the inner liner is non-explosive, the bulging is less energetic than on explosive reactive armour, and thus offers less protection than a similarly-sized ERA. However, NERA and NxRA are lighter, safe to handle, and safer for nearby infantry; can theoretically be placed on any part of the vehicle; and can be packaged in multiple spaced layers if needed. A key advantage of this kind of armour is that it cannot be defeated by tandem warhead shaped charges, which employ a small forward warhead to detonate ERA before the main warhead fires.\nElectric armour.\n\"Electric armour\" or \"electromagnetic armour\" is a proposed reactive armour technology. It is made up of two or more conductive plates separated by an air gap or by an insulating material, creating a high-power capacitor. In operation, a high-voltage power source charges the armour. When an incoming body penetrates the plates, it closes the circuit to discharge the capacitor, dumping energy into the penetrator, which may vaporize it or even turn it into a plasma, diffusing the attack. It is not public knowledge whether this is supposed to function against both kinetic energy penetrators and shaped charge jets, or only the latter. As of 2005, this technology had not yet been introduced on any known operational platform.\nAnother electromagnetic alternative to ERA uses layers of plates of electromagnetic metal with silicone spacers on alternate sides. The damage to the exterior of the armour passes electricity into the plates, causing them to magnetically move together. As the process is completed at the speed of electricity the plates are moving when struck by the projectile, causing the projectile energy to be deflected whilst the energy is also dissipated in parting the magnetically attracted plates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69657", "revid": "47255112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69657", "title": "Tandy Center Subway", "text": "Former subway system in Fort Worth, Texas\nThe Tandy Center Subway was a small rapid transit system that operated in Fort Worth, Texas, from February 15, 1963 to August 30, 2002. It ran a distance of and was, during the period of its operation, the only privately owned subway in the United States.\nHistory.\nThe subway was originally built by Leonard's Department Store in 1963, connecting the store to its large parking lots on the edge of downtown. Originally known as the Leonard's M&amp;O Subway, it consisted of one underground station beneath the store and four stations in the parking lots. Between 1962 and 1966, Leonard's acquired a total of 15 PCC streetcars from DC Transit in Washington, D.C. These had been manufactured by the St. Louis Car Company in the 1930s and 1940s.\nThe Tandy Corporation purchased the department store, its parking lots, and the subway in 1967. Dillard's operated the store and subway, under the name Dillard's Metro Liner, for a short amount of time there after. The corporation built its headquarters, the Tandy Center, on the site in 1974. Although it demolished the original store, Tandy retained the subway.\nThe small subway primarily served patrons visiting the mall at the base of the Tandy Center, which also linked to the downtown location of Fort Worth Public Library. However, the anchor tenant moved out in 1995 and the mall declined. The Tandy Center Subway ceased operation on August 30, 2002.\nAfter the closure, one of the streetcars used on the subway was acquired by Dallas's McKinney Avenue Transit Authority, which modified it to again make it suitable for in-street use, and it operated in service on the McKinney Avenue heritage streetcar line in Dallas until the mid-to late 2000s. Nicknamed \"Winnie\" for its shape, it had repeated mechanical failures during its short service life. As of 2012[ [update]], it remains in storage in Dallas, out of use.\n\"Leonard's number one\" was the first PCC streetcar to run the line in 1963, the subway car was originally manufactured by the St. Louis Car Co. between 1937 and 1944 in Washington, D.C., with custom made air conditioning and heating. The number one car is the only one of five original subway cars to survive. In April 1982 the car was saved from the cutting torch by a Tandy computer programmer and stored on a farm south of Fort Worth, where it remained for over 25 years. On February 2, 2008, it was moved to a restoration location near Benbrook, Texas. As of 2013[ [update]], Leonard's number one is on public display in the lobby of Texas Capital Bank, Fort Worth (One City Place).\nA second car, nicknamed \"Ms. Marty\" was stored in a warehouse after the closure of the subway, and was relocated when said warehouse was demolished for the Panther Island Project. Miss Marty has been relocated to a Trinity Metro maintenance facility for storage.\nParts of the tunnels that ran the cars still exist but currently closed off to the public. Due to the subway station being located directly under the street, it remains to this day, with the gaps in-between the subway platforms filled in, and the tunnel gated off. The end of the tunnel opening into the parking lots was buried during construction of the Tarrant County College Trinity River Campus. In 2015, Gordon Dickson with Lauren Leonard, the great-granddaughter of Obie Leonard and cousin Marty Leonard, daughter of founder Marvin Leonard, visited the tunnel with asset manager for Spire Realty Group Ryan Johnson. During that visit, Marty Leonard signed \u201cRemember the M&amp;O,\u201d with date and name on the wall closing off the tunnel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69658", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69658", "title": "Dakar, Senegal", "text": ""}
{"id": "69659", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69659", "title": "Frankie Howerd", "text": "English actor and comedian (1917\u20131992)\nFrancis Alick Howard (6 March 1917 \u2013 19 April 1992), better known by his stage-name Frankie Howerd, was an English actor and comedian.\nEarly life.\nHowerd was born the son of a soldier Francis Alfred William (1887\u20131934) and Edith Florence Howard (n\u00e9e Morrison, 1888\u20131962), at the City Hospital in York, England, in 1917 (not 1922 as he later claimed). His mother worked at the Rowntree's factory. The family lived in Hartoft Street, which he later described as \"a poorish area of the city near the River Ouse\". He retained an affection for his home city, to which he often returned.\nWhen his father was posted to Woolwich, the family moved to Eltham, London while he was a young child, and he was educated at Shooter's Hill Grammar School in Shooter's Hill.\nCareer.\nHis first stage appearance was at age 13 but his early hopes of becoming a serious actor were dashed when he failed an audition for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. He began to entertain during World War II service in the British Army. It was at this time that he adapted his surname to Howerd \"to be different\". In 1944 he became a bombardier in Plymouth, was promoted to sergeant, and on 6 June 1944 was part of the D-Day effort but was stuck on a boat off Normandy. Despite suffering from stage fright, he continued to work after the war, beginning his professional career in the summer of 1946 in a touring show called \"For the Fun of It\".\nHis act was soon heard on radio, when he made his debut, in early December 1946, on the BBC's \"Variety Bandbox\" programme with a number of other ex-servicemen. His profile rose in the immediate postwar period (aided with material written by Eric Sykes, Galton and Simpson and Johnny Speight). Sykes had headed a rival concert party during the war and was asked by Howerd if he could provide his material; Sykes obliged and offered to write anything more Howerd needed. Sykes punctuated the material with various 'ooh's and 'ahh's to provide \"punctuation pauses\" in the delivery, but Howerd decided to deliver these verbatim. Howerd then toured the Music Hall circuit with an act including what became his standard catch-phrases such as \"titter ye not\". He also became a regular in the 1950s editions of the weekly hard-copy comic \"Film Fun\".\nIn 1954 he made his screen debut opposite Petula Clark in \"The Runaway Bus\", which had been written for his specific comic talent. Filming took five weeks, with a budget of \u00a345,000.\nHe then experimented with different formats and contexts, including stage farces, Shakespearean comedy roles, and television sitcoms. At the start of the 1960s, he began to recover his old popularity, initially with a season at Peter Cook's satirical Establishment Club in Soho in London. He was boosted further by success on \"That Was the Week That Was\" (TW3) in 1963 and on stage with \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" (1963\u20131965), which led into regular television work. In 1966 and 1967, he co-hosted a 90-minute Christmas show called \"The Frankie and Bruce Christmas Show\" with Bruce Forsyth, featuring many top acts of the day.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, he was involved in shows for the BBC and Thames Television (as well as \"Frankie Howerd Reveals All\" for Yorkshire Television in 1980). Ray Galton and Alan Simpson wrote for him from 1964 to 1966 when he worked for the BBC and also for a one-off show for Thames, \"Frankie Howerd meets the Bee Gees\", shown on 20 August 1968. He was known for his seemingly off-the-cuff remarks to the audience, especially in the show \"Up Pompeii!\" (1969\u201370), which was a direct follow-up from \"Forum\". His television work was characterised by direct addresses to camera and by his littering monologues with verbal tics such as \"Oooh, no missus\" and \"Titter ye not\". A later sale of his scripts, however, showed that the seemingly off-the-cuff remarks had all been meticulously planned. Barry Cryer said of his technique: \"What he could do with a script was amazing, like all the great performers. He transformed something you'd just written \u2013 what you hoped was in a Frankie Howerd idiom \u2013 but when you heard him do it, my God, it was something else; \u2013 it was gossiping over the garden wall, the \"apparent\" waffle \u2013 he was like a tightrope walker, you thought he's going to fall off in a minute, you thought, 'Come on, Frank' , we're waiting for a laugh, and then, suddenly, \"Bang\". He knew exactly what he was doing.\" Another feature of his humour was to feign innocence about his obvious and risqu\u00e9 double entendres, while mockingly censuring the audience for finding them funny.\nHowerd appeared as Francis Bigger, one of the lead characters in 1967's \"Carry On Doctor\", of which \"Variety\" noted, \"Added zest is given by the inclusion of Frankie Howerd as a quack 'mind-over-matter' doctor who becomes a reluctant patient. Howerd's brilliantly droll sense of comedy is given plenty of scope.\"\nThe success of the film version of \"Up Pompeii\" in 1971 saw British exhibitors vote him the ninth most popular star at the British box office that year. He would play versions of the character Lurcio in \"Up the Chastity Belt\" (Lurkalot), also in 1971, and \"Up the Front\" (Boot Boy Lurk) in 1972.\nIn 1971 Howerd recorded, with June Whitfield, a comedy version of the song \"Je t'aime\", previously recorded by Jane Birkin and Serge Gainsbourg, in which she featured as \"Mavis\" alongside Howerd's \"Frank\", and a third unexplained sleeping partner named \"Arthur\". The song was included in the 2004 CD re-issue of \"Oh! What a Carry On!\".\nIn 1976, Howerd appeared in \"The Frankie Howerd Show\" on CBC Television in Canada. It received good ratings but was not renewed.\nHe was awarded an OBE in 1977.\nIn 1978, Howerd appeared in the big-budget Hollywood musical \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" playing Mean Mr Mustard, acting alongside musical and film talent such as Peter Frampton, the Bee Gees, George Burns, Alice Cooper, Aerosmith and Steve Martin. He was cast by producer Robert Stigwood as he was on Stigwood's record label at the time. The film was a critical and commercial flop. Since Howerd was not well known to American audiences, this may have been his biggest exposure in the US.\nThere was a cabaret tour of New Zealand in 1979. In 1982, Howerd appeared in the televised versions of Gilbert and Sullivan's \"Trial by Jury\" (as the Learned Judge) and \"H.M.S. Pinafore\" (as Sir Joseph Porter, KCB). He performed a comedy-duet with Cilla Black on \"Cilla Black's Christmas\" (1983).\nAfter six years without a regular television show in the United Kingdom (though he had hosted a one-off UK version of \"The Gong Show\" for Channel 4, which was critically panned and was not commissioned for a full series), Howerd returned to TV screens in 1987 in the Channel 4 show \"Superfrank!\", scripted by Miles Tredinnick and Vince Powell. In the last years of his career, Howerd developed a following with student audiences and performed a one-man show at universities and in small theatrical venues. He was also a regular guest on the late night BBC Radio 1 programme \"Into the Night\", hosted by Nicky Campbell.\nIn 1990, he contributed to the last recording studio collaboration between Alan Parsons and Eric Woolfson, on the album \"Freudiana\", performing \"Sects Therapy\".\nHowerd often worked with Sunny Rogers (1913\u20132005), who was his accompanying pianist from 1960 onwards. She appeared in his TV and live theatre shows including his last major West End appearance \u2013 his one-man show \u2013 at the Garrick Theatre in 1990. He also occasionally performed with accompanist Vera Roper (1908\u20132001), of Southend-on-Sea, who was billed as \"Madam Vere-Roper\".\nPersonal life.\nThroughout his career, Howerd hid his potentially career-destroying homosexuality from both his audience and his mother, Edith. (Sexual acts between consenting males were illegal in England and Wales until 1967.) In 1958, he met sommelier Dennis Heymer at the Dorchester Hotel while dining with Sir John Mills; Howerd was 40 and Heymer was 28. Heymer became his lover as well as manager, and stayed with him for more than thirty years, until Howerd's death, with Heymer helping to revive Howerd's flagging career in the 1960s. However, the two had to remain discreet as Howerd feared being blackmailed if anyone beyond his immediate circle found out. The relationship was explored in 2008 in a drama for BBC Four, \"Rather You Than Me\", starring David Walliams and Rafe Spall.\nBackstage, Howerd was notoriously bold in his advances, and was known for his promiscuity. One of Howerd's former boyfriends was comic actor Lee Young who created the TV sitcom \"Whoops Baghdad\" (1973) for him. Howerd's uncomfortable relationship with his sexuality\u00a0\u2013 he once allegedly said to Cilla Black, \"I wish to God I wasn't gay\"\u00a0\u2013 as well as his depressive mental state, led him to seek resolution through a series of different methods. Heymer would often drop Howerd off on Friday at his psychiatrist, who would ply him with LSD over the weekend. This experience was later the subject of the March 2015 BBC Radio 4 drama \"Frankie Takes a Trip\".\nIn his early career, Howerd suffered from a stutter, which caused him some distress, but which he turned to an advantage in developing his delivery style as a comic.\nFor the last 20 years of Howerd's life, he and Heymer lived in Wavering Down, a house in the village of Cross, Somerset, under the Mendip Hills. After Howerd's death, Heymer curated Howerd's collection of memorabilia until his own death in 2009.\nDeath.\nHaving contracted a virus during a Christmas trip to the Amazon in 1991, Howerd suffered respiratory problems at the beginning of April 1992 and was taken to a clinic in London's Harley Street, but was discharged at Easter. He collapsed and died of heart failure two weeks later, on the morning of 19 April 1992, aged 75. Two hours before he died, he was speaking on the telephone to his TV producer about new ideas for his next show.\nHowerd's death came one day after that of fellow comedian Benny Hill, but as Hill had died alone at his home, it was not yet known he was dead. Some newspapers ran an obituary of Howerd which featured a quote, ostensibly from Hill, saying that \"We were great, great friends\". The quote was released by Dennis Kirkland, a friend of Hill who acted as his press agent; Kirkland had issued the statement himself after being unable to contact Hill.\nHowerd was buried at St. Gregory's Church in Weare, Somerset. In May 2009, when Heymer died, he was buried near him.\nLegacy.\nA BBC TV biography about Frankie Howerd, \"Rather You Than Me\", was broadcast by BBC Four on 9 April 2008, and repeated on 10 February 2013. The script was written by Peter Harness, after extensive interviews with Howerd's partner, Dennis Heymer. The comedian David Walliams was cast as Howerd.\nOn 15 May 2009, Heymer died in the home, Wavering Down, that he and Howerd had shared. He was 79. Wavering Down is now a tourist attraction and, in the summer, hosts concerts and opens regularly as a museum of Howerd's collection of memorabilia and personal effects such as his false teeth and ill-fitting toupee, to raise funds for charity.\nHowerd also lived at 27 Edwardes Square, Kensington, London W8. The house bears a blue plaque installed by the Dead Comics' Society in 1993. In March 1999 former colleagues and friends and Howerd's sister Betty attended a fund-raising weekend in York and a blue plaque was placed on the Cumberland Street entrance to the Grand Opera House. The inscription reads: \"Frankie Howerd OBE 1917-1992. Son of York\". In 2016, a York Civic Trust plaque was unveiled at 53, Hartoft Street, Howerd's childhood home, by York-born actor Mark Addy and the Lord Mayor of York.\nThe church hall of St Barnabas Church, Eltham, was re-named the Frankie Howerd Centre in the 1980s and was opened by Howerd himself.\nHowerd's career was described by the comedian Barry Cryer as being \"a series of comebacks\".\nWorks.\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69661", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69661", "title": "City of David (archaeological site)", "text": "Archaeological site in Jerusalem\nThe City of David (), known locally mostly as Wadi Hilweh (), is the name given to an archaeological site considered by most scholars to be the original settlement core of Jerusalem during the Bronze and Iron Ages. It is situated on southern part of the eastern ridge of ancient Jerusalem, west of the Kidron Valley and east of the Tyropoeon Valley, to the immediate south of the Temple Mount and separated from it by the so-called Ophel saddle.\nThe City of David is an important site of biblical archeology. Remains of a defensive network dating back to the Middle Bronze Age were found around the Gihon Spring; they continued to remain in use throughout subsequent periods. Two monumental Iron Age structures, known as the Large Stone Structure and the Stepped Stone Structure, were discovered at the site. Scholars debate if these may be identified with David or date to a later period. The site is also home to the Siloam Tunnel, which, according to a common hypothesis, was built by Hezekiah during the late 8th century BCE in preparation for an Assyrian siege. However, recent excavations at the site suggested an earlier origin in the late 9th or early 8th century BCE. Remains from the early Roman period include the Pool of Siloam and the Stepped Street, which stretched from the pool to the Temple Mount.\nThe excavated parts of the archeological site are today part of the Jerusalem Walls National Park. The site is managed by the Israel Nature and Parks Authority and operated by the Ir David Foundation. It is located in Wadi Hilweh, an extension of the Palestinian neighborhood of Silwan, East Jerusalem, intertwined with an Israeli settlement.\nNaming.\nThe name \"City of David\" originates in the biblical narrative where Israelite king David conquers Jerusalem, then known as Jebus, from the Jebusites. David's conquest of the city is described twice in the Bible: once in the Books of Samuel and once in the Books of Chronicles; those two versions vary in certain details. In his \"Antiquities of the Jews,\" 1st century Jewish-Roman historian Josephus repeated the story. The reliability of the Bible for the time period's history is subject to debate among scholars.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the name \"City of David\" was applied to Jerusalem after its conquest by David c. 1000 BCE, and is not to be confused with the modern organization by the same name and which showcases relatively small excavated portions of the larger city. It is first mentioned in the Hebrew Bible, in , in , in and in , being the name given to Jerusalem after it had been conquered by King David and who is said to have ruled in the city for 33 years.\nThe area's majority Palestinian Arab residents refer to it as \"Wadi Hilweh\", before it was renamed by Israeli authorities as the \"City of David\" after 1967, a name which was first applied to the site by French archaeologist Raymond Weill in 1913. Rannfrid Thelle wrote that the title \"City of David\" favors the Jewish national agenda and appeals to its Christian supporters.\nLocation.\nThe archaeological site is on a rocky spur south of the Temple Mount and outside the walls of the Old City of Jerusalem, sometimes described as the southeastern ridge of ancient Jerusalem. The hill descends from the Dung Gate toward the Gihon Spring and the Pool of Siloam.\nToday, the archeological site is part of the Palestinian neighborhood and former village of Silwan, which was historically centered on the slopes of the southern part of the Mount of Olives, east of the City of David. In the 20th century, the village spread west and crossed the valley to the eastern hill, the site of the ancient city. Before 1948, the area was known in Arabic as \"Wadi al-Nabah\", but was renamed to \"Wadi al-Hilweh\" after the wife of the local mukhtar who was killed in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War.\nExcavations and scholarly views.\nThe prevailing view of archaeologists is that the ancient site of the City of David lay on an elongated spur facing north\u2013south, extending outside the wall of the Old City, south of its southeastern corner, in the southern part of the eastern ridge next to the Gihon Spring. The City of David was the ancient epicenter of Jerusalem and whose boundaries stretched from the Temple Mount in the north, thence southward to the Pool of Siloam, including the area marking the Kidron brook in the east and the adjacent dale in the west. Its area is about 50 dunams (ca. 12.3 acres).\nThe beginning of its settlement dates back to the Chalcolithic period and the Early Bronze Age, largely built-up around the natural spring, although not known then by the name City of David. The Old Testament claims that, after the conquest of Jerusalem, an earlier name for the site, Jebus, was replaced by the term \"City of David\". David's son, Solomon, extended the wall to the north and added to it the area of the Temple Mount whereon he built an edifice (Temple) to the God of his fathers. From the eighth century BCE, the city began to expand westward beyond the dale.\nThe debate within biblical archaeology on whether this site on the hill southeast of the Old City could be identified with what the Hebrew Bible calls Jebus and later the City of David, began in the late 19th century with the excavations of Charles Warren and Hermann Guthe. The 1909\u201311 work of Louis-Hugues Vincent and Montagu Brownlow Parker identified the earliest known settlement traces in the Jerusalem region, suggesting the area was an ancient core of settlement in Jerusalem dating back to the Bronze Age.\nOne of the stated objectives of the Palestine Exploration Fund (PEF) since its establishment in 1865 was to search for the true location of the biblical \"City of David\" and to report on its findings. However, after 130 years of research, surveys, and excavations in Jerusalem, only a few of the targets relating to the area of the City of David have been achieved and neither the location of the tombs of David and Solomon or the Ophel are known.\nThe City of David is one of the most excavated archaeological sites in the country and one of the first to be excavated. Many researchers of Near Eastern history often took part in digs within the City of David, among whom were: C. Warren, 1867\u20131870; H. Guthe, 1881; F.J. Bliss and A.C. Dickie, 1894\u20131897; R. Weill, 1913\u20131914 and 1923\u20131924; M. Parker and L. Vincent, 1909\u20131911, in which they documented the location of tunnels and artifacts discovered in and on the bedrock in the areas around Warren's Shaft on the eastern slopes of the mountain above the Gihon Spring; R.A.S. Macalister and J. G. Duncan, 1923\u20131925, who discovered the Ophel ostracon in \"Wadi Hilweh\" of the City of David; J.W. Crowfoot and G.M. Fitzgerald, 1927\u20131928; K.M. Kenyon, in the years 1961\u20131967; , 1978 to 1985; and more.\nMore recent excavations (2000\u20132008) were conducted by R. Reich and E. Shukron on behalf of the Israel Antiquities Authority, and where they detailed Iron Age II findings in a rock-cut pool near the Gihon spring. In the \"City of David Visitors' Center,\" before it was opened to the public, excavations were conducted in and around the general area of that site by a team of IAA archaeologists, again confirming the existence of a city dating back to the Iron Age II, and continuing unabated to the Early Roman period, and which, when the Jewish exiles returned to Jerusalem after the Babylonian captivity in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah, they continued to call the immediate area surrounding the Pool of Siloam by the name \"City of David,\" although this name was eventually replaced by the name Accra (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d7\u05e7\u05e8\u05d0\u200e).\nAccording to \"Haaretz\", \"the prevailing theory in mainstream scholarship, that even if such rulers existed, they were monarchs of a tiny backwater.\" Today, scholars are divided amongst those who support the historicity of the biblical narrative of a united monarchy ruled by David, those who completely deny its existence and those who support its existence but believe that the Hebrew Bible contains theological exaggerations. A view held by Finkelstein, Koch &amp; Lipschits (2011) that the City of David is to be placed on the Temple Mount has largely been rejected by scholars of historical geography.\nArchaeological outline.\nOverview.\nThe area is one of the most intensively excavated sites in the Holy Land. Archaeological practice at the site has been criticized for its practitioners not acknowledging political and corporate motivations, questionable field practice and overtly skewed interpretations.\nLocation and topography.\nIt is on a narrow ridge running south from the Temple Mount. The site has a good defensive position, as it is almost surrounded by the Central or Tyropoeon Valley to its west, by the Hinnom Valley to the south, and the Kidron Valley on the east.\nThe ridge is currently inside the predominantly Arab neighborhood of Wadi Hilweh, which is part of Silwan, an East Jerusalem suburb.\nBronze and Iron Age.\nIt is thought to have been the site of a walled city from the Bronze Age, which enjoyed the defensive advantages of its position. In the pre-Israelite period, the area is thought to have been separated from the site of the later Temple Mount by the Ophel, an uninhabited area which became the seat of government under Israelite rule.\nIn 2014, excavations at the Givati parking lot argued there had been no 10th-century city wall, meaning: no fortified settlement in the City of David during the Iron IIA (c. 1000\u2013925 BCE), the time span usually proposed by biblical scholars for the reigns of David, Solomon and Rehoboam.\nDuring the reign of Hezekiah (reign c. 716\u2013697/687 BCE), the walls of Jerusalem were expanded westward, across the Central Valley from the City of David and the Temple Mount, enclosing a previously unwalled suburb in the area known today as the Western Hill of the Old City.\nExploration.\nArchaeological exploration of the area began in the nineteenth century, with excavations undertaken by Charles Warren in 1867. Warren was sent by the Palestine Exploration Fund. Warren conducted an excavation of the area south of the Temple Mount and recovered a massive fortification. The finding led him to conduct more excavations at the area south of the Temple Mount. There he revealed a vertical shaft descending from a slanted tunnel to an apparent water source. He suggested that the shaft was used to supply water to the city, which he believed was the old biblical city of David. Today this shaft is called after its discoverer \"Warren's shaft\", but his interpretation has been proven wrong, as the shaft is not man-made and had not yet been discovered by Jerusalem's inhabitants in the 10th century BCE.\nThere have been numerous excavations since and several digs are currently underway. Complete chronological lists of the digs are available at the website of the Israel Antiquities Authority, dating to following periods:\nIn 2010, an archaeological survey of the City of David was conducted by Rina Avner, Eliahu Shukron and Ronny Reich, on behalf of the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA). In 2012\u20132013, two teams of archaeologists conducted surveys of the area on behalf of the IAA; one led by Joseph (Joe) Uzziel, and the other by Yuval Gadot. Archaeological surveys in the City of David continued in 2014, led by Uzziel, and Nahshon Szanton.\nDating.\nA four-year project started in 2017, called \"Setting the Clock in the City of David\" and led by Yuval Gadot, an archaeologist at Tel Aviv University together with Elisabetta Boaretto (Weizmann Institute of Science), plus two Israel Antiquities Authority archaeologists, Joe Uziel and Doron Ben Ami, intends to carbon-14 date sites in Jerusalem. At the time only ten reliable carbon dates existed from all of the city's digs. According to Gadot, the chronology of Jerusalem is \"an assumption on an assumption on an assumption\". The results of several studies have been published including for the Gihon Spring Tower and for Wilson's Arch.\nArchaeological sites.\nThere are several excavated sections known as Area A, B, C, etc., which include city walls, water systems, remains of buildings and more.\nThe City of David is traditionally considered to be on the ridge squeezed in by the Central (Tyropoeon) Valley to the west and the Qidron Valley to the east, with the Hinnom Valley bordering it from the south, and distinct from the Ophel saddle area to its north and with the city walls ending before the King's Garden to the south. Here is an incomplete overview of archaeological sites inside the presumed city, and adjacent to it.\nMoat.\nAn at least 70-metre long, 30-metre wide and 9-metre deep moat, separating the Southeastern Ridge from the Ophel and the top of the Temple Mount, was identified in 2023 in the Givati parking lot dig, with an additional segment to the east discovered by Kathleen Kenyon in the 1960s and now understood as part of the same defensive ditch. It is not possible to determine when it was hewn out of the bedrock, but it was in place by the Late Iron Age IIA, around 900 BCE. It reached from Jerusalem's central valley (Josephus' Tyropoeon Valley) in the west, to the western slopes of the Qidron Valley north of the Stepped Stone Structure, thus either protecting the northern walls of the Bronze Age city if it is indeed that old, or separating the Iron Age II, so Israelite acropolis, which possibly included the Temple Mount, from the residential part of the city. Researchers tentatively connected it to a passage from the Hebrew Bible, , where a gap in the walls of David's city is mentioned. After significantly modifying Jerusalem's topography for centuries, the moat disappeared again in the Late Hellenistic period, when it was backfilled as part of construction activities.\nUpper (northern) area.\nIn the uppermost (northern area):\nCity of David archaeologist Eilat Mazar believes that a so-called Large Stone Structure she has discovered at the upper area of the site and tentatively dated to the tenth to ninth century BC, may be the palace of King David. Not far from that excavation area a number of bullae (seal impressions) were unearthed, bearing the names of Yehucal son of Shelemiah and Gedaliah son of Pashhur, two officials mentioned in the Book of Jeremiah.\nGihon Spring and water systems.\nThe Gihon Spring is a major water source used in several successive ancient water systems.\nThe remains at the site include several water tunnels, one of which, the Siloam Tunnel, was built by King Hezekiah and still carries water, along with several pools including the Pool of Siloam known from the Old and New Testaments.\nThe ancient water systems connected to the Gihon Spring include natural, masonry-built, and rock-cut structures, such as\nEastern slope.\nOn the eastern slope of the ridge, towards the Qidron Valley:\nSouth of the city.\nOutside the walls to the south:\nGivati area west of Central Valley.\nThe Giv'ati Parking Lot excavations extend over an area of about 5 dunams (1.2 acres).\nHere archaeologists claim to have found the remains of the Acra, a fortress built by Antiochus Epiphanes to subdue those Jerusalemites who were opposed to Hellenisation.\nOphel area north of the city.\nSee Ophel: Jerusalem \"ophel\".\nFinds by period.\nThe periodisation employed here is mainly based on Avraham Negev and Shimon Gibson's \"Archaeological Encyclopedia of the Holy Land\" (AEHL, 2001), which is also reflected on the page Timeline of the Palestine region, but updated and adapted where needed. Different researchers propose different periodisation systems.\nChalcolithic (4500\u20133500 BCE).\nChalcolithic remains include bits of pottery found in clefts in the bedrock by Macalister and Duncan. The expedition also discovered a number of places where the bedrock had been cut in various ways. These included areas where the rock had been smoothed and others where it had been cut to form flow channels. There were also several groups of small basins, sometimes called cup marks, cut into the bedrock. These are assumed to have been used for some form of agricultural processing. Macalister and Duncan speculated that they were used in olive oil processing.\nEdwin C. M. van den Brink, who notes that similar carved basins have been found at Beit Shemesh and near Modi'in-Maccabim-Re'ut, speculates that they may have been created by repeated grinding and crushing activity, such as the grinding of grain or the crushing of olives. Eilat Mazar speculates that they were used to collect rainwater.\nEarly Bronze Age (3500\u20132350 BCE).\nPieces of pottery have been found.\nMiddle Bronze Age (2000\u20131550 BCE).\nMiddle Bronze Age Jerusalem is mentioned several times in Egyptian texts from the 19th\u201318th centuries BCE.\nLate Bronze Age (1550\u20131200 BCE).\nPottery and bronze arrowheads dating form this period have been found.\nIn 2010, a fragment of a clay tablet dating from the 14th century BCE was uncovered, making it the oldest written document yet uncovered in Jerusalem. It is dated by the writing it bears, in an ancient Akkadian cuneiform script. The text was deciphered by graduate student Takayoshi Oshima working under professor Wayne Horowitz. According to Horowitz, the quality of the writing indicates that this was a royal inscription, apparently a letter from the king of Jerusalem to the pharaoh in Egypt. Professor Christopher Rollston points out that there is no mention of any personal names or titles and no place names in the document. He notes that the quality of the script is good but that this does not show that it is \"international royal correspondence.\" He also suggests that caution should be taken before positing a definite date as it is not a stratified find, having been discovered after excavation in a \"wet sieving\" process.\nIron Age I (1200\u20131000/980/970 BCE).\nIn 2024, several researchers published a number of radiocarbon tests conducted in five different parts of the City of David which they argue provide evidence for the existence of an urban settlement in Jerusalem all through the 12th\u201310th centuries BCE.\nIron Age IIA (1000\u2013900 BCE).\nThe end of the IA IIA period may be set to 925 or 900 BCE.\nThe period of the tenth and ninth centuries BCE has been the subject of an intense scholarly dispute, as well as of ongoing archaeological investigations.\nLarge Stone Structure.\nThe 2005 discovery by archaeologist Eilat Mazar of a Large Stone Structure, which she dated to the tenth century BCE, would be evidence of buildings in Jerusalem of a size appropriate to the capital of a centralized kingdom at that time. Others, most notably Israel Finkelstein of Tel Aviv University, argue that the structure could, for the most part, be from the much later Hasmonean period. However, new evidence continues to emerge from the dig. Mazar's date is supported by 10th century imported luxury goods found within the Large Stone Structure, including two Phoenician-style ivory inlays once attached to iron objects. Comparable objects found in a Phoenician tomb at Achziv suggest that they may have decorated a sword handle. A quantity of luxury round, carinated bowls with red slip and hand burnishing support both the tenth century date and a sophisticated, urban lifestyle. A bone has been radiocarbon dated by Elisabetta Boaretto at the Weizmann Institute, showing a probable date between 1050 and 780 BCE. A large section of a \"delicate and elegant\" black-on-red jug, also found in the structure, is of a kind dated to the second half of the tenth century BCE.\nNorthern wall (date disputed).\nIn 2010 Mazar announced the discovery in the Ophel area north of the City of David of what she believed to be a 10th-century BCE city wall. According to Mazar, \"It's the most significant construction we have from First Temple days in Israel,\" and \"It means that at that time, the 10th century, in Jerusalem there was a regime capable of carrying out such construction.\" Aren Maeir, an archaeology professor at Bar Ilan University, said he has yet to see evidence that the fortifications are as old as Mazar claims.\nEastern wall.\nR. Reich and E. Shukron have excavated a monumental wall on the eastern slope of the hill. This ancient wall was preserved in its full height (6 m.), measuring 2 m. in width.\nMissing western wall.\nDoron Ben-Ami wrote in 2014 that, on the basis of his own excavations in the Givati parking lot area bordering on the \"City of David\" from the north-west, there was apparently no 10th-century city wall: \"Had a fortified settlement existed in the City of David, then the course of the city wall on the west would have had to pass through the Givati excavation area. No such city wall has thus far been found. This means that the Iron Age IIa settlement [c. 1000\u2013925 BCE] was not fortified.\"\nIron Age IIB (c. 925\u2013720 BCE).\nBen-Ami goes on saying that his Givati findings indicate that \"the fortified city of the Iron IIB, which encompassed both the City of David and the Western Hill, had no need for a fortification line between these two sectors of the city.\"\nExcavations at Givati and other sites have shown that 9th-century Jerusalem \"included an acropolis to the north and a city on the lower, southeastern, ridge with a barrier separating the two.\"\nThe related necropolis (9th\u20137th centuries BCE).\nThe elaborate rock-cut tombs of the Israelite period, forming what is known as the Silwan necropolis and dating from the 9th to the 7th centuries BCE, are found outside Wadi Hilweh/the City of David, on the ridge on the opposite, eastern side of the Kidron Valley in and under the Arab village of Silwan. These are large, elaborate tombs of skilfully cut into the stone face of the eastern slope, such as could only have been built by the highest-ranking members of a wealthy society. According to David Ussishkin, \"here ministers, nobles and notables of the kingdom of Judah were buried.\"\nThe architecture of the tombs and the manner of burial is different \"from anything known from contemporary Palestine. Elements such as entrances located high above the surface, gabled ceilings, straight ceilings with a cornice, 13 trough-shaped resting-places with pillows, above-ground tombs, and inscriptions engraved on the facade appear only here.\" However, the stone benches were carved with headrests in a style borrowed from the Egyptian Hathor wig. Ussishkin believes that the architectural similarity to building styles of the Phoenician cities validates the biblical description of Phoenician influence on the Israelite kingdoms, but speculates that some or all of the tombs may have been built by Phoenician aristocrats living in Jerusalem.\nAlthough only three partial inscriptions survive, the paleography makes the dating certain and they suffice for most archaeologists to identify one tomb with the Biblical Shebna, steward and treasurer of King Hezekiah.\nMonumental inscriptions (8th c. BCE).\nDuring an archaeological dig in February 2008, a fragment of a monumental stone inscription was discovered on the east slope of the City of David hill. Broken on all sides and roughly triangular, the fragment is a maximum 13.5\u00a0cm high and 9.5\u00a0cm wide (5.3 x 3.7 inches), and contains on the smooth side the remains if two lines, with a total of six letters and a dot used for separating words. The limestone fragment was found in a fill among pottery sherds dated to the 8th century BCE, with the excavators, Reich and Shukron, also dating the inscription to that century. They suggest that the inscription was placed on an administrative building, but was smashed and the pieces thrown onto the slope during the same century, after which the found piece rolled down together with other material and collected downhill.\nThe three surviving palaeo-Hebrew letters from the first line, qof-yod-heh, seem to contain the ending of a theophoric name like 'Amaqyahu, Hizqiyahu, Hilqiyahu or Zidqiyahu, all known from Iron Age II inscriptions from Judah. The second line contains the signs kaf-heh-dot (word divider)-bet. Words ending in \"kh\" are few, including known ones like \"brkh\" 'pool' and \"tbrkh\" 'May she bless him', but other reconstructions like \"ml'kh\" 'work' are also possible.\nThe date is mainly based on the pottery finds and the location (fill down a slope). Three other fragmentary monumental inscriptions from the City of David and the adjacent Ophel from the same period, additional to the better known Siloam Inscription, are a good element of comparison, the lettering been between similar and identical. The authors note that unlike in an ink-written inscription, in a carved one the order of the strokes offers no additional epigraphic information.\nAlthough only fragments of Hebrew lettering survive, the fragment proves that the city had monumental public inscriptions and the corresponding large public buildings in the eighth century.\nThe Biblical Archaeology Review offers a popular and speculative discussion by Hershel Shanks, who points at the possibility that the fragmentary name might be King Hezekiah's (\"Hizqiyahu\" in Hebrew), and that he could have placed the plaque on a public building he built in connection to the First Temple period iteration of the pool (\"brekha\") at the termination of Hezekiah's Tunnel (the one we see today being of a later date).\nIron Age IIC (c. 720-586 BCE).\nSome items also relating to this period are mentioned in the section above, due to overlaps or differences in either periodisation (years) or the dating range of the findings.\nThis is the period that corresponds to the biblical Kings Hezekiah through Josiah and the destruction of the Kingdom of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar II.\nKing Hezekiah secured the city's water supply against siege by employing his men to dig a conduit deep within the meleke limestone bedrock and, in so doing, to divert the waters of the Gihon Spring to a place on the west side of the City of David, and covering over all signs of the source of the spring and the fortifications that had surrounded it in earlier periods. He built the Pool of Siloam as a water reservoir. Hezekiah then surrounded the new reservoir and the city's burgeoning western suburbs with a new city wall.\nBullae with the names of Yehucal son of Shelemiah and Gedaliah son of Pashhur, two officials mentioned in the Book of Jeremiah, have been found.\nIn 2019, during the excavations of the Givati Parking lot, a seal bearing a Paleo-Hebrew inscription was discovered, belonging to \"Natan-Melech the King's Servant\".\nBabylonian and Persian periods (586\u2013322 BCE).\nTwo bullae in the Neo-Babylonian style, one showing a priest standing beside an altar to the gods Marduk and Nabu. A polished, black, scaraboid stone seal showing a \"Babylonian cultic scene\" of two bearded men standing on each side of an altar dedicated to the Babylonian moon god Sin. The scaraboid is understood to have been produced in Babylonia, with space left below that altar for a personal name. In that space are Hebrew letters that Peter van der Veen has read as the name \"Shelomit\".\nHasmoneans, Herodians and Roman governors (167 BCE \u2013 70 CE).\nMajor archaeological finds include the Pool of Siloam, and the monumental stepped road built by Pilate and drained by an impressive channel. Active Roman-era excavations are also underway at the Givati Parking Lot dig site, where the remains of a palace attributed to Queen Helena of Adiabene were discovered in 2007.\nByzantine period (324\u2013628 CE).\nThe Byzantine-period mansion called \"the \"Eusebius\" house\" stood in the area now underneath the visitor's center, atop the central part of E. Mazar's Large Stone Structure.\nDuring the excavation of the area adjacent to the west, the so-called Givati Parking Lot dig, many Byzantine-period finds were made, including a hoard of 264 gold coins from the time of Emperor Heraclius (7th century CE).\nControversies.\nIn 2014, Israeli archaeology at the site has been criticized; Tel Aviv University Professor Rafi Greenberg stated that archaeological practice at the site is \"completely subsumed to political and corporate motivations that are, however, largely unacknowledged by its 'neutral' practitioners, leading to questionable field practice and overtly skewed interpretations of the past\".\nIn a 2015 report on Israeli archaeology, the National Academy of Sciences criticized the political use of archeology and the extensive cooperation between Elad and the Nature and Parks Authority. Elad's head, David Be'eri, declined to appear before the committee and said the report was biased against Elad.\nIn 2018, a leaked report by the European Union cited the area as one being developed for tourism to justify Israeli settlements, considered illegal under international law, and insist on Jewish heritage at the expense of its Palestinian context.\nTourism.\nThe entire site, including the Gihon Spring and the two Pools of Siloam, is incorporated in an archaeological park open to the public. Visitors can wade through the Siloam Tunnel, through which the waters of the ancient spring still flow. Because of a change in the water table the once-intermittent karstic spring is artificially maintained through pumping.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69662", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69662", "title": "Islamabad, Pakistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "69663", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69663", "title": "India/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "69665", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69665", "title": "Ono", "text": "ONO, Ono or \u014cno may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69666", "revid": "39225496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69666", "title": "Banjul", "text": "Capital of The Gambia\n \nBanjul (, ), officially the City of Banjul, is the capital city of The Gambia. The city of Banjul is located on St Mary's Island (Banjul Island), which is in the Gambia River where it enters the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe population of the city proper is 26,461, with the Greater Banjul Area, which includes the City of Banjul and the Kanifing municipality, at a population of 405,809 (2024 census). The island is connected to the mainland to the west and the rest of Greater Banjul Area via bridges. There are also ferries linking Banjul to the mainland at the other side of the river.\nFrom the 19th century until 24 April 1973, the city was known as Bathurst.\nEtymology.\nThere are several etymologies for 'Banjul.' One traditional history recounts that Bandjougou, son of Barafin, came to the island after fleeing the attacks of Soumaoro Kante on the Manding region. His name became attached to the island, and over time changed to 'Bandjoulou'.\nAnother theory claims that Banjul takes its name from \"Bang julo\", the Mandinka word for rope fibre that the Mandinka people gathered on the island.\nHistory.\nIn 1651, Banjul was leased by the Duke of Courland and Semigallia (German: \"Herzog von Kurland und Semgallen\") from the King of Kombo, as part of the Curonian colonization.\nOn 23 April 1816, Tumani Bojang, the King of Kombo, ceded Banjul Island to Alexander Grant, the British commandant, in exchange for an annual fee of 103 iron bars. Grant's expedition, consisting of 75 men and tasked with establishing a military garrison, had been ordered by Charles MacCarthy. Grant founded Banjul as a trading post and base, constructing houses and barracks for controlling entrance to the Gambia estuary and suppressing the slave trade. The British renamed Banjul Island as St. Mary's Island and named the new town Bathurst, after the 3rd Earl Bathurst, Secretary of State for War and the Colonies at the time. Streets were laid out in a modified grid pattern, and named after Allied generals at the Battle of Waterloo. The town became the centre of British activity in the Gambia Colony and Protectorate.\nWithin a few years of its establishment, the town started attracting migrants. Its population consisted of Africans of various origins, Levantines (Syrians, Lebanese) as well as Europeans (English, French, Portuguese). A majority of the population was Muslim but there was a significant Christian minority, including the Aku inhabitants. The majority of the Africans consisted of Wolof people, whose population rose from 829 in 1881 to 3,666 in 1901 and then 10,130 in 1944. They had mainly hailed from Gor\u00e9e and Saint-Louis. The Mandinka were the second largest African group, followed by the Jola as well as the Fula. The Serer people make up 3.5% of the country's demographics. Islamic schools called \"dara\" were founded in Bathurst from its early years, resulting in the foundation of the first Muslim court in 1905, in addition to the increasingly more sophisticated British legal framework.\nBathurst was officially declared the capital of the Protectorate of the Gambia in 1889, leading to an increase in population. Through the 20th century, it became an even greater attraction for Gambians due to the availability of jobs fuelled by British colonial activities as well as social activities such as cinemas. Young men from rural farming villages would move to Bathurst to work at the Public Works Department (established in 1922) or docks. The town was an important Allied naval and air hub during World War II, resulting in an increase in population from 14,370 in 1931 to 21,154 in 1944.\nAfter independence, the town's name was changed to Banjul in 1973. On 22 July 1994, Banjul was the scene of a bloodless military coup d'\u00e9tat in which President Sir Dawda Jawara was overthrown and replaced by Yahya Jammeh. To commemorate this event, Arch 22 was built as an entrance portal to the capital. The gate is 35 metres tall and stands at the centre of an open square. It houses a textile museum.\nClimate.\nBanjul features hot weather year round. Under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Banjul features a tropical wet and dry climate (\"Aw\"). The city features a lengthy dry season, spanning from November to May and a relatively short wet season covering the remaining five months. However, during those five months, Banjul tends to see heavy rainfall. August is usually the rainiest month, with on average of rainfall. Maximum temperatures are somewhat constant, though morning minima tend to be hotter during the wet season than the dry season.\nAccording to a Gambian government minister, Banjul is at risk of submerging under water by a metre rise in sea levels as a result of climate change and global warming.\nClimate change.\nA 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a \"moderate\" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Banjul in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Bamako in Mali. The annual temperature would increase by , and the temperature of the warmest month by , while the temperature of the coldest month would actually decrease by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.\nDistricts.\nBanjul Division (Greater Banjul Area) is divided into two districts:\nEconomy.\nBanjul is the country's economic and administrative centre and includes the Central Bank of the Gambia. Peanut processing is the country's principal industry, but beeswax, palm wood, palm oil, and skins and hides are also shipped from the port of Banjul.\nBanjul is also the home of the Gambia Technical Training Institute. GTTI is engaged in a partnership with non-profit organization Power Up Gambia to develop a solar energy training program.\nTransport.\nThe primary method of reaching the city by land is by road. A highway connects Banjul to Serrekunda which crosses the Denton Bridge, however ferries provide another mode of transportation. As of May 2014, ferries sail regularly from Banjul across the Gambia River to Barra. The city is served by the Banjul International Airport. Banjul is on the Trans\u2013West African Coastal Highway connecting it to Dakar, Bissau and other cities. This project is eventually intended to provide a paved highway link to 11 other nations of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).\nCulture.\nAttractions in the city include the Gambian National Museum, the Albert Market, Banjul State House, Banjul Court House, and the African Heritage Museum.\nSport.\nBanjul is the destination of the Plymouth-Banjul Challenge, a charity road rally.\nEducation.\nThe University of the Gambia was founded in 1999. There are about five senior secondary schools in Banjul.\nPlaces of worship.\nThe places of worship are predominantly Muslim mosques. There are also Christian churches and congregations: Roman Catholic Diocese of Banjul (Catholic Church), Church of the Province of West Africa (Anglican Communion), Assemblies of God.\nKing Fahad Mosque is the largest mosque in Banjul.\nNotable people.\n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69667", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69667", "title": "Onesimus", "text": "Christian saint mentioned in the New Testament\nOnesimus (, meaning \"useful\") was a Christian mentioned in the New Testament. He was a slave to Philemon, a Christian, and is the subject of Paul's Epistle to Philemon. \nHe may also be the same Onesimus mentioned by Ignatius of Antioch (died c.\u2009107) as bishop in Ephesus. Eastern Orthodox tradition also list an Onesimus as the third bishop of Byzantium.\nIn the New Testament.\nThe name \"Onesimus\" appears in two of Paul's epistles. The Epistle to Philemon was written by Paul the Apostle to Philemon concerning a runaway slave named Onesimus. Onesimus turned up where Paul was imprisoned (Rome or Caesarea Maritima) to escape punishment for a theft of which he was accused. After hearing the Gospel from Paul, Onesimus converted to Christianity. Paul, having earlier converted Philemon to Christianity, sought to reconcile the two by writing the letter to Philemon which today exists in the New Testament. The letter reads (in 1:10-16):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I appeal to you for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten while in my chains, who once was useless to you, but now is useful to you and to me. I am sending him back. You therefore receive him, that is, my own heart, whom I wished to keep with me, that on your behalf he might minister to me in my chains for the gospel. But without your consent I wanted to do nothing, that your good deed might not be by compulsion, as it were, but voluntary. For perhaps he departed for a while for this purpose, that you might receive him forever, no longer as a slave but more than a slave \u2014 a beloved brother, especially to me but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.\nIn this passage Paul is offering a subtle and implicit wordplay on the name of Philemon\u2019s runaway slave Onesimus \u1f48\u03bd\u03ae\u03c3\u03b9\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 (\u201cUseful\u201d) by referring to him as \u201cthe one once useless (\u1f04\u03c7\u03c1\u03b7\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) to you, but now useful (\u03b5\u1f54\u03c7\u03c1\u03b7\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) [both] to you and to me.\u201d Paul follows this wordplay up a few verses later (Phlm 20) with a f\"igura etymologica\" on Onesimus\u2019s name: in his exclamation to Philemon\u2014\u1f10\u03b3\u03ce \u03c3\u03bf\u03c5 \u1f40\u03bd\u03b1\u03af\u03bc\u03b7\u03bd \u201cmay I gain some use from you\u201d\u2014he uses a rare verbal form of the word at the root of Onesimus\u2019s name, \u1f40\u03bd\u03af\u03bd\u03b7\u03bc\u03b9, which is attested only here in the New Testament. By \u201cgaining some use\u201d (\u1f40\u03bd\u03b1\u03af\u03bc\u03b7\u03bd) Paul means that he wishes to gain the services of \u201cMr. Useful\u201d (\u1f48\u03bd\u03ae\u03c3\u03b9\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2).\nIn the Epistle to the Colossians 4:9 a person of this name is identified as a Christian accompanying Tychicus to visit the Christians in Colossae; nothing else is stated about him in this context. He may well be the freed Onesimus from the Epistle to Philemon.\nIn tradition.\nHe may also be the same Onesimus named by Ignatius of Antioch (died c.\u2009107) as bishop in Ephesus In his Epistle written to the Ephesians while on his way to be executed in Rome, Ignatius wrote: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I received, therefore, your whole multitude in the name of God, through Onesimus, whose love surpasses words, in the flesh as your bishop. I pray that you may love him with a love according to Jesus Christ and that you may all be like him. For blessed is He Who granted unto you, worthy as you are, to possess such a bishop. \nOnesimus must have accepted episcopal see of Ephesus following Saint Timothy. If so, Onesimus went from slave to brother to bishop. According to Tradition), Onesimus was imprisoned and may have been martyred by stoning (some sources claim he was beheaded). Given that Ignatius of Antioch died under Emperor Trajan (97-117), Onesimus's death more likely fell under that Emperor as well.\nThe 4th-century \"Apostolic Constitutions\" (VII, 46) mention Onesimus as the first bishop of Beroea in Macedonia.\nEastern Orthodox tradition also list an Onesimus as the third bishop of Byzantium, dating his reign from 54 to 68 AD. However, the authenticity of the first 25 bishops of Byzantium are met with skepticism by scholars as \"there is no evidence of any significant Christian community at Byzantium before Metrophanes of Byzantium\".\nVeneration.\nOnesimus is regarded as a saint by many Christian denominations.\nCatholic Church.\nThe traditional Western commemoration of Onesimus is on 16 February. But in the 2004 edition of the \"Roman Martyrology\", Onesimus is listed under 15 February. There, he is described as \"[a] runaway slave, whom the apostle Paul received to the faith of Christ while in prison, regarding him as a son of whom he had become father, as he himself wrote to Philemon, Onesimus's master\".\nEastern Orthodox Church.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates Onesimus on a variety of dates: \nLutheran Churches.\nThe Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod commemorates him and Philemon on 15 February.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69668", "revid": "4071608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69668", "title": "Transport in the Gambia", "text": " \nThe system of transportation in the Gambia mixes both public and private operations and consists of a system of roads (both paved and unpaved), water and air transportation. The Trans-Gambia Highway runs along both sides of the river Gambia, which bisects the country. The river may be crossed by ferry or the Senegambia bridge. There are no railways in the country.\nHistory.\nDuring the colonial era, several small railways existed in the Gambia. One, in Bathurst (now Banjul), stretched from Wellington Street to The Marina, now Liberation Avenue and Marina Parade respectively. A War Office map from 1909 clearly shows the railway. Both Kuntaur and Kaur had similar railways from the wharfs to the warehouses. The railways had hand-pushed wagons for transporting of goods from ships. They were used by large companies involved in trading, such as Maurel &amp; Prom. These railways existed until the 1960s.\nRailways.\nCurrently there are no railways in the country.\nRoads.\nHighways:&lt;br&gt;The most important highway in the Gambia is the Trans-Gambia Highway.\n\"total:\" 3,742\u00a0km&lt;br&gt; (country comparison to the world: 159)\n\"paved:\" 723\u00a0km&lt;br&gt;\n\"unpaved:\" 3,019\u00a0km (2004)\nNewly paved roads are usually in excellent condition.\nWaterways.\nWaterways: 390\u00a0km (small ocean-going vessels can reach 190\u00a0km) (2008)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 90\nPorts and harbours: Banjul, Gambia Ports Authority\nMerchant marine:&lt;br&gt;\n\"total:\"'5&lt;br&gt;\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 133\n\"by type:\" passenger/cargo: 4, petroleum tanker 1 (2008)\nAirports.\nThe country's only international airport is at Yundum, 26\u00a0km from Banjul. \nAirports: 1 (2008): Banjul International Airport Yundum.\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 133\nAirports - with paved runways:&lt;br&gt;\n\"total:\" 1&lt;br&gt; \n\"over 3,047 m:\" 1 (2008)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69669", "revid": "39226521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69669", "title": "Telecommunications in the Gambia", "text": " \nTelecommunications in the Gambia includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThe Gambia is not individually classified by the OpenNet Initiative (ONI), but is classified as engaged in selective Internet filtering based on the limited descriptions in the ONI 2009 profile for the sub-Saharan Africa region.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. Individuals and groups can generally engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. However, Internet users reported they could not access the Web sites of foreign online newspapers Freedom, The Gambia Echo, Hellogambia, and Jollofnews, which criticized the government.\nThe constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press; however, the government restricted these rights. According to the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, \"the environment for independent and opposition media remained hostile, with numerous obstacles to freedom of expression, including administrative hurdles, arbitrary arrest and detention, intimidation and judicial harassment against journalists, and the closure of media outlets, leading to self-censorship.\" Individuals who publicly or privately criticized the government or the president risked government reprisal. In March 2011 President Jammeh warned independent journalists that he would \"not compromise or sacrifice the peace, security, stability, dignity, and the well being of Gambians for the sake of freedom of expression.\" Accusing some journalists of being the \"mouthpiece of opposition parties,\" he vowed to prosecute any journalist who offended him. The National Intelligence Agency (NIA) was involved in arbitrary closure of media outlets and the extrajudicial detention of journalists.\nIn 2007 a Gambian journalist living in the US was convicted of sedition for an article published online; she was fined US$12,000; in 2006 the Gambian police ordered all subscribers to an online independent newspaper to report to the police or face arrest.\nThe constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, but the government does not respect these prohibitions. Observers believe the government monitors citizens engaged in activities that it deems objectionable.\nIn recent years before the 2016 election social media like WhatsApp, Facebook and Skype have been temporarily blocked in The Gambia. Since 30 November 2016, the evening before the presidential election, internet access, mobile communication and phone calls have been completely shut down by all providers, as ordered by the president of The Gambia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69670", "revid": "50151310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69670", "title": "History of the Gambia", "text": "The first written records of the region come from Arab traders in the 9th and 10th centuries. In medieval times, the region was dominated by the Trans-Saharan trade and was ruled by the Mali Empire. In the 16th century, the region came to be ruled by the Songhai Empire. The first Europeans to visit the Gambia River were the Portuguese in the 15th century, in 1447, who attempted to settle on the river banks, but no settlement of significant size was established. Descendants of the Portuguese settlers remained until the 18th century. In the late 16th century, English merchants attempted to begin a trade with the Gambia, reporting that it was \"a river of secret trade and riches concealed by the Portuguese.\"\nIn the early 17th century, the French attempted to settle the Gambia but failed. Further English expeditions from 1618 to 1621, including under Richard Jobson, were attempted but resulted in huge losses. Merchants of the Commonwealth of England sent expeditions to the Gambia in 1651, but their ships were captured by Prince Rupert the following year. In 1651, the Couronian colonization of the Gambia had also begun, with forts and outposts being erected on several islands. The Courlanders remained dominant until 1659 when their possessions were handed over to the Dutch West India Company. In 1660, the Courlanders resumed possession, but the next year was expelled by the newly formed Royal Adventurers in Africa Company.\nIn 1667, the rights of the Royal Adventurers to the Gambia were sublet to the Gambia Adventurers but later reverted to the new Royal African Company. 1677 saw the beginning of a century-and-a-half-long struggle between the English and French for supremacy over the Gambia and Senegal. The English possessions were captured several times by the French, but in the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, the British rights to the region were recognized by the French. In the mid-18th century, the Royal African Company began having serious financial problems and in 1750, parliament divested the company of its rights in the region. In 1766, the Crown gained possession of the territory, and it formed part of the Senegambia colony. In 1783, Senegambia ceased existing as a British colony.\nPost-Senegambia.\nFollowing the cessation of Senegambia, the colony was in effect abandoned. The only Europeans were traders who existed in a few settlements on the river banks, such as Pisania. Following the end of the Napoleonic Wars, Captain Alexander Grant was sent to re-establish a presence in the Gambia. He established Bathurst which was renamed as Banjul after independence in 1965 and the British possessions continued to grow in size through a series of treaties. It was administered alongside Sierra Leone until 1843 when it was given its own Governor, but in 1866 merged again with Sierra Leone. The cession of the Gambia to France was proposed in the late 19th century but was met with considerable protest in both the Gambia and in England. In 1888, the colony regained its own government structure, and in 1894 the Gambia Colony, and Protectorate was properly established along the lines it would continue to hold until independence.\nIn 1901, legislative and executive councils were established for the Gambia, as well as the Gambia Company of the RWAFF. Gambian soldiers fought in World War I, and in the 1920s Edward Francis Small led the push for emancipation, founding the Bathurst Trade Union and the Ratepayers' Association, E.F. Small represented the Gambian in the former British parliament Gambian were not represented which means their voice and challenges were not the focus of the colonial officers. Thus he never founded a political party in the Gambia but contributed or laid the foundation for others such as P.P.P, U.P and others . During World War II, the Gambia Company was raised to a regiment, and notably fought in the Burma Campaign in the latter years of the war. Franklin D. Roosevelt's visit to the Gambia in 1943 was the first visit by a sitting US President to the African continent. Following the war, the pace of reform increased, with an economic focus on the production of peanuts and a failed programme called the Gambia Poultry Scheme by the Colonial Development Corporation. The push towards self-government increased its pace, and the House of Representatives was established in 1960. Pierre Sarr N'Jie served as Chief Minister from 1961 to 1962, though following the 1962 election Dawda Jawara became prime minister, beginning the People's Progressive Party's dominance of Gambian politics for the next thirty years. Full internal self-government was achieved in 1963, and following extensive negotiations, the Gambia declared independence in 1965.\nThe Gambia gained independence in 1965 as a constitutional monarchy that remained part of the Commonwealth as Sir Firamang Singhateh as the first Gambian governor from 1065 to 1970 many agree that Gambia did not attain full independence as the country was still under the British control, but in 1970 became a presidential republic. Dawda Jawara was elected the first president and remained in this position until 1994. A coup, led by Kukoi Sanyang, was attempted in 1981 but failed after Senegalese intervention. From 1981 to 1989, the Gambia entered into the Senegambia Confederation, which collapsed. In 1994, Jawara was overthrown in a coup d'\u00e9tat led by Yahya Jammeh, who ruled as a military dictator for two years through the AFPRC. He was elected president in 1996 and continued in this role until 2017. During this time, Jammeh's party, the APRC, dominated Gambian politics. the Gambia left the Commonwealth of Nations in 2013 and suffered an unsuccessful coup attempt in 2014. In the 2016 election, Adama Barrow was elected president, backed by a coalition of opposition parties. Jammeh's refusal to step down led to a constitutional crisis and the intervention of ECOWAS forces.\nEarly history.\nIt is possible that the Carthaginian explorer Hanno the Navigator sailed as far as the Gambia on an expedition in the 470 BC. Very few pieces of information are known about the Gambia area from before 500 AD.\nMali and Songhai empires.\nThe first verifiable written accounts of the region come from records of Arab traders in the 9th and 10th centuries AD. In medieval times the area was dominated by the trans-Saharan trade. The Mali Empire, most renowned for the Mandinka ruler Mansa Kankan Musa, brought worldwide recognition to the region due to its enormous wealth, scholarship, and civility.\nFrom the early 13th century, the Kouroukan Fouga, Mali's constitution, was the law of the land. The North African scholar and traveler Ibn Battuta visited the area in 1352 and said about its inhabitants:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The people of the region possess many admirable qualities. They are seldom unjust and have a greater abhorrence of injustice than any other people. There is complete security in their country. Neither traveler nor inhabitant in it has anything to fear from robbers or men of violence.The Songhai Empire, named after the Songhai people whose king assumed formal control of the Empire, came to dominate the region in the 16th century.\n15th and 16th centuries.\nBy the 15th century, most of the Gambia \"valley was under the control of small Mandinka kingdoms founded by immigrants from the Mali empire.\"\nThe European discovery of the Gambia began in the 15th century, with the push toward exploration by the Portuguese Prince Henry the Navigator. In 1446, Portuguese captain Nuno Tristao made contact with the inhabitants of Cape Vert, and made a treaty of commerce and friendship with them. Every year following, ships were sent from Portugal to trade with them. From them, information reached Henry the Navigator regarding the Gambia, and according to their reports, the banks of the river yielded large quantities of gold. In 1455, Henry induced a Venetian called Luiz de Cadamosto to take a single ship on an expedition in search of the river. Later in the same year, he sent a Genoese trader called Antoniotto Usodimare with two ships on the same quest. The two joined forces near Cape Verde and, by keeping close to the coast, easily found the mouth of the Gambia River.\nThey arrived at the River Gambia in June 1455 and proceeded a short way upstream. They repeated the voyage the next year in May 1456, proceeding further upstream and making contact with some of the native chiefs. When they were near the river's mouth, they cast anchor at an island where one of their sailors, who had previously died of a fever, was buried. As his name was Andrew, they named the island St Andrew's Island.\nThis expedition was followed by Portuguese attempts to establish a settlement on the river banks. No settlement ever reached a significant size, and many of the settlers intermarried with the natives while maintaining Portuguese dress and customs and professing to be Christians. Communities of Portuguese descent continued to exist in the Gambia until the 18th century, with Portuguese churches existing at San Domingo, Geregia and Tankular in 1730. The further Portuguese settlement up the river was at Setuku near Fattatenda. By the end of the 16th century, the Songhai Empire, under constant assault by Morocco, collapsed. The name Gambia comes from the Portuguese word for trade, \"cambio\".\nAfter the Portuguese throne was seized by Philip II in 1580, a number of Portuguese sought refuge in England. One of these refugees, Francisco Ferreira, piloted two English ships to the Gambia in 1587 and returned with a profitable cargo of hides and ivory. In 1588, Ant\u00f3nio, Prior of Crato, who had a claim to the throne of Portugal, sold to London and Devon merchants the exclusive right to trade between the Rivers Senegal and Gambia. This grant was confirmed to the grantees for a period of ten years by letters patent of Queen Elizabeth I. The merchants sent several ships to the coast, but, owing to Portuguese hostility, did not venture further south than Joal: 30 miles to the north of the river mouth. They reported that the Gambia was \"a river of secret trade and riches concealed by the Portuguese.\"\n17th century.\nEnglish exploration.\nIn 1612, an attempt by the French to settle in the Gambia ended disastrously due to sickness spreading among the settlers. Letters patent conferring the right of the exclusive trade with the River Gambia were subsequently granted again in 1598, 1618 and 1632 to other English adventurers, but no attempts were made by the English to explore until 1618. An expedition that year was commanded by George Thomson and its objective was to open up trade with Timbuktu. Leaving his ships at Gassan, Thompson proceeded with a small party in boats as far as the River Neriko. During his absence, the crew of his ship were massacred by the Portuguese. However, some of his party managed on their return to make their way overland to Cape Verde and then to England. Thomson remained in the Gambia with seven companions but was killed by one of them in a sudden dispute.\nIn the meantime, a relief expedition had departed from England under the command of Richard Jobson, who seized some Portuguese shipping as a reprisal for the massacre at Gassan. Jobson also made his way up to Neriko and subsequently gave a very positive account of the commercial opportunities of the River Gambia. During his expedition, Jobson refused slaves offered by an African merchant, Buckor Sano. He said that \"we were a people who did not deal in such commodities, neither did we buy or sell one another, or any that had our own shapes.\" His protests were noted as \"exceptional\" by Hugh Thomas. However, both his and Thompson's expedition had resulted in significant losses and a subsequent voyage that he made in 1624 proved a complete failure. After a loss of \u00a35,000, the patentees made no further attempts to exploit the resources of the Gambia but confined their attention to the Gold Coast.\nIn 1651, the Commonwealth of England granted a patent to certain London merchants who in that and the following year sent two expeditions to the River Gambia and established a trading post at Bintang. Members of the expedition proceeded as far as the Barakunda Falls in search of gold, but the climate took its toll. In 1652, Prince Rupert of the Rhine entered the Gambia with three Royalist ships and captured the patentees' vessels. After this heavy loss, they abandoned any further enterprise in the Gambia.\nCourlander Gambia and English reclamation.\nDuring this, Jacob Kettler, the Duke of Courland, had in 1651 obtained from several native chiefs the cession of St Andrew's Island and land at Banyon Point (also known as Half-Die), Juffure and Gassan. Settlers, merchants and missionaries were sent out from Courland and forts were erected on St Andrew's Island and at Banyon Point. This was part of a period in Courlander history known as Couronian colonization, which also saw them colonise Tobago. The Courlanders believed that the possession of these territories would give them control over the river and enable them to levy tolls on all those who used the waterway. They erected a fort built out of local sandstone, appointed a Lutheran pastor, and positioned the cannons on the island so as to command both of the channels to the north and the south. The plan was to sell slaves to the colony in Tobago, but this did not prosper. In 1658, Kettler was made a prisoner by the Swedes during a war between Sweden and Poland. As a consequence, funds were no longer available to maintain the garrisons and settlements in the Gambia and in 1659, the Duke of Courland's agent at Amsterdam entered into an agreement with the Dutch West India Company whereby the Duke's possessions in the Gambia were handed over to the company.\nIn 1660, the fort on St Andrew's Island was captured and plundered by a French privateer in Swedish service. The Dutch thereafter abandoned the fort and the Courlanders resumed possession. After the Restoration of the English monarchy in 1660, English interest in the Gambia was revived due to the reported existence of a gold mine in the upper reaches of the river. A new patent was granted to a number of people who were styled as the Royal Adventurers in Africa Company. The most prominent among them were James, Duke of York, and Prince Rupert. At the end of the year, the Adventurers dispatched an expedition to the Gambia under the command of Robert Holmes, who had been with Prince Rupert in the Gambia in 1652.\nHolmes arrived at the river mouth at the beginning of 1661. He proceeded to occupy Dog Island, which he renamed Charles Island, and to establish a temporary fort there. On 18 March 1661, he sailed up to St Andrew's Island and called on the Courlander officer-in-charge to surrender, threatening to bombard the fort if his request was ignored. There were only seven Europeans in the garrison, and the Courlanders had no alternative but to submit. On the following day, Holmes took possession of the fort, which was renamed James Fort after the Duke of York. An attempt was made in 1662 by the Dutch West India Company to gain possession of the fort. Firstly, they attempted to incite the natives of Barra against the English, secondly they offered bribes to certain English officers, and, lastly, they attempted to bombard the fort. None of these efforts were successful and the English remained in control.\nTrader control.\nMeanwhile, the Duke of Courland had lodged a protest against the seizure of his possessions in a time of peace. On 17 November 1664, after negotiations over the future of the territories, he relinquished in favour of Charles II all claims to his African possessions and in return was granted the island of Tobago and the right for himself to personally trade in the River Gambia.\nFrom the mid-seventeenth century onwards, \"English, Dutch, French and Baltic merchant adventurers shared and fought over trading rights from the restricted, neighbouring bases of Fort James Island and Albreda.\"\nIn 1667, the Royal Adventurers sublet their rights between Capes Blanco and Palmas to another body of adventurers, who became known as the Gambia Adventurers. They were to exploit the Rivers Gambia, Sierra Leone, and Sherbro.This group of adventurers enjoyed these rights for only a year, when, on the expiration of their lease, they reverted to the Royal African Company, which had purchased the rights and property of the Royal Adventurers six years earlier.\nIn 1677, the French wrested the island of Gor\u00e9e from the Dutch. This began a century and a half period of struggle between England and France for political and commercial supremacy in the regions of Senegal and the Gambia. By 1681, the French had acquired a small enclave at Albreda opposite to James Island. Except for short period, during which trouble with the natives of Barra or hostilities with England compelled them to temporarily abandon the place, they retained a foothold there until 1857.\n18th century.\nAfrican Company turmoil and prosperity.\nIn the wars with France following the Glorious Revolution, James Fort was captured on four occasions by the French, in 1695, 1702, 1704 and 1708. However, no attempt was made by France to occupy the fort permanently. At the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, the French recognised the right of the English to James Island and their settlements on the River Gambia. One of the results of these wars was an outbreak of piracy along the West African coast. The English trade in the Gambia suffered heavily from the efforts of the pirates. In 1719, one pirate, Howel Davis, captured James Fort. In 1721, part of the garrison of the fort mutinied under the leadership of Captain John Massey, seizing one of the company's ships and turning pirate. Finally, in 1725, James Fort was extensively damaged by an accidental explosion of gunpowder.\nFollowing these incidents, the Royal African Company benefited from 20 years of comparative prosperity. Factories were established as far up the river as Fattatenda and at other places and a fairly considerable trade was carried out with the interior of Africa. Nevertheless, despite an annual subsidy from the British government for the maintenance of their forts, the Royal African Company became involved in serious financial difficulties. In 1749, James Island was found to be \"in a most miserable condition\". In the following year, it was reported that the garrison at James Fort had been reduced through sickness from around 30 men to between five and eight, and that, with all the officers being dead, a common soldier had succeeded to the command.\nBy 1750, the position had become critical and an Act of Parliament was passed divesting the Royal African Company of its charter and divesting its forts and settlements into a new company, controlled by a committee of merchants. The Act prohibited the new company from trading in its corporate capacity but allowed it an annual subsidy for the upkeep of the forts. It was hoped that this would prevent the monopolistic tendencies of rule by a joint stock company and at the same time to save the government the expense entailed by the creation of a colonial civil service.\nSenegambia colony.\nIn 1766, the fort and settlements were taken from this new company by another Act of Parliament and given to the Crown. For the next 18 years, the Gambia formed part of the Senegambia colony. The government headquarters were at St Louis at the mouth of the Senegal River and a Lieutenant Governor was appointed to take charge of James Fort and the settlements in the Gambia. In 1779, the French captured James Fort for the fifth and final time. On this occasion, they so successfully demolished the fortifications that at the close of the war it was found impossible to rebuild them. Besides a brief period following the Napoleonic Wars, when the island was temporarily occupied by a handful of soldiers as an outpost, James Island stopped playing any part in the history of the Gambia.\nIn 1780, the French privateer \"Senegal\" captured four vessels which had been part of the British garrison at Goree sent to the Bintang Creek under the command of Major Houghton to obtain building material. The \"Senegal\", in turn, was captured by HMS \"Zephyr\" after an engagement off Barra Point. In 1783, St Louis and Goree were handed back to France and Senegambia ceased existing as a British colony.\nAbandonment.\nIt was once again handed back to the Royal African Company. However, they made no attempt to administer the Gambia. In 1785, Lemain Island was acquired by the British government with the view of the establishment of a convict settlement, but nothing came of the plan. For the next thirty years, British influence in the Gambia was confined to the operations of a small number of traders. Settlements were established by these traders along the river banks. Among these settlements, the most important probably was Pisania. This settlement, which was already in operation by 1779, was occupied by Dr John Laidley and a family by the name of Aynsley. Subsequently, Laidley and the Aynsleys rendered invaluable assistance to Major Daniel Houghton in 1790, Mungo Park in 1795 and 1805, and Major William Grey in 1818, in the course of their journeys into the interior of Africa.\n19th century.\nEarly 19th century.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, Montgomery identified that most settlements on the Gambia River were British. However, to the north, there were several native kingdoms, including Barra, Boor Salum, Yani and Woolli. At the time, Barra had a population of 200,000 and its capital was Barra Inding, although the main trading place was Jillifrey. Boor Salum had a population of 300,000 and the smaller kingdoms of Yani and Woolli were to the north of it. The Mandinka people were the inhabitants of all four kingdoms, which all conducted a considerable trade with the interior of Africa. Montgomery said that no considerable kingdom existed south of the Gambia.\nIn 1807, the African slave trade was abolished by an Act of Parliament. At that time, the British were in control of Goree. With the help of the Royal Navy, the Goree garrison made efforts to suppress the slave traders operating in the River Gambia, who were primarily Spanish and American. On more than one occasion, the slavers offered a stubborn resistance and the Royal African Corps suffered several casualties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"raison d'etre\" of the West African forts had been the protection of the slave trade. What was to happen when that trade was abolished? No effort had been made to penetrate the interior and nothing in the nature of colonization had been attempted. At first these posts remained useful for the purposes of suppressing the slave trade.\nH. E. Egerton, \"Oxford Survey of the British Empire, Vol. VI\", p. 141\nBritish recolonisation.\nFollowing the Treaty of Paris in 1814, which ended the war with the French, the British forces and officials on the island of evacuated Gor\u00e9e. Captain Alexander Grant was sent with a detachment of Royal African Corps soldiers to explore the possibility of rebuilding Fort James on James Island but decided that more space would be provided by St Mary's Island. Grant made a treaty with the King of Kombo on 23 April 1816 that ceded the island to the UK. He also founded the town of Bathurst on St Mary's Island. In 1821, the Royal African Company was dissolved by Act of Parliament and the Gambia was placed under the jurisdiction of the Governor of Sierra Leone. It continued to be administered from Sierra Leone until 1843 when it became a separate colony. In 1866, however, the Gambia and Sierra Leone were once again united under the same administration.\nThe British government continued to extend its territorial acquisitions beyond St Mary's Island by concluding treaties with a number of native chiefs. Lemain Island, 160 miles up the river, was ceded to the United Kingdom in 1823 by King Collie and renamed as MacCarthy Island. Georgetown was established on the island as a military barracks and settlement for liberated slaves. In 1826, the Ceded Mile, a one-mile strip on the north bank of the River Gambia, was ceded by the King of Barra. Fattatenda and the surrounding district was ceded in 1829. In 1840 and 1853, considerable areas of the mainland adjoining St Mary's Island were obtained from the King of Kombo for the settlement of discharged soldiers of the West India Regiments and liberated Africans. Cessions of another land further upstream were obtained at various dates, including Albreda, the French enclave, which was obtained in 1857.\nConsolidation as a colony.\nIn the 1850s, under the leadership of Louis Faidherbe, the French colony of Senegal began a vigorous expansion until it virtually engulfed the Gambia. The colony assumed an importance to the French as a possible trade route, proposed cession of the Gambia for some other part of West Africa was first mooted in 1861. It was seriously discussed again during 1865 and 1866. In 1870 and 1876, negotiations were entered into between the French and British government over the proposed cession of the Gambia in exchange for other territories in West Africa.\nHowever, the proposal aroused such opposition in Parliament and among various mercantile bodies in England, as well as among the native inhabitants of the Gambia, that the British government was unable to press ahead with the scheme. This \"remarkably powerful\" Gambia lobby was revived whenever the topic of the proposed cession was brought up, and successfully saw that the British could not cede any land. In 1888, the Gambia was once again separated from Sierra Leone and from that date until its independence operated as a separate colony. In 1889, an agreement was reached between the French and British governments for the delimitation of the borders of the Gambia, Senegal, and Casamance.\nDuring this time, despite a number of small wars with the natives, the Gambian government was able to conclude a series of treaties with the chiefs living along the banks of the river. Some of these included the cession of small tracts of territory, but most conferred British protection. The last and most important of these was concluded in 1901 with Musa Molloh, the paramount chief of Fuladu. In 1894, an Ordinance was passed for the better administration of these districts which had not been ceded but merely placed under the protection of the British government. It was decided that it was not feasible to administer these places from the seat of government in Bathurst, so in 1895 and the following years, ordinances were passed to bring these places under the control of the Protectorate. Finally, a Protectorate Ordinance passed in 1902 brought the whole of the Gambia besides St Mary's Island under the Protectorate system.\n20th century.\nEarly years.\nThe Gambia received its own executive and legislative councils in 1901 and gradually progressed toward self-government. Also in 1901, the Gambia Company, the first colonial military unit of the Gambia, was founded. It was formed as part of the Sierra Leone Battalion of the new West African Frontier Force (late Royal West African Frontier Force). A 1906 ordinance abolished slavery.\nWorld War I and interwar years.\nDuring World War I, the Gambia Company served alongside other British troops in the Kamerun campaign, under the command of Captain V. B. Thurston of the Dorsetshire Regiment, and a number of its soldiers received gallantry medals for their conduct.\nIn 1920, the National Congress of British West Africa was formed, an organisation working towards African emancipation, with Edward Francis Small as the sole delegate. He returned and founded the Gambia Section of the Congress, the principal aim of which was to achieved elected representation in the government of the Gambia. It also frequently petitioned against unpopular government policies. It had some success, with Small founding the first Gambian trade union, the Bathurst Trade Union, in 1929. However, it failed to prevent its opponent, Ousman Jeng, being appointed to the Legislative Council in 1922 and again in 1927.\nIn 1932, Small founded the Rate Payers' Association (RPA) to oppose the unpopular policies of Richmond Palmer, the Governor, and of the conservative elements of Gambian politics, led by Forster and his nephew W. D. Carrol. By the end of 1934, the RPA was winning all the seats on the Bathurst Urban District Council and its successor the Bathurst Advisory Town Council, however, had no representation in the Legislative Council.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, the Gambia Company became the Gambia Regiment, with a strength of two battalions from 1941. It fought in the Burma campaign and served for some time under the command of Antony Read, later the Quartermaster-General to the Forces. the Gambia itself was also important to the war effort. It was home to RAF Bathurst, a flying boat base, and RAF Yundum, an RAF station. HMS \"Melampus\", a shore base, was also based at Bathurst for some of the war, and in 1942, a light cruiser named was launched, which maintained ties to the colony until it was decommissioned in 1960. Bathurst was also the nearest English-speaking port to Dakar, where, before the Battle of Dakar, the Vichy French battleship had been told to travel to.\nthe Gambia was also home to 55 British General Hospital from 1941 to 1942, 40 British General Hospital from 1942 to 1943, and 55 British General Hospital again from 1945 to 1946. During World War II, the Gambia also formed an Auxiliary Police, who, among other things, helped to enforce the blackout in Bathurst. Many air raid shelters were built across the Gambia too. In 1943, Franklin D. Roosevelt, the President of the United States, stopped overnight in Bathurst en route to and from the Casablanca Conference. This marked the first visit to the African continent by a sitting US president. The visit hardened his views against British colonial rule. Appalled, as he was, by the poverty and disease that was present there, he wrote to Churchill describing the territory as a \"hell-hole\".\nPost-war reform.\nAfter the Second World War, the pace of reform increased. The economy of the Gambia, like other African countries at the time, was very heavily orientated towards agriculture. Reliance on the groundnut became so strong that it made up almost the entirety of exports, making the economy vulnerable. Groundnuts were the only commodity subject to export duties; these export duties resulted in the illegal smuggling of the product to French Senegal.\nAttempts were made to increase production of other goods for export: the Gambian poultry scheme/Yundum egg scheme pioneered by the Colonial Development Corporation aimed to produce twenty million eggs and one million lb of dressed poultry a year. The conditions in the Gambia proved unfavourable and typhoid killed much of the chicken stock, drawing criticism to the corporation.\nThe River Gambia was the principal route of navigation and transport inland, with a port at Bathurst. The road network was mainly concentrated around Bathurst, with the remaining areas largely connected by dirt roads.\nThe only airport was at Yundum, built in World War II. Post war it was used for passenger flights. Both British South American Airways and the British Overseas Airways Corporation had services, the former moving its service to Dakar, which had a concrete runway (as opposed to pierced steel planking). The airport was rebuilt in 1963 and the building is still in use today.\nIn anticipation of independence, efforts were made to create internal self-government. The 1960 Constitution created a partly elected House of Representatives, with 19 elected members and 8 chosen by the chiefs. This constitution proved flawed in the 1960 elections when the two major parties tied with 8 seats each. With the support of the unelected chiefs, Pierra Sarr N'Jie of the United Party was appointed Chief Minister. Dawda Jawara of the People's Progressive Party resigned as Minister of Education, triggering a Constitutional Conference arranged by the Secretary of State for the Colonies.\nThe Constitutional Conference paved the way for a new constitution that granted a greater degree of self-government and a House of Representatives with more elected members. Elections were held in 1962, with Jawara's Progressive Party securing a majority of the elected seats. Under the new constitutional arrangements, Jawara was appointed prime minister: a position he held until it was abolished in 1970. Following general elections in 1962, full internal self-governance was granted in the following year.\nIndependent Gambia.\nAt the Marlborough House constitutional conference in June 1964, it was agreed between the British and Gambian delegations that the Gambia would become an independent country on 18 February 1965. It was agreed that Queen Elizabeth II would remain as the head of state, and a Governor-General would exercise executive powers on her behalf. On 18 February, Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, on behalf of the Queen, formally granted the country independence with Prime Minister Jawara representing the Gambia. It became the 21st independent member of the Commonwealth, with a constitution described as a \"sophisticated version of the Westminster export models.\"\nFollowing agreements between the British and Gambian Governments in July 1964, the Gambia achieved independence on 18 February 1965 as a constitutional monarchy within the Commonwealth.\nShortly thereafter, the government held a referendum proposing that an elected president replace the Queen of the Gambia as head of state. The referendum failed to obtain the two-thirds majority required to amend the constitution, but the results received widespread attention abroad as testimony to the Gambia's observance of secret balloting, honest elections, and civil rights and liberties.\nJawara era.\nOn 24 April 1970, the Gambia became a republic within the Commonwealth, following a second referendum, with Prime Minister Sir Dawda Kairaba Jawara as head of state.\nThe relative stability of the Jawara era was first shattered by a coup attempt in 1981. The coup was led by Kukoi Samba Sanyang, who, on two occasions, had unsuccessfully sought election to Parliament. After a week of violence which left several hundred people dead, Jawara, in London when the attack began, appealed to Senegal for help. Senegalese troops defeated the rebel force.\nIn the aftermath of the attempted coup, Senegal and the Gambia signed the 1982 Treaty of Confederation. The Senegambia Confederation came into existence; it aimed eventually to combine the armed forces of the two states and to unify their economies and currencies. the Gambia withdrew from the confederation in 1989.\nUntil a military coup in July 1994, the Gambia was led by President Jawara, who was re-elected five times.\nJammeh era.\nIn July 1994, Yahya Jammeh led a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" that deposed the Jawara government. Between 1994 and 1996, Jammeh ruled as head of the Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council (AFPRC) and banned opposition political activity. The AFPRC announced a transition plan for a return to democratic civilian rule, establishing the Provisional Independent Electoral Commission (PIEC) in 1996 to conduct national elections. After a constitutional referendum in August, presidential and parliamentary elections were held. Jammeh was sworn into office as president on 6 November 1996. On 17 April 1997 the PIEC transformed into the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC).\nJammeh won both the 2001 and 2006 elections. He was re-elected as president in 2011. The People's Republic of China cut ties with the Gambia in 1995 after the latter established diplomatic links with the Republic of China (Taiwan). The Gambia was elected to a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council from 1998 to 1999.\nOn 2 October 2013, the Gambian interior minister announced that the Gambia would leave the Commonwealth of Nations with immediate effect, stating that they would \"never again be part of a neo-colonial organization\"\nIn December 2014, an attempted coup was launched to overthrow President Jammeh.\nFall of Jammeh and Operation Restore Democracy.\nThe presidential election of 2016 saw the surprising victory of the opposition candidate Adama Barrow, who defeated Jammeh with 43,3% of votes. However, Jammeh refused to recognise the result of the election and refused to leave office, instead proclaiming a state of emergency. Barrow abandoned the country and fled to Senegal, where he was sworn in as new president at the Gambian embassy in Dakar on 19 January 2017.\nOn the same day ECOWAS launched a military intervention in Gambia in order to forcefully remove Jammeh from power (Operation Restore Democracy); the move was authorized by United Nations Security Council with UNSC Resolution 2337. On 21 January 2017 Jammeh announced stepped down as president and abandoned the country and went to exile in Equatorial Guinea. On 27 January 2017 Barrow returned to Gambia and officially took office.\nBarrow era.\nOn 6 April 2017 parliamentary elections were held, which saw the victory of Barrow's United Democratic Party, scoring 37,47% and winning 31 of the 53 seats of the National Assembly.\nThe Gambia officially rejoined the Commonwealth on 8 February 2018.\nOn 4 December 2021, Gambian President Adama Barrow won re-election in the presidential election. Opposition candidates rejected the results because of unspecified irregularities.\nSince Jammeh's ouster, The Gambia has undergone a significant democratic transition. Recent presidential and parliamentary elections have been regarded as competitive and fair; media freedom, academic freedom and freedom of expression all have improved significantly. The judiciary also have become more impartial and independent. To ensure justice for persecution of political opponents and dissidents during the Jammeh era, authorities establish the Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission in 2018, though significant problems remained in regards to its proper functioning. Barrow initially promised to serve for only three years, but backtracked on his promise and then split from his old party and formed a new NPP party. Further controversy arose when he built a government coalition with the former-ruling APRC. As a result, widespread protests broke out and a movement called Three Years Jotna began taking shape. Their protests, initially peaceful, turned violent and authorities banned the movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69671", "revid": "980331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69671", "title": "Geography of the Gambia", "text": " \nThe Gambia is a very small and narrow African country with the border based on the Gambia River. The country is less than wide at its greatest width. The country's present boundaries were defined in 1889 after an agreement between the United Kingdom and France. It is often claimed by Gambians that the distance of the borders from the Gambia River corresponds to the area that British naval cannon of the time could reach from the river's channel. However, there is no historical evidence to support the story, and the border was actually delineated using careful surveying methods by the Franco-British boundary commission. The Gambia is almost an enclave of Senegal and is the smallest country on mainland Africa.\nTerrain.\nThe grassy flood plain of the Gambia river contains Guinean mangroves near the coast, and becomes West Sudanian savanna upriver inland.\nStatistics.\nLocation:\nWestern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and Senegal\nGeographic coordinates: \nArea:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 11,295\u00a0km2\n&lt;br&gt;\"land:\" 10,000\u00a0km2\n&lt;br&gt;\"water:\" 1,295\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 749\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"border countries:\" Senegal 749\u00a0km\nCoastline: 80\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\nClimate: tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler, dry season (November to May)\nTerrain: floodplain of the Gambia River, flanked by low hills\nElevation extremes:\nNatural resources: fish, clay, silica sand, titanium (rutile and ilmenite), tin, zircon\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\" 43.48%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\" 0.49%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\" 56.03% (2011)\nCurrent issues: deforestation, desertification, prevalence of water-borne diseases, drought (rainfall has dropped by 30% in the last 30 years)\nEnvironment - party to international agreements on:\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of the Gambia, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69672", "revid": "15962758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69672", "title": "Olive-tree", "text": ""}
{"id": "69673", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69673", "title": "Demographics of the Gambia", "text": " \nThe demographic characteristics of the population of The Gambia are known through national censuses, conducted in ten-year intervals and analyzed by The Gambian Bureau of Statistics (GBOS) since 1963. The latest census was conducted in 2013. The population of The Gambia at the 2013 census was 1.8 million. The population density is 176.1 per square kilometer, and the overall life expectancy in The Gambia is 64.1 years. Since the first census of 1963, the population of The Gambia has increased every ten years by an average of 43.2 percent. Since 1950s, the birth rate has constantly exceeded the death rate; the natural growth rate is positive. The Gambia is in the second stage of demographic transition. In terms of age structure, The Gambia is dominated by 15- to 24-year-old segment (57.6%). The median age of the population is 19.9 years, and the gender ratio of the total population is 0.98 males per female.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith a population of 1.88 million in 2013, The Gambia ranks 149th in the world by population. Its population density is . The overall life expectancy in The Gambia is 64.1 years. The total fertility rate of 3.98 is one of the highest in the world. Since 1950, the United Nations (UN) estimated the birth rate exceeds the death rate. The Gambia Bureau of Statistics (GBOS) estimates the population of The Gambia is expected to reach 3.6 million in 20 years. The population of The Gambia has increased each census, starting with 315 thousand in 1963 to 1.8 million in 2013. The GBOS predicted the reason for the increase from 2003 to 2013 was more coverage in the latter census compared to the former's.\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events in Gambia is not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nSources:\nFertility Rate TFR (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nStructure of the population (DHS 2013) (males 23,904, females 25,649, total 49,553) :\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (30.XII.2015) (Source: Integrated Household Survey (IHS) 2015/2016.):\nFertility data as of 2019-20 (DHS Program):"}
{"id": "69674", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69674", "title": "Noguera", "text": "Noguera may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69675", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69675", "title": "Porirua", "text": "City in the North Island of New Zealand\nPorirua, () a city in the Wellington Region of the North Island of New Zealand, is one of the four cities that constitute the Wellington metropolitan area. The name 'Porirua' is a corruption of 'Pari-rua', meaning \"the tide sweeping up both reaches\". It almost completely surrounds Porirua Harbour at the southern end of the K\u0101piti Coast. As of 2023, Porirua has a population of 62,400 people,\nand is a diverse city with 26.5% of the population identifying as Pasifika and 23.0% of the population identifying as M\u0101ori.\nName.\nThe name \"Porirua\" has a M\u0101ori origin: it may represent a variant of \"pari-rua\" (\"two tides\"), a reference to the two arms of the Porirua Harbour. In the 19th century, the name designated a land-registration district that stretched from Kaiwharawhara (or Kaiwara) on the north-west shore of Wellington Harbour northwards to and around Porirua Harbour.\nThe road climbing the hill from Kaiwharawhara towards Ngaio, Khandallah, Johnsonville and Tawa still bears the name \"Old Porirua Road\".\nHistory.\nTradition holds that, prior to habitation, Kupe was the first visitor to the area, and that he bestowed names of significant sites such as Te Mana o Kupe ki Aotearoa (Mana Island). In addition, it is said that Kupe left his anchor stone, Te Punga o Matahouroa at Whitireia, which is now held at Te Papa Tongarewa.\nThere is evidence of human habitation in Porirua since 1450 at the latest, during the \"moa hunter\" period of M\u0101ori history. The forests, sea, estuaries and swamps provided abundant food and materials. The Porirua area came to be occupied by a succession of tribes, including Ng\u0101ti Tara and Ng\u0101ti Ira.\nNg\u0101ti Toa people migrated south from Kawhia, and took control of the Porirua coast in the 1820s. By the 1840s they had established 12 p\u0101, with Takap\u016bw\u0101hia and Hongoeka still occupied by marae today.\nFrom the late 1830s, European settlers began to express interest in the Porirua region, culminating in the controversial sale of most of the region in 1847. In 1839, the New Zealand Company signed an agreement with Ng\u0101ti Toa from which it claimed to have acquired the entire southern part of the North Island. Following the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi, an inquiry by Land Claims Commissioner William Spain found that most of the alleged purchase, including Porirua, was invalid. However, rising tensions with European settlers led to Ng\u0101ti Toa chief Te Rauparaha being captured by 200 British troops and police in July 1846. Shortly afterwards, the Hutt Valley campaign led to chief Te Rangihaeata's retreat to Poroutawhao in the Horowhenua. In April 1847, eight remaining chiefs, including Tamihana Te Rauparaha, Matene Te Whiwhi and Rawiri Puaha, signed a deed for the sale of 69,000 acres for \u00a32,000, comprising almost the entire area from M\u0101kara in the south to Paek\u0101k\u0101riki in the north. Three reserves totalling 10,000 acres were left aside for Ng\u0101ti Toa. Ng\u0101ti Toa hold that the deed was coerced by the holding of Te Rauparaha and that the chiefs signing sought his release.\nIn the 19th century, a small European settlement grew up, partly because of the need for a ferry across the harbour.\nThe 1880s and 1890s saw the establishment of the Porirua Lunatic Asylum on the hill south-west of Porirua village. Following the Mental Defectives Act of 1911, the Asylum became Porirua Mental Hospital.\nIn the late 1940s state planning envisaged Porirua becoming a satellite city of Wellington with state housing. This required improved rail and road links with Wellington and rail and road development has contributed much to the growth of the Porirua area by reducing travel times, making it possible to live in the Porirua area and work in Wellington, and by making day-trips from Wellington to the beaches at Paremata, and Plimmerton relatively easy.\nSince the 1940s, Porirua has grown to a city population approaching 57,000, with state housing no longer in the majority. Major territorial additions to the city occurred in 1973 and 1988 as part of the reduction and eventual abolition of Hutt County.\nOn 7 June 1976, New Zealand's first McDonald's restaurant opened in Porirua, on the corner of Cobham Court and Hagley Street. The original restaurant closed on 24 April 2009, and the store relocated to Kenepuru Drive.\nIndustry.\nSubstantial industrial areas, generally west of the city centre, have evolved. During the 1960s Kodak, UEB Industries and many small businesses opened at Elsdon. During the following decade, Ashley Wallpapers developed the former UEB property and after favourable negotiations with the government, Todd Motors (later Mitsubishi) moved from Petone to Porirua.\nTodd Motors was a vehicle assembly company which moved from Petone and opened a large factory in Porirua in 1975. The factory covered on a site known as Todd Park. At its peak there were 1500 employees building 22,000 vehicles per year. The company was sold to Mitsubishi in 1987 and the factory closed in 1998.\nHills Hats (established in 1875) set up premises in Porirua in the 1950s. By 1996 it employed 80 people at Porirua and was exporting 75% of its production to 23 countries. The company was sold to overseas investors in 1997, then went into receivership and was bought by Wellington investors in 1998. In 2003, the company shifted from Porirua to Petone.\nBonds Hosiery (later Hilton Bonds, then Sara Lee Apparel, part of Pacific Dunlop) was established in Porirua in the 1960s or early 1970s. In 2001, the factory closed with the loss of 55 jobs, the result of declining hosiery sales worldwide.\nWhittaker's confectionery manufacturers moved their business from Wellington to Porirua in 1969 and as of 2022, have around 160 employees at the Porirua factory.\nRail.\nThe development of the rail through Porirua, part of the K\u0101piti Line, has contributed significantly to the development of Porirua as a satellite city of Wellington. The Wellington and Manawatu Railway Company opened a railway line through Johnsonville from Wellington to Porirua in 1885. The railway reached Longburn (south of Palmerston North) in 1886 to connect with the government's lines to Taranaki and Napier. With the acquisition of the company by the government in 1908, the line to Porirua and northward to Longburn became part of the North Island Main Trunk railway. The railway provided regular passenger services between Wellington and Porirua and linked Porirua to other North Island centres. A shunting service from Wellington delivered goods wagons to sidings at Porirua, Paremata, Plimmerton, and Pukerua Bay and brought timber for the construction of houses in the area.\nThe Tawa Flat railway deviation providing double-track railway with double line automatic signalling as far as Tawa opened to passenger services on 19 June 1937, reducing travel time for passenger trains from Wellington to Porirua by 15 minutes, to 27 minutes rather than 43 to 48 minutes.\nDuring 1940, Centralised Train Control (CTC), which allowed direct control of signals and train movements by Train Control in Wellington, was progressively installed on the single line sections of track north of Tawa, replacing tablet working and allowing more efficient, flexible, and rapid control of train movements. CTC between Plimmerton and Paek\u0101k\u0101riki applied from 25 February 1940, Paremata to Plimmerton from 30 June, and Tawa to Porirua from 4 December 1940.\nOn 24 July 1940, the line through Porirua, from Wellington to Paek\u0101k\u0101riki, was electrified, and double track completed from Plimmerton to South Junction, just north of Muri railway station. Electrification allowed the introduction of electric ED class locomotives, first introduced in 1938 for use on this line, to haul passenger and goods trains. Electric locomotives eliminated the smoke nuisance in the tunnels on the line and allowed longer trains to run. DM/D electric multiple units first ran to Porirua on 5 September 1949 and replaced the majority of locomotive-hauled passenger trains and allowed a more frequent and faster train service. The duplication of the line from Plimmerton to South Junction allowed a more frequent train service between Porirua and Paek\u0101k\u0101riki.\nDuplication of the track from Tawa to Porirua station opened on 15 December 1957. This completed double line automatic signalling from Wellington distant junction, just south of Kaiwharawhara, to Porirua, and eliminated CTC between Tawa and Porirua. This work and the provision of additional signals between Kaiwharawhara and Tawa, allowed close following of trains and more frequent and faster train services between Wellington and Porirua. During peak periods, many multiple unit trains were now terminated at Porirua and returned to Wellington to provide a more frequent service between Wellington and Porirua than was provided for stations north of Porirua.\nExtension of the double track and automatic signalling continued with the Porirua to Mana section opened on 7 November 1960. The work involved harbour reclamation to construct a straight tack from Porirua to Papak\u014dwhai, just south of Paremata, eliminating the tight curves as the former railway followed the coastline, and creating three lagoons on the eastern side of the harbour. The central lagoon, now known as Aotea Lagoon, remains but is reduced in size. From Paremata to Mana, the track was realigned to the West of the original track and a new double-track bridge was built across the entrance to the Pauatahanui Inlet. The original single-track railway bridge, built in 1885, was removed to allow room for the construction of a second road bridge in 2004. The railway stations at Porirua, Paremata, and Dolly Varden were replaced with new stations, with Dolly Varden station renamed Mana.\nMana to Plimmerton double track and automatic signalling were completed on 16 October 1961, completing the double track and automatic signalling from Wellington to South Junction, and allowing more frequent train services north of Porirua station. Crossovers at Plimmerton allowed some trains to terminate at Plimmerton and return to Wellington during peak periods.\nBy 2016, the introduction of electric multiple units with more rapid acceleration, EM/ET class from 1982 and Matangi FP class from 2010, had reduced rail travel time for stopping trains between Wellington and Porirua by another 6 minutes to 21 minutes, despite extra stops at Redwood, Linden, and Kenepuru which each add 48 seconds to the travel time. For non-stopping trains, the time had reduced to 17 minutes. Off-peak passenger services between Wellington and Porirua stations ran every thirty minutes, with more frequent services during peak periods and a less frequent during the night. From 15 July 2018, off-peak day services were increased to one every twenty minutes.\nRoad.\nWellington and Porirua are linked by the Johnsonville\u2013Porirua Motorway, part of State Highway 59 within Porirua and State Highway 1 beyond Porirua. Road improvements have progressively reduced travel times between Wellington and Porirua and increased the demand for housing development in Porirua. In 1940, the Centennial Highway developments saw the opening of a four-lane high-speed highway in Ngauranga Gorge bypassing the slower routes through Ngaio and Khandallah. During the 1950s, the high-speed Johnsonville\u2013Porirua Motorway was built through Tawa on the eastern side of the valley. The first section from Johnsonville to the Tawa turnoff at Takapu Road at the southern entrance to Tawa opened on 15 December 1951, broadly following the line of the old North Island Main Trunk railway. It reduced road travel times and considerably improved access between Wellington and Porirua by eliminating the need to use the narrow, winding road through the bottom of the Tawa valley in the Glenside area. The second section, from Takapu Road to Porirua, opened about 1956 and allowed through traffic to bypass the lower speed road through Tawa. The Johnsonville bypass connecting the south end of the motorway to the top of Ngauranga Gorge opened about 1958, completing the four-lane road link between Wellington and Porirua.\nOn 3 October 1936, a road bridge was opened across the entrance to the Pauatahanui Inlet connecting Paremata to Dolly Varden, known as Mana from 1960, eliminating a 22-kilometre journey around Pauatahanui Inlet to Plimmerton. The bridge became part of SH 1 when centennial highway developments saw the completion of a highway from Pukerua Bay to Paek\u0101k\u0101riki. A second bridge was built in 2004 allowing two lanes of traffic in each direction.\nIn the late 1960s, reclamation work began to the east of the 1960 rail reclamation from Porirua to Paremata, allowing the construction of a four-lane expressway alongside the railway. The expressway opened in the early 1970s, with room allowed for a future interchange at Whitford Brown Avenue. The reclamation work largely eliminated the north and south lagoons created by the rail reclamation on the east side of the harbour and reduced the size of the central lagoon, known as Aotea Lagoon. An intersection between SH 1 and Mungavin Avenue remained at Porirua until 1989 when the intersection was replaced with a grade-separated roundabout interchange with State Highway 1 passing under the interchange.\nThe Transmission Gully Motorway was constructed between 2014 and 2021, providing an eastern bypass of Porirua. On 7 December 2021, shortly before its opening, SH 1 was shifted to the Transmission Gully Motorway and the former SH 1 route through Porirua was renumbered SH 59.\nDemographics.\nPorirua City covers and had an estimated population of 61,500 as of June 2025, with a population density of people per km2.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPorirua City had a population of 59,445 in the 2023 New Zealand census, an increase of 2,886 people (5.1%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 7,728 people (14.9%) since the 2013 census. There were 29,052 males, 30,183 females and 210 people of other genders in 19,134 dwellings. 3.1% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 35.9 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 13,128 people (22.1%) aged under 15 years, 11,352 (19.1%) aged 15 to 29, 27,252 (45.8%) aged 30 to 64, and 7,710 (13.0%) aged 65 or older.\nPeople could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 60.1% European (P\u0101keh\u0101); 23.0% M\u0101ori; 26.5% Pasifika; 11.5% Asian; 1.6% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 1.8% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as \"New Zealander\". English was spoken by 94.9%, M\u0101ori language by 5.8%, Samoan by 8.8% and other languages by 14.1%. No language could be spoken by 2.5% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.7%. The percentage of people born overseas was 25.9, compared with 28.8% nationally.\nReligious affiliations were 38.6% Christian, 2.0% Hindu, 1.4% Islam, 1.1% M\u0101ori religious beliefs, 1.2% Buddhist, 0.3% New Age, 0.1% Jewish, and 1.2% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 47.4%, and 6.9% of people did not answer the census question.\nOf those at least 15 years old, 9,192 (19.8%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, 23,664 (51.1%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 10,509 (22.7%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $47,200, compared with $41,500 nationally. 7,842 people (16.9%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 25,401 (54.8%) people were employed full-time, 5,652 (12.2%) were part-time, and 1,689 (3.6%) were unemployed.\nUrban area.\nPorirua's urban area covers and had an estimated population of 60,100 as of June 2025, with a population density of people per km2.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe urban area had a population of 58,080 in the 2023 New Zealand census, an increase of 2,862 people (5.2%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 7,662 people (15.2%) since the 2013 census. There were 28,353 males, 29,517 females and 204 people of other genders in 18,663 dwellings. 3.1% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 35.8 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 12,891 people (22.2%) aged under 15 years, 11,136 (19.2%) aged 15 to 29, 26,565 (45.7%) aged 30 to 64, and 7,491 (12.9%) aged 65 or older.\nPeople could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 59.3% European (P\u0101keh\u0101); 23.3% M\u0101ori; 27.1% Pasifika; 11.7% Asian; 1.6% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 1.7% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as \"New Zealander\". English was spoken by 94.9%, M\u0101ori language by 5.9%, Samoan by 9.0% and other languages by 14.2%. No language could be spoken by 2.5% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.7%. The percentage of people born overseas was 26.0, compared with 28.8% nationally.\nReligious affiliations were 38.9% Christian, 2.1% Hindu, 1.4% Islam, 1.1% M\u0101ori religious beliefs, 1.2% Buddhist, 0.3% New Age, 0.1% Jewish, and 1.2% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 47.0%, and 6.9% of people did not answer the census question.\nOf those at least 15 years old, 8,946 (19.8%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, 23,064 (51.0%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 10,356 (22.9%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $46,900, compared with $41,500 nationally. 7,491 people (16.6%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 24,753 (54.8%) people were employed full-time, 5,475 (12.1%) were part-time, and 1,668 (3.7%) were unemployed.\nLocal government.\nThe city is administered by Porirua City Council. The wider Wellington Region is administered by the Greater Wellington Regional Council.\nWhen New Zealand became a separate Colony from New South Wales in 1841, the royal charter established three provinces. The Porirua area became part of New Munster which included that part of the North Island south of the Patea River and the whole of the South Island. The British Parliament passed the first constitution act, the New Zealand Constitution Act 1846, which reformed the provinces and the Porirua area became part of New Ulster which now included all of the North Island. The provinces were reformed again when the New Zealand Constitution Act 1852 established six provinces, with Porirua included in the Wellington Province. In 1876, the provincial government was abolished and replaced with 36 borough councils and 63 county councils and the Porirua area became the Porirua Riding of the Hutt County, formed in 1877. The Hutt County covered all the area south of the Waikanae River and West of the Remutaka Ranges that lay outside of Wellington City. As the population of local areas grew, a number of local boroughs were split off from the Hutt County. In 1908, a smaller Makara County with offices in Porirua was formed from the M\u0101kara and Porirua Ridings or the south-western part of the Hutt County. The new Makara County included Porirua, T\u012btahi Bay, Tawa Flat, and all of the area to the south lying to the west of Wellington City and outside the areas covered by Wellington City and the new and independent boroughs of Miramar, Karori, Onslow, and Johnsonville.\nIn 1939, northern Tawa valley residents seeking a separate name for the northern part of the Tawa district met and chose \"Linden\", from \"Linden Vale\", the name of the home of Mr Stuart Duncan and the name \"Linden\" was adopted in 1940. In 1948, the Tawa Flat and Linden Progressive Associations and Porirua interests, led by Arthur Carman and Percy Clark, made a representation to the Local Government Commission asking for a single borough covering the whole of the Porirua Basin. The Commission did not accept this proposal but responded by giving the Tawa Flat-Linden area the status of a Town District, with the first Tawa Flat Town Board elected on 16 May 1951. With continued urbanisation and population growth in the Tawa valley, the population reached 3,900 in 1953 and the upgrade of the Town District to a borough was approved in October 1953.\nRapid urbanisation and population growth was now occurring in the Porirua Basin with the development of state housing in T\u012btahi Bay, Elsdon, and to the East of State Highway 59, and in 1961 the first municipality to have \"Porirua\" in its name, the Borough of Porirua, was formed when Makara County was abolished, with the mostly rural western part becoming the Makara Ward of Hutt County and the rapidly growing eastern urban portion (including T\u012btahi Bay) becoming the Borough of Porirua. Four years later, the population was officially estimated at over the 20,000 threshold then necessary for Porirua to be declared a city.\nOn 1 April 1973, large areas to the north-east (and a few elsewhere) were transferred to the city from Hutt County by popular vote. Mana Island was added to the city at the same time. In 1988, a further addition was the Horokiri riding of the about-to-be-abolished county, containing most of the new Whitby suburb and substantial rural areas.\nThe city and its council have remained (with changes of personnel and ward boundaries) into the 21st century, despite proposals to change the name to \"Mana\" and several small movements for amalgamation with Wellington.\nCivic symbols.\nFlag.\nThe city of Porirua first adopted a flag in 1978 following a competition for designs among local schools, with the winning design being submitted by John Mansfield of Papakowhai School. This flag consisted of a yellow cross on a green background with the coat of arms superimposed over it. After the 1989 local government reforms, the new Porirua City Council did not seek to continue use of this flag.\nThe present flag of Porirua was adopted on 30 September 1998. It has several blue stripes, and a green shape to symbolise the city's harbour and land. The canton optionally features the coat of arms.\nSuburbs.\nPorirua is largely formed around the arms of the Porirua Harbour, and the coastline facing out to Cook Strait and the north-eastern parts of the South Island. Most of the populated areas of Porirua are coastal: Camborne, Karehana Bay, Mana, Onepoto, Papak\u014dwhai, Paremata, P\u0101uatahanui, Plimmerton, Pukerua Bay, Takap\u016bw\u0101hia, T\u012btahi Bay and Whitby all have direct access to coastal parks and recreation reserves. Several suburbs without direct coastal access, including Aotea, Ascot Park and Ranui Heights, have substantial portions with good views over the harbour. Elsdon, formerly known as Prosser Block, lost access to the harbour as a result of reclamation work, especially during the 1960s. Much of the existing city centre, north of Parumoana Street and east of Titahi Bay Road, was built upon this landfill.\nThe suburbs include the following, grouped by council ward:\nCommerce.\nNorth City Shopping Centre (originally Kmart Plaza and then North City Plaza) is Porirua's largest indoor shopping complex. The two-level mall first opened in 1990, was extended in 1996 and was refurbished in 2004. With over 80 stores, the centre includes Wellington's first Kmart department store, which opened in the mall as an anchor tenant in 1990.\nThe Megacentre shopping complex in Porirua opened in November 1999.\nBefore North City and the Megacentre were built, shopping centred around the Cobham Court area of central Porirua. In 1996, large white canopies were erected over Cobham Court, Serlby Place and Harham Place to freshen up the area and provide protection from the weather. The project cost $4.2 million and won three architectural awards. Judges for the awards described the canopies as \"spare, crisp, potent and elegant\" with \"rich cultural and architectural relevance.\" The canopies were removed in 2015 as part of a major revitalisation project by Porirua City Council. A report to the Council in 2017 stated that crime in the area had decreased by 25% after the canopies were removed.\nTransport.\nState Highway 59 is the main route through Porirua itself, passes north\u2013south through the middle of the city, linking Porirua southwards to Wellington and northwards to the K\u0101piti Coast and the bulk of the North Island. Porirua is the northern terminus of the Johnsonville\u2013Porirua motorway (opened progressively from 1950), with the section of motorway within Porirua being part of the SH 59 route. Until 7 December 2021, the SH 59 route was part of State Highway 1.\nState Highway 1, the most significant route in the New Zealand state highway network, forms an eastern bypass of Porirua as the Transmission Gully Motorway. There are link roads between the Transmission Gully Motorway and Kenepuru, Waitangirua and Whitby.\nState Highway 58 links Paremata via Whitby and P\u0101uatahanui (where an interchange with the Transmission Gully Motorway is located) with Haywards in the Hutt Valley to the east.\nThe Ara Harakeke is a pathway that runs alongside SH 59 and the Taup\u014d Swamp, north of Plimmerton. The first section was opened in 2002. Porirua City Council won a Cycle Friendly Award for this project from the Cycling Advocates' Network in 2003.\nThe North Island Main Trunk railway line passes through Porirua, mostly close to State Highway 59, with six stations including the main Porirua Railway Station inside the city and one on the Wellington City border. The railway stations from south to north are Kenepuru, Porirua, Paremata, Mana (known as Dolly Varden before 1960), Plimmerton, Pukerua Bay, and Muri (closed 30 April 2011). K\u0101piti Line suburban passenger trains run between Wellington and Waikanae (generally half-hourly during the day before 15 July 2018 and every twenty minutes during the day after that date, more frequently during peak periods, and less frequently at night). The Northern Explorer long-distance passenger train between Auckland and Wellington passes through Porirua. This train was known as the Overlander before 25 June 2012 which stopped southbound but not northbound.\nThe nearest airports are Wellington Airport to the south (the closest), and Paraparaumu Airport to the north.\nFerry services ran between Paremata and Picton for short periods but appeared unable to compete with Wellington-based services despite the shorter distance.\nEducation.\nThe Royal New Zealand Police College, where all the country's police recruits receive some 19 weeks' training, is at Papak\u014dwhai.\nJust up the road from Aotea Lagoon is Aotea College, the secondary school closest to the northern suburbs. Other colleges include Mana College and Bishop Viard College near the city centre and to the east, Porirua College. Tertiary education is provided by Whitireia Polytechnic, which has its main campus north of the city centre.\nArts and culture.\nThe local culture, history and artists are represented at the P\u0101taka Museum of Arts &amp; Cultures where the library is also public library is also housed.\nThe indie rock radio station andHow.FM broadcasts locally at 107.5 FM from the suburb of Papak\u014dwhai.\nSport and recreation.\nTe Rauparaha Arena is a multi-purpose venue for sports and events located next to P\u0101taka Museum of Arts &amp; Cultures. Nearby is the Porirua Skatepark designed by local Moses Viliamu. Aotea Lagoon is a popular recreational area on the south-eastern shore of the Porirua Inlet.\nWatersports, fishing and other boating activities are common in the area, served by a large marina in Mana and Sea Scouts, yachting, power-boating, rowing, and water-skiing clubs. The harbour entrance from Plimmerton or Mana is popular with experienced windsurfers and kitesurfers while beginners find the shallow, enclosed waters of the Pauatahanui arm of the harbour a forgiving environment in which to develop their skills.\nAs early as 1883, Porirua began to hold regular horse racing events on the harbour's Southern beach. Towards the end of a meeting, competing riders would also have to combat the incoming tide. The Porirua Jockey Club was quickly established with Mr W. Jillett the first secretary and local butcher, John Rod, the treasurer. Joshua Prosser built stables on his nearby property 'Prosser Block' (now Elsdon) and became a notable trainer of Dominion race-horses. The beach now lies beneath Porirua city centre.\nPorirua is home to the powerful Northern United RFC, the current Wellington regional champions, and the smaller Paremata-Plimmerton RFC. Both clubs play in the Wellington Rugby Football Union club rugby competition.\nPorirua is also home to the three-time Chatham Cup winning Capital Football team Western Suburbs FC. Well known as a dominant force in New Zealand club football, and for producing many former and current All Whites, they were officially recognised as Porirua City's 2006 Team of the Year for their Chatham Cup Grand Final triumph over Auckland's Eastern Suburbs.\nPorirua was the host of the 2010 Oceania Handball Championship. Australia won the tournament from hosts New Zealand. The Cook Islands finished third.\nA branch of Adrenalin Forest, an adventure park where paying visitors navigate rope bridges, swings and flying foxes strung between trees up to 31 metres off the ground, opened in Porirua in 2010. The park is located on the east side of Porirua Harbour near the Gear Homestead.\nNotable people.\nNotable councillors of Porirua have included:\nOther prominent residents have included:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69677", "revid": "1319268617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69677", "title": "Ramon Llull", "text": "Majorcan writer and philosopher (c. 1232 \u2013 1316)\nRamon Llull (; ; c.\u20091232 \u2013 1316), sometimes anglicized as Raymond Lully, was a Mallorcan Catholic philosopher, theologian, poet, missionary, apologist and former knight. He invented a philosophical system known as the \"Art\", conceived as a type of universal logic to prove the truth of Christian doctrine to interlocutors of all faiths and nationalities. The \"Art\" consists of a set of general principles and combinatorial operations. It is illustrated with diagrams.\nA prolific writer, he is also known for his literary works written in Catalan, which he composed to make his \"Art\" accessible to a wider audience. In addition to Catalan and Latin, he also probably wrote in Arabic (although no texts in Arabic survive). His books were translated into Occitan, French, and Castilian during his lifetime.\nAlthough his work did not enjoy huge success during his lifetime, he has had a rich and continuing reception. In the early modern period his name became associated with alchemical works. More recently he has been recognized as a precursor of the modern field of social choice theory, 450 years before Borda and Condorcet's investigations reopened the field. His ideas also prefigured the development of computation theory.\nVenerated as a saintly figure in the Catholic Church, he was beatified by Pope Pius IX in 1847. He was a member of the Third Order of Saint Francis.\nLife.\nEarly life and family.\nLlull was born in Palma into a wealthy family of Barcelona patricians who had come to the Kingdom of Majorca in 1229 with the conquering armies of James I of Aragon. James I had conquered the formerly Almohad-ruled Majorca as part of a larger move to integrate the territories of the Balearic Islands (now part of Spain) into the Crown of Aragon. Llull was born there a few years later, in 1232 or 1233. Muslims still constituted a large part of the population of Majorca and Jews were present in cultural and economic affairs.\nIn 1257 Llull married Blanca Picany, with whom he had two children, Dom\u00e8nec and Magdalena. Although he formed a family, he lived what he would later call the licentious and worldly life of a troubadour.\nReligious calling.\nIn 1263 Llull experienced a series of visions. He narrates the event in his autobiography \"Vita coaetanea\" (\"A Contemporary Life\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ramon, while still a young man and Seneschal to the King of Majorca, was very given to composing worthless songs and poems and to doing other licentious things. One night he was sitting beside his bed, about to compose and write in his vulgar tongue a song to a lady whom he loved with a foolish love; and as he began to write this song, he looked to his right and saw our Lord Jesus Christ on the Cross, as if suspended in mid-air. \nThe vision came to Llull five times in all and inspired in him three intentions: to give up his soul for the sake of God's love and honor, to convert the Saracens (i.e., Arabs and/or Muslims) to Christianity, and write the best book in the world against the errors of the unbelievers.\nFollowing his visions he sold his possessions on the model of Saint Francis of Assisi and set out on pilgrimages to the shrines of Saint Mary of Rocamadour, Saint James, and other places, never to come back to his family and profession. When he returned to Majorca he purchased a Muslim slave in order to learn Arabic from him. For the next nine years, until 1274, he engaged in study and contemplation in relative solitude. He read extensively in both Latin and Arabic, learning both Christian and Muslim theological and philosophical thought.\nIn 1270 Llull founded the hermitage of the Holy Trinity in Mallorca, known as Miramar.\nBetween 1271 and 1274 Llull wrote his first works, a compendium of the Muslim thinker Al-Ghazali's logic and the \"Llibre de contemplaci\u00f3 en D\u00e9u\" (\"Book on the Contemplation of God\"), a lengthy guide to finding truth through contemplation.\nIn 1274, while staying at a hermitage on Puig de Randa, the form of the great book Llull was to write was finally given to him through divine revelation: a complex system that he named his \"Art\", which would become the motivation behind most of his life's efforts.\nMissionary work and education.\nLlull urged the study of Arabic and other languages in Europe, in order to convert Muslims and schismatic Christians. He travelled through Europe to meet popes, kings, and princes, trying to establish special colleges to prepare future missionaries. In 1276 a language school for Franciscan missionaries was founded at Miramar, funded by the King of Majorca.\nAbout 1291 he went to Tunis, preached to the Saracens, disputed with them in philosophy, and after another brief sojourn in Paris, returned to the East as a missionary. Llull travelled to Tunis a second time in about 1304, and wrote numerous letters to the king of Tunis, but little else is known about this part of his life.\nHe returned in 1308, reporting that the conversion of Muslims should be achieved through prayer, not through military force. He finally achieved his goal of linguistic education at major universities in 1311 when the Council of Vienne ordered the creation of chairs of Hebrew, Arabic and Chaldean (Aramaic) at the universities of Bologna, Oxford, Paris, and Salamanca as well as at the Papal Court.\nDeath.\nIn 1314, at the age of 82, Llull traveled again to Tunis, possibly prompted by the correspondence between King James II of Aragon and al-Lihyani, the Hafsid caliph, indicating that the caliph wished to convert to Christianity. Whereas Llull had been met with difficulties during his previous visits to North Africa, he was allowed to operate this time without interference from the authorities due to the improved relations between Tunis and Aragon.\nHis last work is dated December 1315 in Tunis. The circumstances of his death remain unknown. He probably died sometime between then and March 1316, either in Tunis, on the ship on the return voyage, or in Majorca upon his return. Llull's tomb, created in 1448, is in the Franciscan church in Palma, Majorca.\nVeneration.\nVenerated as a saintly figure, Llull was officially considered for canonization after his death. He was beatified on 11 September 1847 by Pope Pius IX.\nWorks.\nLlull's \"Art\".\nLlull's \"Art\" (in Latin \"Ars\") is at the center of his thought and undergirds his entire corpus. It is a system of universal logic based on a set of general principles activated in a combinatorial process. It can be used to prove statements about God and Creation (e.g., God is a Trinity). Often the \"Art\" formulates these statements as questions and answers (e.g., Q: Is there a Trinity in God? A: Yes.). It works cumulatively through an iterative process; statements about God's nature must be proved for each of His essential attributes in order to prove the statement true for God (i.e., Goodness is threefold, Greatness is threefold, Eternity is threefold, Power is threefold, etc.).\nWhat sets Llull's system apart is its unusual use of letters and diagrams, giving it an algebraic or algorithmic character. He developed the \"Art\" over the course of many decades, writing new books to explain each new version. The \"Art\"'s trajectory can be divided into two main phases, although each phase contains numerous variations. The first is sometimes called the Quaternary Phase (1274 - 1290) and the second the Ternary Phase (1290 - 1308). This terminology was coined by Anthony Bonner.\nQuaternary Phase.\nThe two main works of the Quaternary Phase are the \"Ars compendiosa inveniendi veritatem\" (ca. 1274) and the \"Ars demonstrativa\" (ca. 1283). The \"Ars demonstrativa\" has twelve main figures. A set of sixteen principles, or 'dignities' (divine attributes) comprise the general foundation for the system's operation. These principles are displayed in the first figure (Figure A) and assigned letters (B through R). The rest of the figures enable the user to combine these principles to demonstrate the truth of statements. Figure T, for instance, contains \"relative principles\" (i.e.: minority, majority, equality, etc.), also assigned letters. Figure S displays the Augustinian powers of the soul (will, intellect, and memory) and their acts (willing, understanding, and remembering).\nTernary Phase.\nLlull inaugurated the Ternary Phase with two works written in 1290: the \"Ars inventiva veritatis\" and the \"Art amativa\" (or \"Ars amativa boni\"). The culmination of this phase came in 1308 with a finalized version of the \"Art\" called the \"Ars generalis ultima\". In the same year Llull wrote an abbreviated version called the \"Ars brevis\". In these works Llull revised the \"Art\" to have only four main figures. He reduced the number of divine principles in the first figure to nine (goodness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, will, virtue, truth, glory). Figure T also now has nine relational principles (difference, concordance, contrariety, beginning, middle, end, majority, equality, minority), reduced from fifteen. Llull kept the combinatorial aspect of the process.\nCorrelatives.\nLlull introduced an aspect of the system called the \"correlatives\" just before the final transition to the Ternary Phase. The correlatives first appear in a work called the \"Lectura super figuras Artis demonstrativae\" (c. 1285-7) and came to undergird his formulation of the nature of being. The doctrine of correlatives stipulates that everything, at the level of being, has a threefold structure: agent, patient, act. For example, the divine principle \"goodness\" consists of \"that which does good\" (agent), \"that which receives good\" (patient), and \"to do good\" (act). Llull developed a system of Latin suffixes to express the correlatives, i.e. \"bonitas\" (goodness); \"bonificans\", \"bonificatus\", \"bonificare\". This became the basis for proving that the divine principles are distinct yet equivalent in God (each principle has the same underlying threefold structure, yet retains its own unique correlatives). This supports the combinatorial operation of the \"Art\" (i.e., this means that in God goodness \"is\" greatness and greatness \"is\" goodness, goodness \"is\" eternity and eternity \"is\" goodness, etc.), the Lullian proof of the Trinity (each divine principle has the three correlatives, and together the principles comprise the Godhead; therefore, the Godhead is threefold) and the Incarnation (the active and passive correlatives are equivalent to matter and form, and the trinitarian unfolding of being occurs on all levels of reality).\nWithin this framework, \"Liber Chaos\"\u2014a section of the \"Lectura\"\u2014explores the concept of primordial chaos as the initial state of creation, whereat divine principles had yet to impose order upon formless potential. Llull's treatment of chaos aligns with his system of correlatives, suggesting that chaos itself contains within it the active force of divine causation, the passive potential of undifferentiated being, and the act of transformation by which it becomes structured reality. This concept\u2014though philosophical, in Llull\u2019s system\u2014bears a striking resemblance to alchemical notions of \"prima materia\", the raw substance from which all transmutations arise.\nOther works.\nInfluence of Islam and early works.\nIt has been pointed out that the \"Art\"'s combinatorial mechanics bear a resemblance to zairja, a device used by medieval Arab astrologers. The Art's reliance on divine attributes also has a certain similarity to the contemplation of the ninety-nine Names of God in the Muslim tradition. Llull's familiarity with the Islamic intellectual tradition is evidenced by the fact that his first work (1271-2) was a compendium of Al-Ghazali's logic.\nDialogues.\nFrom early in his career Llull composed dialogues to enact the procedure of the \"Art\". This is linked to the missionary aspect of the \"Art\"; Llull conceived of it as an instrument to convert all peoples of the world to Christianity, and experimented with more popular genres to make it easier to understand. His earliest and most well-known dialogue is the \"Book of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men\", written in Catalan in the 1270s and later translated into Latin. It is framed as a meeting of three wise men (a Muslim, a Jew, and a Christian) and a Gentile in the woods. They learn about the Lullian method when they encounter a set of trees with leaves inscribed with Lullian principles. Lady Intelligence appears and informs them of the properties of the trees and the rules for implementing the leaves. The wise men use the trees to prove their respective Articles of Faith to the Gentile (although some of the Islamic tenets cannot be proved with the Lullian procedure), and in the end the Gentile is converted to Christianity.\nLlull subsequently composed many other dialogues. Later in his career, when he became concerned with heretical activity in the Arts Faculty of the University of Paris, he wrote \"disputations\" with philosophers as interlocutors. He also created a character for himself, and he stars in many of these dialogues as the Christian wise man (for instance: \"Liber de quaestione valde alta et profunda\", composed in 1311).\nTree diagrams.\nLlull structured many of his works around trees. In some, like the \"Book of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men\", the \"leaves\" of the trees stand for the combinatorial elements (principles) of the \"Art\". In other works a series of trees shows how the \"Art\" generates all (\"encyclopedic\") knowledge. The \"Tree of Science\" (1295-6) comprises sixteen trees ranging from earthly and moral to divine and pedagogical. Each tree is divided into seven parts (roots, trunk, branches, twigs, leaves, flowers, fruits). The roots always consist of the Lullian divine principles and from there the tree grows into the differentiated aspects of its respective category of reality.\nProverbs.\nLlull wrote several books of proverbs in Catalan, to make it easier for local people to read. \"The Book of One Thousand Proverbs\", written in 1302, compiled maxims that encompassed various fields: theology, philosophy, morality, social life, and practical life. The main virtues noted of Llull's proverbs are concision, didactic simplicity, and musicality.\nNovels.\nLlull also wrote narrative prose drawing on the literary traditions of his time (epic, romance) to express the \"Art\". These works were intended to communicate the potentially complex operations of the \"Art\" to a lay audience. \"Blanquerna\" (c.1276-83) is the [?] of his novels; \"Felix\" (1287-9) is also notable, though it was not widely circulated during his lifetime and was only available in Catalan. It is a \"Bildungsroman\", of sorts, in which the titular protagonist sets out on a journey at the instigation of his father, who has written a \"Book of Wonders\". The book is divided into ten chapters\u2014echoing the encyclopedic range of the \"Tree of Science\"\u2014as Felix gains knowledge of God, angels, heavens, elements, plants, minerals, animals, man, Paradise, and Hell. Felix's journey ends at a monastery, where he relates the \"Book of Wonders\"\u2014now embellished and fused with the account of his own adventures.\nReception.\nMedieval.\nAcademic theology.\nAccording to Llull's autobiographical \"Vita\", his \"Art\" was not received well at the University of Paris when he first presented it there in the 1280s. This experience supposedly is what led him to revise the \"Art\" (creating the tertiary version). Llull's \"Art\" was never adopted by mainstream academia of the thirteenth and early-fourteenth centuries, but it did accrue quite a bit of interest. A significant number of Lullian manuscripts were collected by the Carthusian monks of Paris at Vauvert and by several theologians who donated their manuscripts to the Sorbonne Library. One disciple, Thomas Le My\u00e9sier, went so far as to create elaborate compilations of Llull's works, including a manuscript dedicated to the queen of France.\nOpposition.\nIn the 1360s the inquisitor Nicholas Eymerich condemned Lullism in Aragon. He obtained a papal bull in 1376 to prohibit Lullian teaching, although it proved ineffective. In Paris Jean Gerson also issued a series of polemical writings against Lullism. There was an official document issued to prohibit the Lullian \"Art\" from being taught in the Faculty of Theology.\nEarly modern.\nAcademic theology.\nLlull's most significant early modern proponent was Nicholas of Cusa. He collected many works by Llull and adapted many aspects of Lullian thought for his own mystical theology. There was also growing interest in Lullism in Catalonia, Italy, and France. Jacques Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples published eight of Llull's books in 1499, 1505, and 1516. Lef\u00e8vre was therefore responsible for the first significant circulation of Llull's work in print outside of Catalonia. It is thought that the influence of Lullian works in Renaissance Italy (coinciding with the rise of neoplatonism) contributed to a development in metaphysics, from a static Artistotelian notion of being to reality as a dynamic process. In Northern and Central Europe Lullism was adopted by Lutherans and Calvinists interested in promoting programs of theological humanism. Gottfried Leibniz was exposed to these currents during his years in Mainz, and Llull's \"Art\" clearly informed his \"De Arte Combinatoria\".\nPseudo-Lullian Alchemy and Encyclopedism.\nThere is a significant body of alchemical treatises falsely attributed to Llull. The two fundamental works of the corpus are the \"Testamentum\" and the \"Liber de secretis naturae seu de quinta essentia\" which both date to the fourteenth century. Occultists such as Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa and Giordano Bruno were inspired by these works. Despite Llull's growing identification with alchemy and Neoplatonic mysticism, others (such as Giulio Pace and Johann Heinrich Alsted) were still interested in the Lullian \"Art\" as a universal logic, even in the seventeenth century when Descartes and Ramus proposed competing systems.\nIberian Revival and beatification.\nMeanwhile, in Spain, the Cardinal Francisco Jim\u00e9nez de Cisneros, Archbishop of Toledo, had taken up Lullism for his project of reform. Cisneros mobilized various intellectuals and editors, founding chairs at universities and publishing Llull's works. Founded in 1633, the Pontifical College of La Sapiencia on Majorca became the epicenter for teaching Lullism. The Franciscans from La Sapiencia were the ones to seek Llull's canonization at Rome in the seventeenth century. These efforts were renewed in the eighteenth century, but never succeeded. Llull was beatified in 1847 by Pope Pius IX. His feast day was assigned to 30 June and is celebrated by the Third Order of St. Francis.\nTwentieth and twenty-first centuries.\nScholarship.\nLlull is now recognized by scholars as significant in both the history of Catalan literature as well as intellectual history. From 1906 to 1950 the Comissi\u00f3 Editora Lul\u00b7liana led a project to edit Llull's works written in Catalan. This series was called the Obres de Ramon Llull (ORL). In 1957 the Raimundus-Lullus-Institut was founded in Freiburg, Germany to begin the work of editing Llull's Latin works. This series is called the Raimundi Lulli Opera Latina (ROL) and is still ongoing. In 1990 the work on the Catalan texts was restarted with the Nova Edici\u00f3 de les Obres de Ramon Llull (NEORL). In the world of English-language scholarship on memory systems, the work of Frances Yates () brought new interest to Ramon Llull as a figure in the history of cognitive systems.\nArt and fiction.\nLlull has appeared in the art and literature of the last century, especially in the genres of surrealism, philosophical fantasy, and metafiction. Salvador Dal\u00ed's alchemical thought was influenced by Ramon Llull and Dal\u00ed incorporated the diagrams from the Lullian \"Art\" into his work called \"Alchimie des Philosophes\". In 1937 Jorge Luis Borges wrote a snippet called \"Ramon Llull's Thinking Machine\" proposing the Lullian \"Art\" as a device to produce poetry. Other notable references to Ramon Llull are: Aldous Huxley's short story \"The Death of Lully\", a fictionalized account aftermath of Llull's stoning in Tunis, set aboard the Genoese ship that returned him to Mallorca. Paul Auster refers to Llull (as Raymond Lull) in his memoir \"The Invention of Solitude\" in the second part, \"The Book of Memory\". Llull is also a major character in \"The Box of Delights\", a children's novel by poet John Masefield.\nOther recognition.\nLlull's \"Art\" is sometimes recognized as a precursor to computer science and computation theory. With the discovery in 2001 of his lost manuscripts, \"Ars notandi\", \"Ars eleccionis\", and \"Alia ars eleccionis\", together known as \"Ars Magna\" (what today would be called a logical system to discover some sort of truth), Llull is also given credit for creating an electoral system now known as the Borda count and Condorcet criterion, which Jean-Charles de Borda and Nicolas de Condorcet independently proposed centuries later.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69678", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69678", "title": "The Bible", "text": ""}
{"id": "69679", "revid": "49982590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69679", "title": "Obed-Edom", "text": "Biblical name meaning \"servant of Edom\"\nObed-Edom or Oved Edom (hebr.: \u05e2\u05b9\u05d1\u05b5\u05d3 \u05d0\u05b1\u05d3\u05b9\u05dd) is a biblical name which in Hebrew means \"servant of Edom,\" and which appears in the books of 2 Samuel and 1 and 2 Chronicles. The relationship between these passages has been the subject of scholarly discussions which express uncertainty and disagreements about the relationships between various passages that use the name.\nBiblical texts.\nThe following sections reflect every mention of the name Obed-Edom in the Hebrew Bible.\nObed-Edom in Samuel.\nIn , the Philistines, a neighboring people, capture the Ark of the Covenant, also known as the \"Ark of God\", a sacred object of the Israelites, during the Battle of Aphek. The Philistines then take the Ark into their own territory, leading God to attack the Philistines with illness (). Eventually, the Philistines realize that they cannot safely keep the Ark, and place it on a cart pulled by two cattle, who return it to the Israelites along with a peace-offering (). After this, the Israelites take it to the \"house of Abinadab\", where it remains for twenty years ().\nEventually, the Israelite king David decides to bring the ark from the \"house of Abinadab\" to his new stronghold in Jerusalem (). The ark is placed on an ox-cart driven by Uzzah and Ahio, Abinadab's sons, in a festive atmosphere (). At one point, the ark rocks violently as the oxen pull it, and Uzzah sticks out his hand to steady the Ark, and so God strikes Uzzah dead (). David temporarily abandons his plan to move the ark to his city.\n\"So David would not remove the ark of the LORD unto him into the city of David; but David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. And the ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months; and the LORD blessed Obed-edom, and all his house\".\nWhen David hears that the LORD has blessed the house of Obed-edom, he decides to move the Ark to Jerusalem as originally planned. Rev. F. Gardiner, in Ellicott's Commentary for Modern Readers, stresses that \"this implies neither jealousy nor a wish to deprive his subject (Obed-edom) of a blessing. It had been his original purpose to carry the ark to Jerusalem, and he had only desisted in a fit of vexation and then of fear. He now saw that such fear was groundless, and went on to the completion of his unfinished action.\"\nObed-Edom in 1 Chronicles.\nMoving the Ark.\n1 Chronicles 13 also relates the incident concerning the death of Uzzah. Following the death of Uzzah, the biblical text says, \"And David was afraid of God that day, saying: 'How shall I bring the ark of God home to me?' So David removed not the ark unto him into the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months; and the LORD blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that he had\" (1 Chronicles 13:12-14).\n1 Chronicles 14 then relates various details of David's kingdom, including David's successes in international relations, the birth of several children, and David's successful war against the Philistines. Following the fighting with the Philistines, the narrative returns its attention to the Ark.\n\"And [David] made him houses in the city of David; and he prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent. Then David said: 'None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites; for them hath the LORD chosen to carry the ark of the LORD, and to minister to Him for ever'\" (1 Chronicles 15:1-2, Jewish Publication Society Version of 1917). David then calls an assembly and gathers a large number of Levites in preparation for moving the Ark (15:3-11). Calling to mind the disaster with Uzzah, David provides instructions for the proper handling of the Ark to avoid a repeat of the incident (15:12-13). The Levites prepare themselves and carry the Ark in an appropriate manner (15:14-15). David then tells the Levites to appoint some Levites for playing music, with instruments and singing (15:16).\n\"So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; of the sons of Merari their brethrean, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; and with them their breathren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, . . . and Eliphalehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers\" (15:17-18).\n\"So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, [were appointed,] with cymbals of brass to sound aloud; and Zechariah, and Aziel, . . . and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries set to Alamoth; and Mattithiah, and Eliphalehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith, to lead\" (15:19-21).\n\"And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was over the song; he was master in the song, because he was skillful. And Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark. And Shebaniah, and Joshaphat, and Nethanel, . . . and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the trumpets before the ark of God; and Obed-edom and Jehiah were doorkeepers for the ark. So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the house of Obed-edom with joy\" (15:22-25).\nThen further festivities related to the event are related (15:26-16:3).\n\"And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD, and to celebrate and to thank and praise the LORD, the God of Israel: Asaph the chief, and second to him, Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps; and Asaph with cymbals, sounding aloud; and Benaiah and Jehaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the covenant of God\" (16:4-6).\nThis is followed by an extensive poem of praise (16:8-36).\n\"So he left there, before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, Asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as every day's work required; and Obed-edom with their brethren, threescore and eight; Obed-edom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to be door-keepers . . .\" (16:37-38 Various other details follow.\n1 Chronicles 26.\nLater, in 1 Chronicles 26, a genealogical passage references the name Obed-edom. Verse 1 introduces a list of doorkeepers, beginning with Korahites, specifically a man named Meshelemiah and his sons (verses 1-3).\nAfter the mention of Meshelemiah's sons, Chronicles reads, \"And Obed-Edom had sons: Shemaiah the first-born, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, . . . Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth; for God blessed him\" (verses 4-5). Verses 6 through 7 name six grandsons of Obed-edom by Shemaiah. Verse 8 concludes, \"All these were the sons of Obed-edom: they and their sons and their brethren, able men in strength for the service; threescore and two of Obed-edom.\"\nThe chapter relates that lots were cast to assign positions to the doorkeepers, and that the lot fell \"To Obed-edom southward; and to his sons the Storehouse\" (verse 15).\nObed-Edom in 2 Chronicles.\n2 Chronicles 25 relates events that it claims occurred during the reign of king Jehoash of Israel and Amaziah of Judah. They reigned at the same time around approximately 800-775 BCE. This is at least one or two centuries after the period when David would have reigned (somewhere in the range of 1050-925 BCE). The chapter relates that Jehoash attacked Amaziah, and came to Jerusalem, \"And [he took] all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-edom, and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria\" (25:24).\nScholarly views.\nSeveral scholars have noted the existence of uncertainties and disagreements about the Obed-Edom passages. However, most scholars agree that in the name \"Obed-Edom the Gittite,\" (as he is called in 2 Samuel 6 and 1 Chronicles 13) the term \"Gittite\" refers originally to a Philistine (and therefore a non-Israelite man). However, in Chronicles \"Obed-edom is assigned a levitical pedigree,\" that is, is described as a Levite, an Israelite member of the tribe entrusted with holy responsibilities. This description as a Levite is \"usually regarded as the Chronicler's own interpretation.\" As a result of these differing interpretations, several scholars have proposed that the Chronicler has altered the original description of a Philistine Obed-edom in order to make the character a Levite. Conservative scholars point out that \"Gittite\" refers simply to the town of Gath, not to the nationality of the individual. David had recently been given sanctuary in Gath by Achish, king of Gath (1 Samuel 27:3), and yet it would be erroneous to conclude that David was somehow therefore a Philistine. Moreover, Gath was one of the originally deeded Levitical cities, given to the Kohathites (Joshua 21:24), from whose family Obed-Edom was descended. Therefore, his residence in this contested city is not surprising.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69680", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69680", "title": "Kurdistan Workers' Party", "text": "Kurdish militant political organization\nThe Kurdistan Workers' Party, or the PKK, is a Kurdish militant political organization and armed guerrilla group primarily based in the mountainous Kurdish-majority regions of southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq and north-eastern Syria. It was founded in Ziyaret, Lice, on 27November 1978 and was involved in asymmetric warfare in the Kurdistan Workers' Party insurgency (with several ceasefires between 1993 and 2013\u20132015). Although the PKK initially sought an independent Kurdish state, in the 1990s, its official platform changed to seeking autonomy and increased political and cultural rights for Kurds within Turkey.\nThe PKK is designated as a terrorist organization by Turkey, the United States, the European Union, Australia, and Japan. Some analysts and organizations disagree with this designation, believing that the PKK no longer engages in organized terrorist activities or systemically targets civilians. Turkey has often characterized the demand for education in Kurdish as supporting terrorist activities by the PKK.\nThe PKK's ideology was originally a fusion of revolutionary socialism and Marxism\u2013Leninism with Kurdish nationalism, seeking the foundation of an independent Kurdistan. The PKK was formed as part of a growing discontent over the suppression of Turkey's Kurds, in an effort to establish linguistic, cultural, and political rights for the Kurdish minority. Following the military coup of 1980, the Kurdish language was officially prohibited in public and private life. Many who spoke, published, or sang in Kurdish were arrested and imprisoned. The Turkish government denied the existence of Kurds and the PKK was portrayed trying to convince Turks of being Kurds.\nThe PKK has been involved in armed clashes with Turkish security forces since 1979, but the full-scale insurgency did not begin until 15August 1984, when the PKK announced a Kurdish uprising. Since the conflict began, more than 40,000people have died, most of whom being Turkish Kurdish civilians. In 1999, PKK leader Abdullah \u00d6calan was captured and imprisoned. In May 2007, serving and former members of the PKK set up the Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK), an umbrella organisation of Kurdish organisations in Turkish, Iraqi, Iranian, and Syrian Kurdistan. In 2013, the PKK declared a ceasefire and began slowly withdrawing its fighters to Iraqi Kurdistan as part of a peace process with the Turkish state. The ceasefire broke down in July 2015. Both the PKK and the Turkish state have been accused of engaging in terror tactics and targeting civilians. The PKK has and recruited child soldiers, and conducted several attacks that massacred civilians. Turkey has depopulated and burned down thousands of Kurdish villages and massacred Kurdish civilians in an attempt to root out PKK militants.\nOn 1March 2025, the PKK declared a ceasefire with Turkey, and on 12May, announced plans for a total dissolution of the organisation.\nBackground.\nAs a result of the Turkish military coup of 1971, many militants of the revolutionary left were deprived of a public appearance. Movements like the People's Liberation Army of Turkey (THKO) or the Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist\u2013Leninist (TKP-ML) were cracked down upon and forbidden. Subsequently, several of the remaining political actors of the Turkish left organized away from the public in university dorms or in meetings in shared apartments. In 1972\u20131973 the organization's core ideological group was made up largely of students led by Abdullah \u00d6calan (\"Apo\") in Ankara who made themselves known as the \"Kurdistan Revolutionaries\"\".\" The new group focused on the oppressed Kurdish population of Turkish Kurdistan in a capitalist world. In 1973, several students who later would become founders of the PKK established the student organization Ankara Democratic Association of Higher Education (ADY\u00d6D), which would be banned the next year. Then a group around \u00d6calan split from the Turkish left and held extensive discussions focusing on the colonization of Kurdistan by Turkey. Following the military coup of 1980, the Kurdish language was officially prohibited in public and private life. Many who spoke, published, or sang in Kurdish were arrested and imprisoned. At this time, expressions of Kurdish culture, including the use of the Kurdish language, dress, folklore, and names, were banned in Turkey. In an attempt to deny their separate existence from Turkish people, the Turkish government categorized Kurds as \"Mountain Turks\" until 1991. The PKK was then formed as part of a growing discontent over the suppression of Kurds in Turkey, in an effort to establish linguistic, cultural, and political rights for Turkey's Kurdish minority.\nFollowing several years of preparation, the Kurdistan Workers Party was established during a foundation congress on 26 and 27 November 1978 in the rural village of F\u00ees, Lice, Diyarbak\u0131r. On 27 November 1978, a central committee consisting of seven people was elected, with Abdullah \u00d6calan as its head. Other members were: \u015eahin D\u00f6nmez, Mazlum Do\u011fan, Haki Karer (an ethnic Turk), Mehmet Hayri Durmu\u015f, Mehmet Karasungur, Cem\u00eel Bay\u00eek. The party program \"K\u00fcrdistan Devrimci Yolu\" drew on Marxism and saw Kurdistan as a colonized entity. Initially the PKK concealed its existence and only announced their existence in a propaganda stunt when they attempted to assassinate a politician of the Justice Party, Mehmet Celal Bucak, in July 1979. Bucak was a Kurdish tribal leader accused by the PKK of exploiting peasants and collaborating with the Turkish state to oppress Kurds.\nIdeology and aims.\nThe organization originated in the early 1970s from the radical left and drew its membership from other existing leftist groups, mainly Dev-Gen\u00e7. During the 1980s, the movement included and cooperated with other ethnic groups, including ethnic Turks, who were following the radical left. The organization initially presented itself as part of the worldwide communist revolution. Its aims and objectives have evolved over time towards the goals of national autonomy a federation similar the one of Switzerland, Germany or the United States and democratic confederalism.\nAround 1995, the PKK ostensibly changed its aim from independence to a demand for equal rights and Kurdish autonomy within the Turkish state, though all the while hardly suspending their military attacks on the Turkish state except for ceasefires in 1999\u20132004 and 2013\u20132015. In 1995, \u00d6calan said: \"We are not insisting on a separate state under any condition. What we are calling for very openly is a state model where a people's basic economic, cultural, social, and political rights are guaranteed\".\nWhilst this shift in the mid-nineties has been interpreted as one from a call for independence to an autonomous republic, some scholars have concluded that the PKK still maintains independence as the ultimate goal, but through society-building rather than state-building.\nThe PKK has in March 2016 also vowed to overthrow the Turkish government of Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan, through the 'Peoples' United Revolutionary Movement'.\nThe organization has adapted the new democratic confederalist views of its arrested leader, which aim to replace the United Nations, capitalism and nation state with the democratic confederalism which is described as a system of popularly elected administrative councils, allowing local communities to exercise autonomous control over their assets while linking to other communities via a network of confederal councils. Followers of \u00d6calan and members of the PKK are known, after his honorary name, as \"Apocu\" (Apo-ites) under his movement, \"Apoculuk\" (Apoism). The slogan \"Bij\u00ee Serok Apo\", which translates into Long Live leader Apo, is often chanted by his sympathizers.\nReligion.\nWhile the PKK has no known Islamist or practicing religious member among its leadership, it has supported the creation of religious organizations. It has also supported Friday prayers to be in Kurdish instead of the Turkish language. \u00d6calans early writings did not have a positive view of Islam, but later works had a more favorable tone, specifically regarding the revolutionary activity of Muhammad against an established order, as well as the role Islam can play in reconciliation between Kurds and Turks. The PKK was accused of having a presence in mosques in Germany to attract religious Muslim Kurds into their ranks. \u00d6calan had respect for Zoroastrianism and saw it as the first religion of the Kurds.\nOrganization.\nEven though the PKK had several prominent representatives in various countries such as Iraq, Iran, Syria, Russia, and Europe, Abdullah \u00d6calan stayed the unchallenged leader of the organization. Today, though serving life imprisonment, \u00d6calan is still considered the honorary leader and figurehead of the organization.\nMurat Karay\u0131lan led the organization from 1999 to 2013. In 2013 Cemil Bayik and Bes\u00ea Hozat assumed as the first joint leadership. Cemil Bayik was one of the core leaders since its foundation. The organization appointed \"Doctor Bahoz\", nom de guerre of Fehman Huseyin, a Syrian Kurd, in charge of the movement's military operations signifying the long-standing solidarity among Kurds from all parts of Kurdistan.\nPolitical and popular wing.\nIn 1985, the National Liberation Front of Kurdistan (, ERNK) was established by the PKK as its popular front wing, with the role of both creating propaganda for the party, and as an umbrella organization for PKK organizations in different segments of the Kurdish population, such as the peasantry, workers, youth, and women. It was dissolved in 1999, after the capture of Abdullah \u00d6calan.\nCultural branch.\nIn 1983, the Association of Artists (\"Hunerkom\") was established in Germany under the lead of the music group Koma Berxwedan. Its activities spread over Kurdish community centers in France, Germany and the Netherlands. In 1994 the Hunerkom was renamed into the 'Kurdish Academy of Culture and Arts'. Koma Berxwedans songs, which often were about the PKK resistance, were forbidden in Turkey and had to be smuggled over the border.\nArmed wing.\nThe PKK had an armed wing, originally formed in 1984 as the Kurdistan Freedom Brigades (, HRK), renamed to the People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (, ARGK) in 1986, and again renamed to the People's Defense Forces (, HPG) in 1999.\nWomen's armed wing.\nThe Free Women's Units of Star (, YJA-STAR) was established in 2004 as the women's armed wing of the PKK, emphasizing the issue of women's liberation.\nYouth wing.\nThe Civil Protections Units (YPS) is the successor of the Patriotic Revolutionary Youth Movement (YDG-H), the youth wing of the PKK. In February 2016 the ANF news agency reported the establishment of the women's branch of the YPS, the YPS-Jin.\nTraining camps.\nThe first training camps were established in 1982 in Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Iran and also in Beqaa Valley with the support of the Syrian government. In the third party congress of October 1986, the PKK established the Mahsum Korkmaz Academy in the Beqaa Valley. After Turkey pressured Syria to enforce its closure in 1992, the academy moved to Damascus. After the Iran-Iraq War and the Kurdish Civil War, the PKK moved all its camps to Northern Iraq in 1998. The PKK had also completely moved to Qandil Mountains from Beqaa Valley, under intensive pressure, after Syria expelled \u00d6calan and shut down all camps established in the region. At the time, Northern Iraq was experiencing a vacuum of control after the Gulf War-related Operation Provide Comfort. Instead of a single training camp that could be easily destroyed, the organization created many small camps. During this period the organization set up a fully functioning enclave with training camps, storage facilities, and reconnaissance and communications centers.\nIn 2007, the organization was reported to have camps strung out through the mountains that straddle the border between Turkey and Iraq, including in Sinaht, Haftanin, Kanimasi and Zap. The organization developed two types of camps. The mountain camps, located in Turkey, Iraq and Iran, are used as forward bases from which militants carry out attacks against Turkish military bases. The units deployed there are highly mobile and the camps have only minimal infrastructure. The other permanent camps, in the Qandil Mountains of Iraq, have more developed infrastructure\u2014including a field hospital, electricity generators and a large proportion of the PKK's lethal and non-lethal supplies. The organization is also using the Qandil mountain camps for its political activities. It was reported in 2004 that there was another political training camp in Belgium, evidence that the organization had used training camps in Europe for political and ideological training.\nPolitical representation.\nThe PKK could count on support from protests and demonstrations often directed against policies of the Turkish government. The PKK also fought a turf war against other radical Islamist Kurdish and Turkish organizations in Turkey. Turkish newspapers said that the PKK effectively used the prison force to gain appeal among the population which PKK has denied.\nAlleged political representation.\nThe organization had sympathizer parties in the Grand National Assembly of Turkey since the beginning of the early 1990s. The existence of direct links between the parties and the PKK have several times been a question in Turkish politics but also in Turkish and European courts. In sequence HEP/DEP/HADEP/DEHAP/DTP and the BDP, which later changed its name to Democratic Regions Party (DBP) on 11 July 2014, as well as the HDP and then DEM have been criticized of sympathizing with the PKK, since they have refused to brand it as a terrorist group.\nPolitical organizations established in Turkey are banned from propagating or supporting separatism. Several political parties supporting Kurdish rights have been reportedly banned on this pretext. The constitutional court stated to find direct links between the HEP/DEP/HADEP and the PKK. In 2007 against the DTP was initiated a closure case before the constitutional court which resulted in its closure on 11 December 2009. In 2021, against the HDP was also initiated a closure case during which the HDP is accused of being linked to the PKK. It is reported that Turkey has used the PKK as an excuse to close Kurdish political parties. Senior DTP leaders maintained that they support a unified Turkey within a democratic framework. In May 2007, the co-president of DTP Aysel Tu\u011fluk, published an article in \"Radikal\" in support of this policy.\nSeveral parliamentarians and other elected representatives have been jailed for speaking in Kurdish, carrying Kurdish colors or otherwise allegedly \"promoting separatism\", most famous among them being Leyla Zana. The European Court of Human Rights has condemned Turkey for arresting and executing Kurdish writers, journalists and politicians in numerous occasions. Between 1990 and 2006 Turkey was condemned to pay \u20ac33 million in damages in 567 cases. The majority of the cases were related to events that took place in southeastern Anatolia. In Iraq the political party Tevgera Azad\u00ee is said to have close to the PKK.\nReported links with Turkish intelligence.\nDuring the controversial Ergenekon trials in Turkey, allegations have been made that the PKK was linked to elements of the Turkish intelligence community.\n\u015eamil Tayyar, author and member of the ruling AK Party, said that \u00d6calan was released in 1972 after just three months' detention on the initiative of the National Intelligence Organization (Mill\u00ee \u0130stihbarat Te\u015fkilat\u0131, M\u0130T), and that his 1979 escape to Syria was aided by elements in M\u0130T. \u00d6calan has admitted making use of money given by the MIT to the PKK, which he says was provided as part of MIT efforts to control him.\nFormer police special forces member Ayhan \u00c7ark\u0131n said that the state, using the clandestine Ergenekon network, colluded with militant groups such as the PKK, Dev-Sol and Turkish Hezbollah, with the goal of profiting from the war.\nThe secret witness \"First Step\" testified that General Levent Ers\u00f6z, former head of JITEM, had frequent contact with PKK commander Cem\u00eel Bayik.\nHistory.\n1970s.\nDuring the 1970s, the PKK was involved in urban warfare. PKK tactics were based on ambush, sabotage, riots, protests, and demonstrations against the Turkish government. During these years, the PKK also fought a turf war against Kurdish and Turkish radical Islamist organisations in Turkey. Turkish newspapers said that the PKK effectively used the prison force to appeal to the general population, which the PKK has denied. In Turkey, this period was characterized by violent clashes that culminated in the 1980 military coup.\n1980s.\nThe 1980 Turkish coup d'\u00e9tat brought a difficult environment for the PKK, with members being executed, or being jailed. Other fled to Syria, where they were allowed to establish bases by Hafez al-Assad. The PKK also managed to come to agreements with the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), the Fatah of Yassir Arafat or the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front (PPSF) of Samir Ghawshah and also with Masoud Barzani's Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) in Iraqi Kurdistan which would facilitate their activities.\nIn a second phase, which followed the return of civilian rule in 1983, escalating attacks were made on the government's military and vital institutions all over the country. The objective was to destabilize the Turkish authority through a long, low-intensity confrontation. The establishment of the Kurdistan Liberation Force (\"H\u00eaz\u00ean Rizgariya Kurdistan\" \u2013 HRK) was announced on 15 August 1984. From 1984, the PKK became a paramilitary group with training camps in Turkish Kurdistan, Iraqi Kurdistan, Syria, Lebanon and France. The PKK received significant support from the Syrian government, which allowed it to maintain headquarters in Damascus, as well as some support from the governments of Iran, Iraq, and Libya. It began to launch attacks and bombings against Turkish governmental installations, the military, and various institutions of the state. The organization focused on attacks against Turkish military targets, although civilian targets were also hit.\nIn addition to skirmishing with Turkish military, police forces and local village guards, the PKK has conducted bomb attacks on government and police installations. Kidnapping and assassination against government and military officials and Kurdish tribal leaders who were named as puppets of the state were performed as well. Widespread acts of sabotage were continued from the first stage. Turkish sources had also stated that the PKK carried out kidnappings of tourists, primarily in Istanbul, but also at different resorts. However, the PKK had in its history arrested 4 tourists and released them all after warning them to not enter the war zone. The vast majority of PKK's actions have taken place mainly in Turkey against the Turkish military, although it has on occasions co-operated with other Kurdish nationalist paramilitary groups in neighboring states, such as Iraq and Iran. The PKK has also attacked Turkish diplomatic and commercial facilities across Western Europe in the late 1980s. In effect, the Turkish state has led a series of counter-insurgency operations against the PKK, accompanied by political measures, starting with an explicit denunciation of separatism in the 1982 Constitution, and including proclamation of the state of emergency in various PKK-controlled territories starting in 1983 (when the military relinquished political control to the civilians). This series of administrative reforms against terrorism included in 1985 the creation of village guard system by the then prime minister Turgut \u00d6zal. The establishment of the Village Guards resulted into a change of policy by the PKK, who reorganized its military wing at the 3rd party congress in October 1986 and made the joining of its military wing the Kurdistan People's Liberation Force compulsory.\n1990s.\nFrom the mid-1990s, the organization began to lose the upper hand in its operations as a consequence of a change of tactics by Turkey and Syria's steady abandonment of support for the group. The group also had lost its support from Saddam Hussein. As during the international operation Poised Hammer the collaboration between Barzani and Turkey embittered, the situation for the PKK became even more difficult, with Barzani condemning terrorist attacks by the PKK during a Newroz festival. At the same time, the Turkish government started to use more violent methods to counter Kurdish militants. After in 1992 a high-profile Turkish Delegation visited Damascus, the Syrian Government seemed to have ordered the closure of the PKK camp in the Bekaa valley and told the PKK to keep a low profile for some time.\nIn March 1993 \u00d6calan, in presence of PUK leader Jalal Talabani declared a unilateral ceasefire for a month in order to facilitate peace negotiations with Turkey. At an other press conference which took place on 16 April 1993 in Bar Elias, Lebanon, the ceasefire was prolonged indefinitely. To this event, the Kurdish politicians Jamal Talabani, Ahmet T\u00fcrk from the People's Labor Party (HEP) and also Kemal Burkay also attended and declared their support for the ceasefire. The ceasefire ended after the Turkish army killed 13 PKK members in Kulp, Diyarbakir province in May 1993.\nThe fighting and violence augmented significantly following the presidential elections of June 1993 after which Tansu \u00c7iller was elected prime minister. In December 1995 the PKK announced another unilateral ceasefire to give a new Government an opportunity to articulate a more peaceful approach towards the conflict. The government elected in December 1995 did not initiate negotiations and kept on evacuating Kurdish populated villages. Despite the violent approach of the Government to the ceasefire, it was upheld by the PKK until August 1996. Turkey was involved in serious human rights violations during the 1990s.\nFrom 1996 to 1999, the organization began to use suicide bombers, VBIED, and ambush attacks against military and police bases. The role of suicide bombers, especially female ones were encouraged and mythologised by giving them the status of a \"goddess of freedom\", and shown as role models for other women after their death. On 30July 1996, Zeynep K\u0131nac\u0131, a female PKK fighter, carried out the organization's first suicide attack, killing eight soldiers and injuring 29others. The attacks against civilians, especially Kurdish citizens who refused to cooperate with them, were also reported at the same years. On 20January 1999, a report published by HRW, stated that the PKK was reported to have been responsible for more than 768executions. The organization had also reportedly committed 25massacres, killing more than 300people. Over a hundred victims were children and women.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, in an effort to win increased support from the Kurdish peasantry, the PKK altered its leftist secular ideology to better accommodate and accept Islamic beliefs. The group also abandoned its previous strategy of attacking Kurdish and Turkish civilians who were against them, focusing instead on government and military targets. In its campaign, the organization has been criticized of carrying out atrocities against both Turkish and Kurdish civilians and its actions have been criticised by human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. Similar actions of the Turkish state have also been criticized by these same groups. The ECHR has investigated Turkey for executions of Kurdish civilians, torturing, forced displacements and massive arrests. In 1998 Turkey increased the pressure on Syria and ended its support for the PKK. The leader of the organization, Abdullah \u00d6calan, was captured, prosecuted and sentenced to death, but this was later commuted to life imprisonment as part of the government's seeking European Union membership.\n2000s.\nThe European Court of Human Rights has condemned Turkey for human rights abuses during the conflict. Some judgements are related to executions of Kurdish civilians, torturing, forced displacements, destroyed villages, arbitrary arrests, murdered and disappeared Kurdish journalists, activists and politicians. As a result of increasing Kurdish population and activism, the Turkish parliament began a controlled process of dismantling some anti-Kurdish legislation, using the term \"normalization\" or \"rapprochement\", depending on the sides of the issue. It partially relaxed the bans on broadcasting and publishing in the Kurdish language, although significant barriers remain. At the same time, the PKK was blacklisted in many countries. On 2 April 2004, the Council of the European Union added the PKK to its list of terrorist organizations. Later that year, the US Treasury moved to freeze assets of branches of the organization. The PKK went through a series of changes, and in 2003 it ended the unilateral truce declared when \u00d6calan was captured.\nCease fire 1999\u20132004.\nThe third phase (1999\u20132012), after the capture of \u00d6calan, PKK reorganized itself and new leaders were chosen by its members. The organization made radical changes to survive, such as changing its ideology and setting new goals. During the 7th Party congress in January 2000, the former military wing the Peoples Liberation Army of Kurdistan (\"Art\u00ea\u015fa Rizgariya Gel\u00ea Kurdistan\" \u2013 ARGK) was succeeded by the People's Defense Forces (\"H\u00eaz\u00ean Parastina Gel \u2013\" HPG) and also declared that it wanted to aim for a democratic solution for the conflict. At the same time, the PKK continued to recruit new members and sustain its fighting force.\nAccording to Paul White, in April 2002, the PKK changed its name to the \"Kurdistan Freedom and Democracy Congress (KADEK)\" and proclaimed a commitment to nonviolent activities. A PKK/KADEK spokesman stated that its armed wing, the HPG, would not disband or surrender its weapons for reasons of self-defense. This statement by the PKK/KADEK avowing it would not lay down its arms underscores that the organization maintained its capability to carry out armed operations. PKK/KADEK established a new ruling council in April, its membership virtually identical to the PKK's Presidential Council. The PKK/KADEK did not conduct an armed attack in 2002; however, the group periodically issued veiled threats that it will resume violence if the conditions of its imprisoned leader are not improved and its forces are attacked by Turkish military, and it continued its military training like before.\nIn November 2003, another congress was held which lead to renaming itself as the \"People's Congress of Kurdistan\" or \"Kongra-Gel (KGK)\". The stated purpose of the organizational change was to leave behind nationalistic and state-building goals, in favor of creating a political structure to work within the existing nation-states. Through further internal conflict during this period, it is reported that 1500 militants left the organization, along with many of the leading reformists, including Nizamettin Ta\u015f and Abdullah \u00d6calan's younger brother Osman \u00d6calan.\nSecond insurgency 2004\u20132006.\nKongra-Gel called off the cease-fire at the start of June 2004, saying Turkish security forces had refused to respect the truce. Turkish security forces were increasingly involved in clashes with Kurdish separatist fighters. Ankara stated that about 2,000 Kurdish fighters had crossed into Turkey from hideouts in mountainous northern Iraq in early June 2004.\nWhile the fight against the Turkish security forces between 2004 and 2010 continued, the PKK and its ancillary organizations continued to enjoy substantial support among the Kurds of Turkey. In 2005, the original name of the organization \"PKK\" was restored, while the Kongra-Gel became the legislature of the Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK). Turkey's struggle against the Kongra-Gel/PKK was marked by increased clashes across Turkey in 2005. In the southeast, Turkish security forces were active in the struggle against the Kongra-Gel/PKK. There were bombings and attempted bombings in resort areas in western Turkey and Istanbul, some of which resulted in civilian casualties. A radical Kurdish separatist group calling itself the Kurdish Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for many of these attacks. The TAK is a rival to PKK that since 2006 repeatedly damaged the PKK's efforts to negotiate cease-fires and unlike the PKK, is seeking to establish independent Kurdistan. In 2006 alone, the PKK claimed over 500 victims. On 1 October 2006, the PKK reportedly declared a unilateral cease-fire that slowed the intensity and pace of its attacks, but attacks continued in response to Turkish security forces significant counterinsurgency operations, especially in the southeast.\nCease-fire and renewed conflict.\nOn 13 April 2009, the PKK declared a cease fire after the DTP won 99 municipalities and negotiations were spoken about. The AKP first spoke of the \"Kurdish Opening\", then it was renamed in the \"Democratic Opening\" to appease nationalist interests and then the \"National Unity Project\".\nOn 21 October 2011 Iranian foreign minister Ali Akbar Salehi announced Iran would co-operate with Turkey in some military operations against the PKK.\n2012 was the most violent year in the armed conflict between the Turkish State and PKK since 1999. At least 541 individuals lost their lives as a result of the clashes including 316 militants and 282 soldiers. In contrast, 152 individuals lost their lives in 2009 until the Turkish government initiated negotiations with the PKK leadership. The failure of this negotiations contributed to violence that were particularly intensified in 2012. The PKK encouraged by the rising power of the Syrian Kurds increased its attacks in the same year.\nDuring the Syrian Civil War, the Kurds in Syria have established control over their own region with the help of the PKK as well as with support from the Kurdistan Regional Government in Erbil, under President Masoud Barzani.\n2010s\u20132020s.\n2013\u20132015 peace process.\nIn late 2012, the Turkish government began secret talks with \u00d6calan for a ceasefire. To facilitate talks, government officials transmitted letters between \u00d6calan in jail to PKK leaders in northern Iraq. On 21 March 2013, a ceasefire was announced. On 25 April, it was announced that the PKK would leave Turkey. Commander Murat Karay\u0131lan remarked \"As part of ongoing preparations, the withdrawal will begin on May 8, 2013. Our forces will use their right to retaliate in the event of an attack, operation or bombing against our withdrawing guerrilla forces and the withdrawal will immediately stop.\" The semi-autonomous Kurdish region of Iraq welcomed the idea of refugees from its northern neighbor. The BDP held meetings across the region to state the pending withdrawal to concerned citizens. \"The 8th of May is a day we both anticipate and fear,\" said party leader Pinar Yilmaz. \"We don't trust the government at all. Many people here are afraid that once the guerrillas are gone, the Turkish military will crack down on us again.\"\nThe withdrawal began as planned with groups of fighters crossing the border from southeastern Turkey to northern Iraq. Iraqi leadership in Baghdad, however, declared that it would not accept armed groups into its territory. \"The Iraqi government welcomes any political and peaceful settlement\", read an official statement. \"[But] it does not accept the entry of armed groups to its territories that can be used to harm Iraq's security and stability.\" The prospect of armed Kurdish forces in northern Iraq threatens to increase tensions between the region and Baghdad who are already at odds over certain oil producing territory. PKK spokesman Ahmet Deniz sought to ease concerns stating the plan would boost democracy. \"The [peace] process is not aimed against anyone,\" he said \"and there is no need for concerns that the struggle will take on another format and pose a threat to others.\"\nIt is estimated that between 1,500 and 2,000 PKK fighters resided in Turkey at the time. The withdrawal process was expected to take several months even if Iraq does not intervene to try to stop it. On 14 May 2013, the first groups of 13 male and female fighters entered Iraq's Heror area near the Metina mountain after leaving Turkey. They carried with them Kalashnikov assault rifles, light machine guns and rocket-propelled grenade launchers before a welcoming ceremony.\nOn 29 July 2013, the PKK issued an ultimatum in saying that the peace deal would fail if reforms were not begun to be implemented within a month. In October, Cemil Bayik warned that unless Turkey resumed the peace process, the PKK would resume operations to defend itself against it. He also criticized Turkey of waging a proxy war against Kurds during the Syrian Civil War by supporting other extremist rebels who were fighting them. As part of the civil war, many PKK fighters laid down arms in Turkey and moved to Syria, facilitating the creation of a progressive Kurdish government in Rojava.\nIraqi Kurdistan President Masoud Barzani backed the initiative saying, alongside Erdogan: \"This is a historic visit for me ... We all know it would have been impossible to speak here 15 or 20 years ago. Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan has taken a very brave step towards peace. I want my Kurdish and Turkish brothers to support the peace process.\"\n2014 action against Islamic State and renewed tensions in Turkey.\nThe PKK engaged the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) forces in Syria in mid-July 2014 as part of the Syrian Civil War. In August the PKK engaged IS in Northern Iraq and pressured the Government of Turkey to take a stand against IS. PKK forces helped tens of thousands of Yazidis escape an encircled Mount Sinjar. In September 2014, during the Siege of Koban\u00ee, some PKK fighters engaged with Islamic State forces in Syria who were attacking Kurdish city Kobane, which resulted in conflicts with Turks on the border and an end to a cease-fire that had been in place over a year. The PKK said Turkey was supporting ISIS. The PKK participated in many offensives against ISIS in Iraq and Syria.\nA number of Turkish Kurds rallied in large-scale street protests, demanding that the government in Ankara take more forceful action to combat IS and to enable Kurdish militants already engaged against IS to more freely move and resupply. These protests included a PKK call for its supporters to turn out. Clashes between police and protesters killed at least 31 people. The Turkish government continued to restrict PKK-associated fighters' movement across its borders, arresting 260 People's Protection Units fighters who were moving back into Turkey. On 14 October, Turkish Air Force fighter-bombers attacked PKK positions in the vicinity of Daglica, Hakkari Province.\nTurkish military statements stated that the bombings were in response to PKK attacks on a Turkish military outpost in the area. The Firat news agency, which Al Jazeera describes as \"close to the PKK\", stated that Turkish forces had been shelling the PKK positions for days beforehand and that the PKK action had itself been retaliation for those artillery strikes. The PKK had already reported several Turkish attacks against their troops months before Turkish bombing started.\nJuly 2015 \u2013 March 2025: Third insurgency.\nIn the months before the parliamentary election of 2015, as the \"Kurdish-focused\" HDP's likelihood of crossing the 10% threshold for entry into the government seemed more likely, Erdogan gave speeches and made comments that repudiated the settlement process and the existence of a Kurdish problem and refusing to recognize the HDP as having any role to play despite their long participation as intermediaries. These announcements increased distrust of the government's good faith among Kurdish leaders. In July 2015, Turkey finally became involved in the war against ISIL. While they were doing so, they decided to bomb PKK targets in Iraq. The bombings came a few days after PKK was suspected of assassinating two Turkish police officers in Ceylanp\u0131nar, \u015eanl\u0131urfa, criticized by the PKK of having links with ISIS after the 2015 Suru\u00e7 bombing. The PKK has blamed Turkey for breaking the truce by bombing the PKK in 2014 and 2015 continuously.\nIn August 2015, the PKK announced that they would accept another ceasefire with Turkey only under US guarantees. The leadership of Iraqi Kurdistan has condemned the Turkish airstrikes in its autonomous region in the north of Iraq.\nThe number of casualties since 23 July was stated by Turkish government to be 150 Turkish officers and over 2,000 Kurdish rebels killed (by September). In December 2015, Turkish military operation in southeastern Turkey has killed hundreds of civilians, displaced hundreds of thousands and caused massive destruction in residential areas.\nIn March 2016, the PKK helped to launch the Peoples' United Revolutionary Movement with nine other Kurdish and Turkish revolutionary leftist, socialist and communist groups (including the TKP/ML, THKP-C/MLSPB, MKP, TKEP/L, T\u0130KB, DKP, DK and MLKP) with the aim of overthrowing the Turkish government of Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan.\nIn November 2022, an explosion took place on \u0130stiklal Avenue in Istanbul's Beyo\u011flu district that left at least six people dead and 81 injured. Minister of Interior S\u00fcleyman Soylu formally accused the PKK of being behind the attack and announced the arrest of the bomber who had alleged links to the organization and twenty-one others.\nOn 21 November 2022, at approximately 11:00 TSI, a mortar attack targeted a school, two houses, and a truck in the Karkam\u0131\u015f district of Gaziantep. The assault claimed the lives of a 5-year-old boy and a 22-year-old woman, while 6\u201310 individuals sustained injuries.\nIn October 2024, the PKK claimed responsibility for a deadly attack on Turkish Aerospace Industries (TUSA\u015e) headquarters, resulting in 5 deaths, including four civilians, and 22 injuries. Following this attack, the Turkish air force conducted airstrikes targeting positions of the PKK in northern Syria and Iraq. The Turkish defense ministry reported the destruction of 32 targets during these operations.\nIn November 2024, British police arrested seven people in London as part of a counter-terrorism investigation linked to the PKK. Searches were carried out at eight locations, including the Kurdish Community Centre, which would be closed for up to two weeks. Authorities assured the public there was no imminent threat and informed the Kurdish community that the operation was aimed at ensuring safety.\nDisarming and disbanding as part of peace effort.\nIn February 2025, PKK leader Abdullah \u00d6calan urged all members of the group to lay down arms and dissolve the organisation for good. In a statement read out by the deputies of the pro-Kurdish Peoples' Equality and Democracy Party (DEM), \u00d6calan called on the PKK to convene its congress, lay down its arms and dissolve itself, arguing that the party \"has completed its life like its counterparts and necessitated its dissolution\". He also called for an alliance between Turks and Kurds and for peaceful coexistence, quoting the positive political approaches of President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan and calls for peace by Nationalist Movement Party Devlet Bah\u00e7eli.\nBetween 5\u20137 May, the PKK's 12th Party Congress convened. The organisation announced its own dissolution on 12 May 2025. The decision was appreciated by Turkish authorities. President Erdo\u011fan characterised it as \"important\", stating that they have now \"crossed another critical threshold\" toward the goal of a terror-free Turkey. Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan described the PKK's self-dissolution as \"a historic and important decision\", saying that \"practical steps will be taken after this\".\nDisarmament started with a symbolic weapons destruction ceremony in northern Iraq on 11 July 2025.\nStatus in Turkey.\nIn Turkey, anything which could be perceived as a support of the PKK is deemed unsuitable to be shown to the public. Turkey views the demand for education in Kurdish language or the teaching of the Kurdish language as supporting terrorist activities by the PKK. The fact that both the HDP and the PKK support education in Kurdish language was included in the indictment in the Peoples' Democratic closure case. In January 2016, the Academics for Peace who signed a declaration in support of peace in the Kurdish\u2013Turkish conflict were labelled and prosecuted for \"spreading terrorist propaganda\" on behalf of the PKK. In November 2020, a playground for children in Istanbul was dismantled after the municipality decided its design too closely resembled the symbol of the PKK. Politicians of pro-Kurdish like the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) or the HDP were often prosecuted and sentenced to prison term for their alleged support of the PKK. The possession of \"Devran\", a book authored by the political prisoner Selahattin Demirta\u015f, was viewed as an evidence for a membership in a terrorist organization in 2019 because according to the prosecution it described events involving the PKK.\nStatus in Germany.\nThe PKK could count with a strong support from the diaspora in Germany where the Hunerkom, its cultural branch was based. During the 1990s, the PKK was able to organize blockades of highways and its sympathizers self-immolated for which the PKK official Cemil Bayik apologized in 2015 after sympathizers of the PKK launched several waves of attacks against Turkish institutions in Germany. The PKK's activities were banned by the Minister of the Interior Manfred Kanther in November 1993. In a meeting between German MP Heinrich Lummer of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) and Abdullah \u00d6calan in Damascus in 1996, \u00d6calan assured Lummer that it was the PKKs aim to find a peaceful solution for their activities in Germany. The PKK also demanded that it should be recognized as a legitimate entity and not as a terrorist organization in Germany, a demand to which Germany did not accede to. In Germany several Kurdish entities such as the Association of Students from Kurdistan (YXK), the Mesopotamia publishing house or the Mir Multimedia music label were deemed to be close to the PKK. The latter two were eventually closed down by Interior Minister Horst Seehofer who accused them of acting as a forefront of the PKK and to support the PKKs activities in Europe with its revenue. The Kurdish satellite channel Roj TV was also accused of being a branch of the PKK by Interior Minister Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble and had to end its activities in Germany in 2008. The PKK has received political support for a lift of its prohibition by the Die Linke and its party leader Bernd Riexinger in 2016.\nTactics.\nThe organization said that its violent actions against the government forces were used by \"the need to defend Kurds in the context of what it calls as the massive cultural suppression of Kurdish identity (including the 1983 Turkish Language Act Ban) and cultural rights carried out by other governments of the region\". The areas in which the group operates are generally mountainous rural areas and dense urban areas. The mountainous terrain offers an advantage to members of the PKK by allowing them to hide in a network of caves. In 1995 the PKK declared that it would comply with Geneva Conventions of 1949 and also its amendment of 1977. The PKK divides the combat area within Turkey into several regions which comprise a number of Turkish provinces, of which each one is headed by its commander. A province is further also divided into several sub regions, in which a number of fighting battalions of between 100 and 170 militants are stationed. The battalions are again divided into companies of 60 to 70 fighters of which at least one needs to constituted by female and two by male militants.\nCriticism.\nThe PKK has faced condemnation by some countries and human rights organizations for the killing of teachers and civil servants, using suicide bombers, and recruiting child soldiers. According to the TEPAV, an Ankara-based think tank, a survey conducted using data from 1,362 PKK fighters who lost their lives between 2001 and 2011 estimated that 42% of the militants were recruited under 18, with roughly 9% under 15 at the time of recruitment. In 2013 the PKK stated it would prohibit the recruitment of children under the age of 16 as well as keep 16\u201318 year olds away from combat. Human Rights Watch has documented 29 cases of children being recruited into the HPG (the PKK's armed wing) and the YB\u015e since 2013. Some children were recruited under the age of 15, constituting a war crime according to international law.\nRecruitment.\nSince its foundation, the PKK has recruited new fighters mainly from Turkey, but also from Syria, Iraq, Iran, and Western countries using various recruitment methods, such as using nationalist propaganda and its gender equality ideology. At its establishment, it included a small number of female fighters but over time the number increased significantly and by the early 1990s, 30 percent of its 17,000 armed fighting forces were women. After the third party congress in 1986 or in 1989, the PKK's armed wing issued a so-called \"Compulsory Military Service Law\", which authorized the forcible recruitment of young men. The law provoked disagreement within the party, and in 1990 it was suspended. The PKK has had to temporarily suspend recruitment several times since 1991, as it had difficulties providing training to the large number of volunteers who wanted to join its ranks.\nBy 2020, 40% of the fighting force were women. In much of rural Turkey, where male-dominated tribal structures, and conservative Muslim norms were commonplace, the organization increased its number of members through the recruitment of women from different social structures and environments, also from families that migrated to several European countries after 1960 as guest workers. It was reported by a Turkish university that 88% of the subjects initially reported that equality was a key objective, and that they joined the organization based on this statement. In 2007, approximately 1,100 of 4,500\u20135,000 total members were women.\nAccording to the Jamestown Foundation, in the early years of the PKK existence, it recruited young women by abducting them. Families would also encourage family members to join the PKK in order to avenge relatives killed by the Turkish army.\nWeapons.\nIn July 2007, the weapons captured between 1984 and 2007 from the PKK operatives and their origins published by the Turkish General Staff indicates that the operatives erased some of the serial numbers from their weapons. The total number of weapons and the origins for traceable ones were:\nResources.\nFunding.\nParties and concerts are organized by branch groups. According to the European Police Office (EUROPOL), the organization collects money from its members, using labels like 'donations' and 'membership fees' which are seen as a fact extortion and illegal taxation by the authorities. There are also indications that the organization is actively involving in money laundering, illicit drugs and human trafficking, as well as illegal immigration inside and outside the EU for funding and running its activities.\nInvolvement in drug trafficking.\nPKK's involvement in drug trafficking has been documented since the 1990s. A report by Interpol published in 1992 states that the PKK, along with nearly 178 Kurdish organizations were suspected of illegal drug trade involvement. Members of the PKK have been designated narcotics traffickers by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. The Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, Germany's domestic security agency, echoed this report in its 2011 Annual Report on the Protection of the Constitution, stating that despite the U.S. Department of Treasury designation, there was \"no evidence that the organizational structures of the PKK are directly involved in drug trafficking\".\nOn 14 October 2009, the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) targeted the senior leadership of the PKK, designating Murat Karay\u0131lan, the head of the PKK, and high-ranking members Ali Riza Altun and Z\u00fcbeyir Aydar as foreign narcotics traffickers at the request of Turkey. On 20 April 2011, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced the designation of PKK founders Cem\u00eel Bayik and Duran Kalkan and other high-ranking members as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers (SDNT) pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act). Pursuant to the Kingpin Act, the designation freezes any assets the designees may have under U.S. jurisdiction and prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with these individuals. On 1 January 2012, the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) announced the designation of Moldovan-based individuals Zeyneddin Geleri, Cerkez Akbulut, and Omer Boztepe as specially designated narcotics traffickers for drug trafficking on behalf of the PKK in Europe. According to the OFAC, Zeynedding Geleri was identified as a high-ranking member of the PKK while two others were activists. The OFAC stated that the drug trafficking is still one of the organization's criminal activities it uses to obtain weapons and materials.\nAccording to research conducted by journalist Aliza Marcus, the PKK accepted the support of smugglers in the region. Aliza Marcus stated that some of those Kurdish smugglers who were involved in the drug trade, either because they truly believed in the PKK\u2014or because they thought it a good business practice (avoid conflicts)\u2014frequently donated money to the PKK rebels. However, according to Aliza Marcus, it does not seem that the PKK, as an organization, directly produced or traded in narcotics.\nThe EUROPOL which has monitored the organization's activities inside the EU has also claimed the organization's involvement in the trafficking of drugs.\nHuman resources.\nIn 2008, according to information provided by the Intelligence Resource Program of the Federation of American Scientists the strength of the organization in terms of human resources consists of approximately 4,000 to 5,000 militants of whom 3,000 to 3,500 are located in northern Iraq. With the new wave of fighting from 2015 onwards, observers said that active support for the PKK had become a \"mass phenomenon\" in majority ethnic Kurdish cities in the southeast of the Republic of Turkey, with large numbers of local youth joining PKK-affiliated local militant groups.\nAlleged international support.\nAt the height of its campaign, it is alleged that the organization received support from a range of countries. According to Turkey, those countries the PKK previously or currently received support from include: Greece, Cyprus, Iran, Iraq, Russia, Syria, Finland, Sweden and the United States. The level of support given has changed throughout this period. Between the PKK and the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia (ASALA) a cooperation has been agreed on in April 1980 in Sidon, Lebanon.\nVarious PKK leaders, including Hidir Yalcin, Riza Altun, Zubeyir Aydar, and Ali Haydar Kaytan all lived in Europe and moved freely. The free movement was achieved by strong ties with influential persons. Danielle Mitterrand, the wife of the former President of France Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, had active connections during the 1990s with elements of the organization's leadership that forced a downgrade in relationships between the two states. After harboring Ali Riza Altun, Austria arranged a flight to Iraq for him, a suspected key figure with an Interpol arrest warrant on his name. Turkish foreign minister Abdullah G\u00fcl summoned the Austrian ambassador and condemned Austria's action. On 30 September 1995, while \u00d6calan was in Syria, Damascus initiated contact with high-ranking German CDU MP Heinrich Lummer and German intelligence officials. Sedat La\u00e7iner, of the Turkish think tank ISRO, says that US support of the PKK undermines the US war on terror.\nDesignation as a terrorist group.\nThe PKK has been designated as a terrorist group by a number of governments and organizations. It is often referred as \"separatist terrorist organization\" () by the Turkish authorities.\nIn the 1980s, the PKK was labeled as a terror organization by the Swedish government of Olof Palme. After Palme was murdered in 1986, the PKK was considered a potential suspect \u2013 however, this theory was soon abandoned and in September 2020, the state prosecutor Krister Petersson announced he believed he had found the murderer and closed the case as that person was no longer alive.\nIn 1994, Germany prohibited the activities of the PKK.\nThe PKK has been designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization by the US State Department since 1997. In 2016, US Vice-president Joe Biden called the PKK a terrorist group \"plain and simple\" and compared it to the Islamic State. In 2018, the United States also offered a $12\u00a0million reward for information on three PKK leaders.\nFirst designated as a terror organization by the European Union in 2002, the PKK was ordered to be removed from the EU terror list on 3 April 2008 by the Court of First Instance on the grounds that the EU had failed to give a proper justification for listing it in the first place. However, EU officials dismissed the ruling, stating that the PKK would remain on the list regardless of the legal decision. The EU in 2011 renewed its official listing of the PKK as group or entity subject to \"specific [EU] measures to combat terrorism\" under its Common Foreign and Security Policy. In 2018, Prakken d'Oliveira Human Rights Lawyers reported that the PKK won another case against its listing as a terror organization by the EU, but the PKK was kept on the list as the ruling only concerned the years from 2014 until 2017.\nThe PKK is also a Proscribed Organisation in the United Kingdom under the Terrorism Act 2000; the then British Prime Minister Theresa May used the phrase \"Kurdish terrorism\" in 2018.\nFrance prosecutes Kurdish-French activists and bans organizations connected to the PKK on terrorism-related charges, having listed the group as a terrorist organization since 1993. However, French courts often refuse to extradite captured individuals criticized of PKK connections to Turkey due to technicalities in French law, frustrating Turkish authorities.\nThe following other countries and organizations have listed or otherwise labelled the PKK in an official capacity as a terrorist organization:\nAustralia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Czech Republic, Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, New Zealand, Spain, Syria and Iraq.\nIn May 2022, Finland and Sweden submitted applications to join the NATO alliance as a response to the invasion of Ukraine, Turkey has opposed their admission to the alliance unless they crack down on local PKK, Democratic Union Party (Syria) (PYD) and People's Defense Units (YPG) networks. On 28 June, the first day of the 2022 NATO summit in Madrid, the Turkish delegation softened their opposition to Finland and Sweden's NATO membership applications and signed a tripartite memorandum addressing Turkey's concerns regarding arms exports and Kurdish relations. Finland and Sweden affirmed that the PKK is \"a terrorist organization\". On 30 June 2022, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan said that Sweden made a \"promise\" to extradite \"73 terrorists\" wanted by Turkey.\nRefusal to designate PKK as a terrorist group.\nRussia has long ignored Turkish pressure to ban the PKK. The government of Switzerland has also rejected Turkish demands to blacklist the PKK. Switzerland does not have a list of terrorist organizations, but it has taken its own measures to monitor and restrict the group's activities on Swiss soil, including banning the collection of funds for the group in November 2008.\nIn 2020, the supreme court of Belgium ruled that the PKK was not a terrorist organization, instead labeling the group as an actor in an internal armed conflict. Following this, the Belgian Government announced that the ruling would not affect the current designation of the PKK as a terrorist organization.\nSee also.\nRelated and associated organizations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69681", "revid": "380940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69681", "title": "Numbering of the people", "text": ""}
{"id": "69682", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69682", "title": "Bastille Saint-Antoine", "text": ""}
{"id": "69683", "revid": "46376176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69683", "title": "Nose-jewel", "text": "Jewelry worn on or through the nose\nThese nose piercing ornaments are attached through a piercing in the nostril or septum.\nMiddle East and North Africa.\nEarliest known reference to nose ornament comes from the Middle East dating back to 4,000 years ago. In the book of Genesis, Abraham\u2019s servant gifts young Rebekah an array of jewellery as a marriage offering on behalf of her future husband, Isaac. Among the gifts and trinkets was a golden ring called a \u201cShanf\u201d also known as a nose ring. Ezekiel 16:11-14 refers to personification of Jerusalem as a woman who was given a golden crown, earrings and a nose ring by the God; \"And I put a ring on your nose and earrings in your ears and a beautiful crown on your head. Thus you were adorned with gold and silver, and your clothing was of fine linen and embroidered cloth.\". \nIn ancient Carthage, septum piercings were worn by both Carthaginian men and women. These were commonly made of gold, some examples in silver are also known. \nAmericas.\nIn Americas, nose piercing can be dated through pre-Columbian and colonial times throughout North and South America. Numerous status ceremonies are carved into the North Temple of the Great Ballcourt at Chichin Itza. One of these processions is a nose piercing ceremony that is depicted on the North Temple vault. Rather than depicting sacrifice, the common theme of the temple's carvings, the central figure is shown aiming what most likely is a bone awl to pierce the figure's nose. The ritual of the nostril piercing signified the elevated status of this figure. His place in society is symbolized by his nose piercing. Similarly, nose piercing signified elevated status in Colonial Highland Maya. The two prominent lords, Ajpop and the Ajpop K'ama, of the K'iche were pierced through the nose at the pinnacle of an elaborate ceremony. Similar to a crowning of a king, the nose piercing was to show their newfound leadership of the K'iche.\nIn Yucat\u00e1n, explorers Oviedo y Valdes, Herrera y Tordesillas, Diego de Landa, and Jeronimo de Aguilar all noted different nose piercings that they observed in Mayans and other cultures in Yucat\u00e1n in general. They reported that different stones could have different meaning within each civilization. In addition, they believed the different placement and size and shape of beads could denote the specific society the person came from. The Toltecs were believed to have piercings through the ala of the nose that was adorned with a bead. While the Mayans pierced through the septum and consisted of an oblong bead rather than a spherical.\nSouth Asia.\nThe nose ring is called a Nath (, ) in various local languages and was introduced around the 9th and 10th centuries becoming a symbol of a woman's marital status. The nath in its full form contains a jeweled ring with a chain connected to a hairpiece.\nIn South Asia, nose piercings were introduced as early as 10th century and by 15th century they were common across South Asia. Historian A.S Altekar suggests nose piercings does not find mention in Indian literature before 8th century and was likely introduced after this period. According to historian Benoytosh Bhattacharya the 12th century text Manasollasa mentions various ornaments worn by women but does not mention nose ring, and was likely introduced by Mohammadans after the 12th century. Jewelry historian Oppi Untracht suggests nose piercings were introduced during 13th century by Muslims and was quickly established over the years.\nThe \"nath\" (nose jewel) displays economic status of the wearer; made of pearls, sapphire and kundan while others wore those made of silver from the 15th century onwards. The ornament became quite popular during the 17th and 18th centuries. British museum contains large collection of golden nose ring jewels from various parts of India, Nepal and Pakistan donated by researcher Dr. Waltraud Ganguly.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69684", "revid": "45720091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69684", "title": "List of Catalan-language poets", "text": "This is a list of poets and writers writing in the Catalan language."}
{"id": "69685", "revid": "31031784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69685", "title": "Nicolaism", "text": "Early Christian sect mentioned twice in the Book of Revelation\nNicolaism (also called Nicholairufus, Nicolaitism, Nicolationism or Nicolaitanism) was an early Christian sect mentioned twice in the Book of Revelation of the New Testament. The adherents were called Nicolaitans, Nicolaitanes, or Nicolaites. They were considered heretical by the mainstream early Christian Church. According to Revelation 2:6 &amp; 15, they were known in the cities of Ephesus and Pergamum. In this chapter, the church at Ephesus is endorsed for \"[hating] the works of the Nicolaites, which I also hate\"; and the church in Pergamos is rebuked: \"So thou hast also some [worshiping in their midst] who hold the teaching of the Nicolaites\". In the original Greek, they are called, in genitive, (\"Nikola\u00eft\u014dn\").\nSeveral of the early Church Fathers mentioned this group, including Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Hippolytus, Epiphanius, and Theodoret, stating that Nicolas the Deacon, one of the Seven Deacons, was the author of the heresy and the sect. Other scholars, both ancient and modern, have questioned this connection and proposed alternative theories, and due to the scanty evidence, there is no consensus on their origin, beliefs or practices.\nBiblical Passages.\nThe New Testament mentions the Nicolaites in the second chapter of the Book of Revelation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yet this is to your credit [the church of Ephesus]: you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I [Jesus] also hate.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But I have a few things against you [the church of Pergamos]: you have some there who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the people of Israel, so that they would eat food sacrificed to idols and practice fornication. So you also have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans. Repent then. If not, I will come to you soon and make war against them with the sword of my mouth.\u2014\u200a\nChurch Fathers.\nSeveral Church Fathers attribute the term \"Nicolaitans\" as deriving from Nicolaus (\u039d\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03bb\u03b1\u03bf\u03c2), a native of Antioch and one of the first Seven Deacons mentioned in . The nature of the link between Nicolaus and Nicolaitans has not been definitively proven.\nSome scholars believe that the Nicolaitans came from another Nicolas and that Nicolas the Deacon did not become apostate.\nIrenaeus.\nIrenaeus was of the opinion that Nicolas the Deacon was their founder.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Nicolaitanes are the followers of that Nicolas who was one of the seven first ordained to the diaconate by the apostles. They lead lives of unrestrained indulgence. The character of these men is very plainly pointed out in the Apocalypse of John, [when they are represented] as teaching that it is a matter of indifference to practice adultery, and to eat things sacrificed to idols.\u2014\u200a\nHe held that the Gospel of John was written to counter the teachings of Cerinthus, which he believed was influenced by the Nicolaitans (in \"Adversus Haereses\" III. xi. 1; I. xxvi. 3). Later, Augustine of Hippo ascribed to them Cerinthian doctrines concerning the creation of the world (in his \"De haeresibus ad Quodvultdeum\", v).\nEpiphanius.\nEpiphanius relates some details of the life of Nicolas the deacon, and describes him as gradually sinking into the grossest impurity, and becoming the originator of the Nicolaitans and other libertine Gnostic sects:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Nicolas] had an attractive wife, and had refrained from intercourse as though in imitation of those whom he saw to be devoted to God. He endured this for a while but in the end could not bear to control his incontinence... But because he was ashamed of his defeat and suspected that he had been found out, he ventured to say, \"Unless one copulates every day, he cannot have eternal life.\"\u2014\u200a\nHippolytus of Rome shared the opinion that Nicolas became a heresiarch (in \"Refutation of All Heresies\" vii. 24).\nJerome.\nJerome believed the account of Nicolas succumbing to heresy, at least to some extent. This was also the opinion of the unknown Christian author (writing around 435) of \"Praedestinatus\" (in i. 4.), as well as other writers in the 4th century.\nClement of Alexandria.\nNot all early writers accepted the connection between the Nicolaitans and Nicolas the Deacon, saying that the Nicolaitans are \"falsely so called\" (\u03c8\u03b5\u03c5\u03b4\u03ce\u03bd\u03c5\u03bc\u03bf\u03b9). This negative view of Nicolas is irreconcilable with the traditional account of his character given by Clement of Alexandria, an earlier writer than Epiphanius. He states that Nicolas led a chaste life and brought up his children in purity. He describes a certain occasion when Nicolas had been sharply reproved by the apostles as a jealous husband, and he repelled the charge by offering to allow his wife to become the wife of any other person. Clement also writes that Nicolas was in the habit of repeating a saying which is ascribed to the apostle Matthias, \"that it is our duty to fight against the flesh and to abuse\" (\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03c7\u03c1\u1fc6\u03c3\u03b8\u03b1\u03b9) \"it\". His words were perversely interpreted by the Nicolaitans as authority for their immoral practices. Theodoret repeats the foregoing statement of Clement in his account of the sect, and charges the Nicolaitans with false dealing in borrowing the name of the deacon.\nClement (in \"Stromata\" 3, 2) does condemn heretics whose views on sex he sees as licentious, but he does not associate them with Nicolas:\nBut the followers of Carpocrates and Epiphanes think that wives should be common property. Through them the worst calumny has become current against the Christian name. ...he [Epiphanes] says [in his book \"Concerning Righteousness\"] that the idea of Mine and Thine came into existence through the [Mosaic] laws so that the earth and money were no longer put to common use. And so also with marriage. 'For God has made vines for all to use in common, since they are not protected against sparrows and a thief; and similarly corn and the other fruits. But the abolition, contrary to divine law, of community of use and equality begat the thief of domestic animals and fruits. He brought female to be with male and in the same way united all animals. He thus showed righteousness to be a universal fairness and equality. But those who have been born in this way have denied the universality which is the corollary of their birth and say, \"Let him who has taken one woman keep her,\" whereas all alike can have her, just as the other animals do.' After this, which is quoted word for word, he again continues in the same spirit as follows: 'With a view to the permanence of the race, he has implanted in males a strong and ardent desire which neither law nor custom nor any other restraint is able to destroy. For it is God's decree. ...Consequently one must understand the saying \"Thou shalt not covet\" as if the lawgiver was making a jest, to which he added the even more comic words \"thy neighbor's goods\". For he himself who gave the desire to sustain the race orders that it is to be suppressed, though he removes it from no other animals. And by the words \"thy neighbor's wife\" he says something even more ludicrous, since he forces what should be common property to be treated as a private possession.'\nClement asks: \nAnd how can this man still be reckoned among our number when he openly abolishes both law and gospel by these words...Carpocrates fights against God, and Epiphanes likewise. ...These, so they say, and certain other enthusiasts for the same wickedness, gather together for feasts (I would not call their meeting an \"Agape\"), men and women together. After they have sated their appetites ('on repletion Cypris, the goddess of love, enters,' as it is said), then they overturn the lamps and so extinguish the light that the shame of their adulterous 'righteousness' is hidden, and they have intercourse where they will and with whom they will. After they have practiced community of use in this love-feast, they demand by daylight of whatever women they wish that they will be obedient to the law of Carpocrates-it would not be right to say the law of God. ...Of these and other similar sects Jude, I think, spoke prophetically in his letter - 'In the same way also these dreamers'[Jude 1:8] (for they do not seek to find the truth in the light of day) as far as the words 'and their mouth speaks arrogant things.' [Jude 1:16]\nEusebius of Caesarea.\nEusebius of Caesarea speaks directly about the Nicolaitans and Nicolas (in his \"Church History\" iii, 29), saying \"At this time the so-called sect of the Nicolaitans made its appearance and lasted for a very short time. Mention is made of it in the Apocalypse of John. They boasted that the author of their sect was Nicolaus, one of the deacons who, with Stephen, were appointed by the apostles for the purpose of ministering to the poor.\"\nEusebius repeats Clement's story about Nicolas and his wife and holds that those he decries as heretics are claiming his name for their sect because they misunderstand the context of his presentation of his wife to the apostles and are \"imitating blindly and foolishly that which was done and said, [in order to] commit fornication without shame. But I understand that Nicolaus had to do with no other woman than her to whom he was married, and that, so far as his children are concerned, his daughters continued in a state of virginity until old age, and his son remained uncorrupt. If this is so, when he brought his wife, whom he jealously loved, into the midst of the apostles, he was evidently renouncing his passion; and when he used the expression, 'to abuse the flesh,' he was inculcating self-control in the face of those pleasures that are eagerly pursued. For I suppose that, in accordance with the command of the Savior, he did not wish to serve two masters, pleasure and the Lord [Matthew 6:24; Luke 16:13]. ...So much concerning those who then attempted to pervert the truth, but in less time than it has taken to tell it became entirely extinct.\"\nEusebius (in his \"Church History\", iv, 7) held that as Satan was shut off from using persecution against Christians \"he devised all sorts of plans, and employed other methods in his conflict with the church, using base and deceitful men as instruments for the ruin of souls and as ministers of destruction. Instigated by him, impostors and deceivers, assuming the name of our religion, brought to the depth of ruin such of the believers as they could win over, and at the same time, by means of the deeds which they practiced, turned away from the path which leads to the word of salvation those who were ignorant of the faith.\" He traces heresy from the biblical figure of Simon Magus (Acts 8:9-29) through Menander to both Saturnius of Antioch and Basilides of Alexandria. Following Irenaeus, Eusebius says \"Basilides, under the pretext of unspeakable mysteries, invented monstrous fables, and carried the fictions of his impious heresy quite beyond bounds.\" He reports that Christian author Agrippa Castor \"While exposing his mysteries he says that Basilides wrote twenty-four books upon the Gospel, and that he invented prophets for himself named Barcabbas and Barcoph, and others that had no existence, and that he gave them barbarous names in order to amaze those who marvel at such things; that he taught also that the eating of meat offered to idols and the unguarded renunciation of the faith in times of persecution were matters of indifference; and that he enjoined upon his followers, like Pythagoras, a silence of five years. ...Thus it came to pass that the malignant demon, making use of these ministers, on the one hand enslaved those that were so pitiably led astray by them to their own destruction, while on the other hand he furnished to the unbelieving heathen abundant opportunities for slandering the divine word, inasmuch as the reputation of these men brought infamy upon the whole race of Christians. In this way, therefore, it came to pass that there was spread abroad in regard to us among the unbelievers of that age, the infamous and most absurd suspicion that we practiced unlawful commerce with mothers and sisters, and enjoyed impious feasts.\" Here a doctrine of indifference concerning eating meat sacrificed to idols is put forward along with a doctrine of licentious sex, but no mention of Nicolaitanes is made nor blame assigned to Nicolas.\nIsidore of Seville.\nThe last Western Church Father was Isidore of Seville, who finished the \"Etymologies\", in AD 636. In Book VIII titled \"The Church and sects (\"De ecclesia et secta\")\" he wrote, \"The Nicolaites (Nicolaita) are so called from Nicolaus, deacon of the church of Jerusalem, who, along with Stephen and the others, was ordained by Peter. He abandoned his wife because of her beauty, so that whoever wanted to might enjoy her; the practice turned into debauchery, with partners being exchanged in turn. The prophecy from the ethereal being that \u201cis someone \"like\" the son of man\u201d as transcribed by John, condemns them in the book of Revelation, saying (2:6): \"But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaites.\"\nInterpretations.\nConnection to Nicolas the Deacon.\nAmong later critics, Cotelerius seems to lean towards the favorable view of the character of Nicolas the Deacon in a note on \"Constit. Apost.\" vi. 8, after reciting the various authorities. Edward Burton was of opinion that the origin of the term Nicolaitans is uncertain, and that, \"though Nicolas the deacon has been mentioned as their founder, the evidence is extremely slight which would convict that person himself of any immoralities.\"\nTillemont was possibly influenced by the fact that no honor is paid to the memory of Nicolas by any branch of the church. He allows more weight to the testimony against him, and peremptorily rejects Cassian's statement (to which Neander adheres) that some other Nicolas was the founder of the sect. Tillemont concludes that, if not the actual founder, he was so unfortunate as to give occasion to the formation of the sect by his indiscreet speaking. Grotius' view is given in a note on Revelation 2:6 and is substantially the same as that of Tillemont.\nConnection to Balaam.\nOther scholars think that the group's name was not based upon an individual's name, but as a compound descriptive word. \"Nico-\" means \"victory\" in Greek, and \"laos\" means \"people\" or, more specifically, \"the laity\". Hence they take the word to mean \"lay conquerors\" or \"conquerors of the lay people\".\nThe name Balaam is perhaps capable of being interpreted as a Hebrew equivalent of the Greek Nicolas. Some commentators think that John alludes to this in Revelation 2:14; and C. Vitringa argues forcibly in support of this opinion. However, Albert Barnes notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Vitringa supposes that the word is derived from \u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2, victory, and \u03bb\u03b1\u03bf\u03c2, people, and that thus it corresponds with the name Balaam, as meaning either \"lord of the people\", or \"he destroyed the people\"; and that, as the same effect was produced by their doctrines as by those of Balaam, that the people were led to commit fornication and to join in idolatrous worship, they might be called Balaamites or Nicolaitanes\u2014that is, corrupters of the people. But to this it may be replied,\n(a) that it is far-fetched, and is adopted only to remove a difficulty;\n(b) that there is every reason to suppose that the word here used refers to a class of people who bore that name, and who were well known in the two churches specified;\n(c) that, in Rev 2:15 , they are expressly distinguished from those who held the doctrine of Balaam, Rev 2:14\u2014\"So hast thou also (\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9) those that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes.\"\u2014\u200a\nAntinominism from John Henry Blunt.\nA common view holds that the Nicolaitans held the antinomian heresy of 1 Corinthians 6. One scholar who espouses this interpretation, John Henry Blunt, maintains that the comparison between the Nicolaitans and Balaam \"proves that the fornication spoken of is not that crime under ordinary circumstances, but fornication connected with religious rites\". Blunt points out that the Hebrews had a long history of preaching against or alternatively using cult prostitutes (Genesis 38:21\u201322; Deuteronomy 23:17\u201318; 1 Kings 14:24, 15:12, 22:46; 2 Kings 23:7; Ezekiel 16:16; Hosea 4:14). He also points out that the early Christians lived in a pagan culture where the worship of Aphrodite included \"hierodoule\" who engaged in ritual prostitution in her shrines and temples, and that the Dionysian Mysteries used intoxicants and other trance-inducing techniques to remove inhibitions and social constraints of believers to enter into an animalistic state of mind.\nBlunt holds that the Nicolaitans either believed that the command against ritual sex was part of the Mosaic law and it was licit for them, or that they went too far during Christian \"love-feasts\". Blunt sees echoes of this behavior in the admonitions which Paul gives the Corinthians, though he does not name them as such. Blunt also believes that similar echoes can be found in the admonitions of Jude 4-16 (which invokes both \"Balaam's error\" and \"love feasts\") and 2 Peter 2:2-21 (which repeats much of Jude's statements, including invoking Balaam).\nThe trend began early in Christianity of applying the term \"Nicolaitans\" to describe other antinomian groups with no attachment to the historical Nicolaitans. Tertullian in his \"Prescription Against Heretics\", 33, is such an example: \"John, however, in the Apocalypse is charged to chastise those 'who eat things sacrificed to idols,' and 'who commit sexual immorality.' There are even now another sort of Nicolaitans. Theirs is called the Gaian heresy.\"\nBlunt pointed out that the Bible condemns the false teachings, and the use of a name to describe a group \"shows that there was a distinct heretical party which held the doctrine.\" The letters which John dictates for the churches in Revelation 2 \"show that these heretics had neither formally separated themselves from the church nor had been excommunicated.\"\nFood for Idols from Victorinus of Pettau.\nVictorinus of Pettau held that the error of the Nicolaitans was that they considered it necessary to exorcise things offered to idols before eating, and that there was no sin of fornication after seven days had passed.\n\"But the works of the Nicolaitanes in that time were false and troublesome men, who, as ministers under the name of Nicolas, had made for themselves an heresy, to the effect that whatever had been offered to idols might be exorcised and eaten, and that whoever had committed fornication might receive peace on the eighth day.\"\nPolygamy.\nBede states that Nicolas allowed other men to marry his wife. Thomas Aquinas believed that Nicolas supported either polygamy or the holding of wives in common. Eusebius claimed that the sect was short-lived.\nThe description of Nicolas the Deacon as celibate was used by 16th century Protestant apologists to argue against the practice of mandatory clerical celibacy by suggesting it originated within Nicolaism first before spreading into Christianity.\nEcclesiastical Hierarchy.\nC. I. Scofield writes in his reference Bible:\nNicolaitanes\nFrom nikao, \"to conquer,\" and laos, \"the people,\" or \"laity.\" There is no ancient authority for a sect of the Nicolaitanes. If the word is symbolic it refers to the earliest form of the notion of a priestly order, or \"clergy,\" which later divided an equal brotherhood (Matt. 23:8) into \"priests\" and \"laity.\" What in Ephesus was \"deeds\" (Rev. 2:6) had become in Pergamos a \"doctrine\" (Rev. 2:15).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69687", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69687", "title": "Nethaneel", "text": ""}
{"id": "69688", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69688", "title": "Sterilization (medicine)", "text": "Medical technique that intentionally leaves a person unable to reproduce\nSterilization (also spelled sterilisation) is any of several medical methods of permanent birth control that intentionally leaves a person unable to reproduce. Sterilization methods are available for both males and females. Although a non-surgical option for females (\"Essure\") was available until 2019, it is no longer an option. Sterilization procedures are intended to be permanent; reversal is generally difficult.\nThere are multiple ways of having sterilization done, but the two that are used most frequently are salpingectomy or tubal ligation for women and vasectomy for men. There are many different ways tubal sterilization can be accomplished. It is highly effective, like use of an IUD or arm implant, and in the United States, surgical complications are low. With that being said, tubal sterilization is still a method that involves surgery, so there is still a danger. Women who choose tubal sterilization have a higher risk of serious side effects than men who have a vasectomy do. Pregnancies after tubal sterilization can still occur, even many years after the procedure. Some recent studies have estimated that 3% of women become pregnant after tubal sterilization.It is not very likely, but if it does happen, there is a high risk of ectopic gestation. Tubal sterilization surgeries can be performed during a Cesarean section or shortly after a vaginal delivery mostly by mini-laparotomy. In some cases, sterilization can be reversed, but this can not be guaranteed. If you might want to become pregnant in the future, do not have this surgery.\nSterilization procedures can be undertaken voluntarily or promoted by governments. The legal framework surrounding sterilizations varies significantly between countries. In some cases, governments have historically or presently implemented compulsory or incentivized sterilization programs. On the other hand, certain nations have enacted laws that restrict or prohibit the practice.\nMethods.\nSurgical.\nSurgical sterilization methods include:\nTransluminal.\nTransluminal procedures are performed by entry through the female reproductive tract. These generally use a catheter to place a substance into the fallopian tubes that eventually causes a blockage of the tract in this segment. Such procedures are normally referred to as \"non-surgical\" because they use natural orifices and thereby do not necessitate any surgical incision.\nIn April 2018, the FDA restricted the sale and use of Essure due to a number of complications that certain women experienced. On July 20, 2018, Bayer announced it would end sales in the US by the end of 2018.\nPharmacological.\nThere are no oral medications for sterilization currently approved for human use.\nEffects.\nThe effects of sterilization vary greatly according to gender, age, location, and other factors. When discussing female sterilization, one of the most important factors to consider is the degree of power that women hold in the household and within society.\nPhysical.\nUnderstanding the physical effects of sterilization is important because it is a common method of contraception. Among women who had interval tubal sterilization, studies have shown a null or positive effect on female sexual interest and pleasure. Similar results were discovered for men who had vasectomies. Vasectomies did not negatively influence the satisfaction of men, and there was no significant change in communication and marital satisfaction among couples as a result. According to \"Johns Hopkins Medicine\", tubal sterilizations result in serious problems in less than 1 out of 1000 women. Tubal sterilization is an effective procedure, but pregnancy can still occur in about 1 out of 200 women. Some potential risks of tubal sterilization include \"bleeding from a skin incision or inside the abdomen, infection, damage to other organs inside the abdomen, side effects from anesthesia, ectopic pregnancy (an egg that becomes fertilized outside the uterus), [and] incomplete closing of a fallopian tube that results in pregnancy.\" Potential risks of vasectomies include \"pain continuing long after surgery, bleeding and bruising, a (usually mild) inflammatory reaction to sperm that spill during surgery called sperm granuloma, [and] infection.\" Additionally, the vas deferens, the part of the male anatomy that transports sperm, may grow back together, which could result in unintended pregnancy.\nPsychological.\nIt can be difficult to measure the psychological effects of sterilization, as certain psychological phenomena may be more prevalent in those who eventually decide to partake in sterilization. The relationships between psychological problems and sterilization may be due more to correlation rather than causation. That being said, there are several trends surrounding the psychological health of those who have received sterilizations. A 1996 Chinese study found that \"risk for depression was 2.34 times greater after tubal ligation, and 3.97 times greater after vasectomy.\" If an individual goes into the procedure after being coerced or with a lack of understanding of the procedure and its consequences, they are more likely to develop negative psychological consequences afterward. However, most people in the United States who are sterilized maintain the same level of psychological health as they did prior to the procedure. Because sterilization is a largely irreversible procedure, post-sterilization regret is a major psychological effect. The most common reason for post-sterilization regret is the desire to have more children.\nFamilial.\nWomen in the household.\nSome people believe that sterilization gives women, in particular, more control over their sexuality and their reproduction. This can lead to empowering women, giving them more of a sense of ownership over their bodies, and an improved relationship with the household. In the United States, where there are no governmental incentives for being sterilized (see below), the decision is often made for personal and familial reasons. A woman, sometimes along with her partner, can decide that she does not want any more children or she does not want children at all. Many women report feeling more sexually liberated after being sterilized, as there is no concern of a pregnancy risk. By eliminating the risk of having more children, a woman can commit to a long-term job without a disruption of maternity leave in the future. A woman will feel more empowered since she can make a decision about her body and her life. Sterilization eliminates the need for potential abortions, which can be a very stressful decision overall.\nRelationship with spouse.\nIn countries that are more entrenched in the traditional patriarchal system, female sterilizations can inspire abusive behavior from husbands for various reasons. Sterilization can lead to distrust in a marriage if the husband suspects his wife of infidelity. Furthermore, the husband may become angry and aggressive if the decision to be sterilized is made by the wife without consulting him. If a woman marries again after sterilization, her new husband might be displeased with her inability to bear him children, causing tumult in the marriage. There are many negative consequences associated with women who hold very little personal power. However, in more progressive cultures and in stable relationships, there are few changes observed in spousal relationships after sterilization. In these cultures, women hold more agency, and men are less likely to dictate women's personal choices. Sexual activity remains fairly constant, and marital relationships do not suffer, as long as the sterilization decision was made collaboratively between the two partners.\nChildren.\nAs the Chinese government tried to communicate to their people after the population boom between 1953 and 1971, having fewer children allows more of a family's total resources to be dedicated to each child. Especially in countries that give parents incentives for family planning and for having fewer children, it is advantageous to existing children to be in smaller families.\nIn more rural areas where families depend on the labor of their children to survive, sterilization could have more of a negative effect. If a child dies, a family loses a worker. During China's controversial one-child policy reign, policymakers allowed families to have another child if an existing child in the same family died or became disabled. However, if either parent is sterilized, this is impossible. The loss of a child could impact the survival of an entire family.\nVoluntary (Elective) Sterilization.\nMotivations for voluntary sterilizations include:\nLifestyle.\nBecause of the emphasis placed on childbearing as the most important role of women, not having children was traditionally seen as a deficiency or due to fertility problems. However, better access to contraception, new economic and educational opportunities, and changing ideas about motherhood have led to new reproductive experiences for women in the United States, particularly for women who choose to be childless. Scholars define \"voluntarily childless\" women as \"women of childbearing age who are fertile and state that they do not intend to have children, women of childbearing age who have chosen sterilization, or women past childbearing age who were fertile but chose not to have children\".\nIn industrialized countries such as the United Kingdom, those of Western Europe, and the United States, the fertility rate has declined below or near the population replacement rate of two children per woman. Women are having children at a later age, and most notably, an increasing number of women are choosing not to bear children at all. According to the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey, 46% of women aged 15 to 44 were childless in June 2008 compared to 35% of childless women in 1976. The personal freedoms of a childless lifestyle and the ability to focus on other relationships were common motivations underlying the decision to be voluntarily childless. Such personal freedoms included increased autonomy and improved financial positions.\nIn relationships, the couple could engage in more spontaneous activities because they did not need a babysitter or to consult with someone else. Women had more time to devote to their careers and hobbies. Regarding other relationships, some women chose to forgo children because they wanted to maintain the \"type of intimacy that they found fulfilling\" with their partners. Although voluntary childlessness was a joint decision for many couples, \"studies have found that women were more often the primary decision makers. There is also some evidence that when one partner (either male or female) was ambivalent, a strong desire not to have children on the side of the other partner was often the deciding factor.\" 'Not finding a suitable partner at an appropriate time in life\" was another deciding factor, particularly for ambivalent women.\nFinancial.\nEconomic incentives and career reasons also motivate women to choose sterilization. Regarding women who are voluntarily childless, studies show that there are higher \"opportunity costs\" for women of higher socioeconomic status because women are more likely than men to forfeit labor force participation once they have children. Some women stated the lack of financial resources as a reason they remained childfree. Combined with the cost of raising children, having children was viewed as a negative impact on financial resources. Thus, childlessness is generally correlated with working full-time. \"Many women expressed the view that women ultimately have to make a choice between motherhood and career.\" In contrast, childlessness was also found among adults who were not overly committed to careers. Here, the importance of leisure time and the potential to retire early was emphasized over career ambitions.\nSterilization is also an option for low-income families. Public funding for contraceptive services comes from a variety of federal and state sources in the United States. Until the mid-1990s, \"[f]ederal funds for contraceptive services [were] provided under Title X of the Public Health Service Act, Title XIX of the Social Security (Medicaid), and two block-grant programs, Maternal and Child Health (MCH) and Social Services.\" The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families was another federal block granted created in 1996 and is the main federal source of financial \"welfare\" aid. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services administers Title X as the sole federal program dedicated to family planning. Under Title X, public and nonprofit private agencies receive grants to operate clinics that provide care largely to the uninsured and the underinsured. Unlike Title X, Medicaid is an entitlement program that is jointly funded by federal and state governments to \"provide medical care to various low-income populations\". Medicaid provided the majority of publicly funded sterilizations. In 1979, regulations were implemented on sterilizations funded by the Department of Health and Human Services. The regulations included \"a complex procedure to ensure women's informed consent, a 30-day waiting period between consent and the procedure, and a prohibition on sterilization of anyone younger than 21 or who is mentally incompetent.\"\nPhysiological.\nPhysiological reasons, such as disease, genetic disorders, or disabilities, can influence whether individuals seek sterilization. For example, females may choose to undergo sterilization procedures as a form of treatment for certain diseases. In individuals with endometriosis, a hysterectomy, sometimes along with an oophorectomy, may be a viable treatment option, although it is often a last resort. Another reason may include individuals who choose sterilization in order to concentrate on caring for a child with a disability and to avoid withholding any necessary resources from additional children. For individuals without children, technological advancements have enabled the use of carrier screening and prenatal testing for the detection of genetic disorders in prospective parents or their unborn offspring. If prenatal testing has detected a genetic disorder in the child, parents may opt to be sterilized to forgo having more children who may also be affected.\nBarriers to Elective Sterilization.\nIndividuals who desire to undergo elective sterilization may face barriers to accessing these procedures. In the United States, there has been a growing demand for sterilization procedures, especially among women. This is thought to be at least partially due to the Supreme Court's decision to overturn \"Roe v. Wade\" in 2022, leaving the fate of abortion rights uncertain. However, due to skepticism from medical providers, cost, and insurance issues, many individuals desiring sterilization have been denied or prevented from undergoing the procedures. Patients of childbearing age without children report difficulty in finding physicians who are willing to perform sterilizations. In the United States, insurance companies differ in the extent to which they cover sterilization procedures. Under the Affordable Care Act, FDA-approved female sterilization procedures are covered when prescribed by a physician. However, male reproductive procedures, like vasectomies, are not required to be covered. These differing levels of coverage may create cost barriers, preventing some individuals desiring sterilization procedures from accessing them.\nIn the United States, men also encounter barriers when seeking elective sterilization procedures, particularly vasectomies. Despite being a safe and effective form of birth control, the U.S. has the lowest vasectomy rate among wealthy nations. This can be attributed to both cultural attitudes and structural obstacles within the healthcare system. Misinformation continues to surround the procedure, such as the misconception that a vasectomy undermines masculinity, contributing to hesitation and stigma. At the same time, systemic barriers further limit access. Insurance limitations and provider attitudes often restrict who can undergo the procedure. Because vasectomies are not covered under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), men may face out-of-pocket costs of up to $1,000. Additionally, while any man over 18 is legally eligible, some providers refuse to perform the procedure on younger patients or those without children, creating another barrier for those seeking sterilization.\nNational examples.\nUnited States.\nSterilization is the most common form of contraception in the United States when female and male usage is combined. However, usage varies across demographic categories such as gender, age, education, etc. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 16.7% of women aged 15\u201344 used female sterilization as a method of contraception in 2006\u20132008, while 6.1% of their partners used male sterilization. Minority women were more likely to use female sterilization than their white counterparts. The proportion of women using female sterilization was highest for black women (22%), followed by Hispanic women (20%), and white women (15%). Reverse sterilization trends by race occurred for the male partners of the women: 8% of male partners of white women used male sterilization, but it dropped to 3% of the partners of Hispanic women and only 1% of the partners of black women. White women were more likely to rely on male sterilization and the pill. While use of the pill declined with age, the report found that female sterilization increased with age. \nCorrespondingly, female sterilization was the leading method among currently and formerly married women; the pill was the leading method among cohabiting and never married women. 59% of women with three or more children used female sterilization. Thus, women who do not intend to have more children primarily rely on this method of contraception in contrast with women who only aim to space or delay their next birth. Regarding education, \"less-educated women aged 22\u201344 years were much more likely to rely on female sterilization than those with more education.\" For example, female sterilization was used among 55% of women who had not completed high school compared with 16% of women who had graduated from college.\nBecause national surveys of contraceptive methods have generally relied on the input of women, information about male sterilization is not as widespread. A survey using data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth found similar trends to those reported for female sterilization by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 2006\u20132008. Among men aged 15\u201344 years, vasectomy prevalence was highest in older men and those with two or more biological children. Men with less education were more likely to report female sterilization in their partner. In contrast to female sterilization trends, vasectomy was associated with white males and those who had ever visited a family planning clinic.\nSeveral factors can explain the different findings between female and male sterilization trends in the United States. Women are more likely to receive reproductive health services. \"Additionally, overall use of contraception is associated with higher socioeconomic status, but for women, use of contraceptive tubal sterilization has been found to be related to lower socioeconomic status and lack of health insurance.\" This finding could be related to Medicaid-funded sterilizations in the postpartum period that are not available to men.\nPromoted Sterilization.\nCompulsory.\nCompulsory sterilization, including forcible and involuntary sterilization, refers to governmental policies put in place as part of human population planning or as a form of eugenics (changing hereditary qualities of a race or breed by controlling mating) to prevent certain groups of people from reproducing. In certain countries, some women were sterilized without their consent, later resulting in lawsuits against the doctors who performed those surgeries. There are also many examples of women being asked for their consent to the procedure during times of high stress and physical pain. Some examples include women who have just given birth and are still being affected by the drugs, women in the middle of labor, or people who do not understand English. Many of the women affected by this were poor, minority women.\nIn May 2014, the World Health Organization, OHCHR, UN Women, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA, and UNICEF issued a joint statement on Eliminating forced, coercive and otherwise involuntary sterilization, An interagency statement. The report references the involuntary sterilization of several specific population groups. They include:\nThe report recommends a range of guiding principles for medical treatment, including ensuring patient autonomy in decision-making, ensuring non-discrimination, accountability, and access to remedies.\nIncentivizing.\nSome governments in the world have offered and continue to provide economic incentives to use birth control, including sterilization. In countries with high population growth and not enough resources to sustain a large population, these incentives become more enticing. Many of these policies are aimed at certain target groups, often disadvantaged and young women (especially in the United States). While these policies are controversial, the ultimate goal is to promote greater social well-being for the whole community. One of the theories supporting incentivizing or subsidy programs in the United States is that it offers contraception to citizens who may not be able to afford it. This can help families prevent unwanted pregnancies and avoid the financial, familial, and personal stresses of having children if they so desire.\nSterilization becomes controversial when considering the degree of a government's involvement in personal decisions. For instance, some have posited that by offering incentives to receive sterilization, the government may change the decision of the families, rather than just supporting a decision they had already made. Some critics argue that incentive programs are inherently coercive, making them unethical. In contrast, proponents argue that as long as potential users of these programs are well-educated about the procedure, taught about alternative methods of contraception, and are able to make voluntary, informed consent, then incentive programs are providing a good service that is available for people to take advantage of.\nNational examples.\nUnited States.\nThe United States is an example of a country that once implemented eugenic sterilization laws and practices. White American eugenicists promoted involuntary sterilization as a means of ensuring white supremacy by preventing so-called \"race suicide.\" Therefore, eugenic policies in America often targeted Latinos, African Americans, Native Americans, people with disabilities, and poor whites. The first involuntary sterilization law was enacted in Indiana in 1907, later followed by a Supreme Court ruling in 1927 that legalized the practice nationwide. The 1927 Supreme Court decision in \"Buck v. Bell\" ruled that a state could perform forcible sterilization procedures on those deemed unfit for reproduction. As a result of this ruling, an estimated 70,000 Americans were forcibly sterilized. Until 1970, 30 states had enacted eugenic sterilization practices. Both men and women were subjected to sterilization, with vasectomy being the most common procedure for men, and women often subjected to a salpingectomy, a comparatively more invasive procedure. These eugenic sterilizations had the greatest impacts on people with mental illness, intellectual disabilities, and people of color. In addition, states varied in the extent to which they employed these practices, with California operating one of the largest eugenic sterilization programs in the country. Beginning in 1909, California executed approximately one-third of the nation's eugenic sterilizations. Under California law, sterilization was permitted for individuals in hospitals and state homes who were classified as \"feebleminded.\" These laws disproportionately targeted people of Latin American heritage, especially women and girls. By the late 1930s, the practice of widespread eugenic sterilization in the United States began to decline, with further declines following the 1942 Supreme Court Ruling in \"Skinner v. Oklahoma\". However, the \"Buck v. Bell\" ruling has never been explicitly overturned.\nJapan.\nAn example of forced sterilization that was ended within the last two decades is Japan's Race Eugenic Protection Law, which required citizens with mental disorders to be sterilized. This policy was active from 1940 until 1996, when it and all other eugenic policies in Japan were abolished. In many cases, sterilization policies were not explicitly compulsory in that they required consent. However, this meant that men and women were often coerced into agreeing to the procedure without being in the right state of mind or receiving all of the necessary information. Under the Japanese leprosy policies, citizens with leprosy were not forced into being sterilized; however, they had been placed involuntarily into segregated and quarantined communities.\nSingapore.\nSingapore is an example of a country with a sterilization incentive program. In the 1980s, Singapore offered US $5000 to women who elected to be sterilized. The conditions associated with receiving this grant were clearly aimed at targeting low-income and less-educated parents. It specified that both parents should be below a specified educational level and that their combined income should not exceed $750 per month. This program, among other birth control incentives and education programs, greatly reduced Singapore's birth rate, female mortality rate, and infant mortality rate while increasing family income, female participation in the labor force, with a rise in educational attainment among other social benefits. These are the intended results of most incentivizing programs, although questions of their ethicality remain.\nIndia.\nAnother country with an overpopulation problem is India. Medical advances in the past fifty years have lowered the death rate, resulting in large population density and overcrowding. This overcrowding is also a result of poor families' lack of access to birth control. Despite this lack of access, sterilization incentives have been in place since the mid-1900s. In the 1960s, the governments of three Indian states and one large private company offered free vasectomies to some employees, occasionally accompanied by a bonus. In 1959, the second Five-Year Plan offered medical practitioners who performed vasectomies on low-income men monetary compensation. Additionally, those who motivated men to receive vasectomies, and those men who did, received compensation. These incentives partially served as a way to educate men that sterilization was the most effective form of contraception and that vasectomies did not affect sexual performance. The incentives were only available to low-income men. Men were the target of sterilization because of the ease and quickness of the procedure, as compared to sterilization of women. However, mass sterilization efforts resulted in a lack of cleanliness and careful technique, potentially resulting in botched surgeries and other complications. As the fertility rate began to decrease (but not quickly enough), more incentives were offered, such as land and fertilizer. In 1976, compulsory sterilization policies were put in place, and some disincentive programs were created to encourage more people to become sterilized. However, these disincentive policies, along with \"sterilization camps\" (where large amounts of sterilizations were performed quickly and often unsafely), were not received well by the population and gave people less incentive to participate in sterilization. The compulsory laws were removed. Further problems arose, and by 1981, there was a noticeable problem in the preference for sons. Since families were encouraged to keep the number of children to a minimum, son preference meant that female fetuses or young girls were killed at a rapid rate. The focus of population policies has changed in the twenty-first century. The government is more concerned with empowering women, protecting them from violence, and providing basic necessities to families. Sterilization efforts are still in existence and still target poor families.\nChina.\nWhen the People's Republic of China came to power in 1949, the Chinese government viewed population growth as a growth in development and progress. The population at the time was around 540 million. Therefore, abortion and sterilization were restricted. With these policies and the social and economic improvements associated with the new regime, rapid population growth ensued. By the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1971, and with a population of 850 million, population control became a top priority of the government. Within six years, more than thirty million sterilizations were performed on men and women. Soon, the well-known one-child policy was enforced, which came along with many incentives for parents to maintain a one-child family. This included free books, materials, and food for the child through primary school if both parents agreed to sterilization. The policy also came with harsh consequences for not adhering to the one-child limit. For example, in Shanghai, parents with \"extra children\" must pay between three and six times the city's average yearly income in \"social maintenance fees\". In the past decade, the restrictions on family size and reproduction have lessened. The Chinese government has found that by giving incentives and disincentives that are more far-reaching than a one-time incentive to be sterilized, families are more willing to practice better family planning. These policies seem to be less coercive as well, as families are better able to see the long-term effects of their sterilization rather than being tempted with a one-time sum.\nCriminalization.\nCertain countries have enacted legislation prohibiting or restricting elective sterilization procedures for contraceptive purposes.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, reproductive sterilization of men or women has been defined as a criminal act since 1997 and remains so as of 2019[ [update]], under Article 156 \u00a71, which also covers making someone blind, deaf or mute, of the 1997 law. The original 1997 law punished contraventions with a prison sentence of one to ten years, and the updated law as of 2019[ [update]] sets a prison sentence of at least 3 years. The prison sentence is a maximum of three years if the sterilization is involuntary, under Art. 156 \u00a72."}
{"id": "69689", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69689", "title": "Neriglissar", "text": "Babylonian king from 560 BC to 556 BC\nNeriglissar (Babylonian cuneiform: \"Nergal-\u0161ar-u\u1e63ur\" or \"Nergal-\u0161arra-u\u1e63ur\", meaning \"Nergal, protect the king\") was the fourth king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, ruling from his usurpation of the throne in 560 BC to his death in 556 BC. Though unrelated to previous Babylonian kings, possibly being of Aramean ancestry, Neriglissar was a prominent official and general in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II (r.605\u2013562 BC) and became even more influential through marrying one of Nebuchadnezzar's daughters, possibly Kashshaya.\nNebuchadnezzar was initially succeeded by his son, Amel-Marduk, but Amel-Marduk's reign only lasted for two years before Neriglissar usurped the Babylonian throne and put him to death. Through his marriage to Nebuchadnezzar's daughter, possibly significantly older than any of the old king's sons, Neriglissar might have represented a less legitimate but more wealthy and well-established faction of the royal family, even if he himself was not part of this family.\nThe most well documented event of Neriglissar's reign is his successful 557\u2013556 BC campaign in Anatolia against Appuwashu, king of a small kingdom in Cilicia. Neriglissar successfully captured Appuwashu's capital, Ura, as well as another city, Kirshu, before conducting an amphibious attack against a nearby island and then laying waste to mountain passes on the western border to Lydia. Shortly after returning home to Babylonia victorious, Neriglissar died in April 556 BC. He was succeeded as king by his son, Labashi-Marduk, whose reign would only last for two or three months before being deposed and killed in favour of Nabonidus.\nBackground.\nReign of Nebuchadnezzar.\nThe Neo-Babylonian Empire reached the apex of its power during the reign of its second king, Nebuchadnezzar II (r.605\u2013562 BC). During his rule, the empire consolidated its territories and army and established its hegemony over territories that had once belonged to the Neo-Assyrian Empire, defeated and destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar's father Nabopolassar (r.626\u2013605 BC). Throughout his reign, Nebuchadnezzar spent much time and many resources on extensive building projects throughout Babylonia, mostly focusing on his capital, Babylon. As the royal treasury became more and more strained under the weight of the expenditures, local businessmen would come to grow wealthier and, as a consequence, more influential in political matters.\nAccording to Neriglissar's own inscriptions, he was the son of a man by the name Bel-shum-ishkun (\"B\u00eal-\u0161um-i\u0161kun\"). This is probably the same person as Bel-shum-ishkun, son of Nabu-epir-la'a (\"Nab\u00fb-\u0113pir-la'\u00ee\"), whose income is listed in a Babylonian economic document alongside the incomes of Nebuchadnezzar and one of the king's daughters, Kashshaya. Both Neriglissar and Bel-shum-ishkun are also listed in another royal document that records various officials of the empire, wherein Neriglissar is recorded as a Simmagir official and Bel-shum-ishkun is recorded as originating in the province Puqudu. Both Neriglissar and his father might have been from the Aramean clan of the Puqudu (same name as the province from which Bel-shum-ishkun originated).\nNeriglissar was an active businessman and landowner during Nebuchadnezzar's reign. He is recorded as having purchased properties from a bankrupt man by the name Nabu-ahhe-iddina and from a wealthy banker by the name Iddina-Marduk, both in Sippar. In addition to Sippar, Neriglissar also owned estates in Uruk. Due to his presence at Sippar, and due to him being recorded as present at Opis in 565/564 BC, it is possible that Neriglissar was involved in the construction of Nebuchadnezzar's Median Wall, meant to protect Babylon from attacks from the north. In addition to being a wealthy landowner, Neriglissar was also one of Nebuchadnezzar's leading officials as a Simmagir. During Nebuchadnezzar's military campaigns, Neriglissar served as an officer of the rank \"rab m\u0101g\". He might be identical to a \"Nergal\u0161are\u1e63er\" which the Bible describes as present at Nebuchadnezzar's siege of Jerusalem in 597 BC (). \nRise to the throne.\nNeriglissar's influence was further increased through his marriage to one of Nebuchadnezzar's daughters. Historian David B. Weisberg proposed in 1974 that the daughter in question was Kashshaya, since her name appears together with the name of Nebuchadnezzar, Neriglissar and Bel-shum-ishkun in economic documents. Although there is no concrete evidence that Kashshaya, instead of one of Nebuchadnezzar's other daughters, was the wife of Neriglissar, subsequent historians, such as Donald Wiseman and Jona Lendering, have accepted the assumption that Neriglissar married Kashshaya.\nAccording to the later Hellenistic-era Babylonian writer and astronomer Berossus, Naboukhodonosoros (Nebuchadnezzar) died of sickness after a reign of 43 years and was succeeded by his son Euilmaradokhos (Amel-Marduk), who \"ruled capriciously and had no regard for the laws\". After ruling two years, Neriglassaros (Neriglissar) plotted against Amel-Marduk and had him deposed and killed. If Berossus is to be believed, Neriglissar was the leader of this conspiracy. It is likely that the conflict between Amel-Marduk and Neriglissar was a case of inter-family discord rather than some other form of rivalry. \nNeriglissar's marriage to Kashshaya (or another of Nebuchadnezzar's daughters) is probably what made usurping the throne possible. A factor which might have significantly improved Neriglissar's chances of becoming king was the position of Kashshaya relative to Nebuchadnezzar's other children. Kashshaya might have been the oldest of all of Nebuchadnezzar's children as she is attested as being active significantly earlier in his reign (5th year) than most of his sons (most attested in Nebuchadnezzar's 39th\u201341st years). Although the sons only being referenced this late could also be coincidental or accidental, the significant gap in time could even be interpreted as an indication that the sons were the product of a second marriage. It is thus possible that the usurpation was the result of infighting between an older, wealthier and more influential branch of the royal family (represented by Nebuchadnezzar's daughters, Kashshaya in particular) and a less well established and younger, though more legitimate, branch (represented by Nebuchadnezzar's sons, such as Amel-Marduk). Kashshaya is, like Neriglissar, attested as a wealthy landowner in Uruk during her father's reign.\nReign.\nEarly activities.\nThere are only a small number of cuneiform sources for the period between 594 BC and 557 BC, covering much of the later reign of Nebuchadnezzar as well as the reigns of Amel-Marduk, Neriglissar and Neriglissar's son and successor Labashi-Marduk. Historical reconstructions of this period as such generally follow secondary sources in Hebrew, Greek and Latin to determine what events transpired at the time, in addition to contract tablets from Babylonia. The last document dated to the reign of Amel-Marduk is a contract dated to 7 August 560 BC, written in Babylon. Four days later, documents instead dated to Neriglissar are known from both Babylon and Uruk. Judging by increased economic activity attributed to him in the capital, Neriglissar was at Babylon at the time of the usurpation.\nAfter becoming king, Neriglissar increased his hold on the throne through marrying his daughter, Gigitum (\"Gig\u012btu\"), to Nabu-shuma-ukin, the administrator of the Ezida temple in Borsippa and an influential religious leader. Not much is otherwise documented from Neriglissar's first two years as king. He is known to have continued construction and repair work on the Esagila, the main temple in Babylon, as well as repaired the royal palace and the eastern bank of the Euphrates river after its annual flooding.\nCampaign in Anatolia.\nIn Neriglissar's third year as king, 557 BC, he led a successful military campaign into Anatolia, an expedition chronicled in contemporary annals (chiefly the 'ABC 6' chronicle). The campaign was in response to rumours that Appuwashu (\"Appua\u0161u\"), king of Piriddu or Pirindu, was planning a raid into Syria. To counter this raid, Neriglissar marched his army into Hume (eastern Cilicia, under Babylonian control ever since the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire). Although Appuwashu, who ruled a portion of territory west of Hume, had prepared ambushes and attacks to halt the Babylonian advance, he was defeated and pursued by Neriglissar for more than of mountainous terrain along the Cilician coast until he reached his capital, Ura, which was taken and sacked by Neriglissar. Where Ura was located is unclear today, but it must have been somewhere in the vicinity of the modern city Silifke. After this victory, Neriglissar continued his campaign, marching another 65 kilometres to the north along the G\u00f6ksu river to attack and destroy the city Kirshu (rebuilt centuries later as Claudiopolis).\nAfter having taken Kirshu, Neriglissar undertook an amphibious attack against the island Pitusu, two miles off-shore, and then laid waste to the mountain passes that led to the settlement Sallune at the border of Lydia. Though Appuwashu escaped Neriglissar's onslaught, the campaign was successful in asserting Babylonian control of Piriddu and turned the small kingdom into a buffer state between the Babylonian, Lydian and Median empires.\nThe account of the campaign presented in the ABC 6 chronicle reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Appua\u0161u, the king of Pirindu, mustered a large army and set out to plunder and sack Syria. Neriglissar mustered his army and marched to Hume to oppose him.&lt;br&gt;Before his arrival Appua\u0161u placed the army and cavalry which he had organized in a mountain valley ambush. When Neriglissar reached them he inflicted a defeat upon them and conquered the large army. The army and numerous horses he captured. He pursued Appua\u0161u or a distance of fifteen double-hours and marched through difficult mountains, where men must walk in single file, as far as Ura, the royal city.&lt;br&gt;He captured him, seized Ura, and sacked it. When he had marched for a distance of six double hours through rough mountains and difficult passes, from Ura to Kir\u0161i \u2013 his forefather's royal city \u2013 he captured Kir\u0161i, the mighty city, his royal metropolis. He burnt its wall, its palace, and its people.&lt;br&gt;Pitusu, a land in the midst of the ocean, and six thousand combat troops who were stationed in it he captured by means of boats. He destroyed their city and captured their people.&lt;br&gt;In that same year from the pass of Sallune to the border of Lydia he started fires. Appua\u0161u fled, so he did not capture him.\nIn February 556 BC, Neriglissar turned home, a journey which probably would have taken him about fifty days. That his campaign had been conducted so far from Babylonia's core territory could mean that he was aided by the Median Empire, or that the campaign was partially intended to counteract the growing influence of the Medes in Anatolia.\nDeath and succession.\nNeriglissar did not rule for long. The last known documents dated to Neriglissar's reign are a contract from 12 April 556 BC at Babylon and a contract from 16 April that same year at Uruk. The Uruk King List (IM 65066, also known as King List 5), a record of rulers of Babylon from Shamash-shum-ukin (r.668\u2013648 BC) to the Seleucid king Seleucus II Callinicus (r.246\u2013225 BC), accords Neriglissar a reign of three years and eight months, consistent with the possibility that Neriglissar died in April.\nBerossus writes that Neriglissar ruled four years before dying and being succeeded by his son Laborosoardokhos (Labashi-Marduk). Berossus erroneously gives Labashi-Marduk's reign as nine months (though it is possible that this is a scribal error) and states that Labashi-Marduk's \"evil ways\" led to his friends plotting against him, eventually resulting in the child king being beaten to death. The plotters then agreed that Nabonnedos (Nabonidus), one of the plotters, should rule. The Uruk King List only gives Labashi-Marduk a reign of three months and contract tablets from Babylonia suggest that he might have ruled as briefly as just two months. Although Berossus refers to Labashi-Marduk as a child, it possible that he became king as an adult since commercial texts from two years earlier indicate that Labashi-Marduk was in charge of his own affairs at that time.\nWhy Labashi-Marduk was deposed and killed in a coup (led by Nabonidus's son, Belshazzar) is unclear. It is possible that the reason was that although Labashi-Marduk and his father before him were well-connected and rich, they were ultimately seen as commoners, lacking noble blood. Additionally, it is possible that while Neriglissar was seen as legitimate due to his connection to Nebuchadnezzar through his wife, Labashi-Marduk might have been the son of another wife of Neriglissar and thus completely unconnected to the royal dynasty. Despite this, and despite his brief reign, Neriglissar was remembered favourably by later Babylonians. In his inscriptions, Nabonidus specifically mentions Nebuchadnezzar and Neriglissar as good kings with whom he had been associated.\nTitles.\nFrom one of his inscriptions commemorating his restoration of the Esagila at Babylon, Neriglissar's titles read as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Neriglissar, king of Babylon, pious prince, the favorite of the god Marduk, the humble (and) submissive one who reveres the lord of lords, the wise (and) pious one, the one who constantly seeks out the shrines of the god Nab\u00fb \u2014 his lord \u2014 the ruler who provides, the one who brings large gifts to Esagil and Ezida, the one who copiously supplies offerings (and) ensures that their purification rites are carried out correctly, son of B\u0113l-\u0161um-i\u0161kun, wise prince, the perfect warrior, the one who ensures the protection of Esagil and Babylon, the one who blocks the approach to the country like a strong wall, am I.\nIn another inscription, commemorating other building projects at Babylon, the titles used are the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Neriglissar, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, the one who performs good deeds, about the exercise of whose everlasting kingship the great gods made a decision, whose fate the god Marduk \u2014 the foremost of the gods, the one who determines fates \u2014 determined to exercise authority over the lands, whose hands the god Nab\u00fb \u2014 the legitimate heir \u2014 let grasp a just scepter to perform the shepherdship over the black-headed (people), to whom the god Erra \u2014 the majestic one of the gods \u2014 gave his weapon(s) to save the people (and) spare the land, son of B\u0113l-\u0161um-i\u0161kun, king of Babylon, am I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69690", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69690", "title": "Tubal ligation", "text": "Surgical clipping, removal or blocking of the fallopian tubes\nTubal ligation (commonly known as having one's \"tubes tied\") is a surgical procedure for female sterilization in which the fallopian tubes are permanently blocked, clipped or removed. This prevents the fertilization of eggs by sperm and thus the implantation of a fertilized egg. Tubal ligation is considered a permanent method of sterilization and birth control by the FDA. Bilateral tubal ligation is not considered a sterilization method by the MHRA.\nMedical uses.\nFemale sterilization through tubal ligation is primarily used to permanently prevent a patient from having a spontaneous pregnancy (as opposed to pregnancy via in vitro fertilization) in the future. While both hysterectomy (the removal of the uterus) or bilateral oophorectomy (the removal of both ovaries) can also accomplish this goal, these surgeries carry generally greater health risks than tubal ligation procedures.\nLess commonly, tubal ligation procedures may also be performed for patients who are known to be carriers of mutations in genes that increase the risk of ovarian and fallopian tube cancer, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2. While the procedure for these patients still results in sterilization, the procedure is chosen preferentially among these patients who have completed childbearing, with or without a simultaneous oophorectomy.\nBenefits and advantages for use as contraception.\nHigh effectiveness.\nMost methods of female sterilization are approximately 99% effective or greater in preventing pregnancy. These rates are roughly equivalent to the effectiveness of long-acting reversible contraceptives such as intrauterine devices and contraceptive implants, and slightly less effective than permanent male sterilization through vasectomy. These rates are significantly higher than other forms of modern contraception that require regular active engagement by the user, such as oral contraceptive pills or male condoms.\nAvoidance of hormonal medications.\nMany forms of female-controlled contraception rely on suppression of the menstrual cycle using progesterones and/or estrogens. For patients who wish to avoid hormonal medications because of personal medical contraindications such as breast cancer, unacceptable side effects, or personal preference, tubal ligation offers highly effective birth control without the use of hormones.\nReduction of pelvic inflammatory disease risk.\nOccluding or removing both fallopian tubes decreases the likelihood that a sexually transmitted infection can ascend from the vagina to the abdominal cavity, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) or a tubo-ovarian abscess. Tubal ligation does not eliminate the risk of PID, and does not offer protection against sexually transmitted infections.\nReduction of ovarian and fallopian tube cancer risk.\nPartial tubal ligation or full salpingectomy (a tubal ligation method that relies upon the physical removal of the fallopian tube) reduces the lifetime risk of developing ovarian or fallopian tube cancer later in life. This is true both for patients who are already known to be at high risk for ovarian or fallopian tube cancer secondary to genetic mutations, as well as females who have the baseline population risk.\nRisks and complications.\nRisks associated with surgery and anesthesia.\nMost tubal ligation procedures involve accessing the abdominal cavity through incisions in the abdominal wall and require some form of anesthesia. Major complications from laparoscopic surgery may include need for blood transfusion, infection, conversion to open surgery, or unplanned additional major surgery, while complications from anesthesia itself may include hypoventilation and cardiac arrest. Major complications during female sterilization are uncommon, occurring in an estimated 0.1\u20133.5% of laparoscopic procedures, with mortality rates in the United States estimated at 1\u20132 patient deaths per 100,000 procedures. These complications are more common for patients with a history of previous abdominal or pelvic surgery, obesity, and/or diabetes.\nFailure.\nWhile female sterilization procedures are highly effective at preventing pregnancy, there is a small continuing risk of unintended pregnancy after tubal ligation. Several factors influence the likelihood of failure: increased time since sterilization, younger age at the time of sterilization, and certain methods of sterilization are all associated with increased risk of failure. Pregnancy rates at 10 years after sterilization vary depending on the type of procedure used, documented as low as 7.5 per 1,000 procedures to as high as 36.5 per 1,000 procedures.\nEctopic pregnancy.\nOverall, all pregnancies, including ectopic pregnancies, are less common among patients who have had a female sterilization procedure than among patients who have not. However, if patients do have a pregnancy after tubal ligation, a greater percentage of these will be ectopic; approximately one third of pregnancies that occur after a tubal ligation will be ectopic pregnancies. The likelihood of ectopic pregnancy is higher among patients sterilized before age 30 and differs depending on the type of sterilization procedure used.\nEmotional after effects.\nThe majority of patients who undergo female sterilization procedures do not regret their decisions. However, regret appears to be more common among patients who undergo sterilization at a young age (often defined as younger than 30 years old), patients who are unmarried at the time of sterilization, non-white patients, patients with public insurance such as Medicaid, or patients who undergo sterilization soon after the birth of a child. Regret has not been found to be associated with the number of children a person has at the time of sterilization.\nSide effects.\nMenstrual changes.\nPatients who have undergone female sterilization procedures have minimal or no changes in their menstrual patterns. They were more likely to have perceived improvements in their menstrual cycle, including decreases in the amount of bleeding, in the number of days of bleeding, and in menstrual pain.\nOvarian reserve.\nStudies of hormone levels and ovarian reserve have demonstrated no significant changes after female sterilization, or inconsistent effects. Evidence does not indicate a strong association between tubal ligation and earlier onset of menopause.\nSexual function.\nSexual function appears unchanged or improved after female sterilization compared with non-sterilized females.\nHysterectomy.\nPatients who had tubal occlusion surgeries have been found to be four to five times more likely to undergo hysterectomy later in life than those whose partners underwent vasectomy. There is no known biologic mechanism to support a causal relationship between tubal ligation and subsequent hysterectomy, but there is an association across all methods of tubal ligation.\nPostablation tubal sterilization syndrome.\nSome females who have undergone tubal ligation prior to an endometrial ablation procedure experience cyclic or intermittent pelvic pain; this may happen in up to 10% of women who have undergone both surgeries.\nContraindications.\nGiven its permanent nature, tubal ligation is contraindicated in patients who desire future pregnancy or who want to have the option of future pregnancy. In such cases, reversible methods of contraception are recommended.\nSince most forms of tubal ligation require abdominal surgery under regional or general anesthesia, tubal ligation is also relatively contraindicated in patients for whom the risks of surgery and/or anesthesia are unacceptably high considering their other medical issues.\nProcedure technique.\nTubal ligation through blocking or removing the tubes may be accomplished through an open abdominal surgery, a laparoscopic approach, or a hysteroscopic approach. Depending on the approach chosen, the patient will need to undergo local, general, or spinal (regional) anesthesia. The procedure may be performed either immediately after the end of a pregnancy, termed a \"postpartum\" or \"postabortion tubal ligation\", or more than six weeks after the end of a pregnancy, termed an \"interval tubal ligation\". The steps of the sterilization procedure will depend on the type of procedure being used. (See Tubal ligation methods below.)\nIf the patient chooses a \"postpartum tubal ligation\", the procedure will further depend on the delivery method. If the patient delivers via Cesarean section, the surgeon will remove part or all of the fallopian tubes after the infant has been delivered and the uterus has been closed. Anesthesia for the tubal ligation will be the same as that being used for the Cesarean section itself, usually regional or general anesthesia. If the patient delivers vaginally and desires a postpartum tubal ligation, the surgeon will remove part or all of the fallopian tubes usually one or two days after the birth, during the same hospitalization.\nIf the patient chooses an \"interval tubal ligation\", the procedure will typically be performed under general anesthesia in a hospital setting. Most tubal ligations are accomplished laparoscopically, with an incision at the umbilicus and zero, one, or two smaller incisions in the lower sides of the abdomen. It is also possible to perform the surgery without a laparoscope, using larger abdominal incisions. It is also possible to perform an interval tubal ligation hysteroscopically, which may be performed under local anesthesia, moderate sedation, or full general anesthesia. While no methods of hysteroscopic sterilization are currently on the market in the United States as of 2019, the Essure and Adiana systems were previously used for hysteroscopic sterilization, and research trials are investigating new hysteroscopic approaches.\nTubal ligation methods.\nThere are a number of methods of removing or occluding the fallopian tubes, some of which rely on medical implants and devices.\nPostpartum tubal ligation.\nPerformed immediately after a delivery, this method removes a segment, or all, of both fallopian tubes. The most common techniques for partial bilateral salpingectomy are the Pomeroy or Parkland procedures. The ten year pregnancy rate is estimated at 7.5 pregnancies per 1000 procedures performed, and the ectopic pregnancy rate is estimated at 1.5 per 1000 procedures performed.\nInterval tubal ligation.\nBilateral salpingectomy.\nThis method removes both tubes entirely, from the uterine cornuae out to the tubal fimbriae. This method has recently become more popular for female sterilization, given evidence to support the fallopian tube as the potential site of origin of some ovarian cancers. Some large medical systems such as Kaiser Permanente Northern California have endorsed complete bilateral salpingectomy as the preferred means of female sterilization and professional medical societies such as the Society of Gynecologic Oncology and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommend discussing the benefits of salpingectomy during counseling for sterilization. While complete bilateral salpingectomy theoretically should have an efficacy rate that approaches 100 percent and eliminates the risk of tubal ectopic pregnancy, there is not high quality data available comparing this method to older methods.\nBipolar coagulation.\nThis method uses electric current to cauterize sections of the fallopian tube, with or without subsequent division of the tube. The ten year pregnancy rate is estimated at 6.3 to 24.8 pregnancies per 1000 procedures performed, and the ectopic pregnancy rate is estimated at 17.1 per 1000 procedures performed.\nMonopolar coagulation.\nThis method uses electric current to cauterize the tube, but also allows radiating current to further damage the tubes as it spreads from the coagulation site. The tubes may also be transected after cauterization. The ten year pregnancy rate is estimated at 7.5 pregnancies per 1000 procedures performed.\nTubal clip.\nThis method uses a tubal clip (Filshie clip or Hulka clip) to permanently clip the fallopian tubes shut. Once applied and fastened, the clip blocks movement of eggs from the ovary to the uterus. The ten year pregnancy rate is estimated at 36.5 pregnancies per 1000 procedures performed, and the ectopic pregnancy rate is estimated at 8.5 per 1000 procedures performed.\nTubal ring (Falope ring).\nThis method involves a doubling over of the fallopian tubes and application of a silastic band to the tube. The ten year pregnancy rate is estimated at 17.7 pregnancies per 1000 procedures performed, and the ectopic pregnancy rate is estimated at 8.5 per 1000 procedures performed.\nLess commonly used or no longer used procedures.\nIrving's procedure.\nThis method places two ligatures (sutures) around the fallopian tube and removing the segment of tube between the ligatures. The medial ends of the fallopian tubes on the side closer to the uterus are then connected to the back of the uterus itself.\nUchida tubal ligation.\nThis method involves dissecting the fallopian tube from the overlying connective tissue (serosa), placing two ligatures and excising a segment of the tube, then buries the end of the fallopian tube closest to the uterus underneath the serosa. Dr. Uchida reported no failures among 20,000 procedures.\nEssure tubal ligation.\nThis method closed the fallopian tubes through a hysteroscopic approach by placing two small metal and fiber coils in the fallopian tubes through the fallopian ostia. After insertion, scar tissue forms around the coils, blocking off the fallopian tubes and preventing sperm from reaching the egg. It was removed from the US market in 2019.\nAdiana tubal ligation.\nThis method closed the fallopian tubes through a hysteroscopic approach by placing two small silicone pieces in the fallopian tubes. During the procedure, the health care provider heated a small portion of each fallopian tube and then inserts a tiny piece of silicone into each tube. After the procedure, scar tissue formed around the silicone inserts, blocking off the fallopian tubes and preventing sperm from reaching the egg. It was removed from the US market in 2012.\nReversal or in vitro fertilization after tubal ligation.\nAll tubal ligation procedures are considered permanent and are not reliably reversible forms of birth control. Patients who wish to have the option of future pregnancy should ideally be directed towards effective but reversible forms of birth control, rather than sterilization procedures. Examples of this include intrauterine devices. However, patients who desire pregnancy after having undergone a female sterilization procedure have two options.\nTubal reversal is a type of microsurgery to repair the fallopian tube after a tubal ligation procedure. Successful pregnancy rates after reversal surgery are 42-69%, depending on the sterilization technique that was used.\nAlternatively, in vitro fertilization (IVF) may allow patients with absent or occluded fallopian tubes to successfully carry a pregnancy. The choice of whether to attempt tubal reversal or move straight to IVF depends on individual patient factors, including the likelihood of successful tubal reversal surgery and the age of the patient.\nRecovery and rehabilitation.\nMost laparoscopic methods of interval tubal ligation are outpatient surgeries and do not require hospitalization overnight. Patients are counseled to expect some soreness but to expect to be ready to perform daily activities 1\u20132 days after surgery. Patients undergoing postpartum tubal ligations will not be delayed in their discharge from the hospital after birth, and recovery is not significantly different from normal postpartum recovery.\nHistory.\nThe first modern female sterilization procedure was performed in 1880 by Dr. Samuel Lungren of Toledo, Ohio, in the United States. Hysteroscopic tubal ligation was developed later by Mikulicz-Radecki and Freund.\nSince its development, female sterilization has been periodically performed on patients without their informed consent, often specifically targeting marginalized populations. Given this history of human rights abuses, current sterilization policy in the United States requires a mandatory waiting period for tubal sterilization on Medicaid beneficiaries. This waiting period is not required for private insurance beneficiaries, which has the effect of selectively restricting low-income women's access to tubal sterilization.\nSociety and culture.\nPrevalence.\nOf the 64% of married or in-union women worldwide using some form of contraception, approximately one fifth (19% of all women) used female sterilization as their contraception, making it the most common contraceptive method globally. The percentage of women using female sterilization varies significantly between different regions of the world. Rates are highest in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, North America, Oceania, and selected countries in Western Europe, where rates of sterilization are often greater than 40%; rates in Africa, the Middle East, and parts of Eastern Europe, however, are significantly lower, sometimes less than 2%. An estimated 180 million women worldwide have undergone surgical sterilization, compared to approximately 42.5 million men who have undergone vasectomy.\nIn the United States, female sterilization is used by 30% of married couples and 22% of women who use any form of contraception, making it the second-most popular contraceptive after the birth control pill. Slightly more than 8.2 million women in the US use tubal ligation as their main form of contraception, and approximately 643,000 female sterilization procedures are performed each year in the United States. A September 2024 study found that states which enacted abortion bans following the ruling in \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\" saw a 39% increase in tubal ligation rates by December 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69691", "revid": "36449898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69691", "title": "Esai Morales", "text": "American actor (born 1962)\nEsai Manuel Morales Jr. (born October 1, 1962) is an American actor. He has had notable roles in the films \"Bad Boys\" with Sean Penn and \"La Bamba\" with Lou Diamond Phillips. His television roles include the PBS 2002 drama series \"American Family\", the Showtime series \"Resurrection Blvd.\" (2000\u20132002), portraying Lt. Tony Rodriguez on \"NYPD Blue\" (2001\u20132004), Joseph Adama in the science fiction series \"Caprica\" (2009\u20132010), Camino del Rio in the Netflix original series \"Ozark\" (2017), and the DC Comics supervillain Slade Wilson / Deathstroke in the superhero series \"Titans\" (2019).\nMorales appeared as Gabriel, the main antagonist in the 2023 spy action film ' opposite Tom Cruise, a role which he reprised in ' in 2025.\nEarly life.\nOf Puerto Rican descent, Morales was born in Brooklyn to Esai Morales Sr., a welder, and Iris Margarita (n\u00e9e Declet), a union activist involved with the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union. Morales began his pursuit of an acting career by attending the High School of Performing Arts in Manhattan.\nCareer.\nHis first professional performances were in theater and television in New York. His first major film was \"Bad Boys\" (1983), about rival teenagers sentenced to a juvenile correction facility. Morales appeared in a 1985 episode of the TV series \"Fame\". He co-starred with Burt Lancaster in the 1986 NBC miniseries \"On Wings of Eagles\", playing the Iranian Rashid, the hero of a true story about Ross Perot. Morales also appeared in \"Miami Vice\", \"The Equalizer\", and \"24\".\nHe played Bob Morales, the real-life ex-convict and biker half-brother of 1950s rock and roll singer Ritchie Valens, in \"La Bamba\" (1987). He also played Nicholas Walker in \"Ultraviolet\" (1992). Some of his other roles have reflected his socio-political interests, such as \"The Burning Season\" in 1994, \"My Family/Mi Familia\" in 1995, \"The Disappearance of Garcia Lorca\" (1997), and \"Southern Cross\" (1999). In the latter three films, as well as in others such as \"Bloodhounds of Broadway\" (1989) and \"Rapa-Nui\" (1994), Morales saw increased amounts of screen time, starting with a role in the Pauly Shore film \"In The Army Now\" (1994). He portrayed a police officer in the film \"Dogwatch\" (1996) and Father Herrera in \"The Virgin of Juarez\" (2006).\nIn the 1990s, he guest-starred on episodes of \"The Outer Limits\", \"Tales from the Crypt\", and two shorter-lived series, \"L.A. Doctors\" and \"The Hunger\". He appeared in a two-part episode of \"Family Law\" in 2000. He was part of the main cast of the long-running series \"NYPD Blue\" for three and a half seasons, from 2001 to 2004, as the head of the 15th precinct detective squad.\nHe played a drug dealer named Lulu in the 2002 film \"Paid in Full\". In 2005, he was a voice actor in the video game \"\".\nMorales was cast in the film \"American Fusion\" (2005), and in 2006, he joined the cast of the Fox series \"Vanished\", as FBI agent Michael Tyner; the series ran for one season. In 2007, Morales appeared in an episode of the USA Network drama series \"Burn Notice\", as a Cuban shopkeeper being shaken down for \"protection\" money by local criminals. In 2008, Morales had a role in the CBS drama \"Jericho\", as Major Edward Beck. He appeared in all seven episodes of the shortened . That same year, he appeared in \"Kill Kill Faster Faster\", a film noir based on the novel of the same name by Joel Rose.\nMorales played the role of Joseph Adama in the science fiction television series \"Caprica\" \u2013 Syfy's prequel to the series \"Battlestar Galactica\". The series, though highly anticipated, only ran for one season in 2010. In 2009, he served as an official festival judge for the Noor Iranian Film Festival in Los Angeles.\nIn 2011, Morales starred in the drama film \"Gun Hill Road\" as Enrique, and in the web drama \"Los Americans\" airing on PIC.tv. Morales worked with Tony Plana, Yvonne DeLaRosa, Lupe Ontiveros, and JC Gonzalez in \"Los Americans\", an Internet program launched in 2011.\nIn 2015, Robert Rodriguez cast him as Lord Amancio Malvado for the second season of horror series \"\", which was followed in 2017 by a main role in the first season of the Netflix original series \"Ozark\", and then in 2019 in an antagonist role for the second season of the DC Universe superhero series \"Titans\" as Slade Wilson / Deathstroke.\nMorales appeared in ' as Gabriel, the film's main villain, a role which he reprised in its sequel '.\nIn 2023, Morales starred in the western thriller \"Cottonmouth\", which is set for release in 2024.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 2005, Morales (along with Mercedes Ruehl) received the Rita Moreno HOLA Award for Excellence from the Hispanic Organization of Latin Actors (HOLA).\nHe received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Arpa Foundation for Film, Music and Art, for his impact as an actor and role model.\nActivism.\nMorales has described himself as an \"actorvist\", primarily as one of the founders of the \"National Hispanic Foundation for the Arts\", taking inspiration from his mother, who was an organizer for the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union. He is also interested in environmental issues and was a founding board member of E.C.O. (Earth Communications Office).\nIn a February 28, 2007, all-star benefit reading of \"The Gift of Peace\" at UCLA's Freud Playhouse, he portrayed a hopeful member of a struggling immigrant family. The play was an open appeal and fundraiser for passage of U.S. House Resolution 808, which sought to establish a Cabinet-level \"Department of Peace\" in the U.S. government, to be funded by a two percent diversion of the Pentagon's annual budget.\nPersonal life.\nMorales is a vegetarian. He has a daughter, born in 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69692", "revid": "50226035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69692", "title": "Nehushtan", "text": "Brass serpent in Torah\nIn the biblical Books of Kings (; written c. 550 BC), the Nehushtan (; ) is the bronze image of a serpent on a pole. The image is described in the Book of Numbers, where Yahweh instructed Moses to erect it so that the Israelites who saw it would be cured and be protected from dying from the bites of the \"fiery serpents\", which Yahweh had sent to punish them for speaking against him and Moses ().\nAccording to 2 Kings 18:4, King Hezekiah instituted an iconoclastic reform: \"He abolished the shrines, smashed the pillars, and cut down the sacred post. He also broke into pieces the bronze serpent that Moses had made, for until that time, the Israelites had been offering sacrifices to it; it was called Nehushtan.\" Historical findings have also shown that the utilization of bronze serpents was not unique. In several Canaanite cities there were discoveries of the cultic use of these objects. It may have represented traces of an older practice associated with medicine and healing, that was also not restricted to the Levant.\nEtymology.\n\"Nehushtan\" is a pun on either the Hebrew word for \"snake\" (, \"n\u0101\u1e25\u0101\u0161\") or \"brass\" (, \"n\u0259\u1e25o\u0161e\u1e6f\"), and thus may mean \"The (Great) Serpent\" or \"The (Great) Brass\".\nAlternative translations.\nThe English Standard Version of the Bible and the majority of contemporary English translations refer to the serpent as made of \"bronze\", whereas the King James Version and a number of other versions state \"brass\". 2 Kings 18:4 is translated as \"brasen\" in the King James Version. The Douay-Rheims 1899 edition has \"brazen\". Eugene H. Peterson, in his paraphrase of the Bible \"The Message\" (2002), opted for \"a snake of fiery copper\".\nSerpent image.\nSnake cults had been well established in Canaan in the Bronze Age: archaeologists have uncovered serpent cult objects in Bronze Age strata at several pre-Israelite cities in Canaan: two at Megiddo, one at Gezer, one in the sanctuary of the Area H temple at Tel Hazor and two at Shechem. Cultic serpent imagery was not isolated to Canaan. It appeared in surrounding areas, including the Esagila or temple of Marduk as tutelary deity in Babylon, where pairs of bronze serpents were erected beside each entrance to the temple.\nAccording to Lowell K. Handy, the Nehushtan may have been the symbol of a deity for snakebite cure within the Temple in Jerusalem.\nIn scriptures.\nHebrew Bible.\nIn the biblical story, following their Exodus from Egypt, the Israelites set out from Mount Hor to go to the Red Sea. However they had to detour around the land of Edom (Numbers 20, 25). Impatient, they complained against Yahweh and Moses (), and in response God sent \"fiery serpents\" among them and many died. The people came to Moses to repent and asked him to ask God to take away the serpents. Verse 9 says, \"Moses made a copper serpent and mounted it on a standard; and when bitten by a serpent, anyone who looked at the copper serpent would recover.\"\nThe term appears in in a passage describing reforms made by King Hezekiah, in which he tore down the high places, cut down symbols of Asherah, destroyed the Nehushtan, and according to many Bible translations, gave it that name.\nRegarding the passage in 2 Kings 18:4, M. G. Easton noted that \"the lapse of nearly one thousand years had invested the 'brazen serpent' with a mysterious sanctity; and in order to deliver the people from their infatuation, and impress them with the idea of its worthlessness, Hezekiah called it, in contempt, 'Nehushtan', a brazen thing, a mere piece of brass\".\nThe tradition of naming it Nehushtan is not considered older than Hezekiah's time.\nNew Testament.\nIn the Gospel of John, Jesus makes a comparison between the raising up of the Son of Man and the act of the serpent being raised by Moses for the healing of the people. Jesus says \"And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up\". ()\nCharles Spurgeon preached a famous sermon on \"the Mysteries of the Brazen Serpent\" and this passage from John's Gospel in 1857.\nBook of Mormon.\nIn the Book of Mormon, three prophets make reference to this event. The first is the prophet Nephi, son of Lehi in a general discourse, the second is many years later by the prophet Alma, and the third is years later by Alma's great-grandson also named Nephi. Nephi tells the people that many of the Israelites perished because of the simplicity and faith required i.e., \"and the labor which they had to perform was to look; and because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished.\" In the latter narrative, Alma tells the people of Antionum that many of the Israelites died because they lacked the faith to look at the brazen serpent. He then compared the brazen serpent to a type of Christ and exhorted the people to look to Christ and spiritually live. These same themes from Alma were reiterated by Nephi in the Book of Helaman.\nRabbinic literature.\nInasmuch as the serpent in the Talmud stands for such evils as talebearing and defamation of character (Genesis 3:4\u20135), the Midrash finds in the plague of the fiery serpents a punishment for sins of the evil tongue (Numbers 21:5). God said: \"Let the serpent who was the first to offend by 'evil tongue' inflict punishment on those who were guilty of the same sin and did not profit by the serpent's example\".\nOne of the complaints in this case was dissatisfaction with the manna. Whereas the manna is said to have had any taste desired by the person eating it (Shemot Rabbah 25:3), to the serpent all things had the taste of dust, in accordance with the words: \"And dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life\" (Genesis 3:14). It was very appropriate, therefore, that they who loathed the food which had given any taste desired, should be punished by means of that creature to which everything has the same taste (Tan., ed. Buber, \u1e24u\u1e33\u1e33at, xlv. [337]; Midrash R. Num. xix. 22). The Mishnah does not take literally the words \"Every one who was bitten by a serpent would look at the serpent and live\", but interprets them symbolically. The people should look up to the God of heaven, for it is not the serpent that either brings to life or puts to death, but it is God (Mishnah R. H. 3:8, B. Talmud R.H. 29a). In the course of time, however, the people lost sight of the symbolical meaning and regarded the serpent itself as the seat of the healing power, and they made it an object of worship, so that Hezekiah found it necessary to destroy it (; see also Ber. 10a).\nThe question that puzzled Heinrich Ewald (\"Gesch. des Volkes Israel,\" iii. 669, note 5) and others, \"Where was the brazen serpent till the time of Hezekiah?\" occupied the Talmudists also. They answered it in a very simple way: Asa and Joshaphat, when clearing away the idols, purposely left the brazen serpent behind, in order that Hezekiah might also be able to do a praiseworthy deed in breaking it (\u1e24ul. 6b).\nDebated origins.\nOld Testament scholar H. H. Rowley proposed that Nehushtan, as it was known during Hezekiah\u2019s reign, had no origins in Yahwism despite being regarded as a symbol of Yahweh at the time of its destruction. Instead, Rowley theorized that the bronze serpent destroyed by King Hezekiah was a sacred pre-Israelite symbol of serpent worship associated with a Canaanite god and was adapted by the Israelites following the occupation of Jerusalem. W.W.G. Baudissin was also of the belief that the Canaanite bronze serpent was adapted by the Israelites between 850\u2013750 B.C.E following their settlement in Jerusalem.\nEgyptologist Henry Hall supports the theory that the Nehushtan destroyed by Hezekiah was not associated with Yahweh, but Hall alternately suggests that it was an ancient serpent image carried from Egypt by the ancestors of the Israelites. This theory is supported by acknowledging the standard Egyptian practice of using the image of a serpent as to defend themselves against snake bites, in a form of sympathetic magic.\nIn his notion that the brazen serpent existed within Jerusalem before the arrival of the Israelites, Rowley argues that there is no record of Nehushtan before the reign of Hezekiah, aside from the Numbers 21 story of the bronze serpent. Rowley states that had Nehushtan been brought into Jerusalem at any time as a genuine relic, there would be a documented record of its arrival or transfer. In his argument, Rowley also inserts that the arrival of Moses's sacred rod would be a public spectacle with an honorary procession, which would be well documented. Instead, he proposes that the bronze serpent became associated with Nehushtan through process of religious syncretism, citing that the gradual fusion of Canaanite and Israelite beliefs and customs. He hypothesized that symbols representing both religions may have been erected side by side within a sanctuary or public space as a political maneuver following the Israelite settlement.\nHebraist and Old Testament scholar R. H. Kennett hypothesized that Moses made the Brazen Serpent and that the Ark of the Covenant was created specifically to contain it despite no known written reference made to the Ark's contents. Kennett also theorized that should Nehushtan truly date back to the time of Moses, it was either maintained by priests after fleeing to Nob from Shiloh or accompanied the Ark as it was carried off by the Philistines. This is not widely accepted due to no known tradition or association between the Serpent and Ark.\nIn art.\nThere is a Brazen Serpent Monument on Mount Nebo in Jordan created by Italian artist Giovanni Fantoni. \nSimilarly, on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, Michelangelo painted a mural of the Israelites' deliverance from the plague of serpents by the creation of the bronze serpent.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69695", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69695", "title": "Necho II", "text": "Egyptian pharaoh\nNecho II (sometimes Nekau, Neku, Nechoh, or Nikuu; Greek: \u039d\u03b5\u03ba\u03ce\u03c2 \u0392'; Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0) of Egypt was a king of the 26th Dynasty (610\u2013595 BC), which ruled from Sais. Necho undertook a number of construction projects across his kingdom. In his reign, according to the Greek historian Herodotus, Necho II sent out an expedition of Phoenicians, which in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa to the Strait of Gibraltar and back to Egypt. His son, Psammetichus II, upon succession may have removed Necho's name from monuments.\nNecho played a significant role in the histories of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Neo-Babylonian Empire and the Kingdom of Judah. Necho II is most likely the pharaoh Necho who was mentioned in 2 Kings, 2 Chronicles, and Jeremiah of the Bible. The aim of the second of Necho's campaigns was Asiatic conquest, to contain the westward advance of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, and cut off its trade route across the Euphrates. However, the Egyptians were defeated by the unexpected attack of the Babylonians and were eventually expelled from Syria.\nThe Egyptologist Donald B. Redford observed that Necho II was \"a man of action from the start, and endowed with an imagination perhaps beyond that of his contemporaries, [who] had the misfortune to foster the impression of being a failure.\"\nBiography.\nLineage and early life.\nNecho II was the son of Psammetichus I by his Great Royal Wife Mehtenweskhet. His prenomen or royal name Wahem-Ib-Re means \"Carrying out [the] Heart (i.e., Wish) [of] Re.\" Upon his ascension, Necho was faced with the chaos created by the raids of the Cimmerians and the Scythians, who had not only ravaged Asia west of the Euphrates, but had also helped the Babylonians shatter the Assyrian Empire. That once mighty empire was now reduced to the troops, officials, and nobles who had gathered around a general holding out at Harran, who had taken the throne name of Ashur-uballit II. Necho attempted to assist this remnant immediately upon his coronation, but the force he sent proved to be too small, and the combined armies were forced to retreat west across the Euphrates.\nMilitary campaigns.\nFirst campaign.\nIn the spring of 609 BC, Necho personally led a sizable force to help the Assyrians. At the head of a large army, consisting mainly of his mercenaries, Necho took the coast route Via Maris into Syria, supported by his Mediterranean fleet along the shore, and proceeded through the low tracts of Philistia and Sharon. At Megiddo (according to 2 Kings 23) he engaged the Judean king, Josiah, and had the Judean king killed (an alternative version, in 2 Chronicles 35, of a battle in Megiddo also exists.)\nHerodotus reports the campaign of the pharaoh in his \"Histories, Book 2:159\":\nNecho soon captured Kadesh on the Orontes and moved forward, joining forces with Ashur-uballit and together they crossed the Euphrates and laid siege to Harran. Although Necho became the first pharaoh to cross the Euphrates since Thutmose III, he failed to capture Harran, and retreated back to northern Syria. At this point, Ashur-uballit vanished from history, and the Assyrian Empire was conquered by the Babylonians.\nLeaving a sizable force behind, Necho returned to Egypt. On his return march, he found that the Judeans had selected Jehoahaz to succeed his father Josiah, whom Necho deposed and replaced with Jehoiakim. He brought Jehoahaz back to Egypt as his prisoner, where Jehoahaz ended his days (2 Kings 23:31-34; 2 Chronicles 36:1\u20134).\nSecond campaign.\nThe Babylonian king was planning on reasserting his power in Syria. In 609 BC, King Nabopolassar captured Kumukh, which cut off the Egyptian army, then based at Carchemish. Necho responded the following year by retaking Kumukh after a four-month siege, and executed the Babylonian garrison. Nabopolassar gathered another army, which camped at Qurumati on the Euphrates. However, Nabopolassar's poor health forced him to return to Babylon in 605 BC. In response, in 606 BC the Egyptians attacked the leaderless Babylonians (probably then led by the crown prince Nebuchadnezzar) who fled their position.\nAt this point, the aged Nabopolassar passed command of the army to his son Nebuchadnezzar II, who led them to a decisive victory over the Egyptians at Carchemish in 605 BC, and pursued the fleeing survivors to Hamath. Necho's dream of restoring the Egyptian Empire in the Middle East as had occurred under the New Kingdom was destroyed as Nebuchadnezzar conquered Egyptian territory from the Euphrates to the Brook of Egypt (Jeremiah 46:2; 2 Kings 23:29) down to Judea. Although Nebuchadnezzar spent many years in his new conquests on continuous pacification campaigns, Necho was unable to recover any significant part of his lost territories. For example, when Ashkalon rose in revolt, despite repeated pleas the Egyptians sent no help, and were barely able to repel a Babylonian attack on their eastern border in 601 BC. When he did repel the Babylonian attack, Necho managed to capture Gaza while pursuing the enemy. Necho turned his attention in his remaining years to forging relationships with new allies: the Carians, and further to the west, the Greeks.\nAmbitious projects.\nAt some point during his Syrian campaign, Necho II initiated but never completed the ambitious project of cutting a navigable canal from the Pelusiac branch of the Nile to the Red Sea. Necho's Canal was the earliest precursor of the Suez Canal. It was in connection with a new activity that Necho founded a new city of \"Per-Temu Tjeku\" which translates as 'The House of Atum of Tjeku' at the site now known as Tell el-Maskhuta, about 15\u00a0km west of Ismailia. The waterway was intended to facilitate trade between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean.\nNecho also formed an Egyptian navy by recruiting displaced Ionian Greeks. This was an unprecedented act by the pharaoh since most Egyptians had traditionally harboured an inherent distaste for and fear of the sea. The navy which Necho created operated along both the Mediterranean and Red Sea coasts. Necho II constructed warships, including questionably triremes.\nPhoenician expedition.\nAt some point between 610 and before 594 BC, Necho reputedly commissioned an expedition of Phoenicians, who it is said in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa back to the mouth of the Nile; and would thereby be the first completion of the Cape Route. Herodotus' account was handed down to him by oral tradition, but is seen as potentially credible because he stated with disbelief that the Phoenicians \"as they sailed on a westerly course round the southern end of Libya (Africa), they had the sun on their right\"\u2014to northward of them (\"The Histories\" 4.42). Pliny reported that Hanno had circumnavigated Africa, which may have been a conflation with Necho's voyage, while Strabo, Polybius, and Ptolemy doubted the description; at the time it was not generally known that Africa was surrounded by an ocean (with the southern part of Africa being thought connected to Asia). F. C. H. Wendel, writing in 1890, concurred with Herodotus as did James Baikie. Egyptologist A. B. Lloyd disputed in 1977 that an Egyptian Pharaoh would authorize such an expedition, except for the reasons of Asiatic conquest and trade in the ancient maritime routes.\nDeath and succession.\nNecho II died in 595 BC and was succeeded by his son, Psamtik II, as the next pharaoh of Egypt. Psamtik II, however, apparently removed Necho's name from almost all of his father's monuments for unknown reasons. However, some scholars, such as Roberto Gozzoli, express doubt that this actually happened, arguing that the evidence for this is fragmentary and rather contradictory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69696", "revid": "246230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69696", "title": "Steven Segal", "text": ""}
{"id": "69697", "revid": "58947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69697", "title": "Nativity of Christ", "text": ""}
{"id": "69701", "revid": "1315977147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69701", "title": "Shocking Blue", "text": "Dutch rock band\nShocking Blue was a Dutch rock band formed in The Hague in 1967. They were part of the Nederbeat movement in the Netherlands. The band had a string of hit songs during the counterculture movement of the 1960s and early 1970s, including \"Send Me a Postcard\" and \"Venus\", which became their biggest hit and reached number one on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and many other countries during 1969 and 1970. The band sold 13 million records by 1973 but disbanded in 1974. Together with Golden Earring and the George Baker Selection, they are considered the most successful Nederbeat band, because their best hits charted abroad and especially in the United States.\nHistory.\nOriginal era.\nShocking Blue was founded in 1967 by the Motions guitarist Robbie van Leeuwen. Other members of the group at this time were Fred de Wilde, Klaasje van der Wal (1 February 1949 \u2013 12 February 2018) and Cor van der Beek (9 June 1949 \u2013 2 April 1998). They had a minor hit in 1968 with \"Lucy Brown is Back in Town\". When De Wilde was the band's lead singer, the band originally had a sound that was described as a cross between the Beatles and Brothers Four. \nDe Wilde left in 1968 after joining the Dutch army, and van Leeuwen was introduced to Mariska Veres, singing at that time with a club band. He persuaded her to take over the vocals, and the group recorded a worldwide hit with the song \"Venus\", which entered the Veronica top\u00a040 hit parade at position No.12 the 12\u00a0July 1969 and peaked at number three on 26\u00a0July 1969 in the Netherlands. The song was released in the United States and the United Kingdom at the end of the year and reached number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot\u00a0100 in February 1970. It subsequently sold 350,000 copies in Germany and topped the U.S. chart for three weeks, the first song from the Netherlands to do so. It sold over one million copies there by January 1970 and received a gold record awarded by the Recording Industry Association of America. Global sales exceeded five million copies. Other hits include \"Send Me a Postcard\" in late 1968 and \"Long and Lonesome Road\" (often mistakenly named as \"Long Lonesome Road\") in 1969.\n\"Venus\" was followed by \"Mighty Joe\" (flip-side \"Wild Wind\") in 1969 and \"Never Marry a Railroad Man\" (flip-side \"Roll Engine Roll\") in 1970, both of which sold over a million records. The latter became a top-ten hit in several countries around the world. Later songs were successful in Europe, Latin America, and Asia, including \"Hello Darkness\", \"Demon Lover\" (1970), \"Shocking You\", \"Blossom Lady\" and \"Out of Sight, Out of Mind\" (1971), \"Inkpot\", \"Rock in the Sea\" and \"Eve and the Apple\" (1972) and \"Oh Lord\" (1973), but they failed to make the charts in the U.S. or U.K.\nKlaasje van der Wal left towards the end of 1971, following their first trip to Japan (which spawned a live album). In 1974, Robbie Van Leeuwen quit, and Mariska Veres left later that year, leading to the band's split. Veres went on to pursue a solo career until 1982.\nReunions.\nShocking Blue reformed with its most famous line-up in 1979 and recorded \"Louise\" as their first single since their break-up in 1974. The song was never released. They did, however, perform live in 1980 with earlier songs such as \"Venus\" and \"Never Marry a Railroad Man\". \nThe band attempted another comeback in 1984 and released a new single \"The Jury and the Judge\" with \"I Am Hanging on to Love\" as the B-side in 1986. \nIn 1994, the single \"Body and Soul\" was released.\nLegacy.\nDrummer Cor van der Beek died on 2\u00a0April 1998 at age 49 in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Mariska Veres died of gallbladder cancer on 2\u00a0December 2006 at age 59 in The Hague, Netherlands. Bassist Klaasje van der Wal died on 12\u00a0February 2018 at age 69.\nBananarama covered \"Venus\" in 1986, hitting number 1 in the United States, Canada, and Australia, and reaching number 8 in the UK.\nNirvana covered \"Love Buzz\" as their debut single in 1988 and later included it on their first album \"Bleach\" in 1989.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69702", "revid": "378390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69702", "title": "Ragdoll cat", "text": ""}
{"id": "69703", "revid": "35930533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69703", "title": "Nadab", "text": "Nadab or Nadav may refer to:\nPlaces.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69704", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69704", "title": "Turkish Van", "text": "Breed of cat\nThe Turkish Van is a semi-long-haired, standardised breed of domestic cat, which was developed in the United Kingdom from a selection of cats obtained from various cities of modern Turkey, especially southeast Turkey. The breed is rare, is one of the larger breeds, and is distinguished by the Van pattern (named after the breed), where the colour is restricted to the head and the tail, and the rest of the cat is white; this is due to the expression of the piebald white spotting gene, a type of partial leucism. A Turkish Van may have blue or amber eyes, or be odd-eyed (having one eye of each colour).\nThe breed was first recognised as such by a breeder/fancier organisation, the UK-based Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF), in 1969, under the name Turkish cat. It was later renamed Turkish Van to better distinguish it from the Turkish Angora breed. The Turkish Van has been claimed to be descended from (and is often confused with) the landrace of usually all-white Van cats, mostly found near Lake Van, though one of the two original breeders' own writings indicate clearly that none of the breed's foundation cats came from the Van area.\nBreed standards.\nBreed standards allow for one or more body spots as long as there is no more than 20% colour and the cat does not give the appearance of a bicolour. A few random spots are acceptable, but they should not detract from the pattern. The rest of the cat is white. Although red tabby and white is the classic Van colour, the colour on a Van's head and tail can be one of the following: red, cream, black, blue, red tabby, cream tabby, brown tabby, blue tabby, tortoiseshell, dilute tortoiseshell (also known as blue-cream), brown-patched tabby, blue-patched tabby, and any other colour not showing evidence of crossbreeding with the point-coloured breeds (Siamese, Himalayan, etc.). Not all registries recognise all of these colour variations.\nWhile A registries recognise all-white specimens as Turkish Vans, most do not. The US-based Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA, the world's largest registry of pedigreed cats) and F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale F\u00e9line (FIFe, the largest international cat fancier organisation) recognise only Van-patterned specimens, as they define the breed by both its type and pattern. The Germany-based but international World Cat Federation (WCF) considers the all-white specimens a separate breed, which it calls the Turkish Vankedisi, a name that is easily confused with the landrace Van cat, which is called (two words) in Turkish. In other registries, the all-white cats are not considered show quality and are therefore actively bred against. They are prone to deafness; this is a common defect with many all-white animals.\nHistory.\nIn 1955, two British photographers, Laura Lushington and Sonia Halliday, while on assignment in Turkey for the Turkish Ministry of Tourism, were given two unrelated cats in Turkey, which Lushington took home with her and allowed to mate. When the offspring came out identical to their parents \u2013 chalk white with dark tail and head markings \u2013 she set to establishing a standardised breed, originally named Turkish cat, later Turkish Van, and having it recognised by the British cat fancy organisations. Lushington returned to Turkey to find another pair, with the goal of breeding to the standard \"three clear generations\".\nAccording to Lushington, her original imported cats were: Van Iskenderun Guzelli (female), a cat that came from Hatay Province, Iskenderun, and Stambul Byzantium (male), a cat given by a hotel manager in Istanbul, both in 1955. Two later additions to the gene pool were Antalya Anatolia (female), from the city of Antalya, and Burdur (male), from Burdur city, both in 1959. Lushington did not see Van city before 1963, and only stayed there \"for two days and two nights\". It is unclear why the name \"Turkish Van\" was chosen, or why one of the original 1955 kittens was named \"Van Iskenderun Guzelli\", given their provenance. Of the founding 1955 pair, Lushington wrote, in 1977:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is unclear whether Lushington was intending to imply that the Hatay and Istanbul kittens had originally come from the Lake Van region, or was simply referring to the Turkish Van foundation stock as \"Van kittens\" for short. Neither city is near Van Province, and there is no evidence that specimens of the Van cat landrace were ever among the foundation stock.\nThe Turkish Van was given full pedigree status in 1969 by the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF). Called simply the Turkish cat at this point, the name was changed in 1979 in the UK (1985 in the US) to Turkish Van to better distance the breed from the Turkish Angora cat (originally called simply Angora, an old spelling of Ankara).\nThe Turkish Van began to be imported into America in the 1970s. Beginning in 1983, two Florida breeders, Barbara and Jack Reark, worked to popularise this breed, and in 1985, The International Cat Association (TICA) granted the Turkish Van championship status. In 1988, the Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) accepted the breed for registration in the miscellaneous class. The CFA later bestowed provisional status to the Van in 1993, and championship status in 1994. In that first year, four Turkish Vans attained the grand title.\nPhysical characteristics.\nThe Turkish Van is a large, muscular cat with a moderately long body and tail. It has strong, broad shoulders and a short neck; the jock of the cat world. The body of a Van should neither be stocky, or thin. It should call to mind the body build of an athlete, and indeed, it is one of the largest cats. They take from 3 to 5 years to reach their full maturity and when they do males range in weight from 10 \u2013 20 pounds with females ranging from 7 \u2013 12 pounds.\nThe coat on a Turkish Van is considered semi-long-haired. While many cats have three distinct hair types in their coat \u2013 guard hair, awn hair, and down hair \u2013 the Turkish Van has no evident undercoat, only one coat. This makes their coat feel like cashmere or rabbit fur. The lack of an undercoat gives a sleek appearance. The coat is uncommonly water repellent, which makes bathing these cats a challenge, though the coat dries quickly. The breed actually has two lengths of hair, determined by season. In the winter, the hair is thick and long. In the summer, the hair sheds to leave a shorter, lighter coat. The coat begins short at birth and grows in gradually over a period of three to five years, so that the kittens may be short-haired in appearance, with thin tails, but as they mature, the fur on the chest will fill out, and the tail will thicken into a full brush tail. The tail does not shed hair or change according to the season, but remains long and full. The ears remain feathered with fur, so that even with its summer coat, the Van looks soft and fluffy.\nThe Turkish Van is one of the larger cat breeds. Ideal type should feature broad shoulders with a body that is \"top-heavy\", that is, a cat with its center of gravity forward. The cat is moderately long, and its back legs are slightly longer than its front legs, but neither the cat itself nor its legs are so long as to be disproportionate. They have large paws and rippling hard muscle structure which allows them to be very strong jumpers. Vans can easily hit the top of a refrigerator from a cold start on the floor. They are slow to mature and this process can take 3 years, possibly longer. Vans have been known to reach long from nose to tip of tail.\nA Turkish Van may have blue eyes, amber eyes, or be odd-eyed (having one eye of each colour, a condition known as heterochromia iridis). \nThe breed typically has very large ears when it is a kitten, growing into its ears over time. The nose is straight and Asiatic, considered long for a semi-longhair, and with its high cheek bones, and startlingly bright eyes, it gives off quite an exotic appearance.\nBehavior.\nThe TICA standard notes several characteristics, including their high intelligence, energy and playfulness \u2013 also making them somewhat mischievous. Muscular and highly driven, they like to climb and perch high up, to study their environment, and they get around their domain with impressive athleticism. They make quite successful hunters as a consequence. Their drive makes them easily trainable with positive reinforcement \u2013 to play fetch, do tricks or walk on a leash. Although there may be efforts to move the breed towards greater sociability. a 2021 study in Finland did find that the Turkish Vans in their research showed higher than average tendencies towards fearfulness, aggression towards humans, as well as a lower stress tolerance (notable excessive grooming and litter-box problems), and lower sociability to humans and cats.\nCurious, Turkish Vans want to be with their owner participating in whatever is happening, and so they may follow a person from room to room. While Turkish vans are affectionate to their family members, these are not normally lap cats. They may lie next to their owners and will happily allow themselves to be petted, but this is not a breed that tolerates being picked up and often wants to be near their owner, not on their owner.\nTurkish Vans do well in a single-pet household and don't seem to suffer much from separation anxiety. When put in a home with other cats, they much prefer being around other Turkish Vans. Dogs can be no problem as long as they are introduced properly and patiently.\nWhen it comes to families, Turkish Vans are happy to play with children, but care must be taken to make sure small ones are reminded that the breed may not enjoy being held, and may strike out if forced into such a situation. The native Van cats of Turkey have been nicknamed the \"swimming cats\", due to an unusual fascination with water. Despite the modern Turkish Van breed consisting almost entirely of pedigreed, indoor-only cats with no access to large bodies of water, and despite dubious connections between them and the cats of the Lake Van area, some feel that the Turkish Van has a notable affinity for water; for example, instead of swimming in a lake, they may stir their water bowls or play with water in the toilet, and some may even follow their owners into water. However, the idea that the breed likes water more than other cats may be mistaken according to some pet writers.\nGenetics.\nThe Turkish Van is largely free of genetic issues and breed-specific health defects. Unlike the Turkish Angora, the Turkish Van does not have issues with deafness.\nAdditionally, due to the Turkish Van's larger size, spay or neutering procedures are sometimes delayed to around 1 year of age, as an early adjustment to their hormone levels can affect how their bones and muscles grow.\nThe piebald spotting gene (partial leucism) appears in other different species (like the horse and the ball python). It also shows up in other breeds of cat, since the Van pattern is merely an extreme expression of the gene.\nThe breed's variability of eye colour is genetically caused by the white spotting factor, which is a characteristic of this breed. The white spotting factor is the variable expression of the piebald gene that varies from the minimal degree (1), as in the blue-eyed cats with white tip on the tail to the maximal degree (8\u20139) that results in a Van-patterned cat, when coloured marks occupy at most 20% of the white background, but the white background in the breed covers about 80% of the body. Breeding two cats together with the same level of white spotting will produce cats with a similar degree of spotting.\nVan-patterned Turkish Vans are not prone to deafness, because their phenotype is associated with the Van pattern (Sv) semi-dominant gene. Solid-white Turkish Angoras carry the epistatic (masking) white colour (W) dominant gene associated with white fur, blue eyes, and often deafness. All-white cats of Turkish Van stock may share this gene. All three types of cat may exhibit eye colours that are amber, blue or odd. Deafness is principally associated with white cats having two blue eyes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69705", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69705", "title": "Sterling (cat)", "text": ""}
{"id": "69706", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69706", "title": "Archdiocese of Tours", "text": "Catholic archdiocese in France\nThe Archdiocese of Tours (; ) is a Latin Church archdiocese of the Catholic Church in France. The archdiocese has roots that go back to the 3rd century, while the formal erection of the diocese dates from the 5th century.\nThe ecclesiastical province of Tours corresponds with the late Roman province of Tertia Lugdunensis. During Breton independence the see of Dol briefly exercised metropolitical functions (mainly tenth century). In 1859 the Breton dioceses except that of Nantes were constituted into a province of Rennes. Tours kept its historic suffragans of Le Mans, Angers together with Nantes and a newly constituted Diocese of Laval. In 2002 Tours lost all connection with its historic province, all its previous suffragans depending henceforth on an expanded province of Rennes (corresponding to the Brittany and Pays de la Loire administrative regions). Tours since 2002 has become the ecclesiastical metropolis of the Centre administrative region.\nIn 2022, in the Archdiocese of Tours there was one priest for every 5,284 Catholics.\nHistory.\nAncient.\nAccording to Louis Duchesne, the See of Tours was probably founded in the time of Constantine; Gregory of Tours says by Gatianus. As the city, (called \"Caesarodunum\"), was important as a crossing point of the Loire, it became a stop on the route to Santiago de Compostela. The fourth bishop was Brice of Tours. Stories about his tenure suggest tensions between the regular clergy and the secular priests in Tours at that time. Saint Perpetuus was bishop from 460 to 490. During his administration Christianity was further developed and consolidated in the province of Touraine. He was followed by Volusianus of Tours, a relative of Ruricius of Limoges. The first cathedral, dedicated to Saint Maurice, was built by Bishop Lidoire, sometime in the fourth century; it burned down in 561, but was restored by Gregory of Tours.\nBishop Chrotbert (Robert) is mentioned in the earliest grant of privileges to the Monastery of St. Martin in Tours, made by Pope Adeodatus (672\u2013676). The document survives only in two copies which differ significantly between them; both are suspect.\nMedieval.\nIn May 858, which was the third year of his pontificate, Archbishop Herardus held a diocesan synod, in which a codification was issued of the \"capitula\" ('regulations') of the diocese. The document contained 140 chapters.\nOn 21 January 1216, Pope Innocent III confirmed an agreement entered into between the Archbishop of Tours and the Chapter of the cathedral on the election of a Dean and Provosts.\nAfter the death of Archbishop Jean de la Faye in April 1228, there appears to have been considerable difficulty in finding a new archbishop. Jean Maan, Dean of Mans, was brought to Tours, but he refused the see, or was unable to muster sufficient votes. Then the see was offered to Master Pierre de Collomedio of Champagne, a Canon of Th\u00e9rouanne and Papal Legate, but, though the election was canonically carried out, he refused the offer.\nRevolution.\nThe leaders of the French Revolution, as part of their program, planned to bring the religions in France under their control. The Roman Church was rich, and therefore powerful. The Revolution needed to redirect that power and acquire that wealth to finance their own projects. One device was to transfer old loyalties by breaking up the traditional units of political, social and religious organization. The property of the religious organizations was to be confiscated for the benefit of the people of France, and all clergy would become state employees, with their salaries fixed and paid by the government. The new political unit was to be the \"d\u00e9partement\", of which eighty-four were planned. It was determined by the Constituent Assembly that the Church was overloaded with bishops; therefore the number of dioceses needed to be reduced, from the 135 of the Ancien R\u00e9gime, to 82 or 83, and that to the extent possible they were to have the same borders as the new political departments. The Diocese of Tours was therefore abolished and subsumed into a new diocese, coterminous with the new 'Departement d'Indre-et-Loire', which was to be a suffragan of the 'Metropole du Centre' (composed of the dioceses of Allier, Cher, Creuse, Indre, Indre-et-Loire, Loire-et-Cher, Ni\u00e8vre and Vienne, with its center at Bourges) in the \"Constitutional Church\". The clergy were required to swear and oath to the Constitution, and under the terms of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy a new bishop was to be elected by all the voters of the d\u00e9partement, who did not even need to be Catholics. This placed them in schism with the Roman Catholic Church and the Pope. Archbishop de Conzi\u00e9 of Tours refused to take the oath, and his bishopric was therefore declared to be vacant.\nOn 13 March 1791 the electors of Indre-et-Loire met in Tours in the cathedral. They were harangued by members of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Amis de la Constitution, who pressed for the election of their president, a former Oratorian by the name of Ysabeau, who, however, could not muster a majority. Instead on the next day the electors chose Pierre Suzor, the curate of Ecueill\u00e9. He proceeded to Paris, where he was consecrated a bishop on 10 April by Constitutional Bishops Massieu, Delcher, and Sibille. His consecration was valid, but uncanonical and schismatic, and brought him excommunication. As bishop, he was at first conservative and somewhat rigorous, refusing to sanction the marriage of clergy, but later he succumbed to pressure. At the end of 1793, when Religion was abolished and replaced by Reason and the churches closed, most of the 360 clergy of Indre-et-Loire abdicated or apostasized. Religion was restored in 1795, but Suzor did not regain possession of the cathedral until 13 May 1797. Suzor suffered a stroke in 1797; the bishops of the Metropolitanate were allowed to assemble at Bourges in 1800 to find him a successor. On 1 February 1801 Hyacinthe Tardiveau accepted the position, and Suzor died on 13 April 1801, having approved of his successor. Tardiveau was never bishop, since he made his acceptance conditional upon receiving the traditional bulls from the pope, which never happened. In May 1801 First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte required the resignation of all Constitutional bishops; he was in the process of completing a concordat with the Papacy, and the Constitutional Church was an obstacle.\nAfter the Concordat went into effect, Pius VII was able to issue the appropriate bulls to restore many of the dioceses and to regulate their boundaries, most of which corresponded closely to the new 'd\u00e9partements'. The Diocese of Tours, which was coterminous with the Department of Indre-et-Loire, had as suffragans: Le Mans, Angers, Rennes, Nantes, Quimper, Vannes, Saint-Pol, Treguier, Saint-Brieux Saint-M\u00e2lo and Dol.\nPilgrimages.\nThe main pilgrimage sites in the diocese besides the grottos of Marmoutier, are: Notre-Dame-la-Riche, a sanctuary erected on the site of a church dating from the third century, and where the founder St. Gatianus is venerated; Notre-Dame-de-Loches; St. Christopher and St. Giles at St-Christophe, a pilgrimage dating from the ninth century; the pilgrimage to the Oratory of the Holy Face in Tours, managed by Priests of the Holy Face canonically erected on 8 December 1876.\nBishops.\nto 700.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n[Valatus 618\u2013619]\n700 to 1000.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n1000\u20131300.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n [Fran\u00e7ois Cassard 1228\u20131229]\n [Philippe 1256\u20131257]\n1300\u20131500.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n1500\u20131700.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n Claude de Saint George (1687\u20131693) (Vicar General and Administrator)\n1700\u20131900.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69707", "revid": "47424798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69707", "title": "Naboth", "text": "Biblical character in the Book of Kings\nNaboth (; ) was a citizen of Jezreel. According to the Book of Kings in the Hebrew Bible, he was executed by Jezebel, the queen of Israel, so that her husband Ahab could possess his vineyard.\nNarrative.\nAccording to 1 Kings 21:1\u201316, Naboth owned a vineyard that was close to Ahab's palace in Jezreel. Ahab asked Naboth if he could buy the vineyard so that he could use it as a vegetable (or herb) garden. Naboth refused because the land was ancestral inheritance. Some theorize that Naboth was also fearful of disobeying the Mosaic law which forbade the permanent selling of land.\nJezebel resolved the issue by writing a letter, under Ahab's name, to the elders and nobles of Jezreel. In the letter, the elders and nobles were instructed to organize a religious fast and exalt Naboth and bring forth two witnesses to (falsely) accuse Naboth of cursing God and the king. Afterwards, they were to stone Naboth to death outside the city. Commentators observe that these instructions deliberately adhered to the Biblical guidelines of criminal justice so that the public would not suspect foul play. That said, Jezebel explicitly calls the two witnesses \"sons of Belial\", which may be descriptive of their willingness to do anything to get paid. \nThe conspiracy succeeded, with Naboth's corpse being licked by stray dogs. \nEmil G. Hirsch points out that \"It seems from II Kings ix. 26 that Naboth's sons perished with their father, probably being killed soon afterward by order of Jezebel in order that they might not claim the vineyard as their inheritance.\" The executions also had precedent in the execution of Achan's family, as recorded in the Book of Joshua, which Jezebel was most likely inspired by. After Naboth and his sons were executed, Jezebel told Ahab that he could possess the vineyard. \nJohannes Pedersen said that \"The story teaches us that the king is bound to respect the proprietary rights of families...\" According to rabbinic literature, Naboth's soul was the lying spirit that was permitted to deceive Ahab to his death. Naboth's death was further avenged after Jehu fatally shot Ahab's son Jehoram in the back with an arrow and threw his body in Naboth's former vineyard. Jezebel met a similar fate after she was thrown off a building, with her corpse devoured by dogs. According to the Bible, all of this was prophesized by prophet Elijah, who fiercely condemned Naboth's execution.\nInterpretations.\nArchaeological exploration conducted by the University of Haifa and the University of Evansville discovered an ancient winery in the vicinity of an Iron Age IIB (900\u2013700 BC) military enclosure at the foot of Tel Jezreel. While not definitely identifying the site as the location for the story of Naboth, archaeologist Dr. Norma Franklin, of the University of Haifa said that the vineyard appears to have been established sometime prior to 300 BCE, which would not be inconsistent with the time frame for Naboth. Franklin further noted, \"Owning a vineyard would make him wealthy since wine was an important commodity. I reckon that since he was from the aristocracy he probably lived in Samaria and had more than one vineyard. This would give a slightly different picture than the Bible, which implies, though does not state explicitly, that he was a poor man being abused by the wealthy king.\"\nBased on the dates of Ahab's death, which occurred three years after Naboth's death, it is presumed that Naboth died on 856\u2013855 BC.\nFrancis Andersen observed that \"Commentators have seen in the episode a clash of Israelite and Canaanite ideas of kingship, of citizenship, and of property.\"\nJewish medieval scholars sometimes used Elijah's words to Ahab \"You have killed and also taken possession\" (\"\u05d4\u05b2\u05e8\u05b8\u05e6\u05b7\u05d7\u05b0\u05ea\u05b8\u05bc \u05d5\u05b0\u05d2\u05b7\u05dd \u05d9\u05b8\u05e8\u05b8\u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05ea\u05b8\u05bc\") or the expression \"Naboth's vineyard\" to hint at double injustice (or crime committed with indecency, as opposed to \"simply committed\" crime). The Talmud also sees here a link to the prohibition of mixtures of milk and meat in Jewish law.\nRoger Williams, the founder of the American colony of Rhode Island and the co-founder of the First Baptist Church in America, wrote about Naboth's story in \"The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience\" as an example of how God disfavored Christians from using government force in religious matters, such as the religious decrees by Jezebel and Ahab. Williams believed using force in the name of religion would lead to political persecution contrary to the Bible.\nIn popular culture.\nThere are a number of artistic, dramatic, musical and literary works that are based on, or inspired by, the story of Naboth and his vineyard. These are less common now than was once the case, as the use of the expression as a cultural reference appears to have declined.\nArt.\nThe 17th century Baroque pulpit in the late Gothic church of Sint Michiel, Roeselare in Belgium depicts the story of Naboth's Vineyard.\n\"Naboth in his Vineyard\", (1856) an oil painting by James Smetham held by Tate Britain.\n\"Elijah confronting Ahab and Jezebel in Naboth's Vineyard\", (1875) by Sir Frank Dicksee, a gold medal winner from the Royal Academy. The original is untraced since having been sold at auction in 1919 from the collection of Sir Merton Russell-Cotes; the British Museum holds a black &amp; white print.\n\"King Ahab's Coveting \u2013 Naboth Refuses Ahab his Vineyard\", (1879) and \"Jezebel Promises Ahab to Obtain it by False Witness\", (1879) both by Thomas Matthews Rooke (Sir Edward Burne-Jones's studio assistant), and held by the Russell-Cotes Art Gallery &amp; Museum, Bournemouth.\nNovels and short stories.\n\"Naboth\" (1886, in book form 1891), by Rudyard Kipling; Kipling sympathises with Ahab, and treats Naboth as being unreasonable in refusing his demands.\n\"Naboth's Vineyard. A novel\" (1891), by E \u0152 Somerville and Martin Ross (Somerville and Ross).\n\"Naboth's Vineyard\" (1928), a short horror story by the English novelist EF Benson.\n\"Naboth's Vineyard\" (1928), a detective short story by Melville Davisson Post.\nPoetry.\n\"Naboth's Vineyard: Or, The Innocent Traytor\", (1679) a mock-Biblical verse satire by the Jacobite peer John Caryll whilst imprisoned in the Tower of London.\n\"The Garden Plot\", (1709) a sonnet by the Anglo-Irish satirist Jonathan Swift.\n\"Naboth, the Jezreelite\", (1844) a dramatic poem by Anne Flinders (the daughter of the explorer Matthew Flinders and the mother of the Egyptologist Flinders Petrie).\nMusic.\n\"Naboth\", (1702) an oratorio by Domenico Filippo Bottari.\n\"Sinfonia a quattro No 11 in D minor (\"Naboth\")\", (1729) a symphony by the Italian Baroque composer Antonio Caldara.\n\"Naboth's Weinbert\", (1781) an oratorio by Romano Reutter.\n\"Naboth's Vineyard\", (1968) a madrigal for three voices, forming the first part of a trilogy by the English composer Alexander Goehr.\n\"La vigne de Naboth: pi\u00e8ce en cinq actes et un \u00e9pilogue\", (1981) by the Belgian composer Andr\u00e9 Laporte.\n\"Naboth's Vineyard\", (1983) a work for recorders, cello and harpsichord by the English composer Malcolm Lipkin.\n\"Custodian \u2013 An Ex Parte Oratorio\", (2018) a protest oratorio for an a cappella choir by the Israeli composer Uri Agnon combining the stories of Naboth's Vineyard and the eviction of the Palestinian Sumreen family from their home in Silwan.\nTheatre.\n\u2018\u2019Faust: Part Two, Act One\u2019\u2019 Faust re-enacts the story and Mephisto cites it\n\"Naboth's Vineyard; a stage piece\", (1925) a play in three acts by the English novelist and playwright Clemence Dane.\n\"La Vigne de Nabot\", (lost date) a piece of black theatre (a form of puppetry making use of shadows) by the French puppeteer Georges Lafaye (puppeteer).\n\"Eating\", (1979) a retelling of the story of Naboth, focusing on the gluttony of Ahab, by the Israeli playwright Yaakov Shabtai.\nBallet.\n\"Naboth's Vineyard\" (1953), a ballet by the Austrian-born American composer Eric Zeisl, although it has not been produced or choreographed in full.\nFilm.\n\"Sins of Jezebel\", (1953) a drama film directed by the Austrian-born American director Reginald Le Borg; Ludwig Donath played Naboth.\n\"Leviathan\", (2014) a drama film directed by the Russian filmmaker Andrey Zvyagintsev, partly based on the story of Marvin Heemeyer, and partly on the Biblical stories of Job and Naboth's Vineyard.\nPolitics.\nThe Confederation of Canada, \ncelebrated July 1, 1867, was largely motivated by Canadians' fear that the United States would annex and absorb these northern British colonies. \"An indication of just how seriously John A. Macdonald\n(Canada's First Prime Minister) took this mood is contained in a letter he wrote shortly before leaving England... 'I sail in four days for Canada with the act uniting all British America in my pocket. A brilliant future would certainly await us were it not for those wretched Yankees who hunger &amp; thirst for Naboth's field - War will come some day between England &amp; the United States.'\"\n\"Naboth's Vineyard\", (1870) a speech by the Congressman Charles Sumner strongly opposing President Ulysses S. Grant's proposed annexation of the Dominican Republic (then called San Domingo).\nLt Gen Sir William Butler undertook a visit of South Africa in 1907 and reported his findings as \"From Naboth's Vineyard\".\nThe Israeli anti-settlement NGO Kerem Navot (\"Naboth's Vineyard\"), founded in 2012, takes its name from the story.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69708", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69708", "title": "Celtic F.C.", "text": "Association football club in Scotland\nFootball club\nThe Celtic Football Club, commonly known as Celtic (), is a professional football club in Glasgow, Scotland. The team competes in the Scottish Premiership, the top division of Scottish football. The club was founded in 1887 with the purpose of alleviating poverty in the Irish\u2013Scots population in the city's East End area. They played their first match in May 1888, a friendly match against Rangers which Celtic won 5\u20132. Celtic established themselves within Scottish football, winning six successive league titles during the first decade of the 20th century. The club enjoyed their greatest successes during the 1960s and 70s under Jock Stein, when they won nine consecutive league titles and the 1967 European Cup. Celtic have played in green and white throughout their history, adopting in 1903 the hoops that have been used ever since.\nCeltic are one of only seven clubs in the world to have won over 100 trophies, with 120 major honours as of 2025, the most of any European club and the second-most in the world. The club has won the Scottish league championship a joint-record 55 times, most recently in 2024\u201325, the Scottish Cup a record 42 times and the Scottish League Cup 22 times. The club's greatest season was 1966\u201367, when Celtic became the first British team to win the European Cup, also winning the Scottish league championship, the Scottish Cup, the League Cup and the Glasgow Cup. Celtic also reached the 1970 European Cup Final and the 2003 UEFA Cup Final, losing in both.\nCeltic have a fierce long-standing rivalry with Rangers, and together the clubs are known as \"The Old Firm\". Their matches against each other are regarded as among the world's biggest football derbies. The club's fanbase was estimated in 2003 as being around 9 million worldwide and there are more than 160 Celtic supporters clubs in over 20 countries. An estimated 80,000 fans travelled to Seville for the 2003 UEFA Cup Final, and their \"extraordinarily loyal and sporting behaviour\" in spite of defeat earned the fans Fair Play awards from both FIFA and UEFA.\nHistory.\nCeltic Football Club was formally constituted at a meeting in St. Mary's church hall in East Rose Street (now Forbes Street), Calton, Glasgow, by Irish Marist Brother Walfrid on 6 November 1887, with the purpose of alleviating poverty in the East End of Glasgow by raising money for the charity Walfrid had instituted, the \"Poor Children's Dinner Table\". Walfrid's move to establish the club as a means of fund-raising was largely inspired by the example of Hibernian, which was formed out of the immigrant Irish population a few years earlier in Edinburgh. Walfrid's own suggestion of the name \"Celtic\" (pronounced \"Seltik\") was intended to reflect the club's Irish and Scottish roots and was adopted at the same meeting. The club has the official nickname, \"The Bhoys\". However, according to the Celtic press office, the newly established club was known to many as \"the bold boys\". A postcard from the early 20th century that pictured the team and read \"The Bould Bhoys\" is the first known example of the unique spelling. The extra \"h\" imitates the spelling system of Gaelic, wherein the letter \"b\" is often accompanied by the letter \"h\".\nOn 28 May 1888, Celtic played their first official match against Rangers and won 5\u20132 in what was described as a \"friendly encounter\". Neil McCallum scored Celtic's first goal. Celtic's first kit consisted of a white shirt with a green collar, black shorts, and emerald green socks. The original club crest was a simple green cross on a red oval background. In 1889 Celtic reached the final of the Scottish Cup in their first season taking part in the competition, but lost 2\u20131 to Third Lanark. Celtic reached the final again in 1892 and this time were victorious after defeating Queen's Park 5\u20131, the club's first major honour. Several months later the club moved to its new ground, Celtic Park, and in the following season won the Scottish League Championship for the first time. In 1895, Celtic set the League record for the highest home score when they beat Dundee 11\u20130.\nIn 1897, the club became a private limited company and Willie Maley was appointed as the first \"secretary-manager\". Between 1905 and 1910, Celtic won the Scottish League Championship six times in a row. They also won the Scottish Cup in both 1907 and 1908, the first times a Scottish club had ever won the double. During World War I, Celtic won the league four times in a row, including 62 matches unbeaten between November 1915 and April 1917. The mid-1920s saw the emergence of Jimmy McGrory as one of the most prolific goalscorers in British football history; over a sixteen-year playing career, he scored 550 goals in 547 games (including 16 goals for Clydebank during a season on loan in 1923\u201324), a British goal-scoring record to this day. In January 1940, Willie Maley's retirement was announced. He was 71 years old and had served the club in varying roles for nearly 52 years, initially as a player and then as secretary-manager. Jimmy McStay became manager of the club in February 1940. He spent over five years in this role, although due to the Second World War no official competitive league football took place during this time. The Scottish Football League and Scottish Cup were suspended and in their place regional league competitions were set up. Celtic did not do particularly well during the war years, but did win the Victory in Europe Cup held in May 1945 as a one-off football match to celebrate Victory in Europe Day.\nEx-player and captain Jimmy McGrory took over as manager in 1945. Under McGrory, Celtic defeated Arsenal, Manchester United and Hibernian to win the Coronation Cup, a one-off tournament held in May 1953 to commemorate the coronation of Elizabeth II. He also led them to a League and Cup double in 1954. On 19 October 1957, Celtic defeated Rangers in the final of the Scottish League Cup at Hampden Park in Glasgow, retaining the trophy they had won for the first time the previous year; the 7\u20131 scoreline remains a record win in a British domestic cup final. The years that followed, however, saw Celtic struggle and the club won no more trophies under McGrory.\nFormer Celtic captain Jock Stein succeeded McGrory in 1965. He won the Scottish Cup in his first few months at the club, and then led them to the League title the following season.\n1967 was Celtic's annus mirabilis. The club won every competition they entered: the Scottish League, the Scottish Cup, the Scottish League Cup, the Glasgow Cup, and the European Cup. With this haul, Celtic became the first club to win the European Treble and remains the only club to win the fabled Quadruple. Under the leadership of Stein, the club defeated Inter Milan 2\u20131 at the Est\u00e1dio Nacional in Lisbon, on 25 May 1967 to become the first British team, and indeed the first from outside Spain, Portugal and Italy to win the European Cup. They remain the only Scottish team to have reached the final. The players that day, all of whom were born within 30 miles of Glasgow, subsequently became known as the \"Lisbon Lions\". The following season Celtic lost to Racing Club of Argentina in the Intercontinental Cup.\nCeltic reached the European Cup Final again in 1970, but were beaten 2\u20131 by Feyenoord at the San Siro in Milan. The club continued to dominate Scottish football in the early 1970s, and their Scottish Championship win in 1974 was their ninth consecutive league title, equalling the joint world record held at the time by MTK Budapest and CSKA Sofia.\nCeltic enjoyed further domestic success in the 1980s, and in their Centenary season of 1987\u201388 won a Scottish Premier Division and Scottish Cup double.\nThe club endured a slump in the early 1990s, culminating in the Bank of Scotland informing directors on 3 March 1994 that it was calling in the receivers as a result of the club exceeding a \u00a35\u00a0million overdraft. However, expatriate businessman Fergus McCann wrested control of the club, and ousted the family dynasties which had controlled Celtic since its foundation. According to media reports, McCann took over the club minutes before it was to be declared bankrupt. McCann reconstituted the club business as a public limited company\u00a0\u2013 Celtic PLC\u00a0\u2013 and oversaw the redevelopment of Celtic Park into a 60,832 all-seater stadium. In 1998 Celtic won the title again under Dutchman Wim Jansen and prevented Rangers from beating their nine-in-a-row record.\nMartin O'Neill took charge of the club in June 2000. Under his leadership, Celtic won three SPL championships out of five (losing the others by very small margins) and in his first season in charge the club also won the domestic treble, making O'Neill only the second Celtic manager to do so after Jock Stein. In 2003, around 80,000 Celtic fans travelled to watch the club compete in the UEFA Cup Final in Seville. Celtic lost 3\u20132 to Porto after extra time, despite two goals from Henrik Larsson during normal time. The conduct of the thousands of travelling Celtic supporters received widespread praise from the people of Seville and the fans were awarded Fair Play Awards from both FIFA and UEFA \"for their extraordinarily loyal and sporting behaviour\".\nGordon Strachan was announced as O'Neill's replacement in June 2005 and after winning the SPL title in his first year in charge, he became only the third Celtic manager to win three titles in a row. He also guided Celtic to their first UEFA Champions League knockout stage in 2006\u201307 and repeated the feat in 2007\u201308 before departing the club in May 2009, after failing to win the SPL title. Tony Mowbray took charge of the club in June 2009, and he was succeeded a year later by Neil Lennon. In November 2010, Celtic set an SPL record for the biggest win in SPL history, defeating Aberdeen 9\u20130 at Celtic Park.\nCeltic celebrated their 125th anniversary in November 2012, the same week as a Champions League match against Barcelona. They won 2\u20131 on the night to complete a memorable week, and eventually qualified from the group stages for the round of 16. Celtic finished the season with the SPL and Scottish Cup double. The club clinched their third consecutive league title in March 2014, with goalkeeper Fraser Forster setting a new record during the campaign of 1,256 minutes without conceding a goal in a league match. At the end of the season, manager Neil Lennon announced his departure from the club after four years in the role.\nNorwegian Ronny Deila was appointed manager of Celtic on 6 June 2014. He went on to lead the team to two consecutive league titles and a League Cup, but the team's performances in European competition were poor. After being eliminated from the Scottish Cup by Rangers in April 2016, Deila announced he would leave the club at the end of the season.\nOn 20 May 2016, Brendan Rodgers was announced as Deila's successor. His first season saw the team go on a long unbeaten run in domestic competitions, during which time the club won their 100th major trophy, defeating Aberdeen 3\u20130 in the League Cup Final in November 2016. Celtic also clinched their sixth successive league title in April 2017 with a record eight league games to spare, and eventually finished with a record 106 points, becoming the first Scottish side to complete a top-flight league season undefeated since Rangers in 1899. Celtic clinched their fourth treble by defeating Aberdeen 2\u20131 in the 2017 Scottish Cup Final, the result of which saw the club go through the entire domestic season unbeaten.\nCeltic continued their unbeaten domestic run into the following season, eventually extending it to 69 games, surpassing their own 100-year-old British record of 62 games, before finally losing to Hearts in November 2017. Celtic retained the League Cup that same month by defeating Motherwell in the final, and went on to clinch their seventh consecutive league title in April 2018. They went on to defeat Motherwell again in the 2018 Scottish Cup Final to clinch a second consecutive domestic treble (the \"double treble\"), the first club in Scotland to do so. Rodgers left the club midway through following season to join Leicester City; Neil Lennon returned as caretaker manager for the rest of the season and helped Celtic secure an unprecedented third consecutive domestic treble (the \"treble treble\"), defeating Hearts 2\u20131 in the 2019 Scottish Cup Final. Later that month, he was confirmed as the club's new manager.\nIn December 2019, Lennon led Celtic to a 1\u20130 win over Rangers in the 2019 Scottish League Cup Final, the club's tenth consecutive domestic trophy. By March 2020, Celtic were 13 points ahead in the league when professional football in Scotland was suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom. they were confirmed as champions in May 2020 following a SPFL board meeting where it was agreed that completing the full league campaign was infeasible. The completion of the 2019\u201320 Scottish Cup was delayed, with the semi-finals and final \u2013 between Celtic and Hearts as in the previous year \u2013 not taking place until late autumn/winter of 2020. Celtic won on penalty-kicks after the sides tied at 3\u20133 after extra time, clinching a fourth successive treble. However, Celtic struggled throughout the 2020\u201321 season with poor performances in Europe, knocked out of the League Cup by Ross County, and by February 2021 were trailing 18 points behind Rangers in the league \u2013 effectively ending their hopes of winning \"ten in a row\" league titles. Lennon resigned on 24 February 2021, with assistant manager John Kennedy taking interim charge of the team. In the closing weeks of the season, Celtic were knocked out of the Scottish Cup by Rangers which condemned them to their first trophy-less season since 2010, and finished the league campaign 25 points behind their Glasgow rivals.\nOn 26 April 2025, Celtic defeated Dundee United 5\u20130 to secure their fourth consecutive league title, which represented their 13th title won across their previous 14 league campaigns.\nCrest and colours.\n \nFor most of Celtic's history their home strip has featured green and white horizontal hoops, but their original strip consisted of a white top with black shorts and black and green hooped socks. The top also featured the Marist Brothers' badge on the right hand side, consisting of a green Celtic cross inside a red circle. In 1889, the club changed to a green and white vertically striped top and for the next fourteen years this remained unchanged although the colour of the shorts alternated between white and black several times over this period. The top did not feature a crest.\nIn 1903, Celtic adopted their now famous green and white hooped tops. The new design was worn for the first time on 15 August 1903 in a match against Partick Thistle. Black socks continued to be worn until the early 1930s, at which point the team switched to green socks. Plain white socks came into use in the mid-1960s, and white has been the predominant colour worn since then.\nThe club began using a badge in the 1930s, featuring a four leaf clover logo surrounded by the club's formal title, \"The Celtic Football and Athletic Coy. Ltd\". However, it was not until 1977 that Celtic finally adopted the club crest on their shirts. The outer segment was reversed out, with white lettering on a green background on the team shirts. The text around the clover logo on the shirts was also shortened from the official club crest to \"The Celtic Football Club\". For their centenary year in 1988, a commemorative crest was worn, featuring the Celtic cross that appeared on their first shirts. The 1977 version was reinstated for season 1989\u201390.\nFrom 1945 onwards numbered shirts slowly came into use throughout Scotland, before becoming compulsory in 1960. By this time Celtic were the last club in Britain to adopt the use of numbers on the team strip to identify players. The traditionalist and idealistic Celtic chairman, Robert Kelly, baulked at the prospect of the famous green and white hoops being disfigured, and as such Celtic wore their numbers on the players' shorts. This unusual tradition survived until 1994, although numbered shirts were worn in European competition from 1975 onwards. Celtic's tradition of wearing numbers on their shorts rather than on the back of their shirts was brought to an end when the Scottish Football League instructed Celtic to wear numbers on their shirts from the start of the 1994\u201395 season. Celtic responded by adding numbers to the top of their sleeves, however within a few weeks the football authorities ordered the club to attach them to the back of their shirts, where they appeared on a large white patch, breaking up the green and white hoops.\nIn 1984 Celtic took up shirt sponsorship for the first time, with Fife-based double glazing firm CR Smith having their logo emblazoned on the front of the team jersey. In season 1991\u201392, Celtic switched to Glasgow-based car sales company Peoples as sponsors. The club failed to secure a shirt sponsor for season 1992\u201393, and for the first time since the early 1980s Celtic took to the field in \"unblemished\" hoops. Despite the loss of marketing revenue, sales of the new unsponsored replica top increased dramatically. Celtic regained shirt sponsorship for season 1993\u201394, with CR Smith returning as shirt sponsors in a four-year deal.\nIn 2005 the club severed their connection with Umbro, suppliers of their kits since the 1930s and entered into a contract with Nike. To mark the 40th anniversary of their European Cup win, a special crest was introduced for the 2007\u201308 season. The star that represents this triumph was retained when the usual crest was reinstated the following season. In 2012, a retro style kit was designed by Nike that included narrower hoops to mark the club's 125th anniversary. A special crest was introduced with a Celtic knot design embroidered round the traditional badge. A third-choice strip based on the first strip from 1888 was also adopted for the season.\nIn March 2015, Celtic agreed a new kit deal worth \u00a330 million with Boston-based sportswear manufacturer New Balance to replace Nike from the start of the 2015\u201316 season.\nAll of the kits for the 2017\u201318 season paid tribute to the Lisbon Lions, with the kits having a line on each side to represent the handles of the European Cup. The kits also included a commemorative crest, designed specifically for the season. The regular crest was reinstated the following season, although the away strip featured a Celtic cross once again in reference to the club's heritage.\nIn March 2020, Celtic announced a new five-year partnership with Adidas starting on 1 July 2020, in a deal believed to be the biggest kit sponsorship ever in Scottish sport.\nStadium.\nCeltic's stadium is Celtic Park, which is in the Parkhead area of Glasgow. Celtic Park, an all-seater stadium with a capacity of 60,411, is the largest football stadium in Scotland and the eighth-largest stadium in the United Kingdom, after Murrayfield, Old Trafford, Twickenham, Wembley, the London Stadium, Tottenham Hotspur Stadium and the Millennium Stadium. It is commonly known as Parkhead or Paradise.\nCeltic opened the original Celtic Park in the Parkhead area in 1888. The club moved to a different site in 1892, however, when the rental charge was greatly increased. The new site was developed into an oval shaped stadium, with vast terracing sections. The record attendance of 83,500 was set by an Old Firm derby on 1 January 1938. The terraces were covered and floodlights were installed between 1957 and 1971. The Taylor Report mandated that all major clubs should have an all-seated stadium by August 1994. Celtic was in an unhealthy financial position in the early 1990s and no major work was carried out until Fergus McCann took control of the club in March 1994. He carried out a plan to demolish the old terraces and develop a new stadium in a phased rebuild, which was completed in August 1998. During this development, Celtic spent the 1994\u201395 season playing at the national stadium Hampden Park, costing the club \u00a3500,000 in rent. The total cost of the new stadium on its completion was \u00a340\u00a0million.\nCeltic Park has been used as a venue for Scotland internationals and Cup Finals, particularly when Hampden Park has been unavailable. Before the First World War, Celtic Park hosted various other sporting events, including composite rules shinty-hurling, track and field and the 1897 Track Cycling World Championships. Open-air masses, and First World War recruitment drives have also been held there. In more recent years, Celtic Park has hosted the Opening Ceremonies of the 2014 Commonwealth Games, the 2005 Special Olympics National Games and the 1990 Special Olympics European Games. Celtic Park has occasionally been used for concerts, including performances by The Who and U2.\nIn July 2016, Celtic Park became the first British football stadium to have a \"rail seating\" (safe standing) area in the ground. Rail seating is particularly common in Germany's Bundesliga, most notably at Borussia Dortmund's Westfalenstadion, a ground with a reputation on par with Celtic Park for its intensity and atmosphere.\nIn June 2018, Celtic announced a series of stadium improvements that would be implemented before the 2018\u201319 season. These include the installation of new LED floodlights and a new entertainment system, a stadium-wide PA system and a new hybrid playing surface.\nSupporters.\nIn 2003 Celtic were estimated to have a fan base of nine million people, including one million in the US and Canada. There are over 160 Celtic Supporters Clubs in over 20 countries around the world.\nAn estimated 80,000 Celtic supporters, many without match tickets, travelled to Seville in Spain for the UEFA Cup Final in May 2003. The club's fans subsequently received awards from UEFA and FIFA for their behaviour at the match.\nCeltic has the highest average home attendance of any Scottish club. They also had the 12th highest average league attendance out of all the football clubs in Europe in 2011. A study of stadium attendance figures from 2013 to 2018 by the \"CIES Football Observatory\" ranked Celtic at 16th in the world during that period, and their proportion of the distribution of spectators in Scotland at 36.5%, the highest of any club in the leagues examined.\nIn October 2013, French football magazine So Foot published a list of whom they considered the \"best\" football supporters in the world. Celtic fans were placed third, the only club in Britain on the list, with the magazine highlighting their rendition of \"You'll Never Walk Alone\" before the start of European ties at Celtic Park.\nOn 23 October 2017, Celtic fans were awarded with the FIFA Fan Award for their tifo commemorating the 50th anniversary of the club's European cup win. The award celebrates the best fan moment of November 2016 to August 2017.\nSectarianism.\nCeltic's traditional rivals are Rangers; collectively, the two clubs are known as the Old Firm and seen by some as the world's biggest football derby. The two have dominated Scottish football's history; between them, they have won the Scottish league championship 108 times (as of May 2023) since its inception in 1890\u00a0\u2013 all other clubs combined have won 19 championships. The two clubs are also by far the most supported in Scotland, with Celtic having the sixth highest home attendance in the UK during the 2014\u201315 season. Celtic have a historic association with the people of Ireland and Scots of Irish descent, both of whom are mainly Roman Catholic. Traditionally fans of rivals Rangers came from Scottish or Northern Irish Protestant backgrounds and support Unionism in Ireland.\nThe clubs have attracted the support of opposing factions in the Troubles in Northern Ireland. Some supporters use songs, chants and banners at matches to abuse or show support for the Protestant or Catholic religions and proclaim support for Northern Irish paramilitary groups such as the IRA and UVF.\nThere have been over 400 Old Firm matches played. The games have been described as having an \"atmosphere of hatred, religious tension and intimidation which continues to lead to violence in communities across Scotland.\" The rivalry has fuelled many assaults and even deaths on Old Firm Derby days. Admissions to hospital emergency rooms have been reported to increase ninefold over normal levels and in the period from 1996 to 2003, eight deaths in Glasgow were directly linked to Old Firm matches, and hundreds of assaults.\nBoth sets of fans fought on the pitch after Celtic's victory in the 1980 Scottish Cup Final at Hampden Park. There was serious fan disorder during an Old Firm match played in May 1999 at Celtic Park; missiles were thrown by Celtic fans, including one which struck referee Hugh Dallas, who needed medical treatment and a small number of fans invaded the pitch.\nCeltic have taken measures to reduce sectarianism. In 1996, the club launched its \"Bhoys Against Bigotry\" campaign, later followed by \"Youth Against Bigotry\" to \"educate the young on having ... respect for all aspects of the community\u00a0\u2013 all races, all colours, all creeds\".\nIrish republicanism.\nSome groups of Celtic fans have expressed their support for Irish republicanism and the Irish Republican Army by singing or chanting about them at matches.\nIn 2008 and 2010, there were protests by groups of fans over the team wearing the poppy for Remembrance Day, as the symbol is opposed by Irish Republicans owing to its association with the British military. Celtic expressed disapproval of these protests, saying they were damaging to the image of the club and its fans, and pledged to ban those involved. In 2011, UEFA and the Scottish Premier League investigated the club over pro-IRA chants by fans at different games. UEFA fined Celtic \u00a312,700, while the SPL took no action, as the club had taken all reasonable action to prevent the chants.\nCeltic media.\nIn 1965, Celtic began publishing its own newspaper, \"The Celtic View\", now the oldest club magazine in football. It was the brainchild of future chairman Jack McGinn, who at the time was working in the circulation department of Beaverbrook Newspapers. McGinn himself edited the paper for the first few years, with circulation initially reaching around 26,000 copies. By 2020, it was a 72-page glossy magazine with over 6,000 weekly readers, and the top selling club magazine in the United Kingdom. In the spring of 2020, the magazine saw a temporary cease of production due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK. However, in August 2021, Celtic announced the restart of the production activities for the magazine, which was turned into a 100-page, quarterly publication.\nFrom 2002, Celtic's Internet TV channel Channel67 (previously known as Celtic Replay) broadcast Celtic's own content worldwide and offered live match coverage to subscribers outside the UK. It also provided three online channels. In 2004, Celtic launched their own digital TV channel called Celtic TV, which was available in the UK through Setanta Sports on satellite and cable platforms. Due to the collapse of Setanta in the UK in June 2009, Celtic TV stopped broadcasting, although the club hoped to find a new broadcast partner. In 2011, Celtic TV was relaunched as an online service and replaced Channel 67.\nInfluence on other clubs.\nDue to Celtic's large following, several clubs have emulated or been inspired by Celtic. As the club has a large following, especially in Northern Ireland, several clubs have been founded there by local Celtic fans. The most notable and successful was Belfast Celtic, formed in 1891 simply as \"Celtic\". Upon incorporation as a limited company in 1901, however, the club adopted the name \"Belfast Celtic\", the title \"Celtic Football Club Ltd\" already being registered by the Glasgow club. Their home from the same year was Celtic Park on Donegall Road in west Belfast, known to the fans as \"Paradise\". It was one of the most successful teams in Ireland until it withdrew from the Irish League in 1949. Donegal Celtic, currently playing in the NIFL Premier Intermediate League, was established in 1970, with the Celtic part being taken on due to the massive local following for Scotland's Celtic and formerly Belfast Celtic. They are nicknamed \"The Wee Hoops\" and play at Donegal Celtic Park on Suffolk Road in Belfast.\nA club by the name of Lurgan Celtic was originally formed in 1903, with the obvious slant of aiming towards the Roman Catholic community of the town, adopting the name and colours of the Glaswegian Celtic. The County Armagh club currently plays in the NIFL Championship. In the Republic of Ireland, both Tuam Celtic A.F.C. and Castlebar Celtic F.C. play at grounds called Celtic Park.\nThroughout Scotland and England, other clubs have been named after and adopted Celtic's kit. These include the now defunct Scottish club Blantyre Celtic F.C.; Irish club Listowel Celtic F.C.; and English lower-league clubs Cleator Moor Celtic F.C., which was founded in 1908\u201309 by Irish immigrants employed in the local iron ore mines, Celtic Nation F.C. (now defunct) and West Allotment Celtic F.C.\nSomerset club Yeovil Town F.C., who traditionally wore an all-green shirt, modified their uniform to emulate Celtic's, inspired by the Scottish club's 2003 UEFA Cup run.\nSouth African club Bloemfontein Celtic F.C., based in Bloemfontein , previously one of the most popular clubs in the country with a large fan base in the Free State, is also named after Celtic F.C. Founded in 1969 as \"Mangaung United\", in 1984, the then owner Molemela took over the club and changed the name to \"Bloemfontein Celtic\". In the United States of America, Hurricanes F.C. of Houston, Texas rebranded as Celtic FC America in 2019 and play in the Texas Premier Soccer League.\nAmateur Australian club South Lismore Celtic FC, which plays in the FFNC Premier League, the top league of the Football Far North Coast region, are named and designed after Celtic. South Lismore Celtic FC were the 2022 champions of the FFNC Premier League.\nCharity.\nCeltic was initially founded to raise money for the poor in the East End of Glasgow and the club still retain strong charitable traditions today. In 1995 the Celtic Charity Fund was formed with the aim of \"revitalising Celtic's charitable traditions\" and by September 2013 had raised over \u00a35\u00a0million. The Charity Fund has since then merged with the Celtic Foundation, forming the Celtic FC Foundation, and continues to raise money for local, national and international causes.\nOn 9 August 2011 Celtic held a testimonial match in honour of former player John Kennedy. Due to the humanitarian crisis in East Africa, the entire proceeds were donated to Oxfam. An estimated \u00a3300,000 was raised.\nCeltic hold an annual charity fashion show at Celtic Park. In 2011 the main beneficiaries were Breast Cancer Care Scotland.\nYorkhill Hospital is another charity with whom Celtic are affiliated and in December 2011 the club donated \u00a33000 to it. Chief Executive Peter Lawwell said that; \"Celtic has always been much more than a football club and it is important that, at all times we play an important role in the wider community. The club is delighted to have enjoyed such a long and positive connection with Yorkhill Hospital.\"\nOwnership and finances.\nPrivate company.\nCeltic were formed in 1887, and in 1897 the club became a Private Limited Company with a nominal share capital of 5000 shares at \u00a31 each. The following year a further share issue of 5000 \u00a31 shares was created to raise more capital. The largest number of shares held were by businessmen from the East End of Glasgow, notably James Grant, an Irish publican and engineer, James Kelly, one of the club's original players turned publican, and John Glass, a builder and driving force in the early years of the club. His shares, upon his death in 1906, passed on to Thomas White. The Grant, Kelly and White families' shareholdings dominated ownership of the club throughout the 20th century.\nThe late 1940s saw Robert Kelly, son of James Kelly, become chairman of the club after having been a director since 1931. Desmond White also joined the board around this time, upon the death of his father Thomas White. By the 1950s, a significant number of shares in the club had passed to Neil and Felicia Grant, who lived in Toomebridge, County Antrim. These shares accounted for more than a sixth of the club's total issue. Club chairman Robert Kelly's own family share-holding was of a similar size, and he used his close relationship with the Toomebridge Grants to ensure his power base at Celtic was unchallengeable. When Neil Grant died in the early 1960s, his shareholding passed to his sister Felicia, leaving her as the largest share-holder in Celtic. This gave rise to the myth among Celtic supporters of the \"old lady in Ireland\" who supposedly had the ultimate say in the running of the club.\nCeltic's board of directors had a reputation of being miserly and authoritarian. In particular they were known for frequently selling their top players and not paying their staff enough; they were also seen as lacking ambition, which caused friction with several managers. Jimmy McGrory's tenure as manager is generally considered a period of underachievement, but with Chairman Robert Kelly's domineering influence. many have questioned how much authority McGrory ever had in team selection. Even Jock Stein's time as manager ended on a sour note when he was offered a place on the Celtic board, but in a role involving ticket sales. Stein felt that this was demeaning, stating he was \"a football man, not a ticket salesman\". He declined this offer and decided to stay in football management, joining Leeds United instead. Billy McNeill won a trophy in each of his five seasons as manager, but was still paid less than the managers of Rangers, Aberdeen and Dundee United. He left the club in June 1983 after his request for a contract and pay rise was publicly rebuffed by the board. McNeill moved on to manage Manchester City, stating that to remain at Celtic would have been humiliating. McNeill's successor, Davie Hay, also had his difficulties with the Celtic board. When trying to sign players in 1987 to strengthen his squad to compete with high-spending Rangers, the board refused to pay for them; chairman Jack McGinn was quoted as saying that if Hay wanted these players, \"he will have to pay for them himself\".\nBy the end of the 1980s the Celtic board consisted of chairman McGinn and directors Kevin Kelly, Chris White, Tom Grant and Jimmy Farrell. Neither McGinn nor Farrell were members of the traditional family dynasties at Celtic. Farrell was a partner in the Shaughnessy law firm that had long-standing connections with Celtic, and was invited to become a director in 1964. McGinn had set up \"The Celtic View\" in the 1960s and later became the club's commercial manager. He was given a seat on the board and became chairman in 1986. In May 1990 the former Lord Provost of Glasgow, Michael Kelly, and property developer Brian Dempsey were invited to join the Celtic board. Dempsey did not last long however, as a dispute about a proposed relocation to Robroyston resulted in him being voted off the board five months later.\nMcCann takeover and transition to plc.\nThroughout the 1960s and 70s Celtic had been one of the strongest clubs in Europe. However, the directors failed to accompany the wave of economic development facing football in the 1980s, although the club continued to remain successful on the field, albeit limited to the domestic scene in Scotland. In 1989, the club's annual budget was \u00a36.4\u00a0million, about a third as much as Barcelona, with a debt of around 40% and on-field success deteriorating. In the early 1990s the situation began to worsen as playing success declined dramatically and the club slipped further into debt.\nIn 1993 fans began organising pressure groups to protest against the board, one of the most prominent being \"Celts for Change\". They supported a takeover bid led by Canadian-based businessman Fergus McCann and former director Brian Dempsey. Football writer Jim Traynor described McCann's attempt to buy the club as \"good against evil\". Despite declining attendances and increasing unrest amongst supporters, the Kelly, White and Grant family groupings continued to guard their control of Celtic.\nOn 4 March 1994, McCann bought Celtic for \u00a39\u00a0million, finally wresting control from the family dynasties that had run the club for almost 100 years. When he bought the club it was reported to be within 24 hours of entering receivership due to exceeding a \u00a35\u00a0million overdraft with the Bank of Scotland. He turned Celtic into a public limited company through a share issue which raised over \u00a314\u00a0million, the most successful share issue in British football history. He also oversaw the building of a new stadium, the 60,000 seater Celtic Park, which cost \u00a340\u00a0million and at the time was Britain's largest club stadium. This allowed Celtic to progress as a club because over \u00a320\u00a0million was being raised each year from season ticket sales.\nMcCann had maintained that he would only be at Celtic for five years and in September 1999 he announced that his 50.3% stake in Celtic was for sale. McCann had wanted the ownership of Celtic to be spread as widely as possible and gave first preference to existing shareholders and season-ticket holders, to prevent a new consortium taking over the club. 14.4\u00a0million shares were sold by McCann at a value of 280 pence each. McCann made \u00a340\u00a0million out of this, meaning he left Celtic with a \u00a331\u00a0million profit. During his tenure, turnover at Celtic rose by 385% to \u00a333.8m and operating profits rose from \u00a3282,000 to \u00a36.7m. McCann was often criticised during his time at Celtic and many people disagreed with him over building a stadium which they thought Celtic could not fill, not investing enough in the squad and being overly focused on finance. However, McCann was responsible for the financial recovery of the club and for providing a very good platform for it to build on. After he left Celtic, the club were able to invest in players and achieved much success such as winning the treble in 2000\u201301 and reaching the 2003 UEFA Cup Final.\nAfter McCann's exit, Irish billionaire Dermot Desmond was left as the majority shareholder. He purchased 2.8\u00a0million of McCann's shares to increase his stake in the club from 13% to 20%.\nIn 2005, Celtic issued a share offer designed to raise \u00a315\u00a0million for the club; 50 million new shares were made available priced at 30p each. It was also revealed that majority shareholder Desmond would buy around \u00a310\u00a0million worth of the shares. \u00a310\u00a0million of the money raised was for building a new training centre and youth academy, expanding the club's global scouting network and investing in coaching and player development programmes. The rest of the money was to be used to reduce debt. Building a youth academy was important for Celtic to surpass both Hearts and Rangers who had superior youth facilities at the time. The share issue was a success and Celtic had more applicants than shares available, The new Lennoxtown training centre was opened in October 2007.\nCeltic have been ranked in the Deloitte Football Money League six times. This lists the top 20 football clubs in the world according to revenue. They were ranked between 2002 (2000\u201301 season), 2006 (2004\u201305 season) and 2008 (2006\u201307 season).\nCeltic's financial results for 2011 showed that the club's debt had been reduced from \u00a35.5\u00a0million to \u00a3500,000 and that a pre-tax profit of \u00a3100,000 had been achieved, compared with a loss of over \u00a32\u00a0million the previous year. Turnover also decreased by 15% from \u00a363\u00a0million to \u00a352\u00a0million.\nIn May 2012, Celtic were rated 37th in Brand Finance's annual valuation of the world's biggest football clubs. Celtic's brand was valued at $64\u00a0million (\u00a340.7\u00a0million), $15\u00a0million more than the previous year. It was the first time a Scottish club had been ranked in the top 50. Matt Hannagan, Sports Brand Valuation Analyst at Brand Finance, said that Celtic were constrained by the amount of money they got from the SPL and that if they were in the Premiership then, due to their large fan base, they could be in the top 10 clubs in the world. Later that month David Low, the financial consultant who advised Fergus McCann on his takeover of Celtic in 1994, said that Celtic's \"enterprise value\" (how much it would cost to buy the club) was \u00a352\u00a0million.\n \"As of 2 September 2025\"\nPlayers.\nFirst-team squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademy squads.\n\"For more details on the academy squads, see Celtic F.C. B Team and Academy.\"\nWomen's team.\nCeltic have a pathway for female players, from eleven years old upwards. In 2007 the club launched their women's first team, sometimes known as Celtic Women. The women's team reached the Scottish Women's Cup Final in their first season, and won their first trophy in 2010, the Scottish Women's Premier League Cup. In December 2018 they announced a move to full-time training, becoming the first professional women's football team in Scotland.\nFormer players.\nFor further information, see List of Celtic F.C. players for players with over 100 appearances or other stated notability, List of Celtic F.C. international footballers and for a general list of ex-players.\nClub captains.\nFor further information, see Celtic club captains\nGreatest ever team.\nIn 2002 the greatest-ever Celtic team was voted by supporters:\nClub officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHalls of Fame.\nScotland Football Hall of Fame.\nAs of 2020,[ [update]] 27 Celtic players and managers have entered the Scottish Football Hall of Fame:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScotland Roll of Honour.\nThe Scotland national football team roll of honour recognises players who have gained 50 or more international caps for Scotland. Inductees to have played for Celtic are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNumbers in brackets indicate the number of caps the above players won whilst at Celtic.\nScottish Sports Hall of Fame.\nIn the Scottish Sports Hall of Fame, five Celtic players have been selected, they are:\nSource:\n 1967\n 1970\n 20031\n 20031\n 20171\n1966\u201367\n1966\u201367, 1968\u201369, 2000\u201301, 2016\u201317, 2017\u201318, 2018\u201319, 2019\u201320, 2022\u201323\n1906\u201307, 1907\u201308, 1913\u201314, 1953\u201354, 1970\u201371, 1971\u201372, 1973\u201374, 1976\u201377, 1987\u201388, 2003\u201304, 2006\u201307, 2012\u201313, 2023\u201324\n1965\u201366, 1967\u201368, 1969\u201370, 1997\u201398, 2005\u201306, 2014\u201315, 2021\u201322, 2024\u201325\n1974\u201375\nClub partners.\nAs of 2025,[ [update]] Celtic has partnerships with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69711", "revid": "1311565089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69711", "title": "Focus (band)", "text": "Dutch rock band\nFocus is a Dutch progressive rock band formed in Amsterdam in 1969 by keyboardist, vocalist, and flautist Thijs van Leer, drummer Hans Cleuver, bassist Martijn Dresden, and guitarist Jan Akkerman. The band has undergone numerous formations in its history; since December 2016, it has comprised Van Leer, drummer Pierre van der Linden, guitarist Menno Gootjes, and bassist Udo Pannekeet. They have sold one million RIAA-certified albums in the United States.\nAfter the addition of Akkerman to Van Leer's rock trio in late 1969, the band named themselves Focus and initially worked for a Dutch production of the rock musical \"Hair\". Their debut album, \"Focus Plays Focus\" (1970), gained little attention but the follow-up, \"Moving Waves\" (1971), and its lead single \"Hocus Pocus\", earned the band international recognition. Their success continued with \"Focus 3\" (1972) and \"Hamburger Concerto\" (1974), the former containing their second hit single, \"Sylvia\". After recording two albums with various musicians, including guitarist Phillip Catherine, singer P. J. Proby, and drummers Colin Allen, David Kemper, and Steve Smith, Focus dissolved in 1978. They briefly reunited in 1990 and 1997.\nIn 2002, Van Leer reformed Focus with a new line-up that saw Van der Linden rejoining the group in 2004. The albums \"Focus 8\" (2002), \"Focus 9 / New Skin\" (2006), and \"Focus X\" (2012) were well received, and Focus continue to perform worldwide. Their most recent album is \"Focus 12\" (2024). Focus remain one of the most successful and influential rock bands from the Netherlands.\nHistory.\n1969\u20131970: Formation.\nFocus formed in mid-1969 by keyboardist, vocalist, and flutist Thijs van Leer, who recruited bass guitarist Martijn Dresden and drummer Hans Cleuver after he met them at sessions for the \"Jazz and Poetry\" radio program in Hilversum, Netherlands. The three went on to start a new three-piece band initially known as Thijs van Leer and the Rebaptised, playing a set formed mostly of cover songs by Traffic and original material mostly written by van Leer. In November 1969, during rehearsals at the theatre where van Leer performed as part of Ramses Shaffy's theatre group, they were joined by guitarist Jan Akkerman of the rock band Brainbox after Shaffy invited him to play with the trio. Van Leer later recalled the first try out session: \"Jan came in and we jammed for hours, and it was really kicking\". They then settled on the name Focus for the new band; Akkerman later said, \"Focus is a Latin word that is the same in many languages. It means concentration, which is the meaning of what Focus does\". Their first live gig as Focus followed at the Bird's Club in Rembrandtplein, and they soon secured a weekly residency playing two shows a night on two days. Early sets were mainly formed of covers, including \"I Shall Be Released\" by Bob Dylan, \"A Whiter Shade of Pale\" by Procol Harum and \"Nights in White Satin\" by The Moody Blues, mixed with original material, including van Leer's first song written with the group in mind, the instrumental \"Focus\".\nIn their search for more work and a steady income, Focus was chosen to play as part of the pit band for the Dutch production of the rock musical \"Hair\" produced by Welsh actor Victor Spinetti. They were invited to audition at the Victoria Ballroom, London after Dutch lyricist Lennaert Nijgh suggested them to Del Newman, the musical's director. Cast member Robin Lent claimed the production was suffering and Focus, taking part only for the money, \"were also pretty rusty ... but this changed and everybody got into it\". The show, launched in December 1969, involved six nightly performances a week and gave them space to rehearse in the afternoons for free and store their equipment. An album of the soundtrack featuring the band was recorded in February 1970 and released soon after by Polydor Records.\nAfter \"Hair\" ended its run in June 1970, Focus declined an offer to tour the musical across the Netherlands for a year and a half and become a full-time band. They had picked up more local gigs and dates across the country by this time, and had performed their first international gigs in Belgium and Spain. Their weekly earnings from gigs, plus their earnings from \"Hair\", had reached 400 guilders though Akkerman recalled the group failed to appreciate its value and were quick to spend it. To manage their finances more carefully, Cleuver was chosen to oversee their earnings and expenses.\n1970\u20131971: Debut album, \"House of the King\", and line-up change.\nIn 1970, Focus reached contact with Hubert Terheggen, director of Radio-Tele-Music Belgium-Holland, a music publishing division of Radio Luxembourg, through connections with Dresden's father. Terheggen enjoyed their music and signed them to his production company, secured deals with music publishers worldwide, and booked studio time for them to record their first album, which took place in January 1970 at Sound Techniques in Chelsea, London during time off from \"Hair\". The result was \"Focus Plays Focus\", better known as its international release title \"In and Out of Focus\", with Terheggen credited as producer and Jerry Boys the engineer. A mix of pop-oriented songs and instrumentals were recorded for the album; van Leer felt the vocals suffered as a result of singing English lyrics with a foreign accent, which inspired the group to become stronger instrumentally.\nAfter recording \"Focus Plays Focus\", the band struggled to find a label willing to release it. Their fortunes changed once they had recorded \"House of the King\", an instrumental by Akkerman with different accounts of its origin. Focus biographer Peet Johnson gives the general consensus that it was inspired by their appearance at the Barbarela de Conjuntos music contest in Mallorca on 11 June 1970, where in the final round, their rendition of \"Concierto de Aranjuez\" by Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo ran over the 15-minute time limit, causing their plugs to be pulled. Focus proceeded to retaliate with van Leer playing the flute to the audience as a distraction while the rest of the group trashed the dressing room, after which they were arrested and spent a night in jail. Van Leer claims Akkerman came up with the track the day after their arrest, but the guitarist said he wrote it \"on a mountain, with a beautiful Spanish stewardess ... in about five minutes\". Focus recorded it without management's permission in one evening at Heemstede, yet it reached staff at Imperial Records who thought it was strong enough as a hit single and signed the group.\n\"Focus Plays Focus\" was released in September 1970, eight months after it was recorded. \"Why Dream\" and \"Happy Nightmare\" were released as their first single in the Netherlands. The album saw an American release in October by Sire Records, who had secured the rights to the band's international distribution, with \"House of the King\" added to the track listing. Prior to signing Focus, Sire founder Seymour Stein had flown to the Netherlands to see the band perform: \"Without a doubt they were the most original band I had ever heard\". Though the album received little commercial attention it earned Focus their first Edison Award, and the January 1971 release of \"House of the King\" went to number 10 on the home chart.\nLate in 1970, Akkerman had become increasingly unhappy with Cleuver and Dresden as a rhythm section and missed his former Brainbox bandmate, drummer Pierre van der Linden. He thought the pair struggled to incorporate their own identity or musicianship into the music. Akkerman then presented an ultimatum to van Leer by threatening to quit unless he asked Cleuver and Dresden to leave. Van Leer refused to part ways with his co-founders and instead told Akkerman to leave, which increased tension between the two as they were often at odds with each other. Cleuver sensed panic from Imperial as it knew \"House of the King\" would be a hit and wanted van Leer and Akkerman to stay together. The situation reached Terheggen, who asked Yde de Jong to become Focus's manager if he could reunite the band. After six weeks of driving to both members' homes to negotiate, van Leer agreed to fire Cleuver and Dresden and joined Akkerman, van der Linden, and newcomer bassist Cyril Havermans on the condition that the group continue as Focus.\nWith the new line-up secured, Stein convinced English producer Mike Vernon to witness the band perform in the Netherlands in late 1970. Vernon was not so impressed with their first album, but enjoyed them as a live act: \"I couldn't stop talking or thinking about them! They were formidable ... the power of Jan and Thijs alone gave me heart palpitations\". Vernon subsequently agreed to produce their next studio album.\n1971\u20131972: \"Moving Waves\" and breakthrough.\nFollowing rehearsals at Groeneveld Castle in Baarn, the band recorded \"Focus II\", better known by its international title \"Moving Waves\", in April and May 1971 at Sound Techniques and Morgan Studios, London. It showcased the band exploring progressive rock with jazz fusion and classical music elements with extended pieces and lengthy solos. Akkerman changed his sound, moving from a Gretsch White Falcon to a 1957 Gibson Les Paul Custom which enabled him to \"'sing' on the guitar\" to compensate for the group's weak vocals. Its opening track, \"Hocus Pocus\", became one of the band's best known tracks, featuring a recognisable rock guitar riff and van Leer's yodelling, whistling, and nonsensical vocals that developed through an improvised jam session. Akkerman wrote \"Janis\" as a tribute to Janis Joplin, and its closer, \"Eruption\", is a 23-minute multi-part track inspired by the operas \"Orfeo ed Euridice\" by Christoph Willibald Gluck and \"L'Orfeo\" by Claudio Monteverdi, combining rock, jazz and classical influences.\nReleased in October 1971, \"Moving Waves\" became the band's international breakthrough, reaching number 2 in the UK, number 4 in the Netherlands, and number 8 in the US. The album earned Focus a Conamus Export Award, their second Edison Award, and gold certifications in the three aforementioned countries; the US award was issued in 1973 for selling 500,000 copies. Its success was helped by the release of \"Hocus Pocus\" as a single, released in the Netherlands in July 1971 which peaked at number 12 and exposed the band to a new audience. It peaked at number 20 in the UK in January 1973.\nBetween the recording and release of \"Moving Waves\", Focus underwent further line-up changes. Shortly before a tour of France in July 1971, Van der Linden temporarily left the band after he found out Van Leer and Akkerman would get paid more than himself. He was replaced by Akkerman's younger brother, the 19-year-old Jacob \"Cocky\" Akkerman, before the rift was sorted and Van der Linden resumed on the drums at its conclusion. This was followed by Havermans' departure in September 1971, having handed in his notice in late June. He wished to sing on more tracks but was unable to do so within the confines of the group and pursued a solo career. The remaining members would reunite with the bassist in the US in early 1973 to play on his first solo album, \"Cyril\". Focus found their new bassist in Bert Ruiter, who had previously rehearsed with van der Linden prior to a gig in Texel in June 1971, and went on to see the band live around ten times thereafter. He was invited by the drummer to a tryout session, after which he became a full-time member.\nFocus resumed as a live act in September 1971; among their first gigs with Ruiter was in Rotterdam as part of the European Newport Jazz Festival on 29 October. Towards the end of the year, de Jong organised the band's first UK tour, a 15-gig trek between 15 February\u201310 March 1972, to increase exposure and record sales. Van Leer felt insecure about the tour at first and expressed the lack of courage from the group when they compared themselves to other popular UK rock acts. They arrived in the UK during a period of nationwide energy shortages, yet de Jong resolved the issue by having Focus tour with their own power generator. Despite receiving little money for their performances, they received radio airplay on BBC Radio 1, earned positive reviews from critics, and gained new fans. Akkerman recalled the attendance of the gigs \"were packed because it was probably the only thing that was going on\". On 28 May 1972, Focus were booked to play the Lincoln Festival for an estimated 40,000 people, but the band arrived too late for their spot and were unable to reschedule, leaving them furious at the missed opportunity. Two days later, Focus made their British television debut with a pre-recorded performance of excerpts of \"Eruption\" and \"Hocus Pocus\" on the BBC music show \"The Old Grey Whistle Test\". In the following month they were voted Brightest Hope by readers of \"Melody Maker\" and Best New Talent by readers of \"New Musical Express\".\n1972\u20131974: \"Focus 3\" and \"Hamburger Concerto\".\nThe band spent four days at Olympic Studios in Barnes, London in July 1972 recording their third album, \"Focus 3\". They had written a considerable amount of material by this time which led to the decision to make a double album, mostly by van Leer and Akkerman. \"Focus 3\" saw the group produce short and extended pieces, including the three-minute instrumental \"Sylvia\" and the group devised, 26-minute \"Anonymous II\" that devotes a solo spot for each member, and the addition of \"House of the King\". Upon its release in November 1972, the album went to number one in the Netherlands for one week, number 6 in the UK, and number 35 in the US. \"Sylvia\" was released as a single and reached number 4 in the UK in January 1973, the week after \"Hocus Pocus\" reached its peak on the same chart. This marked the first time in a decade that a band had two concurrent songs without lyrics in the UK top 40.\nTo support the album, Focus began their largest tour since their formation with spots at the Reading Festival on 12 August 1972 followed by the \"Melody Maker\" Poll Awards show at The Oval, London on 30 September. This was followed by an exhaustive 31-date UK tour in 36 days that included their return appearance on \"The Old Grey Whistle Test\" on 12 December which caused a surge in interest for their records; host Bob Harris said the show was inundated with calls and letters about the band and Polydor's record plant printed nothing but Focus for ten days in order to meet demand. A performance of \"Sylvia\" from the Marquee Club, London aired on the BBC's \"Top of the Pops\" show. After a sell out UK tour in January 1973 that spanned 24 days, Focus completed their first of three North American tours in 1973 from February to April, supporting various acts including Gentle Giant, Frank Zappa and Yes. Upon their return, they toured the UK once more which included two sold-out shows at the Rainbow Theatre, London in May 1973 which aired on BBC television.\nIn early May 1973, Focus returned to Olympic Studios at Vernon's request and recorded a new cut of \"Hocus Pocus\" titled \"Hocus Pocus II\", released exclusively for the American market. Later in the month, the band retreated to Chipping Norton Recording Studios, Oxfordshire to record a fourth studio album. Akkerman had expressed a wish to put down \"great ideas\" he had written over the past year, but extensive touring had left the band physically and mentally exhausted which reduced their eagerness to write and record new group material. Vernon recalled Akkerman's reluctance to take part in the sessions which to him, \"led to the final dissolving of the Akkerman/van Leer partnership\". Around 40 minutes of songs was eventually recorded, yet the pair refused to co-operate and recorded their parts without the other present. Vernon later called this period as \"probably the worst ten days I've ever spent in a studio\". As a new studio album could not be released, Vernon took the recording from the Rainbow Theatre concerts and released it as a live album, \"At the Rainbow\". The album went to number 23 in the UK in October 1973. The band went on to receive a \"Billboard\" Trendsetter Award for their success after notching up two gold albums, combining sales of one million copies sold in the US, and one gold single. Recordings from the Chipping Norton sessions remained unreleased, rearranged years later, or included in the collection of previously unreleased Focus studio recordings \"Ship of Memories\", in 1976.\nUpon their return from their second North American tour from June to September 1973, the band returned to Groeneveld Castle for rehearsals. Van der Linden failed to turn up, and the group soon learned of his decision to quit the band. Van Leer claimed rock music was a step in the wrong direction for the drummer, who wished to pursue jazz. Vernon suggested English players Mitch Mitchell, Aynsley Dunbar, and Colin Allen as replacements. Allen was the only one available as his previous group, Stone the Crows had recently broken up. He flew to the Netherlands to meet the band and after a successful try out session, he joined the group. \"It all happened pretty quickly ... I fitted in.\" His arrival came eight days before the band's upcoming North American tour was to start.\nFrom January to March 1974, Focus recorded \"Hamburger Concerto\" at Olympic Studios with Vernon. Recording was met with growing tension, with van Leer, Ruiter and Allen working together during the day and Akkerman recording his parts in the evening. The album presents further classical music influences, opening with \"Delit\u00e6 Music\u00e6\", a lute piece Akkerman adapted from \"Delit\u00e6 Music\u00e6 Cantiones\" by Dutch composer Joachim van den Hove. It closes with a six-part, 20-minute conceptual title track inspired by Akkerman once eating a hamburger while watching cartoons at his hotel room in New York City and was put down in basic form during the 1973 Chipping Norton sessions. Released in May 1974, \"Hamburger Concerto\" peaked at number 5 in the Netherlands and number 20 in the UK. Van Leer claimed it was the band's \"First proper work. It has strength and purpose\", and Vernon later said the album and \"Moving Waves\" were the most rewarding on a second listen. Akkerman later felt the album suffered as his position in the group had weakened with van der Linden gone and claimed van Leer \"broke up the tandem I had with Pierre rhythmically\". A single version of \"Harem Scarem\" was released but did not chart in the UK.\nFocus toured \"Hamburger Concerto\" from March 1974, starting with dates across Europe, including two in London that were filmed for broadcast on the BBC2 and US television music series \"In Concert\". They began their first tour of Japan and Australia in June, followed by an appearance at the Reading Festival in August and the start of their fourth North American tour in September. They were featured on the nationally syndicated \"Don Kirshner's Rock Concert\" show aired live from Long Beach, California, giving the band widespread exposure. At one concert during the US leg, van Leer and Akkerman noticed a young Michael Jackson sitting in the front row. Upon their return, the band completed a 24-day tour of Europe and two compilation albums were released, \"The Story of Focus\" and \"Masters of Rock\".\n1975\u20131978: \"Mother Focus\", \"Focus con Proby\", and disbanding.\nIn 1975, the band gathered at Morgan Studios, Brussels to rehearse and record \"Mother Focus\". They reunited with Terheggen to oversee the project as executive producer, but the group found themselves without a collective direction; van Leer put its failure down to the band's recording contract which required them to produce one studio album each year, the pressures of touring had affected the songs, and a lack of overall interest from the band. In addition, Akkerman continued to record parts separately, showing no sign of an improvement in his relationship with van Leer. Ruiter became a more prominent songwriter and contributed more ideas than he had on previous Focus albums; he and Allen, after recording \"I Need a Bathroom\", began to experiment with a drum machine to aid their ideas, but the drummer recalled Akkerman got angry, shouted at him, and tossed the machine across the room. Allen was fired the next day, not knowing who made the decision. He was required to pay what he owed to the group during his tenure which amounted to roughly \u00a310,000, using his earnings from royalties to pay much of it. Despite the problems, he \"will always remain proud to have been a member\". In May 1975, at the suggestion of their studio engineer, American drummer David Kemper was brought in to complete the rest of the album.\nReleased in October 1975, \"Mother Focus\" saw Focus depart from their classical and jazz-influenced sound towards shorter, commercially accessible songs with middle of the road influences and little room for improvisation and jamming they were known for. Akkerman argued with van Leer and Ruiter over the group's change in musical direction, deeming it \"typical American music\". The album went to number 23 in the UK, and received mostly negative reviews from critics. During plans for their upcoming tour Akkerman refused to perform the album's music, thinking it was not strong enough. To solve the issue, he and van Leer returned to Morgan Studios and put down \"Red Sky at Night\" and \"Avondrood\", the latter featuring the two singing in Dutch. After Kemper left when recording was complete, Akkerman wished van der Linden to return, thinking he was responsible \"for at least 40%\" of the band's success and said he \"wouldn't leave Focus\" with him on the drums. However, van Leer and Ruiter did not share the same enthusiasm over van der Linden's return. Nevertheless, Focus returned to Australia and Japan in May and June 1975 for a series of sold out dates, yet reviewers of the gigs noticed the lack of cohesiveness than before. During the Scandinavian tour that followed, a gig at the Ullevaal Stadium, Oslo during the Ragnarok Festival was met with Akkerman and van der Linden jamming with \"little adherence to the repertoire\" that was taken as a protest to playing the same material night after night. Matters turned for the worse after van Leer and Ruiter refused to have van der Linden re-record the drums for a single release of \"Crackers\", causing the drummer to quit a second time. With van der Linden gone, Focus cancelled a proposed 34-date UK tour and brought back Kemper during subsequent rehearsals after a desperate plea from de Jong. The \"House of the King\"/\"Avondrood\" single was released in 1976; the latter track originally appeared on a Dutch compilation album. The two appear in instrumental form on \"Ship of Memories\".\nIn February 1976, two and a half days before the group's arrival to the UK for a tour, van Leer asked Akkerman to leave Focus over his disagreements with the music they were rehearsing and the decision not to have van der Linden return on the drums. Akkerman had grown tired of playing the same songs on stage, \"It felt like I was in a straitjacket. There was still a lot of improvisation but even this had become planned\". Van Leer said he wished to write \"happy\" music and move from \"our European minor chords\". Rather than have the tour cancelled, van Leer decided to proceed, with Kemper having seven days to arrive from the US and learn the new material and Akkerman at home with illness. In the guitarist's absence, van Leer met Belgian guitarist Philip Catherine and the two played a jam session that van Leer enjoyed. Akkerman disliked a song that the group had rehearsed about him soon after, which led to van Leer asking him to leave the next day. After Catherine agreed to step in, the group rehearsed for fifty hours without sleep; van Leer spent the evening prior the first gig mapping out the guitar parts on paper which Catherine followed on stage. Refunds were offered to concert goers as news of Akkerman's departure was not made public until after the tour had begun, which ended in March 1976. Dutch guitarist later joined Focus. A handful of scattered gigs were performed through 1977 and 1978 with American drummer Richard James on call out whenever they secured a booking.\nAfter van Leer signed a deal with EMI in April 1976 to record a new Focus album, work did not begin until late 1977 when the band faced potential legal action if they did not release something. Recording took place in December 1977 at EMI Studios in Haarlem, Amsterdam with van Leer, Ruiter, Albers, and a returning Catherine, who was contractually required to perform. Van Leer turned to ideas that he had developed with his wife Roselie during Focus tours, but felt neither his or Ruiter's voices were strong enough to sing on. In the search for a suitable lead vocalist de Jong, a friend of American singer P. J. Proby, rang his Netherlands-based manager and invited him to the studio, thinking his vocals would replace Akkerman's lyrical playing. Van Leer was sceptical as Proby was not familiar with the band and the singer was going through a period of heavy alcohol abuse. Upon Proby's arrival, Albers recalled: \"He drank Four Roses whiskey the whole day, so much so that the nearest liquor store was soon sold out ... he always had the intention to run away\". Proby interpreted the jazz-rock influenced songs as he felt, attempting \"to meet them half-way between jazz and rock\". James's drumming was unsuitable for the lighter material, so van Leer brought in future Journey drummer, American Steve Smith. Following the release of \"Focus con Proby\" in February 1978, which ignored the UK market, the album received negative reviews. Cleuver, then van Leer's manager, later called it \"simply shameful\". After a handful of gigs in the Netherlands, which concluded with a show in Terneuzen in August 1978 with James on the drums, van Leer ended Focus.\n1983\u22121999: Reunions.\nIn 1983, Akkerman agreed to the idea of reuniting with van Leer and record new music, as suggested by his management. Van Leer immediately accepted the invitation and went on to play the synthesiser on \"Headbanger\", a track for Akkerman's solo album \"From the Basement\" (1984). After this initial collaboration, an executive at Phonogram Records suggested the pair work on an album of re-recorded Focus songs with English producer Trevor Horn, but it fell through. They subsequently signed a recording contract with Vertigo Records, which required the two to record as a duo, as opposed to Focus. During the recording, producer Ruud Jacobs was brought in to supervise due to the length of time taken to finalise tracks. Engineer Theo Balijon claimed Jacobs cut corners and pushed for the strongest tracks to be completed quickly to save production costs, which \"unintentionally increased the animosity between Jan and Thijs\". Around 30 tracks were completed with several additional musicians in 1984. \"Focus\" was released in March 1985 and reached number 33 in the Netherlands. The pair followed the album with promotional videos and a local four-date tour.\nIn 1988, EMI acquired the rights to the band's back catalogue and reissued their albums on CD for the first time.\nIn 1990, van Leer, Akkerman, van der Linden, and Ruiter reunited for a live gig, marking their first performance together since 1975. The four played a 40-minute set at the Americahal in Apeldoorn on 20 April that was broadcast as part of the \"Goud van Oud\" television special. It came about when producer Frans Meijer asked Akkerman to perform a gig with the group, and the fact that the guitarist's manager had not seen the band play in the 1970s. After the group agreed to participate, they rehearsed for four hours in Wijchen several days prior to the concert. Ruiter said they \"went very well\"; van Leer said it was \"fantastic\". Following the concert van Leer was keen to formally restart Focus with Akkerman, but the latter resisted. On 17 May 1990 the group, minus Akkerman, mimed a performance of \"House of the King\" on \"Service Salon\" on AVRO-TV. They had planned to perform \"Hocus Pocus\" with Akkerman, but the guitarist declined to take part. Van Leer and Akkerman shared the stage once more in 1993, performing mostly Akkerman solo songs at the North Sea Jazz Festival.\nIn 1997, van Leer reformed Focus with Cleuver and Ruiter returning on drums and bass, respectively, and 21-year-old Dutch guitarist Menno Gootjes who was studying at the Rotterdam Conservatory. The four made their live debut at the Hockey Club in Mill, Netherlands, on 30 August. They performed additional shows in the Netherlands, but disagreements between van Leer and Ruiter over material intended for an official release effectively split up the group, in 1999.\n2001\u20132009: Reformation, \"Focus 8\", and \"Focus 9\".\nIn 2001, van Leer was invited to a session by his stepson and bassist Bobby Jacobs, who was rehearsing with guitarist Jan Dum\u00e9e and drummer Ruben van Roon. Jacobs and van Roon was former members of van Leer's side project Conxi, and Dum\u00e9e had attended school with Jacobs and Gootjes. To van Leer's surprise, he found out the three had been rehearsing Focus songs from the 1970s. The sessions led to the group's decision to perform live as a Focus tribute band named Hocus Pocus \"just for fun, nothing too serious\". After some well received gigs in the Netherlands, the group resumed the Focus name and acquired Willem Hubers as their new manager and booking agent which led to several offers to perform worldwide. \"Focus 8\" was recorded between February and July 2002; van Roon left soon after due to personal circumstances. He was replaced by drummer Bert Smaak. Released on Musea Records in late 2002, it received critical praise and was supported with a world tour in 2002 and 2003.\nIn the autumn of 2004, Smaak had left the group and replaced by a returning van der Linden. Van Leer was particularly happy about his return, and stated that their friendship was better than it had been in the 1970s. In July 2006, Dum\u00e9e was replaced by guitarist Niels van der Steenhoven. This line-up recorded \"Focus 9 / New Skin\", released in September 2006 by Red Bullet Records.\n2010\u2013present: \"Focus X\", \"Focus 11\", 50th anniversary, and \"Focus 12\".\nIn May 2010, Nike included \"Hocus Pocus\" as the main theme in its 2010 FIFA World Cup commercial, Write the Future. The advert aired on television worldwide which generated renewed interest in the band and led to \"Hocus Pocus\" entering the UK Singles Chart at number 57. In late 2010, Gootjes rejoined the band as a replacement to a departing van der Steenhoven. In 2011, American rapper J. Cole sampled \"Hocus Pocus\" in his song \"Blow Up\", which is featured in the game \"\".\nThe band released their eleventh studio album \"Focus X\", featuring cover art by Roger Dean, in November 2012. On 14 April 2014, the band released \"Golden Oldies\" on their own label, In and Out of Focus Records. It is a collection of re-recorded versions of Focus songs. In 2016, the band released \"Focus 8.5 / Beyond the Horizon\". It is credited to \"Focus and Friends featuring Marvio Ciribelli\", and was recorded during gaps in their 2005 South American tour with Brazilian musicians.\nIn December 2016, Udo Pannekeet replaced Jacobs on bass. Focus performed at their second Cruise to the Edge event in February 2017, third in 2018, and fourth in 2019. The line-up included Dum\u00e9e returning on guitar after Gootjes was too ill to perform.\nIn November 2018, Focus released their fourteenth studio album \"Focus 11\" to coincide with their 20-date UK tour. The album was available at each venue which was followed by its full release on 25 January 2019, via Cherry Red Records.\nIn November 2020, a box set containing new remasters of the band's albums from 1970 to 1976, with previously unreleased audio and video material, entitled \"50 Years: Anthology 1970\u20131976\", was released by Red Bullet Productions to commemorate the band's fiftieth anniversary. This was followed in June 2021 by the release of \"Focus 50\", a set featuring live material recorded in 2017 in Rio de Janeiro and a disc entitled \"Completely Focused\", containing studio re-recordings of \"Focus 1\" through \"Focus 12\".\nFormer bassist Bert Ruiter died on 22 March 2022, aged 75.\nOn May 28, 2024, the band released single \"Fjord Focus\" for Focus 12, which was released on July 5th.\nBand members.\nCurrent members\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "69713", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69713", "title": "Rangers F.C.", "text": "Association football club in Scotland\nFootball club\nRangers Football Club is a professional football club in Glasgow, Scotland. The team competes in the Scottish Premiership, the top division of Scottish football. The club is often referred to as Glasgow Rangers, though this has never been its official name. The fourth-oldest football club in Scotland, Rangers was founded by four teenage boys as they walked through West End Park (now Kelvingrove Park), in March 1872, where they discussed the idea of forming a football club, and played its first match against the now-defunct Callander at the Fleshers' Haugh area of Glasgow Green in May of the same year. Rangers' home ground, Ibrox Stadium, designed by stadium architect Archibald Leitch and opened in 1929, is a Category B listed building and Scotland's third-largest football stadium. The club has always played in royal blue shirts.\nRangers have won the Scottish League title a joint-record 55 times, the Scottish Cup 34 times, the Scottish League Cup a record 28 times and the domestic treble on seven occasions. Rangers won the European Cup Winners' Cup in 1972 after being losing finalists twice, in 1961 (the first British club to reach a UEFA tournament final) and 1967. The club has lost a further two European finals, the UEFA Cup final in 2008 and the UEFA Europa League final in 2022. By number of trophies won, Rangers are one of the most successful clubs in the world.\nRangers has a long-standing rivalry with Celtic, the two Glasgow clubs being collectively known as the Old Firm, which is considered one of the world's biggest football derbies. Both clubs have historically been emblematic of sectarianism in Glasgow, with Rangers and its fanbase being associated with Protestantism and Irish unionism, with Rangers having historically had a policy until the 1970s of refusing to sign Catholic players. With more than 600 Rangers supporters' clubs in 35 countries worldwide, Rangers has one of the largest fanbases in world football. The club holds the record for the largest travelling support in football history, when an estimated 200,000 Rangers fans arrived in the city of Manchester for the 2008 UEFA Cup final. An estimated 100,000 fans arrived in Seville for the 2022 UEFA Europa League final.\nOne of the eleven original members of the Scottish Football League, Rangers remained in the top division continuously until a financial crisis during the 2011\u201312 season saw the club enter administration and the original company liquidated with the assets moved to a new company structure. The club was accepted as an associate member of the Scottish Football League and placed in the fourth tier of the Scottish football league system in time for the start of the following season. Rangers then won three promotions in four years, returning to the Premiership for the start of the 2016\u201317 season; in their climb through the Scottish lower divisions, Rangers became the only club in Scotland to have won every domestic trophy. In 2020\u201321 Rangers won their first Scottish championship in ten years, a then world record fifty-fifth league win which also stopped rivals Celtic's quest to break the domestic record of ten titles in a row.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nFormation, early years and William Wilton.\nRangers were formed by four founders \u2013 brothers Moses McNeil and Peter McNeil, Peter Campbell and William McBeath \u2013 who met at West End Park (now known as Kelvingrove Park) in March 1872. Rangers' first match, in May that year, was a goalless friendly draw with Callander on Glasgow Green. David Hill was also a founder member. In 1873, the club held its first annual meeting and staff were elected. By 1876, Rangers had its first international player, with Moses McNeil representing Scotland in a match against Wales. In 1877, Rangers reached the Scottish Cup final; after drawing the first game, Rangers refused to turn up for the replay and the cup was awarded to Vale of Leven. Rangers won the Glasgow Charity Cup the following year against Vale of Leven 2\u20131, their first major cup. The first-ever match against Celtic took place in 1888, the year after the East End club's establishment. Rangers lost 5\u20132 in a friendly to an opposition composed largely of guest players from Hibernian.\nThe 1890\u201391 season saw the inception of the Scottish Football League, and Rangers, by then playing at the first Ibrox Stadium, were one of ten original members. The club's first-ever league match, on 16 August 1890, resulted in a 5\u20132 victory over Heart of Midlothian. After finishing joint-top with Dumbarton, a play-off held at Cathkin Park finished 2\u20132 and the title was shared for the only time in its history. Rangers' first-ever Scottish Cup win came in 1894 after a 3\u20131 final victory over rivals Celtic. By the start of the 20th century, Rangers had won two league titles and three Scottish Cups. During William Wilton's time as match secretary and then team manager, Rangers won ten league titles.\nBill Struth and Scot Symon.\nTaking over as manager after William Wilton's death in 1920, Bill Struth was Rangers' most successful manager, guiding the club to 14 league titles before the onset of the Second World War. On 2 January 1939, a British league attendance record was broken as 118,567 fans turned out to watch Rangers beat Celtic in the traditional New Year's Day Old Firm match. Leading the club for 34 years until 1954, Struth won more trophies than any manager in Scottish Football history, amassing 18 league championships, 10 Scottish Cups, two League Cups, seven war-time championships, 19 Glasgow Cups, 17 Glasgow Merchant Charity Cups and other war-time honours. During the wartime regional league setup (in which the team won all seven seasons, along with official championships either side of the conflict in 1938\u201339 and 1946\u201347), Rangers achieved their highest score against Celtic with an 8\u20131 win in the Southern Football League.\nScot Symon continued Struth's success, winning six league championships, five Scottish Cups and four League Cups, becoming the second manager to win the domestic treble in 1963\u201364 season, the era of 'Slim' Jim Baxter, one of the club's greatest players. Rangers also lost by their biggest Old Firm margin of 7\u20131.\nRangers reached the semi-finals of the European Cup in 1960, losing to German club Eintracht Frankfurt by a record aggregate 12\u20134 for a Scottish team. In 1961 Rangers became the first British team to reach a European final when they contested the Cup Winners' Cup final against Italian side Fiorentina, only to lose 4\u20131 on aggregate. Rangers lost again in the final of the same competition in 1967, by a single goal, after extra time, to Bayern Munich.\nIbrox disaster, European success and Jock Wallace.\nThe Ibrox disaster occurred on 2 January 1971 when large-scale crushing on a stairway exit at the culmination of an Old Firm game claimed 66 lives. An enquiry concluded that the crush was likely to have happened ten minutes after the final whistle and to have been triggered by someone falling on the stairs. A benefit match to raise funds for the victims' families took place after the disaster, a joint Rangers and Celtic team playing a Scotland XI at Hampden, watched by 81,405 fans.\nIn 1972, Rangers emerged from the tragedy of the previous year to finally achieve success on the European stage. A Colin Stein goal and a Willie Johnston double helped secure a 3\u20132 victory over Dynamo Moscow at the Nou Camp, Barcelona, to lift the European Cup Winners' Cup. Captain John Greig received the trophy in a small room within the Nou Camp following pitch invasions by Rangers fans reacting to the heavy handed tactics of the Spanish police, the majority of whom had been brought in from outwith Catalonia. Rangers were banned from Europe for two years for the behaviour of their fans, later reduced on appeal to one year.\nThe following season saw the club compete in the first ever European Super Cup, although the European ban saw it officially recognised as Rangers centenary anniversary match. The side played the European Cup holders Ajax, who had first proposed the idea, in January 1973. The Dutch side proved too strong and recorded a 6\u20133 aggregate win, with Rangers losing 1\u20133 at Ibrox and 3\u20132 in Amsterdam.\nEmerging from the shadows of Jock Stein's Celtic side, Rangers regained ascendancy with notable domestic success under the stewardship of manager Jock Wallace. In his first season in charge \u2013 the club's centenary \u2013 Rangers won the Scottish Cup at Hampden in front of 122,714 supporters. In 1974\u201375, Wallace led Rangers to their first League championship triumph in 11 years, before winning the treble the following season, repeating the historic feat in 1977\u201378.\nJohn Greig served as manager for five years but was unable to achieve the success as a manager that he had as a player. Unable to win the league during his reign, he was replaced by Wallace returning in 1983. Wallace was unable to repeat the success of his first period in charge with a win ratio of less than 50%, and was himself replaced by Graeme Souness in 1986.\nGraeme Souness, Walter Smith and 9-in-a-row.\nEvery year from the 1988\u201389 season until the 1996\u201397 season, Rangers won the league title. This nine-in-a-row achievement equalled Celtic's record, set prior to the forming of the Scottish Football League Premier Division, subsequent to which competing teams met four times a season. The first three of these seasons the club was managed by Graeme Souness; the latter six under the stewardship of Walter Smith.\nNotable seasons included 1990\u201391, which culminated in a last-day finale, Rangers securing a 2\u20130 victory at Ibrox over Aberdeen, who needed only a draw to secure the championship. Season 1992\u201393 was notable for a domestic treble of trophies, as well an extended run in the inaugural UEFA Champions League, the club at one stage only one goal from securing a place in the final.\nRangers' ninth consecutive championship title was secured at Tannadice Park on 7 May 1997, with a single-goal victory over Dundee United.\nDick Advocaat, Alex McLeish and Paul Le Guen.\nIn 1998, Dutchman Dick Advocaat became the club's first foreign manager. Nine-in-a-row era stalwarts having moved on, Advocaat invested heavily in the team with immediate results, leading the club to their sixth domestic treble. The league championship was won with a 3\u20130 victory at Celtic Park on 2 May 1999. A second-consecutive league title was won by a record 21-point margin, the club securing a domestic double with a 4\u20130 Scottish Cup final victory over Aberdeen. Rangers' campaign in the Champions League saw them defeat UEFA Cup winners Parma en route.\nAdvocaat's third season saw Rangers fail to compete domestically against Celtic under new manager Martin O'Neill. Despite investment in the team, including Tore Andre Flo for a club-record \u00a312\u00a0million, European success beyond the Champions League group stages again proved elusive. After a slow start to the following season, Advocaat resigned from his post in December 2001 and was replaced by Alex McLeish.\nIn his first full campaign, the 2002\u201303 season saw McLeish become the sixth Rangers manager to deliver a domestic treble. The championship was won on goal difference during a dramatic final day 6\u20131 triumph over Dunfermline Athletic at Ibrox, securing Rangers' 50th league title, the first club in the world to achieve the feat. Major expenditure sanctioned by chairman David Murray had burdened Rangers with considerable debts in the region of \u00a352m. The club's worsening financial state saw many of the team's top players leave in the summer of 2003, the following season failing to deliver any trophies, only the second such occasion since 1985\u201386.\nThe 2004\u201305 season restored success to Rangers, who were boosted by signings such as Jean-Alain Boumsong, Dado Pr\u0161o and Nacho Novo, along with the return of former captain Barry Ferguson after a spell in England with Blackburn Rovers. The club's league championship triumph culminated in a dramatic final-day finish. The destination of the trophy changed unexpectedly, with Celtic conceding late goals to Motherwell at Fir Park whilst Rangers led against Hibernian, requiring the helicopter carrying the SPL trophy to change direction and deliver the prize to the Easter Road ground in Leith.\nDespite beginning as favourites to retain the championship, Rangers suffered an unprecedented run of poor results between September and November, a club-record run of ten games without a win. Included within this period, a 1\u20131 draw with Inter Milan took Rangers into the last 16 of the Champions League, the first Scottish team to achieve the feat since 1993, the club eventually exiting on the away goals rule to Villarreal. On 9 February 2006, it was announced by David Murray that McLeish would be standing down as manager at the end of that season.\nFrenchman Paul Le Guen replaced Alex McLeish as manager after season 2005\u201306. The season started with an early exit from the League Cup whilst Celtic built a commanding lead at the top of the table. In the UEFA Cup, Rangers became the first Scottish side to qualify for the last 32 of the competition, since the introduction of the group phase, after finishing their group unbeaten. However, amid claims of disharmony between the manager and captain Barry Ferguson, it was announced on 4 January 2007 that Le Guen had left Rangers by mutual consent.\nWalter Smith's return and Ally McCoist.\nOn 10 January 2007, former boss Walter Smith resigned from his post as Scotland manager to return to the Ibrox helm, with Ally McCoist as assistant manager.\nThe following season Rangers contested the UEFA Cup after dropping into the competition from the Champions League. The club reached the final, defeating Panathinaikos, Werder Bremen, Sporting Lisbon and Fiorentina along the way. The final in Manchester against Zenit Saint Petersburg, who were managed by former Rangers manager Dick Advocaat, ended in a 2\u20130 defeat. An estimated 200,000 supporters travelled to Manchester for the event, and the 2008 UEFA Cup final riots occurred.\nThe 2008\u201309 season saw Rangers recover from an early exit from the UEFA Champions League to FBK Kaunas of Lithuania. The club secured its 52nd league championship on the last day of the season with a 3\u20130 victory at Dundee United. Rangers also successfully defended the Scottish Cup, defeating Falkirk 1\u20130 in the final.\nThe 2009\u201310 season saw Rangers reach their fifth consecutive domestic final: against St Mirren in the Scottish League Cup, the club overcame a two-men deficit from red cards, a late deciding goal from Kenny Miller securing the victory. The league championship title was retained, with three matches remaining, at Easter Road, defeating Hibernian 1\u20130 with a Kyle Lafferty goal. The 2010\u201311 season, Smith's final season in charge, saw Rangers retain the League Cup, defeating Celtic at Hampden with a Nikica Jelavi\u0107 goal in extra time. A third consecutive title was won by beating Kilmarnock 5\u20131 on the last day of the season, Smith's final match in charge of the club.\nAlly McCoist took over from Walter Smith in June 2011 but season 2011\u201312 started with Rangers eliminated from two European competitions before the end of August: losing to Swedish side Malm\u00f6 in the Champions League third round qualifying match, and to Slovenian side Maribor in a Europa League qualifying match. While good league form saw Rangers in top spot after being unbeaten for the first 15 games, they were knocked out of the League Cup by Falkirk and the Scottish Cup by Dundee United at Ibrox. Rangers were placed into administration on 14 February 2012 resulting in the club being deducted 10 points as per SPL rules. Though Rangers avoided having Celtic win the championship at Ibrox on 25 March by winning the game 3\u20132, Rangers ultimately finished 20 points behind Celtic in second place.\nInsolvency and the lower leagues.\nOn 1 June 2012, after four months in administration, a failure to reach a CVA agreement with creditors led to The Rangers Football Club plc (since renamed RFC 2012 plc) entering the process of liquidation. The administrators completed a sale of the business and assets to a new company, Sevco Scotland Ltd (which later renamed itself The Rangers Football Club Ltd), though most first-team players refused to transfer across. The new company failed to secure the transfer of Rangers' previous place in the Scottish Premier League, but were later accepted into the Scottish Football League. Rangers were awarded associate membership and placed in the lowest division, the Third, rather than the First Division as the SPL and SFA had sought. The transfer of Rangers' SFA membership was agreed by the SFA upon acceptance of a number of conditions, including a one-year transfer ban, in time for the club to begin the 2012\u201313 season.\nWith most key Rangers players having refused to transfer to the new company, a very different Rangers team lined up for the first league match in the Third Division though it secured a comfortable 5\u20131 victory over East Stirlingshire in front of a crowd of 49,118, a world record for a football match in a fourth tier league. Away from home, Rangers started their league campaign with three successive draws before losing 1\u20130 to Stirling Albion, at the time the bottom club in the country. Rangers were defeated in the third round of the Scottish Challenge Cup by Queen of the South at Ibrox, in the quarter-finals of the Scottish League Cup at home to Inverness Caledonian Thistle and in the fifth round of the Scottish Cup by Dundee United. Rangers beat their own new record against Queens Park with an attendance of 49,463 and again against Stirling Albion with an attendance of 49,913.\nRangers clinched the Third Division title on 30 March after a goalless draw at Montrose.\nApart from being defeated 2\u20131 by Forfar Athletic in the first round of the League Cup on 3 August, the 2013\u201314 season got off to an excellent start with Rangers winning maximum league points in their first 15 games in League One, before being held to a draw at home by Stranraer on Boxing Day 2013. Rangers secured the League One title and promotion to Scottish football's second tier on 12 March 2014 and went on to end the season unbeaten in league football. Rangers also reached the final of the Scottish Challenge Cup, in which they lost to Raith Rovers and the semi-final of the Scottish Cup, in which they lost 3\u20131 at Ibrox to Dundee United.\nPlaying in the Scottish Championship in season 2014\u201315 provided Rangers with a more difficult challenge, with the club losing home and away to both Hibernian and Hearts and also losing away to Queen of the South in the first half of the season. Rangers also failed to beat Alloa either home or away in the league before losing 3\u20132 to Alloa in the semi-final of the Scottish Challenge Cup. Amid mounting criticism, McCoist submitted his resignation intending to honour his 12 months notice period but was placed on gardening leave and replaced by Kenny McDowall on a caretaker basis. McDowall remained in charge for just three months before resigning in March 2015. During his time in charge, Rangers won just three matches. Rangers then named former player Stuart McCall as their third manager of the season for the remaining fixtures. Under McCall, Rangers finished third in the league and then reached the Premiership play-off final, which they lost 6\u20131 on aggregate to Motherwell.\nWarburton, Premiership return, Caixinha and Murty.\nIn June 2015, it was announced that Mark Warburton had been appointed as manager on a three-year deal. Rangers went on to win the 2015\u201316 Scottish Championship and automatic promotion to the Scottish Premiership, ending their four-year stint in the lower divisions. The club also reached the 2016 Scottish Cup Final, beating Old Firm rivals Celtic in the semi-final at Hampden, before losing to Hibernian in the final. After a poor first half of the 2016\u201317 season, Mark Warburton and David Weir left Rangers on 10 February 2017, and Graeme Murty was placed in caretaker control of the Rangers first team. Pedro Caixinha eventually took over as permanent manager.\nCaixinha's first full season started with Rangers suffering one of the worst results in their history. After winning 1\u20130 at Ibrox, Rangers lost 2\u20130 to Luxembourg minnows Progr\u00e8s Niederkorn, resulting in Rangers being knocked out 2\u20131 on aggregate in the first qualifying round of the 2017\u201318 Europa League. Progr\u00e8s had never before won a tie and had only ever scored once before in European competition. After that disappointing start to the season the form did not improve, with notable results including a 2\u20130 reverse to Celtic at home in the league and defeat to Motherwell in the Scottish League Cup semi-final by the same scoreline. On 26 October, a day after a 95th-minute equaliser at Ibrox by last-placed Kilmarnock saw Rangers draw 1\u20131, Caixinha was sacked and Graeme Murty took over as caretaker manager again. The Portuguese manager's reign was described as \"a desperate mess from start to finish\".\nIn late December, after a search for a more experienced manager proved unsuccessful, including a failed attempt to appoint Aberdeen manager Derek McInnes, Murty (who had won back-to-back games over Aberdeen and also defeated Hibernian away from home during his interim spell) was appointed to the role until the end of the season. On 1 May 2018, Murty's second spell in charge ended prematurely when he was sacked as manager following a 5\u20130 defeat to Celtic which resulted in Celtic winning their 7th consecutive league title. Rangers again ended the season in 3rd place, behind Celtic and Aberdeen for the second year in a row.\nThe Gerrard era.\nOn 4 May 2018, former Liverpool and England captain Steven Gerrard was confirmed as the new manager of Rangers on a four-year contract. Gerrard's era started successfully with Rangers remaining unbeaten in their first 12 games, clinching a place in the UEFA Europa League group stage in the process. However Rangers were then defeated by Celtic in the first Old Firm match of the season, and the following month were eliminated from the League Cup by Aberdeen. On 29 December, Rangers defeated Celtic at Ibrox to inflict Brendan Rodgers' first defeat in 13 Old Firm games; Rangers first win over Celtic since a Scottish Cup victory in April 2016 and their first league win over Celtic since March 2012. Aberdeen knocked Rangers out of a cup for the second time in the season after securing a 2\u20130 victory in the Scottish Cup at Ibrox on 12 March 2019.\nThe 2019\u201320 season began with Rangers again qualifying for the UEFA Europa League group stage before losing 2\u20130 to Celtic at Ibrox in the first Old Firm match of the season on 1 September. The following day, the club signed Ryan Kent from Liverpool for \u00a37 million. Rangers reached the final of the League Cup, but despite a dominant performance, were beaten 1\u20130 by Celtic. On 12 December, Rangers progressed to the UEFA Europa League Round of 32 as group runners-up after a 1\u20131 draw with Young Boys which secured European football beyond Christmas for the first time since the 2010\u201311 season. On 29 December, Rangers beat Celtic 2\u20131 at Celtic Park, their first win at their arch rival's stadium since October 2010. However a slump in form thereafter, including losing to Hearts in the Scottish Cup and Hamilton in the league within five days, left Rangers 13 points adrift of Celtic a week into March. However, all professional football in Scotland was suspended later that month due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom. On 18 May 2020, the SPFL officially ended the season, and Celtic were awarded the league title which was determined by points per game.\nOn 7 March 2021, Rangers won the league title for the first time in ten years, going on to end the league campaign undefeated, with a club record 102 points.\nGiovanni van Bronckhorst, Europa League Final, Michael Beale return and Philippe Clement.\nMidway through the 2021\u201322 season, Steven Gerrard left Rangers for Aston Villa, and was replaced by former Rangers midfielder Giovanni van Bronckhorst on 11 November 2021. He led Rangers to their first European final in fourteen years, beating Borussia Dortmund, Red Star Belgrade, Braga and RB Leipzig on the way to facing Eintracht Frankfurt in the 2022 UEFA Europa League Final. He also took the club to their first Scottish Cup final in six years, in which they beat Hearts.\nIn the 2022\u201323 season, Rangers qualified for the UEFA Champions League group stage for the first time since the 2010\u201311 season. They went on to lose all six group matches against Napoli, Liverpool and Ajax with only two goals scored and a \u221220 goal difference overall, setting the worst performance in a Champions League group stage, surpassing Dinamo Zagreb's \u221219 goal difference in the 2011\u201312 season. Giovanni van Bronckhorst was sacked on 21 November 2022, after also falling nine points behind Celtic in the Scottish Premiership. Michael Beale, a coach under previous manager Steven Gerrard, succeeded van Bronckhorst on 28 November 2022. After a winning start, Beale had turned around results quickly. However, they lost out in both cup competitions against Celtic and finished the 2022\u201323 season seven points behind their rivals. After a summer rebuild, Rangers lost on the opening day of the 2023\u201324 season to Kilmarnock; their hopes of qualifying for that seasons Champions League was also crushed after losing to PSV Eindhoven. Beale was sacked as manager on 1 October 2023, the defeat to Aberdeen at Ibrox the culmination of a very poor run of results.\nPhilippe Clement was appointed manager on 15 October 2023, Rangers' sixth permanent manager in ten years, with Steven Davis being the interim manager prior to Clement's appointment. The club won their 28th League Cup title, and their first in twelve years. Rangers finished runners up to Celtic in the league and the Scottish Cup. After being defeated by Dynamo Kyiv in the 2024\u201325 Champions League Third Qualifying Round, Rangers entered the Europa League, where they placed eighth in the new format, placing them directly in the Round of 16. Clement was sacked as manager on 23 February 2025.\n2025 takeover, Russell Martin and Danny R\u00f6hl.\nOn 30 May 2025, Rangers announced that a consortium headed by US businessman Andrew Cavenagh and 49ers Enterprises, the investment arm of the San Francisco 49ers, had purchased 51% of shares to compete a multi-million pound takeover of the club. Russell Martin was appointed head coach in June 2025 on a three-year deal. Following a string of poor results, including one league win in seven games, Martin was sacked after a 1\u20131 draw against Falkirk just 123 days after becoming head coach, making him the shortest serving manager in Rangers' history.\nDanny R\u00f6hl was appointed Martin's successor on 20 October 2025.\nCrest and colours.\nCrest.\nUnusually for a football club, Rangers have two different official crests. Today the original scroll crest appears on the club's strips whereas the lion rampant club crest is used by the media, on club merchandise and on official club documents. Both crests have undergone minor variations since their introduction. It is believed that the scroll crest, representing the letters \"RFC\" overlapping, has been used since the club's formation in 1872, although the oldest remaining piece of memorabilia containing this crest is from the 1881\u201382 season. The scroll crest was replaced in 1959 with the lion rampant club crest which featured a lion rampant, an old-style football and the club's motto \"Ready\", which was shortened from \"Aye Ready\" (meaning \"Always Ready\" in Scots), all surrounded by the team name, \"Rangers Football Club\". The lion rampant club crest was modernised in 1968; the lion rampant, team name, club motto and old style football all remained. It was again updated slightly in the early 1990s and then once more in 2020 to the current version. The modern circular crest is regularly used on club merchandise and by the media; it has never featured prominently on the club strip. In 1968 the scroll crest made a return appearing on the chest of the club shirt for the first time while the modernised club crest was still the club's official logo. The scroll crest first appeared on the teams shorts for the start of the 1978\u201379 season. In 2021 the club unveiled a 150th anniversary crest that was to be used during the 2021\u201322 season.\nThe way the scroll crest has appeared on the club shirt has varied slightly through the years. Between 1990 and 1994, 'Rangers Football Club' and the 'Ready' motto appeared above and below the Crest respectively. Between 1997 and 1999, the scroll crest featured within a shield. After a successful end to the season in 2003, which delivered Rangers a Domestic Treble and their 50th league title; five stars were added to the top of the scroll crest, one for every ten titles won by the club. The team wore a special crest on 8 December 2012 in a home league match against Stirling Albion, to commemorate the 140th anniversary of their formation. '1872\u20132012' appeared above the scroll crest with the words '140 years' featuring below.\nColours.\nThe club colours of Rangers are royal blue, white and red. However, for the majority of the first forty-eight years of Rangers existence the club played in a plain lighter blue home shirt. The only deviation from this was a four-season period from 1879 when the side wore the lighter shade of blue and white in a hooped style. Traditionally this is accompanied by white shorts (often with royal blue or red trim) and black socks with red turn-downs. Rangers moved from the lighter shade of blue to royal blue in 1921, and have had a royal blue home shirt every year since. Black socks were first included in 1883 for five seasons before disappearing for eight years but became a more permanent fixture from 1896 onwards. When the red turn-downs were added to the socks in 1904, the strip began to look more like the modern day Rangers home kit. Occasionally, the home kit will be altered by the shorts and socks, sometimes replacing the black socks with white ones; or replacing the white shorts and black socks combination with royal blue shorts and socks.\nThe basic design of Rangers away strips has changed far more than the traditional home strip. Rangers original change strip, used between 1876 and 1879, was all white featuring blue and white hooped socks and a light blue six pointed star on the chest. White and red have been the most common colours for Rangers alternate strips, though dark and light blue have also featured highly. In 1994 Rangers introduced a third kit. This is usually worn if both the home and away kits clash with their opponents. The colours used in the third kits have included combinations of white, red, dark and light blue as well as black. Orange and blue change strips, first seen in 1993\u201394, worn once in 2002\u201303 and reintroduced in 2018\u201319 and 2022\u201323, have caused controversy because the colours were seen as referencing the Orange Order.\nKit suppliers and shirt sponsors.\nSince 1978, when Rangers signed a deal with Umbro, they have had a specific kit manufacturer and since 1984 have had a kit sponsor. The following tables detail Rangers' shirt sponsors and kit suppliers by year:\nWhen Rangers played French sides in 1996\u201397 and 1997\u201398, they wore the logo of Center Parcs instead of McEwan's Lager, due to a French ban on alcohol advertising. Later matches in France (when the club was sponsored by Carling) saw the club play with no shirt sponsor, in 2006 and 2007.\nDuring 32Red's sponsorship, Rangers faced NK Osijek in 2018\u201319 wearing unsponsored training gear due to Croatia's ban on gambling advertising. Team Talk, an arm of the Rangers Charity Foundation, appeared on the shirts on two occasions in 2021\u201322: away in Leipzig, as Unibet hold no licence for Germany; and in the 2021\u201322 UEFA Europa League final against Eintracht Frankfurt, as gambling advertisements are banned in Spain.\nMascot.\nBroxi Bear is the official mascot of Rangers. Its name is derived from Rangers' home stadium, Broxi being an anagram of Ibrox. Broxi is a brown bear with blue inner ears and nose, wearing a Rangers strip. He made his first appearance in a 2\u20132 draw against Raith Rovers on 13 November 1993. Broxi was later accompanied by his \"wife\" Roxi and their \"son\" Boris although from 2001 Roxi and Boris no longer made any on-field appearances at Ibrox. Roxi and Boris did continue to appear on some club merchandise. On 9 September 2017, Roxi and Boris were re-introduced before a 4\u20131 win against Dundee.\nStadium and training facility.\nThe club used a variety of grounds in Glasgow as a venue for home matches in the years between 1872 and 1899. The first was Fleshers' Haugh, situated on Glasgow Green, followed by Burnbank Park in the Kelvinbridge area of the city, and then Kinning Park for ten years from the mid-1870s to the mid-1880s. From February of the 1886\u201387 season, Cathkin Park was used until the first Ibrox Park, in the Ibrox area of south-west Glasgow, was inaugurated for the following season. Ibrox Stadium in its current incarnation was originally designed by the architect Archibald Leitch, a Rangers fan who also played a part in the design of, among others, Old Trafford in Manchester and Highbury in London. The stadium was inaugurated on 30 December 1899, and Rangers defeated Hearts 3\u20131 in the first match held there.\nRangers' training facility is located in the Auchenhowie area of Milngavie, Glasgow; it was initially named Murray Park after former chairman and owner Sir David Murray, but has since been renamed. It was proposed by then-manager Dick Advocaat upon his arrival at the club in 1998. It was completed in 2001 at a cost of \u00a314\u00a0million. The training centre was the first purpose-built facility of its kind in Scotland, and incorporates features including nine football pitches, a gym, a hydrotherapy pool and a video-editing suite. Rangers' youth teams are also accommodated at the centre, with around 140 players between under-10 and under-19 age groups using the facilities. International club teams playing in Scotland, as well as national sides, have previously used the centre for training, and Advocaat's South Korea team used it for training prior to the 2006 World Cup.\nClub identity, supporters and relations with other clubs.\nRangers are one of the best supported clubs in Europe, the figure for the 2017\u201318 season being in the 20 largest home league attendances in Europe. A study of stadium attendance figures from 2013 to 2018 by the \"CIES Football Observatory\" ranked Rangers at 18th in the world during that period, with Rangers' accounting for 27.4% of total Scottish attendance, placing them eighth overall for national attendance share.\nThe Rangers Worldwide Alliance is a network of supporters clubs that was set up for the benefit of the club and the fans. There are more than 600 registered supporters clubs with over 30,000 registered members. There are also many unregistered supporters clubs currently active. The official club website lists over 100 supporters' clubs in Great Britain and Northern Ireland, with over 100 further clubs spread across over 35 countries around the world.\nRangers fans have contributed to several records for high attendances, including the highest home attendance for a league fixture, 118,567 on 2 January 1939. Rangers record highest attendance was against Hibernian on 27 March 1948 in the Scottish Cup semi-final at Hampden Park. Rangers beat Hibernian 1\u20130 in front of a packed 143,570 crowd.\nIn 2008, up to 200,000 Rangers supporters, many without match tickets, travelled to Manchester for the UEFA Cup Final. Despite most supporters behaving \"impeccably\", Rangers fans were involved in serious trouble and rioting. A minority of fans rioted in the city centre, clashing violently with police and damaging property, resulting in 42 being arrested for a variety of offences.\nIn 2021, Rangers supporters were widely criticised, including by Nicola Sturgeon, John Swinney and Humza Yousaf, after they gathered in George Square to celebrate the club winning the Scottish Premiership. 53 Rangers supporters were arrested following the celebration, which was in breach of COVID-19 lockdown regulations, and in excess of \u00a358,000 worth of damage was done to the square.\nIn 2022, Rangers also took the largest-ever travelling support abroad when an estimated 100,000 fans arrived in Seville for the UEFA Europa League Final. No arrests were made in Seville as Rangers supporters impressed the Spanish police with their good behaviour.\nSupporters group Club 1872 are shareholders in the club.\nRivalries.\nThe club's most distinct rivalry is with Glasgow neighbours Celtic; the two clubs are collectively known as the Old Firm. Rangers' traditional support is largely drawn from the Protestant Unionist community, whilst Celtic's traditional support is largely drawn from the Catholic community. The first Old Firm match was won by Celtic and there have been over four hundred matches played to date. The Old Firm rivalry has fuelled many assaults, sometimes leading to deaths, on Old Firm derby days; an activist group that monitors sectarian activity in Glasgow has reported that on Old Firm weekends, admissions to hospital emergency rooms have increased over normal levels and journalist Franklin Foer noted that in the period from 1996 to 2003, eight deaths in Glasgow were directly linked to Old Firm matches, as well as hundreds of assaults.\nThe bitter rivalry with Aberdeen developed following an incident in the 1979 League Cup final when Rangers' Derek Johnstone provoked the fury of the Dons support with what they believed was a blatant dive but which resulted in the dismissal of Aberdeen's Doug Rougvie and a Rangers victory. Then, the following season, Aberdeen's John McMaster had to be given the kiss of life at Ibrox after a stamp on his throat by Willie Johnston. Relations between fans were further soured during a league match on 8 October 1988, when Aberdeen player Neil Simpson's tackle on Rangers' Ian Durrant resulted in Durrant being injured for two years. Resentment continued and in 1998 an article in a Rangers match programme branded Aberdeen fans \"scum\", although Rangers later issued a \"full and unreserved apology\" to Aberdeen and their supporters, which was accepted by Aberdeen.\nRangers' relaunch in the Third Division in the 2012\u201313 season led to the club's original rivalry with Queen's Park being renewed for the first time since 1958 in the league. Rangers and Queen's Park first played each other in March 1879, some nine years before the start of the Old Firm rivalry. Matches with Queen's Park were advertised as the \"Original Glasgow derby\" by Rangers and the Scottish media; and as the \"Oldest Derby in the World\" by Queen's Park.\nSectarianism.\nJohn Ure Primrose, chairman of Rangers from 1912 to 1923, has been described as sharpening Rangers' Protestant Unionist identity and anti-Catholic identity, contributing to the absence of openly Catholic players from the team. From the early 20th century onwards, Rangers had a policy of not signing Catholic players, or employing Catholics in other prominent roles.\nIn 1989, Rangers signed Mo Johnston, \"their first major Roman Catholic signing\". Johnston was the first high-profile Catholic to sign for the club since the World War I era, though other Catholics had signed for Rangers before. Since Johnston's signing, an influx of overseas footballers has contributed to Catholic players becoming commonplace at Rangers. In 1999, Lorenzo Amoruso became the first Catholic captain of the club.\nRangers partnered with Celtic to form the Old Firm Alliance, an initiative aimed at educating children from across Glasgow about issues like healthy eating and fitness, as well as awareness of anti-social behaviour, sectarianism and racism. The club's Follow With Pride campaign was launched in 2007 to improve the club's image and build on previous anti-sectarian and anti-racist campaigns. William Gaillard, UEFA's Director of Communications, commended the SFA and Scottish clubs, including Rangers, for their actions in fighting discrimination. In September 2007, UEFA praised Rangers for the measures the club has taken against sectarianism.\nSectarian chanting by supporters has continued to incur criticism and sanctions upon the club as well as convictions against individuals identified. In 1999, the vice-chairman of The Rangers Football Club Ltd, Donald Findlay, resigned after being filmed singing sectarian songs during a supporters club event. UEFA's Control and Disciplinary Body has punished Rangers for incidents during European ties, most notably Villarreal in 2006, Osasuna in 2007, PSV Eindhoven in 2011, and at Ibrox in 2019. In February 2015, following sectarian singing from Rangers fans at a match at Raith Rovers, the SPFL came in for criticism for their failure or inability to deal with the issue. However, there have been cases of the police and courts taking action, with Rangers fans having been charged, convicted and jailed for sectarian behaviour.\nRangers' use of orange and blue change strips, first worn in 1993\u201394, once in 2002\u201303 and reintroduced in 2018\u201319 and 2022\u201323, has caused controversy because the colours are seen as referencing the Orange Order.\nPolitics.\nRangers have historically embodied a stark Protestant, Unionist and Monarchist identity, deeply intertwined with British Loyalism in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Academics argue that the club has long served as a symbolic expression of Britishness in Scotland, often associated with the political right and the Conservative Party. Until 1989, Rangers informally refused to sign Catholic players, reinforcing its image as a bastion of Protestant identity. Supporters frequently express their unionist and Orange affiliations through songs, emblems, and banners, with many fans attending sectarian Orange Order events and adopting symbols such as the Union Jack and slogans like \"We are the people.\" In the 2000s, Ranger fanzines like \"Follow Follow\" openly promoted a loyalist and right-wing agenda. Surveys from 1990 and 2001 showed Rangers fans to be the most likely in Scotland to support the Conservative Party, oppose a British withdrawal from Northern Ireland and oppose the Scottish National Party.\nIn contrast to Glasgow Celtic supporters, who are known to support Palestinian nationalism and wave Palestinian flags at games, Glasgow Rangers supporters support Israel and wave Israeli flags.\nSome Rangers fans have been accused of making Nazi salutes, most notably at a UEFA Cup game in Israel in 2007, although the gestures were later clarified as being \"red hand salutes\", identified with the loyalist movement. In 2013, a Rangers fan was banned from attending football games for two years after being found guilty of giving a Nazi salute at a youth cup final game.\nA flag featuring the Nazi SS Tokenkopf has been flown by Rangers fans in both 2023 and 2024, with the club launching an investigation after one of the flags was flown at Ibrox Stadium.\nIn 2003, Rangers chairman John McClelland vowed to \"weed out\" those who among the Rangers support who \"indulge in racist behaviour\" after Celtic players Bobo Balde and Momo Sylla were subjected to racist abuse. In March 2015, Rangers director Chris Graham resigned his position after posting derogatory comments about Muslims on social media. In April 2017, a Rangers fan was seen on TV making racist 'monkey gestures' towards Celtic winger Scott Sinclair and banned for life. In August 2019, UEFA ordered Rangers to close a part of their stadium after their fans were found guilty of 'racist chanting'. In July 2020, Rangers defender Connor Goldson was criticised by Rangers fans for supporting the Black Lives Matter movement, he described the fans' reaction as \"hate\" and \"ignorance\", he was supported by ex-Rangers player Maurice Edu, who also expressed his \"embarrassment\" and \"disappointment\" with some Rangers fans' reaction to the Black Lives Matter movement. These events led Rangers CEO Stewart Robertson to condemn the racial abuse of Rangers players by stating \"if you are unable to support our players, regardless of their background, you are not welcome at Ibrox\".\nIn the 2020s, Rangers hired former Democratic Unionist Party politician David Graham as their head of public relations. Graham was later promoted to the position of general manager at the club, until the position was abolished.\nFriendships.\nSupporters of Rangers have a fan friendship with the Northern Irish club Linfield, dating back to 1920. Two of the founders of the club Moses and Peter McNeil have a Northern Irish connection through the County Down birth of their mother Jean Bain, who after moving to Scotland for work in the mid-19th century married a Scotsman, John McNeil. From Rangers formation to the present day, the club have had 32 players who were born in either Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland and previously Ireland (from 1882 to 1950). A number were former Linfield players, and they have contributed much to the success of Rangers Football Club. Three former Northern Irish players have captained Rangers \u2013 Bert Manderson, John McClelland and Steven Davis; six from a Northern Irish connection have been elevated to the Rangers 'Hall of Fame' and one \u2013 Jimmy Nicholl \u2013 was the club's assistant manager in 2018.\nThe fans of Rangers also have a fan-friendship with the German club Hamburger SV, dating from the 1970s when Scots moved to the German port in search of work and reinforced by their shared affection for the midfielder J\u00f6rg Albertz.\nThis link was formalised in February 2021 with the formation of an official club partnership between the two sides. Conversely, Celtic fans have a long-standing friendship with Hamburger SV's city rivals, FC St. Pauli. The friendship exists due to both the Rangers-HSV affinity and the shared left-wing politics of Celtic and St. Pauli fans.\nOwnership and finances.\nFrom incorporation to liquidation.\nOn 27 May 1899, Rangers Football Club incorporated, forming The Rangers Football Club Ltd. No single shareholding exceeded 50% until 1985 when the Lawrence Group increased its shareholding in Rangers to a 52% majority, following a deal with then club vice-chairman Jack Gillespie. In November 1988, head of the Lawrence Group Lawrence Marlborough sold out to David Murray for \u00a36\u00a0million. In 2000, David Murray decided to list the company on the stock exchange (making it a public limited company), with the name of the company being changed to The Rangers Football Club plc.\nOn 6 May 2011, Craig Whyte bought David Murray's shares for \u00a31. On 13 February 2012, Whyte filed legal papers at the Court of Session giving notice of his intention to appoint administrators. The next day, The Rangers Football Club plc \u2013 which was subsequently renamed RFC 2012 plc \u2013 entered administration over non-payment of \u00a39\u00a0million in PAYE and VAT taxes to HM Revenue and Customs. In April the administrators estimated that the club's total debts could top \u00a3134m which was largely dependent on the outcome of a First Tier Tax Tribunal concerning a disputed tax bill in relation to an Employee Benefit Trust (\"EBT\") scheme employed by the club since 2001. However, on 20 November 2012, the Tribunal ruled in favour of Rangers. Had that decision been upheld the tax bill could have been significantly reduced from an estimated \u00a374m to under \u00a32m. An Upper Tribunal upheld the decision in 2014. HMRC then appealed to the Court of Session, which ruled in November 2015 that Rangers should have paid tax and national insurance on the EBT payments.\nOn 25 June 2012, the Crown Office asked Strathclyde Police to investigate the purchase of Rangers and the club's subsequent financial management during Whyte's tenure.\nCharles Green agreed a deal with the administrators of The Rangers Football Club plc to purchase the company for \u00a38.5\u00a0million if a proposed CVA was agreed or to purchase its business and assets for a \u00a35.5million if the proposed CVA were to be rejected. On 14 June 2012, the formal rejection of the proposed CVA meant that the company would enter the liquidation process. The accountancy firm BDO was appointed to investigate the years of financial mismanagement at the club.\nCurrent corporate identity.\nOn 14 June 2012, hours after the CVA's rejection, Sevco Scotland Ltd, a new company formed by Charles Green's consortium for this eventuality, completed the purchase of the business and assets of The Rangers Football Club Plc and then, on 18 June 2012, formally applied to acquire the SPL share of The Rangers Football Club plc. On 4 July, SPL clubs voted by 10\u20131 to reject the application with Kilmarnock abstaining and the old Rangers company voting in favour. Thereafter, an application to the Scottish Football League was successful with Rangers securing associate membership on 13 July 2012 at an SFL meeting by a vote of 29\u20131. The SFL member clubs voted that Rangers should enter the fourth tier of Scottish Football, Scottish Third Division for the 2012\u201313 season, rather than the Scottish First Division.\nAn application was made for a transfer of SFA membership on 29 June 2012, with the new company applying for the transfer of the membership of The Rangers Football Club plc. Agreement was reached on the transfer with the new company accepting a number of conditions relating to the old company.\nAt the end of 2012, Rangers International Football Club plc became the holding company for the group, having acquired The Rangers Football Club Ltd on the basis of a one for one share exchange. In 2013, after its first 13 months, the company reported operating losses of \u00a314.4m. Thereafter it continued to post annual operating losses, variously \u00a39.8m in 2014 and \u00a39.9m in 2015, \u00a32.5m in 2016, \u00a36.3m in 2017 and \u00a313.2m in 2018, until returning to profit in 2022.\nIn June 2025, the consortium Rangers FC LLC, headed by US businessman Andrew Cavenagh and 49ers Enterprises, the investment arm of the San Francisco 49ers, purchased 51% of shares to compete a multi-million pound takeover of the club.\nRemaining major shareholders of the club included former chairman Douglas Park, George Taylor and Stuart Gibson, who all held at least a 5% shareholding.\nDave King, who had been the largest individual shareholder since leading the regime change in 2015, and John Bennett, chairman from 2023 to 2024, both divested their entire shareholding.\nSocial responsibility.\nSupport for charities.\nThe Rangers Charity Foundation was created in 2002 and participates in a wide range of charitable work, regularly involving Rangers staff and star players. The foundation also has partnerships with UNICEF, The Prostate Cancer Charity and Erskine, and is responsible for over \u00a32.3\u00a0million in donations. As well as fundraising, the Rangers Charity Foundation regularly bring sick, disabled and disadvantaged children to attend matches and tours at Ibrox, with the chance to meet the players.\nThrough its support of the Rangers Charity Foundation, the club has helped a number of charities with support and financial donations. In 2008, the club became the first Scottish side to be selected as a partner club of UNICEF. The club's Charity Foundation has backed initiatives in Togo and India as well as funding one million vaccinations for a children's vaccination programme. The club has been a firm supporter of Erskine, a charity which provides long-term medical care for veterans of the British Armed Forces, and in 2012, donated \u00a325,000 to fund projects within their care homes. In January 2015, Rangers hosted a charity match for the benefit of former player Fernando Ricksen who had been diagnosed with motor neurone disease; this raised \u00a3320,000 for him and MND Scotland.\nWork in the community.\nAlongside its work with numerous charities, the club and its Charity Foundation operate various initiatives within the community including courses to help Armed Forces veterans overcome addictions, to raise awareness of social issues and help unemployed people back into work. In October 2015, the club launched its \"Ready2Succeed\" programme which was a ten-week course designed to develop participants confidence and employability skills by engaging with football and fitness. Rangers first-team players also visit the Royal Hospital for Children in Glasgow every year during the festive period where they hand out presents to the children and donate money to the hospital activity fund.\nPopular culture.\nThe club featured on BBC Scotland comedy \"Scotch and Wry\" in 1979 in a scene where Manager (Rikki Fulton) and Chief Scout (Gregor Fisher) unknowingly sign a young Catholic footballer (Gerard Kelly) but then try to void his contract to avoid publicly breaking the club's \"No Catholic\" signing policy after finding out.\nIn 2002, former Rangers striker Ally McCoist starred in Robert Duvall's film \"A Shot at Glory\" as Jackie McQuillan, where he would play against Rangers in the Scottish Cup Final for \"Kilnockie F.C.\", a fictional side.\nIn 2003, a Scottish television documentary series filmed by BBC Scotland, \"Blue Heaven\", followed aspiring young footballers at Rangers as they tried to forge a career in football. The series was originally broadcast in the winter of 2003 with a follow-up episode in 2011.\nIn 2008, celebrity chef and former Rangers youth player Gordon Ramsay returned to the club to teach them how to cook in Series 4, Episode 12 of \"The F Word\".\nOwing to the notoriety of the \"Rangers Inter City Firm\", a football firm associated with the club, Rangers have also featured in television documentaries and books about football hooliganism, including Series 1, Episode 5 of \"The Real Football Factories\" presented by English actor Danny Dyer on Bravo in 2006, during which he visits his first Old Firm match and meets football casuals from Rangers, Celtic, Aberdeen, Hibernian, Dundee United and Dundee.\nRangers have appeared in theatre a number of times in shows such as \"Follow Follow: The Rangers Story\" at the King's Theatre in 1994 starring Scottish actors Barbara Rafferty, Alexander Morton, Jonathan Watson, Iain Robertson, Ronnie Letham and Stuart Bowman; \"Singin' I'm No A Billy He's A Tim\" at the Pavilion Theatre in 2009; \"Divided City\" at the Citizens Theatre in 2011; and, more recently, \"Billy and Tim and the Wee Glesga Ghost\" in 2015 and \"Rally Roon the Rangers\" in 2019 and 2022, both at the Pavilion Theatre in Glasgow.\nWilliam Orcutt Cushing's hymn \"Follow On\", also known as \"Down in the Valley with My Saviour I Would Go\" or \"I Will Follow Jesus\", has been adopted as the anthem of Rangers in their club song \"Follow Follow\". The club has also played the Tina Turner song \"The Best\" when the teams exit the tunnel before kick off.\nIn October 2023, K-pop girl group STAYC went viral when during a concert in Dallas, Texas, US, they wore cropped 1996\u201397 season Rangers shirts instead of uniforms from the local Major League Baseball team, the Texas Rangers. A club spokesman said that the moment had \"triggered nostalgia for the Light Blues\". When the group traveled to the UK the following month for the Korea On Stage show at Wembley, the club welcomed them to Ibrox Stadium and their adjoining event facility, Edmiston House.\nRecords.\nClub.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n 143,570 vs Hibernian, 27 March 1948\n 118,567 vs Celtic, 2 January 1939\n 100,000 vs Dynamo Kyiv, 16 September 1987\n 50,048 vs Berwick Rangers, 4 May 2013\n 1898\u201399 (Rangers won all of their 18 league matches) and 2020\u201321\n 14\u20132 vs Whitehill, 29 September 1883\n 14\u20132 vs Blairgowrie, 20 January 1934\n 10\u20130 vs Hibernian, 24 December 1898\nPlayer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n Dougie Gray, 940 appearances, 1925\u20131947\n Sandy Archibald, 513 appearances, 1917\u20131934\n Jimmy Smith, 381 goals, 1929\u20131946\n Jimmy Smith, 300 goals, 1929\u20131946\n Ally McCoist, 61 caps, 1983\u20131998\n \"As of 1 September 2025\"\nPlayers.\nFirst-team squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademy squads.\n\"For more details on the academy squads, see Rangers F.C. B Team and Academy.\"\nStaff.\nBoard of directors.\nRangers is owned and operated by The Rangers Football Club Limited (\"TRFCL\"), which, in turn, is a subsidiary of the holding company Rangers International Football Club Limited (\"RIFC\"). The latter company, RIFC, also owns other corporations related to Rangers including Rangers Retail Ltd, Rangers Media Ltd and Garrion Security Services Ltd who are responsible for providing match day security at Ibrox Stadium.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFirst-team staff.\n\"As of 1 November 2025\"\nManagers.\nTwenty-one men (including two repeat appointments) have been manager of Rangers during the club's history. In addition, twelve men have taken charge of the side on a caretaker basis, while five served as secretaries choosing the team, prior to the appointment of the club's first full-time manager, William Wilton, in 1899.\nThe longest-serving manager was Bill Struth, who served for 34 years and 26 days. Rangers have had six foreign managers during their history: Dick Advocaat, Paul Le Guen, Pedro Caixinha, Giovanni van Bronckhorst, Philippe Clement and Danny R\u00f6hl. Graeme Souness is the only player-manager during Rangers' history. There have been two repeat appointments: Jock Wallace and Walter Smith.\nThe most successful manager, in terms of the number of trophies won, is Bill Struth, with eighteen League titles, ten Scottish Cups and two League Cups. Rangers' other manager with notable success was William Waddell, who won the European Cup Winners' Cup.\n \"As of 17 December 2023\"\n 1948\u201349, 1963\u201364, 1975\u201376, 1977\u201378, 1992\u201393, 1998\u201399, 2002\u201303\n 1927\u201328, 1929\u201330, 1933\u201334, 1934\u201335, 1949\u201350, 1952\u201353, 1962\u201363, 1991\u201392, 1995\u201396, 1999\u20132000, 2008\u201309\n 1946\u201347, 1960\u201361, 1986\u201387, 1988\u201389, 1990\u201391, 1993\u201394, 1996\u201397, 2004\u201305, 2009\u201310, 2010\u201311\n 1961\u201362, 1978\u201379, 2001\u201302, 2007\u201308\nHonours.\nNotable statistics.\nRangers became the first British side to reach a UEFA-sanctioned European final in 1961.\n \"As of 5 October 2025\"\nNotable former players.\nClub captains.\nFor further information, see Rangers club captains.\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Goram\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Gough\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Butcher\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Jardine\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Greig\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Gascoigne\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Baxter\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Laudrup\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Cooper\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; McCoist\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Hateley\n The \"Greatest Ever\" Rangers 11 chosen by fans in 1999. The manager chosen was Walter Smith.\nGreatest-ever team.\nThe following team was voted the greatest ever Rangers team by supporters in 1999. When the vote was launched it was feared that younger voters would ignore the great service of many of the pre-war stars (notably the most successful captain and most successful manager the club has ever had, Davie Meiklejohn and Bill Struth respectively). When the ballot was launched Donald Findlay stated it would be limited to post Second World War players because \"few can recall players of these earlier eras\":\nScottish Football Hall of Fame.\nAs of 1 June 2020, 33 players and managers to have been involved with Rangers in their careers have entered the Scottish Football Hall of Fame:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScottish FA International Roll of Honour.\nThe Scottish FA International Roll of Honour recognises players who have gained 50 or more international caps for Scotland. As of 1 July 2021, the 10 inductees to have won caps while playing for Rangers are:\nScottish Sports Hall of Fame.\nThree Rangers players have been selected in the Scottish Sports Hall of Fame, they are:\nGreatest-ever Ranger.\nJohn Greig was voted the greatest ever Rangers player in 1999.\nHe was announced as Honorary Life President in 2015.\nSponsors.\nAs of September 2025, Rangers are sponsored by:\nOfficial suppliers.\nA full list of Rangers commercial partners and sponsors can be found on the official club website and in the Rangers matchday programme, available at every home game.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69715", "revid": "12107077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69715", "title": "Mount of Olives", "text": "Mountain in East Jerusalem\nThe Mount of Olives or Mount Olivet (; ; both lit. 'Mount of Olives'; in Arabic also , , 'the Mountain') is a mountain ridge in East Jerusalem, east of and adjacent to Jerusalem's Old City. It is named for the olive groves that once covered its slopes. The southern part of the mount was the Silwan necropolis, attributed to the elite of the ancient Kingdom of Judah. The western slopes of the mount, those facing Jerusalem, have been used as a Jewish cemetery for over 3,000 years and holds approximately 150,000 graves, making it central in the tradition of Jewish cemeteries. Atop the hill lies the Palestinian neighbourhood of At-Tur, a former village that is now part of East Jerusalem.\nSeveral key events in the life of Jesus, as related in the Gospels, took place on the Mount of Olives, and in the Acts of the Apostles it is described as the place from which Jesus ascended to heaven. Because of its association with both Jesus and Mary, the mount has been a site of Christian worship since ancient times and is today a major site of pilgrimage.\nGeography and geology.\nThe Mount of Olives is one of three peaks of a mountain ridge which runs for just east of the Old City of Jerusalem across the Kidron Valley, in the area called the Valley of Josaphat. The peak to its north is Mount Scopus, at , while the peak to its south is the Mount of Corruption (or the Mount of Offence), at . \nThe Mount of Olives itself also consists of three distinct peaks. The middle peak has a double summit: its eastern top contains the and an Islamic maqam, while its western top supports the Palestinian town of At-Tur and the Chapel of the Ascension, at . The southern head is topped by the Church of the Pater Noster complex. The northern head is known as \"Kurm es Saiad,\" or the Vineyard of the Hunter, and contains the Viri Galilaei Church.\nThe ridge is formed of oceanic sedimentary rock from the Late Cretaceous and contains a soft chalk and a hard flint. While the chalk areas are easily quarried, they are not a suitable strength for construction and features many man-made burial caves. The ridge acts as a watershed, and its eastern side is the beginning of the Judean Desert.\nHistory.\nFrom Biblical times until the present, Jews have been buried on the Mount of Olives. The necropolis on the southern ridge, the location of the modern village of Silwan, was the burial place of Jerusalem's most important citizens in the period of the Biblical kings.\nThe religious ceremony marking the start of a new month was held on the Mount of Olives during the Second Temple period. During the time of the Roman procurator Antonius Felix (52\u201360 CE), a Jewish prophetic figure known as \"the Egyptian\" gathered his followers atop the Mount of Olives in preparation for an invasion of the city or in the belief that he would cause the walls of Jerusalem to fall, allowing them to enter (depending on the version). This group was crushed by the Romans. While \"the Egyptian\" managed to flee, many of his followers were killed or taken captive, and the remainder escaped.\nRoman soldiers from the 10th Legion camped on the mount during the Siege of Jerusalem in the year 70 AD. After the destruction of the Second Temple, Jews celebrated the festival of Sukkot on the Mount of Olives. They made pilgrimages to the Mount of Olives because it was 80 meters higher than the Temple Mount and offered a panoramic view of the Temple site. It became a traditional place for lamenting the Temple's destruction, especially on Tisha B'Av. In 1481, an Italian Jewish pilgrim, Meshullam of Volterra, wrote: \"And all the community of Jews, every year, goes up to Mount Zion on the day of Tisha B'Av to fast and mourn, and from there they move down along Yoshafat Valley and up to Mount of Olives. From there they see the whole Temple (the Temple Mount) and there they weep and lament the destruction of this House.\"\nIn 1189, in the wake of the 1187 Battle of Hattin and reconquest of the land by Saladin, the sultan gave the Mount to two of his commanders.\nIn the mid-1850s, the villagers of Silwan were paid \u00a3100 annually by the Jews in an effort to prevent the desecration of graves on the mount.\nPrime Minister of Israel Menachem Begin asked to be buried on the Mount of Olives near the graves of Etzel members Meir Feinstein and Moshe Barazani, rather than Mount Herzl national cemetery.\nStatus since 1948.\nThe armistice agreement signed by Israel and Jordan following the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War called for the establishment of a Special Committee to negotiate developments including \"free access to the holy sites and cultural institutions and use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives\". However, during the 19 years the Jordanian annexation of the West Bank lasted, the committee was not formed. Non-Israeli Christian pilgrims were allowed to visit the mount, but Jews of all countries and most non-Jewish Israeli citizens were barred from entering Jordan and therefore were unable to travel to the area.\nBy the end of 1949, and throughout the Jordanian rule of the site, some Arab residents uprooted tombstones and plowed the land in the cemeteries, and an estimated 38,000 tombstones were damaged in total. During this period, a road was paved through the cemetery, in the process destroying graves including those of famous persons. In 1964, the Intercontinental Hotel was built at the summit of the mount. Graves were also demolished for parking lots and a filling station and were used in latrines at a Jordanian Army barracks.\nState of Israel.\nFollowing the 1967 Six-Day War restoration work was done and the cemetery was reopened for burials. Tombs in the Mount of Olives Jewish Cemetery have been prone to vandalism, among them the tombs of the Gerrer Rebbe and Menachem Begin.\nIsrael's 1980 unilateral annexation of East Jerusalem was condemned as a violation of international law and ruled null and void by the UN Security Council in UNSC Resolution 478.\nOn 6 November 2010, an international watch-committee was set up by Diaspora Jews with the aim of reversing the desecration of the Jewish cemetery. According to one of the founders, the initiative was triggered by witnessing tombstones that were wrecked with \"the kind of maliciousness that defies the imagination.\"\nReligious significance.\nHebrew Bible references.\nDavid and Absalom.\nThe Mount of Olives is first mentioned in connection with David's flight from Absalom\n(II Samuel 15:30): \"And David went up by the ascent of the Mount of Olives, and wept as he went up.\" The ascent was probably east of the City of David, near the village of Silwan.\nSite of \"the glory of the Lord\".\nThe sacred character of the mount is alluded to in the Book of Ezekiel (11:23): \"And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.\"\n\"Mount of Corruption\".\nThe biblical designation \"Mount of Corruption,\" \"Mount of Ruination\" or \"Mount of Offense,\" or in Hebrew \"Har HaMashchit\" (), derives from the idol worship there, begun by King Solomon building altars to the gods of his Moabite and Ammonite wives on the southern peak, \"on the mountain which is before (east of) Jerusalem\" (), just outside the limits of the holy city. This site was known for idol worship throughout the First Temple period, until King Josiah finally destroyed \"the high places that were before Jerusalem, to the right of Har HaMashchit...\"(II Kings 23:13).\nApocalypse, resurrection, and burials.\nAn apocalyptic prophecy in the Book of Zechariah states that YHWH will stand on the Mount of Olives and the mountain will split in two, with one half shifting north and one half shifting south (). According to the Masoretic Text, people will flee through this newly formed valley to a place called Azal (Zechariah 14:5). The Septuagint (LXX) has a different reading of Zechariah 14:5 stating that a valley will be blocked up as it was blocked up during the earthquake during King Uzziah's reign. Jewish historian Flavius Josephus mentions in \"Antiquities of the Jews\" that the valley in the area of the King's Gardens was blocked up by landslide rubble during Uzziah's earthquake. Israeli geologists Wachs and Levitte identified the remnant of a large landslide on the Mount of Olives directly adjacent to this area. Based on geographic and linguistic evidence, Charles Simon Clermont-Ganneau, a 19th-century linguist and archeologist in Palestine, theorized that the valley directly adjacent to this landslide is Azal. This evidence accords with the LXX reading of Zechariah 14:5, which states that the valley will be blocked up as far as Azal. The valley he identified (which is now known as Wady Yasul in Arabic, and Nahal Etzel in Hebrew) lies \"south\" of both Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives.\nMany Jews have wanted to be buried on the Mount of Olives since antiquity, based on the Jewish tradition (from the Biblical verse Zechariah 14:4) that when the Messiah comes, the resurrection of the dead will begin there. There are an estimated 150,000 graves on the Mount. Notable rabbis buried on the mount include Chaim ibn Attar and others from the 15th century to the present day. Tradition wrongly identifies Roman-period tombs at the foot of the mount as those of Zechariah and Absalom, and a burial complex of the same period on the upper slope as the Tomb of the Prophets Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi.\nNew Testament references.\nThe Mount of Olives is frequently mentioned in the New Testament as part of the route from Jerusalem to Bethany and the place where Jesus stood when he wept over Jerusalem (an event known as \"Flevit super illam\" in Latin).\nJesus is said to have spent time on the mount, teaching and prophesying to his disciples (Matthew 24\u201325), including the Olivet Discourse, returning after each day to rest (Luke 21:37, and John 8:1 in the additional section of John's Gospel known as the \"Pericope Adulterae\"), and also coming there on the night of his betrayal. At the foot of the Mount of Olives lies the Garden of Gethsemane. The New Testament tells how Jesus and his disciples sang together \u2013 \"When they had sung the hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives\" Gospel of Matthew 26:30. Jesus ascended to heaven from the Mount of Olives according to Acts 1:9\u201312.\nGnostic references.\nAgain, the story of Jesus with his disciples on the Mount of Olives can be found in the Gnostic text Pistis Sophia, dated around the 3rd to 4th century CE.\nLandmarks.\nLandmarks at the top of the Mount of Olives include the Augusta Victoria Hospital with the Lutheran Church of the Ascension and its massive bell tower, the with its tall and slender bell tower, the Mosque or Chapel of the Ascension, the Church of the Pater Noster, and the Seven Arches Hotel. On the western slope are the historic Jewish cemetery, the Tomb of the Prophets, the Catholic Church of Dominus Flevit, and the Russian Orthodox Church of Mary Magdalene. At the foot of the mount, where it meets the Kidron Valley, there is the Garden of Gethsemane with the Church of All Nations. Within the Kidron Valley itself are the Tomb of the Virgin Mary, the Grotto of Gethsemane, and the nearby tomb of the medieval historian Mujir ed-Din, and further south are the tombs of Absalom (Hebrew name: Yad Avshalom), the Hezir priestly family and of Zechariah. At the northern margin of Mount Olivet stand the Mormon University with the Orson Hyde Memorial Garden and the Jewish settlement of Beit Orot, bordering on the Tzurim Valley and the Mitzpe Hamasu'ot ('Beacons Lookout') site, where the Temple Mount Sifting Project facilities are located. What lays north of here belongs to Mount Scopus. On the south-eastern slope of the Mount of Olives lies the Palestinian Arab village of al-Eizariya, identified with the ancient village of Bethany mentioned in the New Testament; a short distance from the village centre, towards the top of the mount, is the traditional site of Bethphage, marked by a Franciscan church.\nThe construction of the Brigham Young University Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies, better known locally as the Mormon University, owned and operated by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS) near the Tzurim Valley which separates the Mount of Olives from Mount Scopus, initially sparked controversy because of concerns that the Mormons would engage in missionary activities. After the Mormons pledged not to proselytize in Israel, work on the building was allowed to proceed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69716", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69716", "title": "Mount of Olves", "text": ""}
{"id": "69718", "revid": "50395950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69718", "title": "Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener", "text": "British army officer and colonial administrator (1850\u20131916)\nField Marshal Horatio Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener (; 24 June 1850 \u2013 5 June 1916) was an Anglo-Irish British Army officer and colonial administrator. Kitchener came to prominence for his imperial campaigns, his involvement in the Second Boer War, and his central role in the early part of the First World War.\nKitchener was credited in 1898 for having won the Battle of Omdurman and securing control of the Sudan, for which he was made Baron Kitchener of Khartoum. As Chief of Staff (1900\u20131902) in the Second Boer War he played a key role in Lord Roberts' conquest of the Boer Republics, then succeeded Roberts as commander-in-chief\u00a0\u2013 by which time Boer forces had taken to guerrilla fighting and British forces imprisoned Boer and African civilians in concentration camps. His term as commander-in-chief (1902\u20131909) of the Army in India saw him quarrel with another eminent proconsul, the viceroy Lord Curzon, who eventually resigned. Kitchener then returned to Egypt as British agent and consul-general (\"de facto\" administrator).\nIn 1914, at the start of the First World War, Kitchener became secretary of state for war, a cabinet minister. One of the few to foresee a long war, lasting for at least three years, and having the authority to act effectively on that perception, he organised the largest volunteer army that Britain had seen, and oversaw a significant expansion of material production to fight on the Western Front. Despite having warned of the difficulty of provisioning for a long war, he was blamed for the shortage of shells in the spring of 1915\u00a0\u2013 one of the events leading to the formation of a coalition government\u00a0\u2013 and stripped of his control over munitions and strategy.\nOn 5 June 1916, Kitchener was making his way to Russia on to attend negotiations with Tsar Nicholas II when in bad weather the ship struck a German mine west of Orkney, Scotland, and sank. Kitchener was among 737 who died.\nEarly life.\nKitchener was born at Gunsborough Villa, north of Listowel, County Kerry, in Ireland, son of army officer Henry Horatio Kitchener (1805\u20131894) and Frances Anne Chevallier (1826\u20131864); daughter of John Chevallier, a clergyman, of Aspall Hall, and his third wife, Elizabeth (\"n\u00e9e\" Cole).\nBoth sides of Kitchener's family were from Suffolk, and could trace their descent to the reign of William III; his mother's family was of French Huguenot descent. His father had only recently sold his commission and bought land in Ireland, under the Incumbered Estates (Ireland) Act 1849 designed to encourage investment into Ireland after the Irish Famine. In later life Kitchener only once revisited his childhood home, in the summer of 1910 at the invitation of Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne; he astonished the estate's owners by recalling the Irish names of many of the fields. Although sometimes labeled by military historians as Irish or Anglo-Irish (a group which provided a disproportionate number of senior British officers \u2013 see Irish military diaspora), Kitchener did not regard himself as such and was known to quote the saying misattributed to the Duke of Wellington that \"a man may be born in a stable, but that does not make him a horse\".\nIn 1864 the family moved to Switzerland, where the young Kitchener was educated at Montreux, then at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Pro-French and eager to see action, he joined a French field ambulance unit in the Franco-Prussian War. His father took him back to Britain after he caught pneumonia while ascending in a balloon to see the French Army of the Loire in action.\nCommissioned into the Royal Engineers on 4 January 1871, Kitchener was reprimanded by the Duke of Cambridge, the commander-in-chief, as his service in France had violated British neutrality. He served in Palestine, Egypt and Cyprus as a surveyor, learned Arabic, and prepared detailed topographical maps of the areas. His brother, Lt. Gen. Sir Walter Kitchener, had also entered the army and was Governor of Bermuda from 1908 to 1912.\nSurvey of western Palestine.\nIn 1874, aged 24, Kitchener was assigned by the Palestine Exploration Fund to a mapping-survey of the Holy Land, replacing Charles Tyrwhitt-Drake, who had died of malaria. By then an officer in the Royal Engineers, Kitchener joined fellow officer Claude R. Conder; between 1874 and 1877 they surveyed Palestine, returning to England only briefly in 1875 after an attack by locals at Safed, in Galilee.\nConder and Kitchener's expedition became known as the Survey of Western Palestine because it was largely confined to the area west of the Jordan River. The survey collected data on the topography and toponymy of the area, as well as local flora and fauna.\nThe results of the survey were published in an eight-volume series, with Kitchener's contribution in the first three tomes (Conder and Kitchener 1881\u20131885). This survey has had a lasting effect on the Middle East for several reasons:\nIn 1878, having completed the survey of western Palestine, Kitchener was sent to Cyprus to undertake a survey of that newly acquired British protectorate. He became vice-consul in Anatolia in 1879.\nEgypt.\nOn 4 January 1883 Kitchener was promoted to captain, given the Turkish rank binbasi (major), and dispatched to Egypt, where he took part in the reconstruction of the Egyptian Army.\nEgypt had recently become a British puppet state, its army led by British officers, although still nominally under the sovereignty of the Khedive (Egyptian viceroy) and his nominal overlord the Ottoman sultan. Kitchener became second-in-command of an Egyptian cavalry regiment in February 1883, and then took part in the failed Nile Expedition to relieve Charles George Gordon in the Sudan in late 1884.\nFluent in Arabic, Kitchener preferred the company of the Egyptians over the British, and the company of no-one over the Egyptians, writing in 1884 that: \"I have become such a solitary bird that I often think I were happier alone\". Kitchener spoke Arabic so well that he was able to effortlessly adopt the dialects of the different Bedouin tribes of Egypt and the Sudan.\nPromoted to brevet major on 8 October 1884 and to brevet lieutenant-colonel on 15 June 1885, he became the British member of the Zanzibar boundary commission in July 1885. He became Governor of the Egyptian Provinces of Eastern Sudan and Red Sea Littoral (which in practice consisted of little more than the Port of Suakin) in September 1886, also Pasha the same year, and led his forces in action against the followers of the Mahdi at Handub in January 1888, when he was injured in the jaw.\nKitchener was promoted to brevet colonel on 11 April 1888 and to the substantive rank of major on 20 July 1889 and led the Egyptian cavalry at the Battle of Toski in August 1889. At the beginning of 1890 he was appointed inspector general of the Egyptian police 1888\u201392 before moving to the position of Adjutant-General of the Egyptian Army in December of the same year and Sirdar (commander-in-chief) of the Egyptian Army with the local rank of brigadier in April 1892.\nKitchener was worried that, although his moustache was bleached white by the sun, his blond hair refused to turn grey, making it harder for Egyptians to take him seriously. His appearance added to his mystique: his long legs made him appear taller, whilst a cast in his eye made people feel he was looking right through them. Kitchener, at , towered over most of his contemporaries.\nSir Evelyn Baring, the \"de facto\" British ruler of Egypt, thought Kitchener \"the most able (soldier) I have come across in my time\". In 1890, a War Office evaluation of Kitchener concluded: \"A good brigadier, very ambitious, not popular, but has of late greatly improved in tact and manner\u00a0... a fine gallant soldier and good linguist and very successful in dealing with Orientals\" [in the 19th century, Europeans called the Middle East the Orient].\nWhile in Egypt, Kitchener was initiated into Freemasonry in 1883 in the Italian-speaking La Concordia Lodge No. 1226, which met in Cairo. In November 1899 he was appointed the first District Grand Master of the District Grand Lodge of Egypt and the Sudan, under the United Grand Lodge of England.\nSudan and Khartoum.\n In 1896, the British Prime Minister, Lord Salisbury, was concerned with keeping France out of the Horn of Africa. A French expedition under the command of Jean-Baptiste Marchand had left Dakar in March 1896 with the aim of conquering the Sudan, seizing control of the Nile as it flowed into Egypt, and forcing the British out of Egypt; thus restoring Egypt to the place within the French sphere of influence that it had had prior to 1882. Salisbury feared that if the British did not conquer the Sudan, the French would. He had supported Italy's ambitions to conquer Ethiopia in the hope that the Italians would keep the French out of Ethiopia. The Italian attempt to conquer Ethiopia, however, was going very badly by early 1896, and ended with the Italians being annihilated at the Battle of Adowa in March 1896. In March 1896, with the Italians visibly failing and the Mahdist State threatening to conquer Italian Eritrea, Salisbury ordered Kitchener to invade northern Sudan, ostensibly for the purpose of distracting the \"Ansar\" (whom the British called \"Dervishes\") from attacking the Italians.\nKitchener won victories at the Battle of Ferkeh in June 1896 and the Battle of Hafir in September 1896, earning him national fame in the United Kingdom and promotion to major-general on 25 September 1896. Kitchener's cold personality and his tendency to drive his men hard made him widely disliked by his fellow officers. One officer wrote about Kitchener in September 1896: \"He was always inclined to bully his own entourage, as some men are rude to their wives. He was inclined to let off his spleen on those around him. He was often morose and silent for hours together\u00a0... he was even morbidly afraid of showing any feeling or enthusiasm, and he preferred to be misunderstood rather than be suspected of human feeling.\" Kitchener had served on the Wolseley expedition to rescue General Charles George Gordon at Khartoum, and was convinced that the expedition failed because Wolseley had used boats coming up the Nile to bring his supplies. Kitchener wanted to build a railroad to supply the Anglo-Egyptian army, and assigned the task of constructing the Sudan Military Railroad to a Canadian railroad builder, Percy Girouard, for whom he had specifically asked.\nKitchener achieved further successes at the Battle of Atbara in April 1898, and then the Battle of Omdurman in September 1898. After marching to the walls of Khartoum, he placed his army into a crescent shape with the Nile to the rear, together with the gunboats in support. This enabled him to bring overwhelming firepower against any attack of the \"Ansar\" from any direction, though with the disadvantage of having his men spread out thinly, with hardly any forces in reserve. Such an arrangement could have proven disastrous if the \"Ansar\" had broken through the thin khaki line. At about 5 a.m. on 2 September 1898, a huge force of \"Ansar\", under the command of the Khalifa himself, came out of the fort at Omdurman, marching under their black banners inscribed with Koranic quotations in Arabic; this led Bennet Burleigh, the Sudan correspondent of \"The Daily Telegraph\", to write: \"It was not alone the reverberation of the tread of horses and men's feet I heard and seemed to feel as well as hear, but a voiced continuous shouting and chanting-the Dervish invocation and battle challenge \"Allah e Allah Rasool Allah el Mahdi!\" they reiterated in vociferous rising measure, as they swept over the intervening ground\". Kitchener had the ground carefully studied so that his officers would know the best angle of fire, and had his army open fire on the \"Ansar\" first with artillery, then machine guns and finally rifles as the enemy advanced. A young Winston Churchill, serving as an army officer, wrote of what he saw: \"A ragged line of men were coming on desperately, struggling forward in the face of the pitiless fire\u00a0\u2013 black banners tossing and collapsing; white figures subsiding in dozens to the ground\u00a0... valiant men were struggling on through a hell of whistling metal, exploding shells, and spurting dust\u00a0\u2013 suffering, despairing, dying\". By about 8:30\u00a0am, much of the Dervish army was dead; Kitchener ordered his men to advance, fearing that the Khalifa might escape with what was left of his army to the fort of Omdurman, forcing Kitchener to lay siege to it.\nViewing the battlefield from horseback on the hill at Jebel Surgham, Kitchener commented: \"Well, we have given them a damn good dusting\". As the British and Egyptians advanced in columns, the Khalifa attempted to outflank and encircle the columns; this led to desperate hand-to-hand fighting. Churchill wrote of his own experience as the 21st Lancers cut their way through the \"Ansar\": \"The collision was prodigious and for perhaps ten wonderful seconds, no man heeded his enemy. Terrified horses wedged in the crowd, bruised and shaken men, sprawling in heaps, struggle dazed and stupid, to their feet, panted and looked about them\". The Lancers' onslaught carried them through the 12-men-deep \"Ansar\" line with the Lancers losing 71 dead and wounded while killing hundreds of the enemy. Following the annihilation of his army, the Khalifa ordered a retreat and early in the afternoon, Kitchener rode in triumph into Omdurman and immediately ordered that the thousands of Christians enslaved by the \"Ansar\" were now all free people. Kitchener lost fewer than 500 men while killing about 11,000 and wounding 17,000 of the \"Ansar\". Burleigh summed the general mood of the British troops: \"At Last! Gordon has been avenged and justified. The dervishes have been overwhelming routed, Mahdism has been \"smashed\", while the Khalifa's capital of Omdurman has been stripped of its barbaric halo of sanctity and invulnerability. Kitchener promptly had the Mahdi's tomb blown up to prevent it from becoming a rallying point for his supporters, and had his bones scattered. Queen Victoria, who had wept when she heard of General Gordon's death, now wept for the man who had vanquished Gordon, asking whether it had been really necessary for Kitchener to desecrate the Mahdi's tomb.The body of the Mahdi was disinterred and beheaded. This symbolic decapitation echoed General Gordon's death at the hands of the Mahdist forces in 1885. The headless body of the Mahdi was thrown into the Nile. Kitchener is sometimes claimed to have kept the Mahd\u012b's skull and rumoured that he intended to use it as a drinking cup or ink well. Other historians state that he had the head buried unmarked in a Muslim cemetery. In a letter to his mother, Churchill wrote that the victory at Omdurman had been \"disgraced by the inhuman slaughter of the wounded and\u00a0... Kitchener is responsible for this\". There is no evidence that Kitchener ordered his men to shoot the wounded \"Ansar\" on the field of Omdurman, but he did give before the battle what the British journalist Mark Urban called a \"mixed message\", saying that mercy should be given, while at the same time saying \"Remember Gordon\" and that the enemy were all \"murderers\" of Gordon. The victory at Omdurman made Kitchener into a popular war hero, and gave him a reputation for efficiency and as a man who got things done. The journalist G. W. Steevens wrote in the \"Daily Mail\" that \"He [Kitchener] is more like a machine than a man. You feel that he ought to be patented and shown with pride at the Paris International Exhibition. British Empire: Exhibit No. 1 \"hors concours\", the Sudan Machine\". The shooting of the wounded at Omdurman, along with the desecration of the Mahdi's tomb, gave Kitchener a reputation for brutality that was to dog him for the rest of his life, and posthumously.\nAfter Omdurman, Kitchener opened a special sealed letter from Salisbury that told him that Salisbury's real reason for ordering the conquest of the Sudan was to prevent France from moving into the Sudan, and that the talk of \"avenging Gordon\" had been just a pretext. Salisbury's letter ordered Kitchener to head south as soon as possible to evict Marchand before he got a chance to become well-established on the Nile. On 18 September 1898, Kitchener arrived at the French fort at Fashoda (present day Kodok, on the west bank of the Nile north of Malakal) and informed Marchand that he and his men had to leave the Sudan at once, a request Marchand refused, leading to a tense stand-off as French and British soldiers aimed their weapons at each other. During what became known as the Fashoda Incident, Britain and France almost went to war with each other. The Fashoda Incident caused much jingoism and chauvinism on both sides of the English Channel; however, at Fashoda itself, despite the stand-off with the French, Kitchener established cordial relations with Marchand. They agreed that the tricolor would fly equally with the Union Jack and the Egyptian flag over the disputed fort at Fashoda. Kitchener was a Francophile who spoke fluent French, and despite his reputation for brusque rudeness was very diplomatic and tactful in his talks with Marchand; for example, congratulating him on his achievement in crossing the Sahara in an epic trek from Dakar to the Nile. In November 1898, the crisis ended when the French agreed to withdraw from the Sudan. Several factors persuaded the French to back down. These included British naval superiority; the prospect of an Anglo-French war leading to the British gobbling up the entire French colonial empire after the defeat of the French Navy; the pointed statement from the Russian emperor Nicholas II that the Franco-Russian alliance applied only to Europe, and that Russia would not go to war against Britain for the sake of an obscure fort in the Sudan in which no Russian interests were involved; and the possibility that Germany might take advantage of an Anglo-French war to strike France.\nKitchener became Governor-General of the Sudan in September 1898, and began a programme of restoring good governance. The programme had a strong foundation, based on education at Gordon Memorial College as its centrepiece\u00a0\u2013 and not simply for the children of the local elites, for children from anywhere could apply to study. He ordered the mosques of Khartoum rebuilt, instituted reforms which recognised Friday\u00a0\u2013 the Muslim holy day\u00a0\u2013 as the official day of rest, and guaranteed freedom of religion to all citizens of the Sudan. He attempted to prevent evangelical Christian missionaries from trying to convert Muslims to Christianity.\nAt this stage of his career Kitchener was keen to exploit the press, cultivating G. W. Steevens of the \"Daily Mail\" who wrote a book \"With Kitchener to Khartum\". Later, as his legend had grown, he was able to be rude to the press, on one occasion in the Second Boer War bellowing: \"Get out of my way, you drunken swabs\". He was created Baron Kitchener, of Khartoum and of Aspall in the County of Suffolk, on 31 October 1898.\nAnglo-Boer War.\nDuring the Second Boer War, Kitchener arrived in South Africa with Field Marshal Lord Roberts on the RMS \"Dunottar Castle\" along with massive British reinforcements in December 1899. Officially holding the title of chief of staff, he was in practice a second-in-command and was present at the relief of Kimberley before leading an unsuccessful frontal assault at the Battle of Paardeberg in February 1900. Kitchener was mentioned in despatches from Roberts several times during the early part of the war; in a despatch from March 1900 Roberts wrote how he was \"greatly indebted to him for his counsel and cordial support on all occasions\".\nFollowing the defeat of the conventional Boer forces, Kitchener succeeded Roberts as overall commander in November 1900. He was also promoted to lieutenant-general on 29 November 1900 and to local general on 12 December 1900. He subsequently inherited and expanded the successful strategies devised by Roberts to force the Boer commandos to submit, including concentration camps and the burning of farms. Conditions in the concentration camps, which had been conceived by Roberts as a form of control of the families whose farms he had destroyed, began to degenerate rapidly as the large influx of Boers outstripped the ability of the minuscule British force to cope. The camps lacked space, food, sanitation, medicine, and medical care, leading to rampant disease and a very high death rate for those Boers who entered. Eventually 26,370 women and children (81% were children) died in the concentration camps. The biggest critic of the camps was the English humanitarian and welfare worker Emily Hobhouse. She published a prominent report that highlighted atrocities committed by Kitchener's soldiers and administration, creating considerable debate in London about the war. Kitchener blocked Hobhouse from returning to South Africa by invoking martial law provisions.\nHistorian Caroline Elkins characterised Kitchener's conduct of the war as a \"scorched earth policy\", as his forces razed homesteads, poisoned wells and implemented concentration camps, as well as turned women and children into targets in the war.\nThe Treaty of Vereeniging ending the war was signed in May 1902 following a tense six months. During this period Kitchener struggled against the governor of the Cape Colony (Alfred Milner, 1st Viscount Milner), and against the British government. Milner was a hard-line conservative and wanted to Anglicise the Afrikaans-speaking people (the Boers) by force, and both Milner and the British government wanted to assert victory by forcing the Boers to sign a humiliating peace treaty; Kitchener wanted a more generous compromise peace treaty that would recognise certain rights for the Afrikaners and promise them future self-government. He even entertained a peace treaty proposed by Louis Botha and the other Boer leaders, although he knew the British government would reject the offer; their proposal would have maintained the sovereignty of the South African Republic and the Orange Free State while requiring them to sign a perpetual treaty of alliance with the UK and grant major concessions to the British, such as equal language rights for English with Dutch in their countries, voting rights for Uitlanders, and a customs and railway union with the Cape Colony and the Natal. During Kitchener's posting in South Africa, Kitchener became acting High Commissioner for Southern Africa.\nKitchener, who had been promoted to the substantive rank of general on 1 June 1902, was given a farewell reception at Cape Town on 23 June, and left for the United Kingdom in the SS \"Orotava\" on the same day. He received an enthusiastic welcome on his arrival the following month. Landing in Southampton on 12 July, he was greeted by the corporation, who presented him with the Freedom of the borough. In London, he was met at the train station by the Prince of Wales, drove in a procession through streets lined by military personnel from 70 different units and watched by thousands of people, and received a formal welcome at St James's Palace. He also visited King Edward VII, who was confined to his room recovering from his recent operation for appendicitis, but wanted to meet the general on his arrival and to personally bestow on him the insignia of the Order of Merit (OM). Kitchener was created Viscount Kitchener, of Khartoum and of the Vaal in the Colony of Transvaal and of Aspall in the County of Suffolk, on 28 July 1902.\nCourt-martial of Breaker Morant.\nIn the Breaker Morant case, five Australian officers and one English officer of an irregular unit, the Bushveldt Carbineers, were court-martialled for summarily executing twelve Boer prisoners, and also for the murder of a German missionary believed to be a Boer sympathiser, all allegedly under orders approved by Kitchener. The celebrated horseman and bush poet Lt. Harry \"Breaker\" Morant and Lt. Peter Handcock were found guilty, sentenced to death, and shot by firing squad at Pietersburg on 27 February 1902. Their death warrants were personally signed by Kitchener. He reprieved a third soldier, Lt. George Witton, who served 32 months before being released.\nIndia.\nIn late 1902 Kitchener was appointed Commander-in-Chief, India, and arrived there to take up the position in November, in time to be in charge during the January 1903 Delhi Durbar. He immediately began the task of reorganising the Indian Army. Kitchener's plan \"The Reorganisation and Redistribution of the Army in India\" recommended preparing the Indian Army for any potential war by reducing the size of fixed garrisons and reorganising it into two armies, to be commanded by Generals Sir Bindon Blood and George Luck.\nWhile many of the Kitchener Reforms were supported by the viceroy, Lord Curzon of Kedleston, who had originally lobbied for Kitchener's appointment, the two men eventually came into conflict. Curzon wrote to Kitchener advising him that signing himself \"Kitchener of Khartoum\" took up too much time and space\u00a0\u2013 Kitchener commented on the pettiness of this (Curzon simply signed himself \"Curzon\" as a hereditary peer, although he later took to signing himself \"Curzon of Kedleston\"). They also clashed over the question of military administration, as Kitchener objected to the system whereby transport and logistics were controlled by a \"Military Member\" of the Viceroy's Council. After what Curzon's most recent biographer described as \"prolonged intrigue\" and \"deceitful methods\", including correspondence which Kitchener asked the recipients to destroy after reading, the commander-in-chief won the crucial support of the government in London, and the viceroy had no option but to resign. \nLater events proved Curzon was right in opposing Kitchener's attempts to concentrate all military decision-making power in his own office. Although the offices of Commander-in-Chief and Military Member were now held by a single individual, senior officers could approach only the Commander-in-Chief directly. In order to deal with the Military Member, a request had to be made through the Army Secretary, who reported to the Indian Government and had right of access to the Viceroy. There were even instances when the two separate bureaucracies produced different answers to a problem, with the Commander-in-Chief disagreeing with himself as Military Member. This became known as \"the canonisation of duality\". Kitchener's successor, General Sir Garrett O'Moore Creagh, was nicknamed \"no More K\", and concentrated on establishing good relations with the viceroy, Lord Hardinge.\nKitchener presided over the Rawalpindi Parade in 1905 to honour the Prince and Princess of Wales's visit to India. That same year Kitchener founded the Indian Staff College at Quetta (now the Pakistan Command and Staff College), where his portrait still hangs. His term of office as commander-in-chief, India, was extended by two years in 1907. In April 1906 he was appointed colonel commandant of the Royal Engineers.\nKitchener was promoted to the highest Army rank, field marshal, on 10 September 1909 and went on a tour of Far East (including Japan), Australia and New Zealand. In Japan, Kitchener had an audience with Emperor Meiji and also attended the funeral of Prince It\u014d Hirobumi. \nHe aspired to be Viceroy of India, but the secretary of state for India, John Morley, was not keen and hoped to send him instead to Malta as commander-in-chief of British forces in the Mediterranean, even to the point of announcing the appointment in the newspapers. Kitchener pushed hard for the Viceroyalty, returning to London to lobby cabinet ministers and the dying King Edward VII, from whom, whilst collecting his field marshal's baton, Kitchener obtained permission to refuse the Malta job. However, Morley could not be moved. This was perhaps in part because Kitchener was thought to be a Tory (the Liberals were in office at the time); perhaps due to a Curzon-inspired whispering campaign; but most importantly because Morley, who was a Gladstonian and thus suspicious of imperialism, felt it inappropriate, after the recent grant of limited self-government under the Indian Councils Act 1909, for a serving soldier to be viceroy (in the event, no serving soldier was appointed viceroy until Lord Wavell in 1943, during the Second World War). The prime minister, H. H. Asquith, was sympathetic to Kitchener but was unwilling to overrule Morley, who threatened resignation, so Kitchener was finally turned down for the post of Viceroy of India in 1911.\nFrom 22 to 24 June 1911, Kitchener took part in the coronation of King George V and Queen Mary. Kitchener assumed the role of Captain of the Escort, responsible for the personal protection of the royals during the coronation. In this capacity, Kitchener was also the field marshal, In Command of the Troops, and assumed command of the 55,000 British and imperial soldiers present in London. During the Coronation ceremony itself, Kitchener acted as Third Sword, one of the four swords tasked with guarding the monarch. Later, in November 1911, Kitchener hosted the King and Queen in Port Said, Egypt while they were on their way to India for the Delhi Durbar to assume the titles of Emperor and Empress of India.\nReturn to Egypt.\nIn June 1911, Kitchener then returned to Egypt as British agent and consul-general in Egypt during the formal reign of Abbas Hilmi II as Khedive.\nAt the time of the Agadir Crisis (summer 1911), Kitchener told the Committee of Imperial Defence that he expected the Germans to walk through the French \"like partridges\" and he informed Lord Esher \"that if they imagined that he was going to command the Army in France he would see them damned first\".\nHe was created Earl Kitchener, of Khartoum and of Broome in the County of Kent, on 29 June 1914.\nDuring this period he became a proponent of Scouting and coined the phrase \"once a Scout, always a Scout\".\nFirst World War.\n1914.\nRaising the New Armies.\nAt the outset of the First World War, the prime minister, Asquith, quickly had Kitchener appointed secretary of state for war; Asquith had been filling the job himself as a stopgap following the resignation of Colonel Seely over the Curragh Incident earlier in 1914. Kitchener was in Britain on his annual summer leave, between 23 June and 3 August 1914, and had boarded a cross-Channel steamer to commence his return trip to Cairo when he was recalled to London to meet with Asquith. War was declared at 11pm the next day.\nAgainst cabinet opinion, Kitchener correctly predicted a long war that would last at least three years, require huge new armies to defeat Germany, and cause huge casualties before the end would come. Kitchener stated that the conflict would plumb the depths of manpower \"to the last million\". A massive recruitment campaign began, which soon featured a distinctive poster of Kitchener, taken from a magazine front cover. It may have encouraged large numbers of volunteers, and has proven to be one of the most enduring images of the war, having been copied and parodied many times since. Kitchener built up the \"New Armies\" as separate units because he distrusted the Territorials from what he had seen with the French Army in 1870. This may have been a mistaken judgement. The British reservists of 1914 tended to be much younger and fitter than their French equivalents a generation earlier.\nCabinet Secretary Maurice Hankey wrote of Kitchener:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The great outstanding fact is that within eighteen months of the outbreak of the war, when he had found a people reliant on sea-power, and essentially non-military in their outlook, he had conceived and brought into being, completely equipped in every way, a national army capable of holding its own against the armies of the greatest military Power the world had ever seen.\nHowever, Ian Hamilton later wrote of Kitchener \"he hated organisations; he smashed organisations\u00a0... he was a Master of Expedients\".\nDeploying the BEF.\nAt the War Council (5 August) Kitchener and Lieutenant General Sir Douglas Haig argued that the BEF should be deployed at Amiens, where it could deliver a vigorous counterattack once the route of German advance was known. Kitchener argued that the deployment of the BEF in Belgium would result in having to retreat and abandon much of its supplies almost immediately, because the Belgian Army would be unable to hold its ground against the Germans; Kitchener was proved right but, given the belief in fortresses common at the time, it is not surprising that the War Council disagreed with him.\nKitchener, believing Britain should husband its resources for a long war, decided at Cabinet (6 August) that the initial BEF would consist of only 4 infantry divisions (and 1 cavalry), not the 5 or 6 promised. His decision to hold back two of the six divisions of the BEF, although based on exaggerated concerns about German invasion of Britain, arguably saved the BEF from disaster when Sir John French (on the advice of Sir Henry Wilson who was much influenced by the French) might have been tempted to advance further into the teeth of the advancing German forces, had his own force been stronger.\nKitchener's wish to concentrate further back at Amiens may also have been influenced by a largely accurate map of German dispositions which was published by Repington in \"The Times\" on the morning of 12 August. Kitchener had a three-hour meeting (12 August) with Sir John French, Archibald Murray, Wilson and the French liaison officer Victor Huguet, before being overruled by the prime minister, who eventually agreed that the BEF should assemble at Maubeuge.\nSir John French's orders from Kitchener were to cooperate with the French but not to take orders from them. Given that the tiny BEF (about 100,000 men, half of them serving regulars and half reservists) was Britain's only field army, Kitchener also instructed French to avoid undue losses and exposure to \"forward movements where large numbers of French troops are not engaged\" until Kitchener himself had had a chance to discuss the matter with the Cabinet.\nMeeting with Sir John French.\nThe BEF commander in France, Sir John French, concerned by heavy British losses at the Battle of Le Cateau, was considering withdrawing his forces from the Allied line. By 31 August, French commander-in-chief Joseph Joffre, President Raymond Poincar\u00e9 (relayed via Bertie, the British ambassador) and Kitchener had sent him messages urging him not to do so. Kitchener, authorised by a midnight meeting of whichever cabinet ministers could be found, left for France for a meeting with Sir John on 1 September.\nThey met, together with Ren\u00e9 Viviani (French prime minister) and Alexandre Millerand (now French War Minister). Huguet recorded that Kitchener was \"calm, balanced, reflective\" whilst Sir John was \"sour, impetuous, with congested face, sullen and ill-tempered\". On Francis Bertie's advice Kitchener dropped his intention of inspecting the BEF. French and Kitchener moved to a separate room, and no independent account of the meeting exists. After the meeting Kitchener telegraphed the Cabinet that the BEF would remain in the line, although taking care not to be outflanked, and told French to consider this \"an instruction\". French had a friendly exchange of letters with Joffre.\nFrench had been particularly angry that Kitchener had arrived wearing his field marshal's uniform. This was how Kitchener normally dressed at the time (Maurice Hankey thought Kitchener's uniform tactless, but it had probably not occurred to him to change), but French felt that Kitchener was implying that he was his military superior and not simply a cabinet member. By the end of the year French thought that Kitchener had \"gone mad\" and his hostility had become common knowledge at GHQ and GQG.\n1915.\nStrategy.\nIn January 1915, Field Marshal French, with the concurrence of other senior commanders (e.g. General Sir Douglas Haig), wanted the New Armies incorporated into existing divisions as battalions rather than sent out as entire divisions. French felt (wrongly) that the war would be over by the summer before the New Army divisions were deployed because Germany had recently redeployed some divisions to the east. French took the step of appealing to the prime minister, Asquith, over Kitchener's head, but Asquith refused to overrule Kitchener. This further damaged relations between French and Kitchener, who had travelled to France in September 1914 during the First Battle of the Marne to order French to resume his place in the Allied line.\nKitchener warned French in January 1915 that the Western Front was a siege line that could not be breached, in the context of Cabinet discussions about amphibious landings on the Baltic or North Sea Coast, or against Turkey. In an effort to find a way to relieve pressure on the Western front, Kitchener proposed an invasion of Alexandretta in Turkey with Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC), New Army, and Indian troops. Alexandretta was an area with a large Christian population and was the strategic centre of the Ottoman Empire's railway network\u00a0\u2013 its capture would have cut the empire in two. Yet he was instead eventually persuaded to support Winston Churchill's disastrous Gallipoli Campaign in 1915\u20131916. (Churchill's responsibility for the failure of this campaign is debated; for more information see David Fromkin's \"A Peace to End All Peace\".) As late as mid-October 1915, however, Kitchener told a parliamentary committee that withdrawal from the peninsula would be \"the most disastrous event in the history of the empire\". The eventual failure, combined with the Shell Crisis of 1915\u00a0\u2013 amidst press publicity engineered by Sir John French\u00a0\u2013 dealt Kitchener's political reputation a heavy blow; Kitchener was popular with the public, so Asquith retained him in office in the new coalition government, but responsibility for munitions was moved to a new ministry headed by David Lloyd George. He was a sceptic about the tank, which is why it was developed under the auspices of Churchill's Admiralty.\nWith the Russians being pushed back from Poland, Kitchener thought the transfer of German troops west and a possible invasion of Britain were increasingly likely. He told the War Council (14 May) that he was not willing to send the New Armies overseas. He wired French (16 May 1915) that he would send no more reinforcements to France until he was clear the German line could be broken but sent two divisions at the end of May to please Joffre, not because he thought a breakthrough possible. He had wanted to conserve his New Armies to strike a knockout blow in 1916\u201317, but by the summer of 1915 realised that high casualties and a major commitment to France were inescapable. \"Unfortunately we have to make war as we must, and not as we should like\" as he told the Dardanelles Committee on 20 August 1915.\nAt an Anglo-French conference at Calais (6 July) Joffre and Kitchener, who was opposed to \"too vigorous\" offensives, reached a compromise on \"local offensives on a vigorous scale\", and Kitchener agreed to deploy New Army divisions to France. An inter-Allied conference at Chantilly (7 July, including Russian, Belgian, Serb and Italian delegates) agreed on coordinated offensives. However, Kitchener now came to support the upcoming Loos offensive. He travelled to France for talks with Joffre and Millerand (16 August). The French leaders believed Russia might sue for peace (Warsaw had fallen on 4 August). Kitchener (19 August) ordered the Loos offensive to proceed, despite the attack being on ground not favoured by French or Haig (then commanding First Army). The Official History later admitted that Kitchener hoped to be appointed Supreme Allied Commander. Basil Liddell Hart speculated that this was why he allowed himself to be persuaded by Joffre. New Army divisions first saw action at Loos in September 1915.\nReduction in powers.\nKitchener continued to lose favour with politicians and professional soldiers. He found it \"repugnant and unnatural to have to discuss military secrets with a large number of gentlemen with whom he was but barely acquainted\". Esher complained that he would either lapse into \"obstinacy and silence\" or else mull aloud over various difficulties. Alfred Milner told Howell Arthur Gwynne (18 August 1915) that he thought Kitchener a \"slippery fish\". By autumn 1915, with Asquith's Coalition close to breaking up over conscription, he was blamed for his opposition to that measure (which would eventually be introduced for single men in January 1916) and for the excessive influence which civilians like Churchill and Richard Haldane had come to exert over strategy, allowing \"ad hoc\" campaigns to develop in Sinai, Mesopotamia and Salonika. Generals such as Sir William Robertson were critical of Kitchener's failure to ask the Imperial General Staff (whose chief James Wolfe-Murray was intimidated by Kitchener) to study the feasibility of any of these campaigns. These operations were certainly feasible but assumed a level of competence that the British armed forces proved unable to achieve at that time. Tactical incompetence in the Gallipoli campaign meant that even a fairly straightforward task ended in disaster.\nKitchener advised the Dardanelles Committee (21 October) that Baghdad be seized for the sake of prestige then abandoned as logistically untenable. His advice was no longer accepted without question, but the British forces fell short of their objective and were eventually besieged and captured at Kut.\nArchibald Murray (Chief of the Imperial General Staff) later recorded that Kitchener was \"quite unfit for the position of secretary of state\" and \"impossible\", claiming that he never assembled the Army Council as a body, but instead gave them orders separately, and was usually exhausted by Friday. Kitchener was also keen to break up Territorial units whenever possible whilst ensuring that \"No 'K' Division left the country incomplete\". Murray wrote that \"He seldom told the absolute truth and the whole truth\" and claimed that it was not until he left on a tour of inspection of Gallipoli and the Near East that Murray was able to inform the Cabinet that volunteering had fallen far below the level needed to maintain a BEF of 70 divisions, requiring the introduction of conscription. The Cabinet insisted on proper General Staff papers being presented in Kitchener's absence.\nAsquith, who told Robertson that Kitchener was \"an impossible colleague\" and \"his veracity left much to be desired\", hoped that he could be persuaded to remain in the region as commander-in-chief and acted in charge of the War Office, but Kitchener took his seals of office with him so he could not be sacked in his absence. Douglas Haig\u00a0\u2013 at that time involved in intrigues to have Robertson appointed Chief of the Imperial General Staff\u00a0\u2013 recommended that Kitchener be appointed Viceroy of India (\"where trouble was brewing\") but not to the Middle East, where his strong personality would have led to that sideshow receiving too much attention and resources. Kitchener visited Rome and Athens, but Archibald Murray warned that he would likely demand the diversion of British troops to fight the Turks in the Sinai.\nKitchener and Asquith were agreed that Robertson should become CIGS, but Robertson refused to do this if Kitchener \"continued to be his own CIGS\", although given Kitchener's great prestige he did not want him to resign; he wanted the secretary of state to be sidelined to an advisory role like the Prussian War Minister. Asquith asked them to negotiate an agreement, which they did over the exchange of several draft documents at the Hotel de Crillon in Paris. Kitchener agreed that Robertson alone should present strategic advice to the Cabinet, with Kitchener responsible for recruiting and supplying the Army, although he refused to agree that military orders should go out over Robertson's signature alone \u2013 it was agreed that the secretary of state should continue to sign orders jointly with the CIGS. The agreement was formalised in an Order in Council in January 1916. Robertson was suspicious of efforts in the Balkans and Near East and was instead committed to major British offensives against Germany on the Western Front\u00a0\u2013 the first of these was to be the Somme in 1916.\n1916.\nEarly in 1916 Kitchener visited Douglas Haig, newly appointed commander-in-chief of the BEF in France. Kitchener had been a key figure in the removal of Haig's predecessor Sir John French, with whom he had a poor relationship. Haig differed with Kitchener over the importance of Mediterranean efforts and wanted to see a strong General Staff in London, but nonetheless valued Kitchener as a military voice against the \"folly\" of civilians such as Churchill. However, he thought Kitchener \"pinched, tired, and much aged\", and thought it sad that his mind was \"losing its comprehension\" as the time for decisive victory on the Western Front (as Haig and Robertson saw it) approached. Kitchener was somewhat doubtful of Haig's plan to win decisive victory in 1916, and would have preferred smaller and purely attritional attacks, but sided with Robertson in telling the Cabinet that the planned Anglo-French offensive on the Somme should go ahead.\nBy 29 March 1916, Kitchener was under pressure from French prime minister Aristide Briand for the British to attack on the Western Front to help relieve the pressure of the German attack at Verdun. The French refused to bring troops home from Salonika, which Kitchener thought a ploy for the increase of French power in the Mediterranean.\nOn 2 June 1916, Kitchener personally answered questions asked by politicians about his running of the war effort; at the start of hostilities Kitchener had ordered two million rifles from various US arms manufacturers. Only 480 of these rifles had arrived in the UK by 4 June 1916. The number of shells supplied was no less paltry. Kitchener explained the efforts he had made to secure alternative supplies. He received a resounding vote of thanks from the 200 Members of Parliament (MPs) who had arrived to question him, both for his candour and for his efforts to keep the troops armed; Sir Ivor Herbert, who, a week before, had introduced the failed vote of censure in the House of Commons against Kitchener's running of the War Office, personally seconded the motion.\nDeath.\nRussian mission.\nIn the midst of his other political and military concerns, Kitchener had devoted personal attention to the deteriorating situation on the Eastern Front. This included the provision of extensive stocks of war material for the Imperial Russian Army, which had been under increasing pressure since mid-1915. In May 1916, the chancellor of the exchequer Reginald McKenna suggested that Kitchener head a special and confidential mission to Russia to discuss munition shortages, military strategy and financial difficulties with the Imperial Russian Government and the \"Stavka\" (military high command), which was now under the personal command of Tsar Nicholas II. Both Kitchener and the Russians were in favour of face to face talks, and a formal invitation from the Tsar was received on 14 May. Kitchener left London by train for Scotland on the evening of 4 June with a party of officials, military aides and personal servants.\nLost at sea.\nKitchener sailed from Scrabster to Scapa Flow on 5 June 1916 aboard HMS \"Oak\". He had lunch with Admiral Sir John Jellicoe, commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet, on board his flagship HMS \"Iron Duke\"; Kitchener was keen to discuss the recent Battle of Jutland and stated that he was looking forward to his three-week diplomatic mission to Russia as a break from domestic pressures. He then set out for Russia on board the armoured cruiser HMS \"Hampshire\". At the last minute Jellicoe changed \"Hampshire\"'s route on the basis of a mis-reading of the weather forecast and ignoring (or not being aware of) recent intelligence and sightings of German U-boat activity in the vicinity of the amended route. Shortly before 7:30 pm that same day, while steaming for the Russian port of Arkhangelsk during a force 9 gale, \"Hampshire\" struck a mine laid by the newly launched German U-boat \"U-75\" (commanded by Kurt Beitzen) and sank west of the Orkney Islands. Recent research has set the death toll of those aboard \"Hampshire\" at 737. Only twelve men survived. Among the dead were all ten members of Kitchener's entourage. Kitchener himself was seen standing on the quarterdeck during the approximately twenty minutes that it took the ship to sink. His body was never recovered.\nThe news of Kitchener's death was received with shock all over the British Empire. A man in Yorkshire committed suicide at the news; a sergeant on the Western Front was heard to exclaim \"Now we've lost the war. Now we've lost the war\"; and a nurse wrote home to her family that she knew Britain would win as long as Kitchener lived, and now that he was gone: \"How awful it is \u2013 a far worse blow than many German victories. So long as he was with us we knew even if things were gloomy that his guiding hand was at the helm.\"\nGeneral Douglas Haig commanding the British Armies on the Western Front remarked on first receiving the news of Kitchener's death via a German radio signal intercepted by the British Army, \"How shall we get on without him\". King George V wrote in his diary: \"It is indeed a heavy blow to me and a great loss to the nation and the allies.\" He ordered army officers to wear black armbands for a week.\nC. P. Scott, editor of \"The Manchester Guardian\", is said to have remarked that \"as for the old man, he could not have done better than to have gone down, as he was a great impediment lately\".\nConspiracy theories.\nKitchener's great fame, the suddenness of his death, and its apparently convenient timing for a number of parties gave almost immediate rise to a number of conspiracy theories about his death. One in particular was posited by Lord Alfred Douglas (of Oscar Wilde fame), suggesting a connection between Kitchener's death, the recent naval Battle of Jutland, Winston Churchill, and a Jewish conspiracy. Churchill successfully sued Douglas in what proved to be the last successful case of criminal libel in British legal history, and the latter spent six months in prison. Another claimed that \"Hampshire\" did not strike a mine at all, but was sunk by explosives secreted in the vessel by Irish Republicans.\nGeneral Erich Ludendorff, Generalquartiermeister and joint head (with Paul von Hindenburg) of Germany's war effort stated in the 1920s that Russian anti-Tsarists had betrayed the plan to visit the Russians to the German command:His mysterious death was the work neither of a German mine nor a German torpedo, but of the power which would not permit the Russian Army to recover with the help of Lord Kitchener because the destruction of Czarist Russia had been determined upon. Lord Kitchener's death was caused by his ability. In 1926, a hoaxer named Frank Power claimed in the \"Sunday Referee\" newspaper that Kitchener's body had been found by a Norwegian fisherman. Power brought a coffin back from Norway and prepared it for burial in St Paul's Cathedral. At this point, however, the authorities intervened, and the coffin was opened in the presence of police and a distinguished pathologist. The box was found to contain only tar for weight. There was widespread public outrage at Power, but he was never prosecuted.\nFrederick Joubert Duquesne, a Boer soldier and spy, claimed that he had assassinated Kitchener after an earlier attempt to kill him in Cape Town failed. He was arrested and court-martialled in Cape Town and sent to the penal colony of Bermuda, but managed to escape to the U.S. MI5 confirmed that Duquesne was \"a German intelligence officer\u00a0... involved in a series of acts of sabotage against British shipping in South American waters during the [First World] war\"; he was wanted for: \"murder on the high seas, the sinking and burning of British ships, the burning of military stores, warehouses, coaling stations, conspiracy, and the falsification of Admiralty documents\".\nDuquesne's unverified story was that he returned to Europe, posed as the Russian Duke Boris Zakrevsky in 1916, and joined Kitchener in Scotland. While on board HMS \"Hampshire\" with Kitchener, Duquesne claimed to have signalled a German submarine that then sank the cruiser, and was rescued by the submarine, later being awarded the Iron Cross for his efforts. Duquesne was later apprehended and tried by the authorities in the U.S. for insurance fraud, but managed to escape again. However, there are \"numerous improbabilities\", in Duquesne's story, and \"no records\" to corroborate any part of it.\nDuring the Second World War, Duquesne ran a German spy ring in the United States until he was caught by the FBI in what became the biggest roundup of spies in U.S. history: the \"Duquesne Spy Ring\". Coincidentally, Kitchener's brother was to die in office in Bermuda in 1912, and his nephew, Major H.H. \"Hap\" Kitchener, who had married a Bermudan, purchased (with a legacy left to him by his uncle) Hinson's Island\u00a0\u2013 part of the former prisoner of war camp from which Duquesne had escaped\u00a0\u2013 after the First World War as the location of his home and business.\nLegacy.\nKitchener is officially remembered in a chapel on the northwest corner of St Paul's Cathedral in London, near the main entrance, where a memorial service was held in his honour.\nIn Canada, the city of Berlin, Ontario, named in respect to a large German immigrant settler population, was renamed Kitchener following a 1916 referendum.\nSince 1970, the opening of new records has led historians to rehabilitate Kitchener's reputation to some extent. Robin Neillands, for instance, notes that Kitchener consistently rose in ability as he was promoted. Some historians now praise his strategic vision in the First World War, especially his laying the groundwork for the expansion of munitions production and his central role in the raising of the British army in 1914 and 1915, providing a force capable of meeting Britain's continental commitment.\nHis commanding image, appearing on recruiting posters demanding \"Your country needs you!\", remains recognised and parodied in popular culture.\nIn the 1972 movie \"Young Winston\", Kitchener is portrayed by John Mills.\nIn the 2021 movie \"The King's Man\", Kitchener is portrayed by Charles Dance.\nDebate on Kitchener's sexuality.\nKitchener was a lifelong bachelor. From his time in Egypt in 1892, he gathered around him a cadre of eager young and unmarried officers nicknamed \"Kitchener's band of boys\", who included Captain Oswald Fitzgerald, his aide-de-camp and \"constant and inseparable companion\", who died with him on their voyage to Russia. Rumour sometimes circulated that Kitchener was homosexual. Egyptian campaign and Boer War veteran Major A. E. Wearne, who was a strong critic of Kitchener, stated in 1909 that he had the \"failing acquired by most of the Egyptian officers, a taste for buggery\". In 2001 it was revealed that Lady Astor's son Robert Gould Shaw III told David Somerset, 11th Duke of Beaufort that Kitchener had been his first seducer. An elderly source told an identical story to historian Peter King, while several other sources, including Lady Diana Cooper, stated similar.\nSince Kitchener's death a number of biographers have suggested or hinted that he was latent or active homosexual. Later scholars who made the case for his homosexuality include H. Montgomery Hyde, Ronald Hyam (who commented on his avoidance of interviews with women, his keen interest in the Boy Scout movement, and his decorating his rose garden with four pairs of sculptured bronze boys. According to Hyam, \"there is no evidence that he ever loved a woman\"), Denis Judd and Frank Richardson. Philip Magnus hints at homosexuality, though Lady Winifred Renshaw said that Magnus later said \"I know I've got the man wrong, too many people have told me so.\"\nMore recently biographer C. Brad Faught acknowledged Kitchener's \"vestigial femininity\" in collecting porcelain and organising dinner parties, plus emotional repression typical of his class and time, but concluded that the absence of evidence either way leaves \"an issue about which historians can say almost nothing useful\", while biographer George H. Cassar argued that Kitchener's letters to his sister include evidence of heterosexual attraction and that if there were any credible evidence that Kitchener was homosexual, it would have been used by his many opponents during his lifetime.\nHonours and arms.\nOrders.\nKitchener received numerous campaign and commemorative decorations from the British government, as well as several medals from allied nations.\nHis other decorations included:\nBritish\nForeign\nMedal Bar (as worn at time of death).\nTwo medals were given as souvenirs, and Kitchener never wore them. Great War medals were issued posthumously. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69719", "revid": "46847496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69719", "title": "Band-Aid", "text": "Brand name of adhesive bandages and related products\nBand-Aid is a brand of adhesive bandages distributed by the consumer health company Kenvue, spun off from Johnson &amp; Johnson in 2023. Invented in 1920, the brand has become a generic term for adhesive bandages in countries such as the United States, Canada, Australia, and others.\nHistory.\nThe Band-Aid was invented in 1920 by a Johnson &amp; Johnson employee, Earle Dickson, in Highland Park, New Jersey, for his wife Josephine, who frequently injured, cut and burned herself while cooking. The prototype was a strip of gauze down the middle of a long piece of surgical tape that allowed her to dress her wounds without assistance. Dickson passed the idea on to his employer, which went on to produce and market the product as the Band-Aid. Dickson had a successful career at Johnson &amp; Johnson, rising to vice president until his retirement in 1957. He remained in the board of directors until his death in 1961.\nThe original Band-Aids were handmade at 18 inches long and 2.5 inches wide, which proved to be very unpopular. In 1921, the product made just $3,000. To help improve sales, Johnson &amp; Johnson distributed free Band-Aids to the Boy Scouts of America. By 1924, Johnson &amp; Johnson introduced machine-made Band-Aids and began the sale of sterilized Band-Aids in 1939. A red pull string was added in 1940 to help open the packaging. It remained until 1992, when it was replaced by a new tear-apart design.\nDuring World War II, millions were shipped internationally, helping popularize the product. Since then, Johnson &amp; Johnson has estimated a sale of over 100 billion Band-Aids worldwide.\nIn 1956, the first decorative Band-Aids were introduced, featuring its Stars \u2018n Strips design. Vinyl tape was introduced in 1958. They continue to be a commercial success, with such themes as Nickelodeon characters, Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Superman, Spider-Man, smiley faces, Barbie, Elmo (Sesame Street), and Batman. \nJohnson &amp; Johnson introduced its famous \"I am stuck on BAND-AID Brand \u2019cuz BAND-AID\u2019s stuck on me\" jingle in 1975.\nIn 2022, Band-Aid was named the most trusted brand in the United States, beating the second place brand, Lysol, by more than two points.\nTrademark status.\nOver time, Band-Aid has become a well-known example of a genericized trademark in the United States, Canada and South America. Johnson &amp; Johnson has registered Band-Aid as a trademark on the Principal Register of the United States Patent and Trademark Office and has tried to prevent its genericization in its marketing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69720", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69720", "title": "Gastrointestinal tract", "text": "Organ system within humans and other animals\nThe gastrointestinal tract (also called the GI tract, digestive tract, and the alimentary canal) is the tract or passageway of the digestive system that leads from the mouth to the anus. The tract is one of the largest of the body's systems. The GI tract contains all the major organs of the digestive system, in humans and other animals, including the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. Food taken in through the mouth is digested to extract nutrients and absorb energy, and the waste expelled at the anus as feces. \"Gastrointestinal\" is an adjective meaning of or pertaining to the stomach and intestines.\nMost animals have a \"through-gut\" or complete digestive tract. Exceptions are more primitive ones: sponges have small pores (ostia) throughout their body for digestion and a larger dorsal pore (osculum) for excretion, comb jellies have both a ventral mouth and dorsal anal pores, while cnidarians and acoels have a single pore for both digestion and excretion.\nThe human gastrointestinal tract consists of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines, and is divided into the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts. The GI tract includes all structures between the mouth and the anus, forming a continuous passageway that includes the main organs of digestion, namely, the stomach, small intestine, and large intestine. The complete human digestive system is made up of the gastrointestinal tract plus the accessory organs of digestion (the tongue, salivary glands, pancreas, liver and gallbladder). The tract may also be divided into foregut, midgut, and hindgut, reflecting the embryological origin of each segment. The whole human GI tract is about long at autopsy. It is considerably shorter in the living body because the intestines, which are tubes of smooth muscle tissue, maintain constant muscle tone in a halfway-tense state but can relax in different areas to allow for local distension and peristalsis.\nThe human gut microbiota, is made up of around 4,000 different strains of bacteria, archaea, viruses and eukaryotes, with diverse roles in the maintenance of immune health and metabolism. Enteroendocrine cells of the GI tract release hormones to help regulate the digestive process. These digestive hormones, including gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin, and ghrelin, are mediated through either intracrine or autocrine mechanisms, indicating that the cells releasing these hormones are conserved structures throughout evolution.\nHuman gastrointestinal tract.\nStructure.\nThe structure and function of the GI tract can be described both by gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy (histology). The tract itself is divided into upper and lower tracts, and the intestines into small and large intestines.\nUpper gastrointestinal tract.\nThe upper gastrointestinal tract consists of the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, and duodenum.The exact demarcation between the upper and lower tracts is the suspensory muscle of the duodenum. This differentiates the embryonic borders between the foregut and midgut, and is also the division commonly used by clinicians to describe gastrointestinal bleeding as being of either \"upper\" or \"lower\" origin. Upon dissection, the duodenum may appear to be a unified organ, but it is divided into four segments based on function, location, and internal anatomy. The four segments of the duodenum are as follows (starting at the stomach, and moving toward the jejunum): bulb, descending, horizontal, and ascending.\nThe suspensory muscle of the duodenum suspends the superior border of the ascending duodenum from the diaphragm, and serves as an important anatomical landmark showing the formal division between the duodenum and the jejunum, the first and second parts of the small intestine, respectively. This is a thin muscle which is derived from the embryonic mesoderm.\nLower gastrointestinal tract.\nThe lower gastrointestinal tract includes most of the small intestine and all of the large intestine. In human anatomy, the intestine (bowel or gut; Greek: \u00e9ntera) is the segment of the gastrointestinal tract extending from the pyloric sphincter of the stomach to the anus and as in other mammals, consists of two segments: the small intestine and the large intestine. In humans, the small intestine is further subdivided into the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The large intestine is subdivided into the cecum, and ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid colons, rectum, and anal canal.\nSmall intestine.\nThe small intestine is a tubular structure around 6 to 7 m long, that begins at the duodenum, and ends at the ileum. Its mucosal area in an adult human is about . The combination of the circular folds, the villi, and the microvilli increases the absorptive area of the mucosa about 600-fold, making a total area of about for the entire small intestine. Its main function is to absorb the products of digestion (including carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and vitamins) into the bloodstream. There are three major divisions:\nLarge intestine.\nThe large intestine forms an arch starting at the cecum and ending at the rectum and anal canal. It also includes the appendix, which is attached to the cecum. Its length is about 1.5 m, and the area of the mucosa in an adult human is about . The longest part of the large intestine is the colon whose main function is to absorb water and salts.\nThe large intestine begins at the cecum, where the appendix is located. This is also the start of the colon as the ascending colon in the back wall of the abdomen. At the right colic flexure (hepatic flexure) (the flexed portion of the ascending and transverse colon) it runs across the abdomen in the transverse colon, passing below the diaphragm. At the left colic flexure (splenic flexure) the flexed portion of the transverse and descending colon, it descends down the left side of the abdomen.\nIt reaches the sigmoid colon which is a loop of the colon closest to the rectum and continues to the rectum and anal canal.\nDevelopment.\nThe gut is an endoderm-derived structure. At approximately the sixteenth day of human development, the embryo begins to fold ventrally (with the embryo's ventral surface becoming concave) in two directions: the sides of the embryo fold in on each other and the head and tail fold toward one another. The result is that a piece of the yolk sac, an endoderm-lined structure in contact with the ventral aspect of the embryo, begins to be pinched off to become the primitive gut. The yolk sac remains connected to the gut tube via the vitelline duct. Usually, this structure regresses during development; in cases where it does not, it is known as Meckel's diverticulum.\nDuring fetal life, the primitive gut is gradually patterned into three segments: foregut, midgut, and hindgut. Although these terms are often used in reference to segments of the primitive gut, they are also used regularly to describe regions of the definitive gut as well.\nEach segment of the gut is further specified and gives rise to specific gut and gut-related structures in later development. Components derived from the gut proper, including the stomach and colon, develop as swellings or dilatations in the cells of the primitive gut. In contrast, gut-related derivatives \u2014 that is, those structures that derive from the primitive gut but are not part of the gut proper, in general, develop as out-pouchings of the primitive gut. The blood vessels supplying these structures remain constant throughout development.\nHistology.\nThe gastrointestinal tract has a form of general histology with some differences that reflect the specialization in functional anatomy. The GI tract can be divided into four concentric layers in the following order:\nMucosa.\nThe mucosa is the innermost layer of the gastrointestinal tract. The mucosa surrounds the lumen, or open space within the tube. This layer comes in direct contact with digested food (chyme). The mucosa is made up of:\nThe mucosae are highly specialized in each organ of the gastrointestinal tract to deal with the different conditions. The most variation is seen in the epithelium.\nSubmucosa.\nThe submucosa consists of a dense irregular layer of connective tissue with large blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves branching into the mucosa and muscularis externa. It contains the submucosal plexus, an enteric nervous plexus, situated on the inner surface of the \"muscularis externa\".\nMuscular layer.\nThe muscular layer consists of an inner circular layer and a longitudinal outer layer. The circular layer prevents food from traveling backward and the longitudinal layer shortens the tract. The layers are not truly longitudinal or circular, rather the layers of muscle are helical with different pitches. The inner circular is helical with a steep pitch and the outer longitudinal is helical with a much shallower pitch. Whilst the muscularis externa is similar throughout the entire gastrointestinal tract, an exception is the stomach which has an additional inner oblique muscular layer to aid with grinding and mixing of food. The muscularis externa of the stomach is composed of the inner oblique layer, middle circular layer, and the outer longitudinal layer.\nBetween the circular and longitudinal muscle layers is the myenteric plexus. This controls peristalsis. Activity is initiated by the pacemaker cells, (myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal). The gut has intrinsic peristaltic activity (basal electrical rhythm) due to its self-contained enteric nervous system. The rate can be modulated by the rest of the autonomic nervous system.\nThe coordinated contractions of these layers is called peristalsis and propels the food through the tract. Food in the GI tract is called a bolus (ball of food) from the mouth down to the stomach. After the stomach, the food is partially digested and semi-liquid, and is referred to as chyme. In the large intestine, the remaining semi-solid substance is referred to as feces.\nAdventitia and serosa.\nThe outermost layer of the gastrointestinal tract consists of several layers of connective tissue.\nIntraperitoneal parts of the GI tract are covered with serosa. These include most of the stomach, first part of the duodenum, all of the small intestine, caecum and appendix, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and rectum. In these sections of the gut, there is a clear boundary between the gut and the surrounding tissue. These parts of the tract have a mesentery.\nRetroperitoneal parts are covered with adventitia. They blend into the surrounding tissue and are fixed in position. For example, the retroperitoneal section of the duodenum usually passes through the transpyloric plane. These include the esophagus, pylorus of the stomach, distal duodenum, ascending colon, descending colon and anal canal. In addition, the oral cavity has adventitia.\nGene and protein expression.\nApproximately 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and 75% of these genes are expressed in at least one of the different parts of the digestive organ system. Over 600 of these genes are more specifically expressed in one or more parts of the GI tract and the corresponding proteins have functions related to digestion of food and uptake of nutrients. Examples of specific proteins with such functions are pepsinogen PGC and the lipase LIPF, expressed in chief cells, and gastric ATPase ATP4A and gastric intrinsic factor GIF, expressed in parietal cells of the stomach mucosa. Specific proteins expressed in the stomach and duodenum involved in defence include mucin proteins, such as mucin 6 and intelectin-1.\nTransit time.\nThe time taken for food to transit through the gastrointestinal tract varies on multiple factors, including age, ethnicity, and gender. Several techniques have been used to measure transit time, including radiography following a barium-labeled meal, breath hydrogen analysis, scintigraphic analysis following a radiolabeled meal, and simple ingestion and spotting of corn kernels. It takes 2.5 to 3 hours for 50% of the contents to leave the stomach. The rate of digestion is also dependent of the material being digested, as food composition from the same meal may leave the stomach at different rates. Total emptying of the stomach takes around 4\u20135 hours, and transit through the colon takes 30 to 50 hours.\nImmune function.\nThe gastrointestinal tract forms an important part of the immune system.\nImmune barrier.\nThe surface area of the digestive tract is estimated to be about 32 square meters, or about half a badminton court. With such a large exposure (more than three times larger than the exposed surface of the skin), these immune components function to prevent pathogens from entering the blood and lymph circulatory systems. Fundamental components of this protection are provided by the intestinal mucosal barrier, which is composed of physical, biochemical, and immune elements elaborated by the intestinal mucosa. Microorganisms also are kept at bay by an extensive immune system comprising the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT).\nThere are additional factors contributing to protection from pathogen invasion. For example, low pH (ranging from 1 to 4) of the stomach is fatal for many microorganisms that enter it. Similarly, mucus (containing IgA antibodies) neutralizes many pathogenic microorganisms. Other factors in the GI tract contribution to immune function include enzymes secreted in the saliva and bile.\nImmune system homeostasis.\nBeneficial bacteria also can contribute to the homeostasis of the gastrointestinal immune system. For example, Clostridia, one of the most predominant bacterial groups in the GI tract, play an important role in influencing the dynamics of the gut's immune system. It has been demonstrated that the intake of a high fiber diet could be responsible for the induction of T-regulatory cells (Tregs). This is due to the production of short-chain fatty acids during the fermentation of plant-derived nutrients such as butyrate and propionate. Basically, the butyrate induces the differentiation of Treg cells by enhancing histone H3 acetylation in the promoter and conserved non-coding sequence regions of the FOXP3 locus, thus regulating the T cells, resulting in the reduction of the inflammatory response and allergies.\nGastrointestinal microbiota.\nThe large intestine contains multiple types of bacteria, and other microorganisms that can break down molecules the human body cannot process alone, demonstrating a symbiotic relationship. These microbes are responsible for gas production at host\u2013pathogen interface, which is released as flatulence. Intestinal bacteria can also participate in biosynthesis reactions. For example, certain strains in the large intestine produce vitamin B12; an essential compound in humans for things like DNA synthesis and red blood cell production. However, the primary function of the large intestine is water absorption from digested material (regulated by the hypothalamus) and the reabsorption of sodium and nutrients.\nBeneficial intestinal bacteria compete with potentially harmful bacteria for space and \"food\", as the intestinal tract has limited resources. A ratio of 80\u201385% beneficial to 15\u201320% potentially harmful bacteria is proposed for maintaining homeostasis. An imbalanced ratio results in dysbiosis.\nDetoxification and drug metabolism.\nEnzymes such as CYP3A4, along with the antiporter activities, are also instrumental in the intestine's role of drug metabolism in the detoxification of antigens and xenobiotics.\nOther animals.\nIn most vertebrates, including amphibians, birds, reptiles, egg-laying mammals, and some fish, the gastrointestinal tract ends in a cloaca and not an anus. In the cloaca, the urinary system is fused with the genito-anal pore. Therians (all mammals that do not lay eggs, including humans) possess separate anal and uro-genital openings. The females of the subgroup Placentalia have even separate urinary and genital openings.\nDuring early development, the asymmetric position of the bowels and inner organs is initiated (see also axial twist theory).\nRuminants show many specializations for digesting and fermenting tough plant material, consisting of additional stomach compartments, and the ability to regurgitate partially digested food material for further chewing (aka \"chewing cud\").\nMany birds and other animals have a specialised stomach in the digestive tract called a gizzard used for grinding up food.\nAnother feature found in a range of animals is the crop. In birds this is found as a pouch alongside the esophagus.\nIn 2020, the oldest known fossil digestive tract, of an extinct wormlike organism in the Cloudinidae was discovered; it lived during the late Ediacaran period about 550 million years ago.\nA through-gut (one with both mouth and anus) is thought to have evolved within the nephrozoan clade of Bilateria, after their ancestral ventral orifice (single, as in cnidarians and acoels; re-evolved in nephrozoans like flatworms) stretched antero-posteriorly, before the middle part of the stretch would get narrower and closed fully, leaving an anterior orifice (mouth) and a posterior orifice (anus plus genital opening). A stretched gut without the middle part closed is present in another branch of bilaterians, the extinct proarticulates. This and the amphistomic development (when both mouth and anus develop from the gut stretch in the embryo) present in some nephrozoans (e.g. roundworms) are considered to support this hypothesis.\nClinical significance.\nDiseases.\nThere are many diseases and conditions that can affect the gastrointestinal system, including infections, inflammation and cancer.\nVarious pathogens, such as bacteria that cause foodborne illnesses, can induce gastroenteritis which results from inflammation of the stomach and small intestine. Antibiotics to treat such bacterial infections can decrease the microbiome diversity of the gastrointestinal tract, and further enable inflammatory mediators. Gastroenteritis is the most common disease of the GI tract.\nDiverticular disease is a condition that is very common in older people in industrialized countries. It usually affects the large intestine but has been known to affect the small intestine as well. Diverticulosis occurs when pouches form on the intestinal wall. Once the pouches become inflamed it is known as diverticulitis.\nInflammatory bowel disease is an inflammatory condition affecting the bowel walls, and includes the subtypes Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. While Crohn's can affect the entire gastrointestinal tract, ulcerative colitis is limited to the large intestine. Crohn's disease is widely regarded as an autoimmune disease. Although ulcerative colitis is often treated as though it were an autoimmune disease, there is no consensus that it actually is such.\nFunctional gastrointestinal disorders the most common of which is irritable bowel syndrome. Functional constipation and chronic functional abdominal pain are other functional disorders of the intestine that have physiological causes but do not have identifiable structural, chemical, or infectious pathologies.\nSymptoms.\nSeveral symptoms can indicate problems with the gastrointestinal tract, including:\nTreatment.\nGastrointestinal surgery can often be performed in the outpatient setting. In the United States in 2012, operations on the digestive system accounted for 3 of the 25 most common ambulatory surgery procedures and constituted 9.1 percent of all outpatient ambulatory surgeries.\nImaging.\nVarious methods of imaging the gastrointestinal tract include the upper and lower gastrointestinal series:\nUses of animal guts.\nIntestines from animals other than humans are used in a number of ways. From each species of livestock that is a source of milk, a corresponding rennet is obtained from the intestines of milk-fed calves. Pig and calf intestines are eaten, and pig intestines are used as sausage casings. Calf intestines supply calf-intestinal alkaline phosphatase (CIP), and are used to make goldbeater's skin.\nOther uses are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69721", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69721", "title": "Mount Ephraim", "text": "Historical name for the central mountainous district of Israel\nMount Ephraim (), or alternatively Mount of Ephraim, was the historical name for the central mountainous district of Israel once allotted to the Tribe of Ephraim (), extending from Bethel to the plain of Jezreel. In Joshua's time (), approximately sometime between the 18th century BCE and the 13th century BCE, these hills were densely wooded. They were intersected by well-watered, fertile valleys, referred to in .\nLater, the region became known as Samaria, after the capital city of the northern Kingdom of Israel which was centered in the area.\nNotable persons.\nJoshua was buried at Timnath-heres among the mountains of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill of Gaash (). This region is also called the \"mountains of Israel\" () and the \"mountains of Samaria\" (: ).\nIsrael's fourth judge and prophetess Deborah lived in this region. Her home was called \"the palm tree of Deborah\", and was between Bethel and Ramah in Benjamin ().\n'Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and went out from thence, and built Penuel. And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David:(Ephraim was the new king after the pass of the King of Solomon.) https://\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "69723", "revid": "48508586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69723", "title": "Morning Star", "text": "Morning Star, morning star, or Morningstar may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69725", "revid": "464614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69725", "title": "Chaosnet", "text": "Local area networking technology\nChaosnet is a local area network technology. It was first developed by Thomas Knight and Jack Holloway at MIT's AI Lab in 1975 and thereafter. It refers to two separate, but closely related, technologies. The more widespread was a set of packet-based computer communication protocols intended to connect Lisp machines, which had been recently developed and were very popular at MIT; the second was one of the earliest local area network (LAN) hardware implementations.\nOrigin.\nThe original implementation of the Chaosnet protocol used a CATV coaxial cable modeled on the early Xerox PARC 3 megabit/second Ethernet, the early ARPANET, and the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). It was a contention-based system intended to work over a 0\u20131000 meter range, and included a pseudo-slotted feature intended to reduce collisions, which worked by passing a virtual token of permission from host to host; successful packet transmissions updated each host's knowledge of which host had the token at that time. Collisions caused a host to fall silent for a duration depending on the distance from the host it collided with. Collisions were never a real problem, and the pseudo-slotting fell into disuse.\nChaosnet's network topology was usually a series of linear (not circular) cable segments, each up to a kilometer long with roughly 12 clients. The segments were interconnected by \"bridges\" (much in the ARPANET mold), which were generally older computers such as PDP-11s with two network interfaces.\nThe protocols were also later implemented as a payload that could be carried over Ethernet (usually the later 10 megabit/second variety). Chaosnet was specifically for LANs; features to support WANs were left out for the sake of simplicity.\nChaosnet can be regarded as a contemporary of both the PUP protocols, invented by PARC, and the Internet Protocol (IP), and was recognized as one of the network classes (with the class code \"CH\") alongside Internet (\"IN\") and Hesiod (\"HS\") in the Domain Name System. BIND uses a built-in pseudo-top-level domain in the \"CHAOS class\" for retrieving information about a running DNS server.\nChaosnet protocol.\nThe Chaosnet protocol identifies hosts by 16-bit addresses, 8 bits of which identify the subnet, 8 bits of which identify the host within the subnet. The basic protocol was a full-duplex reliable packet transmission between two user processes. The packet contents could be treated as bytes of 8 or 16 bits, with support for other word sizes provided by higher-level protocols. The connection was identified by a combination of the 16-bit addresses of each host and a 16-bit \"connection index\" assigned by each host to maintain uniqueness. \"Controlled\" packets within a connection were identified by a 16-bit packet number, which was used to deliver controlled packets reliably and in order, with re-transmission and flow control. \"Uncontrolled\" packets were not retransmitted, and were used at a lower level to support the flow-control and re-transmission. Chaosnet also supported \"BRD\" broadcast packets to multiple subnets.\nInitial establishment of the connection was made using \"contact names.\" These names identified the network service and higher-level protocol. For example, \"STATUS\" was the contact name which requested basic network statistics from a host. \"TELNET\" was a contact name for the Arpanet TELNET protocol. \"FILE\" was a contact name for the Lisp Machine network file service. Other contact names included \"SUPDUP\", \"MAIL\", \"NAME\" for the Arpanet Finger protocol, \"TIME\", \"SEND\" for interactive messaging, \"ARPA\" for a gateway service to Arpanet. \"DOVER\" was the contact name for sending print jobs to Chaosnet hosts with a Xerox Dover printer attached (an early laser printer). Developers could easily experiment with new protocols by inventing new contact names. In ITS, a new server for that protocol could be installed by creating a link to the program in the location DSK:DEVICE;CHAOS &lt;cname&gt; where &lt;cname&gt; was up to six letters of the contact name.\nSimple transactions could be completed by a single \"RFC\" packet containing a contact name, answered by a single \"ANS\" packet with the relevant information. For example, an RFC to contact name \"TIME\" would result in a single ANS packet containing a 32-bit number indicating the time.\nThe original GNU Manifesto mentioned that it aimed to, among other things, support the Chaosnet protocol.\nSymbolics, a maker of the Lisp machines, licensed the MIT Chaosnet hardware and software implementation from the CADR computer design.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69726", "revid": "50936876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69726", "title": "Moriah", "text": "Location in the Book of Genesis\nMoriah (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05de\u05d5\u05b9\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05b8\u05bc\u05d4\u200e, \"M\u014dr\u012byya\"; Arabic: \ufee3\ufeae\ufeed\ufee9, \"Marwah\") is the name given to a region in the Book of Genesis where the binding of Isaac by Abraham is said to have taken place. Jews identify the region mentioned in Genesis and the specific mountain in which the near-sacrifice is said to have occurred with \"Mount Moriah\", mentioned in the Book of Chronicles as the place where Solomon's Temple is said to have been built, and both these locations are also identified with the current Temple Mount in Jerusalem. The Samaritan Torah, on the other hand, transliterates the place mentioned for the binding of Isaac as Moreh, a name for the region near modern-day Nablus. It is believed by the Samaritans that the near-sacrifice actually took place on Mount Gerizim, near Nablus in the West Bank.\nMany Muslims, in turn, believe the place mentioned in the first book of the Bible, rendered as Marwa in Arabic in the Quran, is actually located close to the Kaaba in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. There has been a historical account of rams' horns preserved in the Kaaba until the year 683, which are believed to be the remains of the sacrifice of Ishmael \u2013 the first son of Abraham, who most Muslims believe was the son Abraham tied down and almost sacrificed, and not Isaac.\nBiblical references.\nIn the Jewish Bible, \"Moriyya\" and/or \"Moriah\" () occur twice, with differences of spelling between different manuscripts. Tradition has interpreted these two as the same place:\nSpeculation and debate.\nWhereas the mention of Moriah in Genesis could be referring to any mountainous region, the book of Chronicles says that the location of Araunah's threshing floor is on \"Mount Moriah\" and that the Temple of Solomon was built over Araunah's threshing floor. This has led to the classical rabbinical supposition that the Moriah region mentioned in Genesis as the place where Abraham almost sacrificed Isaac was in Jerusalem.\nIn consequence of these traditions, Classical Rabbinical Literature theorised that the name was a (linguistically corrupted) reference to the Temple, suggesting translations like \"the teaching-place\" (referring to the Sanhedrin that met there), \"the place of fear\" (referring to the supposed fear that non-Israelites would have at the Temple), \"the place of myrrh\" (referring to the spices burnt as incense). On the other hand, some interpretations of a biblical passage concerning Melchizedek, king of Salem, would indicate Jerusalem was already a city with a priest at the time of Abraham, and thus is unlikely to have been founded on the lonely spot where Abraham tried to sacrifice Isaac.\nThere is also debate as to whether the two references to Moriyya/Moriah (Genesis 22:2 and 2 Chronicles 3:1) are correctly understood as the same name. Ancient translators seem to have interpreted them differently: whereas all ancient translations simply transliterated the name in Chronicles, in Genesis they tended to try to understand the literal meaning of the name and to translate it. For example, in the Greek Septuagint translation, these verses are translated as:\nMoreover, other ancient translations interpret the instance in Genesis in different ways from the Septuagint:\nSome modern biblical scholars, however, regard the name as a reference to the Amorites, having lost the initial \"a\" via aphesis; the name is thus interpreted as meaning \"land of the Amorites\". This agrees with the Septuagint, where, for example, 2 Chronicles 3:1 refers to the location as . Some scholars also identify it with Moreh, the location near Shechem at which Abraham built an altar, according to Genesis 12:6. Hence a number of scholars believe that the \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05de\u05d5\u05e8\u05d9\u05d4\u200e\" mentioned in Genesis actually refers to a hill near Shechem, supporting the Samaritan belief that the near-sacrifice of Isaac occurred on Mount Gerizim \u2013 a location near Shechem.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69728", "revid": "29750937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69728", "title": "Wheeling", "text": "Wheeling can refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69729", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69729", "title": "Givat HaMoreh", "text": "Mountain in Israel\nGivat HaMoreh (, ) is a hill in northern Israel on the northeast side of the Jezreel Valley. The highest peak reaches an altitude of , while the bottom of the Jezreel Valley is situated at an altitude of . North of it are the plains of the Lower Galilee and Mount Tabor. To the east, Giv'at HaMoreh connects to the Issachar Plateau. To the southeast it descends into the Harod Valley, where the 'Ain Jalut flows eastwards into the Jordan Valley.\nEtymology.\nFor the Hebrew name several possible origins have been discussed. One is \"yoreh\", \"lit.\" \"shoots\" or \"teacher\", a name used for a specific rain in the parasha Eikev () and in the Twelve Minor Prophets (), the first one of the annual rainy season in the Land of Israel. A second is \"high place\", as the hill does indeed dominate the surrounding valleys. A third is based on the meaning of \"teacher\" for the Hebrew \"moreh\", interpreted as a local holy man who could foretell the future. One can also think of a holy man living on Givat HaMoreh who could bring about rain, or of a rainmaking cult once practiced at the site.\nIn the 3rd century BCE, the name was translated into Koine Greek as , \"Gabaath Amora\".\nChristian pilgrims, starting with the Middle Ages, sometimes named the hill \"Little Hermon\" in connection to , \"Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name\", considering that Givat HaMore is close to Mount Tabor, much more so than Mount Hermon.\nIn Arabic, the hill is known as \"Mount Dahi\" (Jebel ed-Dahi), after the Muslim shrine (\"maqam\") of Dihyah al-Kalbi situated at its top and housing the tomb of this seventh-century saint.\nHistory.\nHebrew Bible.\nThe \"hill of Moreh\" is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible three times, in , and .\nThe Hebrew phrase \"elon moreh\" () has been subject to various translations in English versions of the Bible. Translators who consider \"elon moreh\" to be the name of a locality, render it as \"the plain(s) of Moreh\", e.g. King James Version and the Geneva Bible, but translators who consider the term to refer to a sacred tree or grove often render it as \"terebinth\" (\"Pistacia terebinthus\"), a tree which is notable for its size and age in dry landscapes of the region. For example, the New International Version translation of Genesis 12:6a reads:\n\"Abram traveled through the land as far as the site of the great tree of Moreh at Shechem\"\nand the New King James Version translates Deuteronomy 11:30 as:\n\"Are they (Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal) not on the other side of the Jordan, toward the setting sun, in the land of the Canaanites who dwell in the plain opposite Gilgal, beside the terebinth trees of Moreh?\"\n\"Moreh\" is often understood to mean \"teacher\" or \"oracle\", referring to the owner of the tree or the land on which it grew.\nGenesis 35:4:\n\"And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which [were] in their hand, and [all their] earrings which [were] in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which [was] by Shechem.\"\nA neutral reading discovers that the tree, oak or not, grew above buried idols and dedicated treasure, the Hebrews remembered, and they associated the burial of these things with the patriarchal age.\nJohn Wesley noted that the plains of Moreh was one of the first places that Abram came to in Canaan, so when Moses sent the incoming Israelites to this place \"to hear the blessing and the curse, they were minded of the promise made to Abram in that very place\".\nOttoman period.\nA 19th-century travelogue identifies Moreh as Nebi Dahi, south of Mount Tabor.\nBritish Mandate and State of Israel.\nIn the 20th century, in the valley below the mountain, the city of Afula (est. 1925) was developed as the main Jewish center of the region. Afula gradually expanded from the plains to the slopes of Giv'at ha-Moreh. During the War of Independence in 1948, the area was completely dominated by Israeli forces, but local Arab population was not displaced. The Arab villages of Dahi and Nein are located on the slope.\nOn the central part of Giv'at ha-Moreh there is a nature reserve, partly wooded developed by the Jewish National Fund. The Nazareth Iris blooms here in spring.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69730", "revid": "3107162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69730", "title": "Wildwood", "text": "Wildwood and Wild Wood may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69732", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69732", "title": "Williamsburg", "text": "Williamsburg may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69733", "revid": "492987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69733", "title": "HMS Hampshire (1903)", "text": "20th-century Royal Navy ship\nHMS \"Hampshire\" was one of six armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century. She was assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet upon completion. After a refit, she was assigned to the reserve Third Fleet in 1909 before going to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1911. She was transferred to the China Station in 1912 and remained there until the start of the First World War in August 1914.\nThe ship hunted for German commerce raiders until she was transferred to the Grand Fleet at the end of 1914. She was assigned to the 7th Cruiser Squadron upon her return home. She was transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron in 1916 and was present at the Battle of Jutland. Several days later, on 5 June, she was sailing to Arkhangelsk, Russia, carrying the Secretary of State for War, Field Marshal Lord Kitchener, when she is believed to have struck a mine laid by a German submarine. She sank with 737 of 749 people aboard killed, including Kitchener and his staff. Rumours later circulated of German spies and sabotage being involved in the sinking. Her wreck is listed under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986, though parts were later salvaged. Several films have been made exploring the circumstances of her loss.\nDesign and description.\n\"Hampshire\" was designed to displace . The ship had an overall length of , a beam of and a deep draught of . She was powered by two 4-cylinder triple-expansion steam engines, each driving one shaft, which produced a total of and gave a maximum speed of . The engines were powered by seventeen Yarrow and six cylindrical boilers. She carried a maximum of of coal and her complement consisted of 610 officers and ratings.\nHer main armament consisted of four breech-loading (BL) Mk I guns mounted in four single-gun turrets, one each fore and aft of the superstructure and one on each side. The guns fired their shells to a range of about . Her secondary armament of six BL Mk VII guns was arranged in casemates amidships. Four of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather. They had a maximum range of approximately with their shells. \"Hampshire\" also carried 18 quick-firing (QF) 3-pounder Hotchkiss guns and two submerged torpedo tubes. Her two 12-pounder 8 cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore.\nAt some point in the First World War, the main deck six-inch guns of the \"Devonshire\"-class ships were moved to the upper deck and given gun shields. Their casemates were plated over to improve seakeeping and the four 3-pounder guns displaced by the transfer were landed.\nThe ship's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of and was closed off by transverse bulkheads. The armour of the gun turrets was also five inches thick, whilst that of their barbettes was six inches thick. The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from and the conning tower was protected by of armour.\nConstruction and service.\n\"Hampshire\", named to commemorate the English county, was laid down by Armstrong Whitworth at their Elswick shipyard on 1 September 1902 and launched on 24 September 1903. She was completed on 15 July 1905 and was initially assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet together with most of her sister ships. She began a refit at Portsmouth Royal Dockyard in December 1908 and was then assigned to the reserve Third Fleet in August 1909. She recommissioned in December 1911 for her assignment with the 6th Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet and was transferred to the China Station in 1912.\nFirst World War.\nWhen the war began, she was in Wei Hai Wei, and was assigned to the small squadron led by Vice Admiral Martyn Jerram, commander-in-chief of the China Station. She was ordered to destroy the German radio station at Yap together with the armoured cruiser and the light cruiser . \"En route\", the ships captured the collier on 11 August and sank her; \"Hampshire\" was too short on coal by then to make the island so Jerram ordered her back to Hong Kong with the crew of the \"Elspeth\". At the end of the month, she was ordered down to the Dutch East Indies to search for any German ships at sea, narrowly missing the German light cruiser . The German ship had not been reported since the war began and she sailed into the Bay of Bengal and began preying upon unsuspecting British shipping beginning on 14 September. \"Hampshire\" was ordered there to search for \"Emden\" and remained there through October and November, together with the armed merchant cruiser , looking for the raider until she was destroyed on 9 November by . \"Hampshire\" then escorted an ANZAC troop convoy through the Indian Ocean and Red Sea to Egypt. \"Hampshire\" was refitted in Gibraltar in December before returning home to serve with the Grand Fleet. She was assigned the 7th Cruiser Squadron in January 1915 and was detached in November to escort shipping in the White Sea. She returned home in time to participate in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 with the 2nd Cruiser Squadron. During the battle, she was never actually engaged and only fired four salvos at the German II Scouting Group that fell well short of their targets, in addition to shooting at illusory submarine periscopes throughout the day.\nLast voyage and sinking.\nImmediately after the battle, she was ordered to carry Lord Kitchener from Scapa Flow on a diplomatic mission to Russia via the port of Arkhangelsk. Due to the gale-force conditions, it was decided that \"Hampshire\" would sail through the Pentland Firth, then turn north along the western coast of the Orkney Islands. This course would provide a lee from the strong winds, allowing escorting destroyers to keep pace with her. She departed Scapa Flow at 16:45 and about an hour later rendezvoused with her two escorts, the destroyers and . As the ships turned to the northwest, the gale increased and shifted direction so that the ships were facing it head on. This caused the destroyers to fall behind \"Hampshire\". As it was considered unlikely that enemy submarines would be active in such conditions, \"Hampshire\"'s Captain Savill ordered \"Unity\" and \"Victor\" to return to Scapa Flow.\nSailing alone in heavy seas, \"Hampshire\" was approximately off Mainland in the Orkney Islands between Brough of Birsay and Marwick Head at 19:40 on 5 June when an explosion occurred and she heeled to starboard. She had struck one of several mines laid by the German minelaying submarine \"U-75\" on 28\u201329 May, just before the Battle of Jutland. The detonation had holed the cruiser between bows and bridge, and the lifeboats were smashed against the side of the ship by the heavy seas when they were lowered. About 15 minutes after the explosion, \"Hampshire\" sank by the bow. Of the 735 crewmembers and 14 passengers aboard, only 12 crew survived after coming ashore on three Carley floats. A total of 737 were lost, including Kitchener and all the members of the mission to Russia. The sinking happened 12 miles north of the nearest lifeboat station at Stromness. There is speculation whether lifeboat intervention would have made any difference given the conditions, but the lifeboat was never called out.\nFritz Joubert Duquesne \u2013 a Boer and German spy \u2013 claimed to have assumed the identity of Russian Count Boris Zakrevsky and joined Kitchener in Scotland. Duquesne supposedly signalled a German U-boat shortly after departing Scapa Flow to alert them that Kitchener's ship was approaching. He was then rescued by the submarine as \"Hampshire\" sank. In the 1930s and 1940s, he ran the Duquesne Spy Ring and was captured by the FBI along with 32 other Nazi agents in the largest espionage conviction in U.S. history. However, Duquesne's story contains \"numerous improbabilities\", and there are \"no records\" to corroborate any part of it.\nWreck.\nThe wreck is designated as a controlled site under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 at coordinates and diving is forbidden without a licence. The ship is upside down at a depth of of water.\nMemorials.\nIn 1983, one propeller and part of \"Hampshire\"'s drive shaft were salvaged from the wreck. They are now on view at the Scapa Flow Visitor Centre and Museum, Lyness, Hoy, Orkney. Three Vickers 3 Pounder Mk II Quick-Firing deck guns were also salvaged from the wreck. In 2021, one of these was restored to its original condition by specialist conservators in Alloa, and is now on display in the foyer of the museum.\nThe 737 \"Hampshire\" dead are commemorated on the right-hand side of the base at the \"Hampshire, Isle of Wight and Winchester War Memorial\" outside Winchester Cathedral.\nA tower was erected on Marwick Head on Mainland, Orkney, in 1926 by the people of Orkney to the memory of Kitchener and the officers and men of \"Hampshire\". The Kitchener Memorial is a square, crenellated stone tower with the following inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This tower was raised by the people of Orkney in memory of Field Marshal Earl Kitchener of Khartoum on that corner of his country which he had served so faithfully nearest to the place where he died on duty. He and his staff perished along with the officers and nearly all the men of HMS \"Hampshire\" on 5 June 1916.\nMedia.\nThe sinking of the ship and the events surrounding Kitchener's death are portrayed in the 1921 film \"How Kitchener Was Betrayed\", the 1969 film \"Fraulein Doktor\" about a female spy, and the 2021 film \"The King's Man\", a prequel to 2015's \"\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69734", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69734", "title": "Mordecai", "text": "Biblical figure\nMordecai (; also Mordechai; Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0, IPA: ) is one of the main personalities in the Book of Esther in the Hebrew Bible. He is the cousin and guardian of Esther, who became queen of Persia under the reign of Ahasuerus (Xerxes I). Mordecai's loyalty and bravery are highlighted in the story as he helps Esther foil the plot of Haman, the king's vizier, to exterminate the Jewish people. His story is celebrated in the Jewish holiday of Purim, which commemorates his victory.\nOne theory frequently discussed in scholarship suggests that the Book of Esther serves as an etiology for Purim, with Mordecai and Esther representing the Babylonian gods Marduk and Ishtar in a historicized Babylonian myth or ritual. The identification of Mordecai with a Persian official named \"Marduka\" mentioned in an inscription from the reign of Xerxes I is debated, with some scholars rejecting the connection while others support it due to the commonality of name and office. Even if the Marduka who was mentioned in the inscription was not Mordecai himself it shows the name was in use during that period.\nBiblical account.\nMordecai resided in Susa (Shushan or Shoushan), the metropolis of Persia (now Iran). He adopted his orphaned cousin (Esther 2:7), Hadassah (Esther), whom he brought up as if she were his own daughter. When \"young virgins\" were sought, she was taken into the presence of King Ahasuerus and was made queen in the place of the exiled queen Vashti. Subsequently, Mordecai discovered a plot of the king's chamberlains Bigthan and Teresh to assassinate the king. Because of Mordecai's vigilance, the plot was foiled.\nHaman the Agagite had been raised to the highest position at court. In spite of the king's decree that all should prostrate themselves before Haman, Mordecai refused to do so. Haman, stung by Mordecai's refusal, resolved to kill not only Mordecai but all Jewish exiles throughout the Persian empire, and won the king's permission to carry out his plan. Mordecai communicated Haman's scheme to Queen Esther, who used her favor with the king to reverse the scheme, leading the king to authorize Jews to kill their enemies, which they did. \nDuring all this, the king had happened to learn of Mordecai's service in foiling the assassination plot and had asked Haman how a person who did a great service to the king should be honored. Haman answered, thinking the question was about him; and the king followed this advice, and honored Mordecai, and eventually made Mordecai his chief advisor. Haman was executed on gallows that he had set up for Mordecai. The feast of Purim celebrates these reversals of fortune.\nHistory.\nBook of Esther.\nAlthough the details of the setting are entirely plausible and the story may even have some basis in actual events, some think that the book of Esther is a novella rather than history. Persian kings did not marry outside of seven Persian noble families, making it unlikely that there was a Jewish queen Esther, and in any case the historical Xerxes's queen was Amestris.\nThere is general agreement that the story was created to justify the Jewish appropriation of an originally non-Jewish feast. The festival which the book explains is purim, which is explained as meaning \"lot\", from the Babylonian word \"puru\". There are wide-ranging theories regarding the origin of Purim: one popular theory says festival has its origins in a historicized Babylonian myth or ritual in which Mordecai and Esther represent the Babylonian gods Marduk and Ishtar, others trace the ritual to the Persian New Year, and scholars have surveyed other theories in their works. Some scholars have defended the story as real history, but others have said the attempt to find a historical kernel to the narrative \"is likely to be futile\".\nName.\nThe name \"Mordecai\" is of uncertain origin but is considered identical to the name \"Marduka\" or \"Marduku\" (), attested as the name of up to four Persian court officials in thirty texts (the Persepolis Administrative Archives) from the period of Xerxes I and his father Darius.\nThe Talmud (\"Menachot\" 64b and 65a) relates that his full name was \"Mordechai Bilshan\" (which occurs in Ezra 2:2 and Nehemiah 7:7, albeit likely as two \"separate\" names in sequence). Hoschander interpreted this as the Babylonian \"Marduk-belshunu\" (\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udc2b\ud808\udf13\ud808\udc97\ud808\uded7\ud808\ude61, dAMAR.UTU-EN-\"\u0161u\"-\"nu\", meaning \"Marduk is their lord\") \"Mordecai\" being thus a hypocorism.\nIn the King James Version of the deuterocanonical Greek additions to Esther, his name is spelled as \"Mardocheus\", which may better preserve the original vowels, though the Masoretic Text versions of the Persian names in the Bible are known to be the most reliable.\nAge.\nEsther 2:5-6 contains a short snippet of Mordecai's genealogical history, generally translated as, \"Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, who had been carried into exile from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, among those taken captive with Jeconiah king of Judah\". The wording of the passage lends to two conclusions: either that Mordecai (the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish) was carried into exile by Nebuchadnezzar, or that his ancestor Kish was the one carried into exile.\nThe Pentecostal minister Finis Dake interprets the Bible verses Esther 2:5\u20136 to mean that Mordecai himself was exiled by Nebuchadnezzar. Biblical scholar Michael D. Coogan discusses this as an inaccuracy regarding Mordecai's age. If \"who had been carried into exile\" refers to Mordecai, he would have had been more than 100 years old during the events described in the Book of Esther (assuming the biblical Ahasuerus is indeed Xerxes I). However, the verse may be read as referring not to Mordecai's exile to Babylon, but to his great-grandfather Kish's exile \u2014 a reading which many accept.\nGenealogy.\nThe Targum Sheni gives his genealogy in more detail, as follows: \"Mordecai, son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Shemida, son of Ba'anah, son of Elah, son of Micah, son of Mephibosheth, son of Jonathan, son of Saul, son of Kish, son of Abiel, son of Zeror, son of Bechorath, son of Aphiah, son of Shecharim, son of Uzziah, son of Sason, son of Michael, son of Eliel, son of Amihud, son of Shephatiah, son of Penuel, son of Petah, son of Melokh, son of Yerubaal, son of Yeruham, son of Hananiah, son of Zabdi, son of Elpa'al, son of Shimri, son of Zebadiah, son of Rimoth, son of Khashum, son of Shekhorah, son of Gazza, son of 'Uzza, son of Gera, son of Bela, son of Benjamin, son of Jacob the firstborn, whose name is called Israel.\" The same genealogy is inscribed on a massive metal tablet in the Tomb of Esther and Mordechai (pictured). \nThis traditional genealogy implicates Kish as the name of an ancient ancestor and not simply Mordecai's great-grandfather, meaning that Esther 2:5\u20146 was interpreted as \"Mordecai\" being the one who was exiled to Babylon. The chronological inconsistencies of this assumption are detailed above.\nProphet status.\nThe Talmud lists Esther as a prophet. Some talmudic scholars such as Nachman b. Yaakov have suggested that Mordecai is the Biblical prophet Malachi, but this argument is rejected by consensus and certain interpretations of the Talmud.\nMordecai's genealogy in the second chapter of the Book of Esther is given as a descendant of a Benjaminite named Kish. As \"Kish\" was also the name of the father of King Saul, another Benjaminite, the Talmud accords Mordecai the status of a descendant of the first King of Israel.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69735", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69735", "title": "Williamsport", "text": "Williamsport is a place name that may refer to the following places in the United States:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "69737", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69737", "title": "Windham", "text": "Windham is an English surname and may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69740", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69740", "title": "TSR, Inc.", "text": "Former company, publisher of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"\nTSR, Inc. was an American game publishing company, best known as the original publisher of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"D&amp;D\"). Its earliest incarnation, Tactical Studies Rules, was founded in October 1973 by Gary Gygax and Don Kaye. Gygax had been unable to find a publisher for \"D&amp;D\", a new type of game he and Dave Arneson were co-developing, so he founded the new company with Kaye to self-publish their products. Needing financing to bring their new game to market, Gygax and Kaye brought in Brian Blume in December as an equal partner. \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is generally considered the first tabletop role-playing game (TTRPG), and established the genre. When Kaye died suddenly in 1975, the Tactical Studies Rules partnership restructured into TSR Hobbies, Inc. and accepted investment from Blume's father Melvin. With the popular \"D&amp;D\" as its main product, TSR Hobbies became a major force in the games industry by the late 1970s. Melvin Blume eventually transferred his shares to his other son Kevin, making the two Blume brothers the largest shareholders in TSR Hobbies.\nTSR Hobbies ran into financial difficulties in the spring of 1983, prompting the company to split into four independent businesses, with game publishing and development continuing as TSR, Inc. (TSR). After losing their executive positions, the Blume brothers subsequently sold their shares to TSR Vice President Lorraine Williams, who in turn engineered Gygax's ouster from the company in October 1985. TSR saw prosperity under Williams, but encountered financial trouble in the mid-1990s. While their overall sales and revenue were healthy, TSR's high costs meant the company nevertheless became unprofitable and deeply in debt. TSR was left unable to cover its publishing costs due to a variety of factors. Facing insolvency, TSR was purchased in 1997 by Wizards of the Coast (WotC). WotC initially continued using the TSR name for \"D&amp;D\" products, but by 2000, the TSR moniker was dropped, coinciding with the release of the 3rd edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nWotC allowed the TSR trademark to expire in the early 2000s. Two other companies have since used the TSR trademark commercially.\nHistory.\nTactical Studies Rules (1973\u20131975).\nTactical Studies Rules (TSR) was formed in 1973 as a partnership between Gary Gygax and Don Kaye, who collected together $2,400 for costs related to startup, to formally publish and sell the rules of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", the creation of Gygax and Dave Arneson and the first modern role-playing game (RPG). The first TSR release, however, was \"Cavaliers and Roundheads\", a miniature game, to start generating income for TSR. The partnership was subsequently joined by Brian Blume in December 1973. Blume was admitted to the partnership to fund further publishing of \"D&amp;D\", as \"Cavaliers and Roundheads\" was not a commercial success. In the original configuration of the partnership, Kaye served as president, Blume as vice-president, and Gygax as editor.\nIn January 1974, TSR\u2014with Gygax using his basement as a headquarters\u2014produced 1,000 copies of \"D&amp;D\", selling them for $10 each (and the required extra dice for another $3.50 - equivalent to about $ in 2024). This first print sold out in 10 months. In January 1975, TSR printed a second batch of 1,000 copies of \"D&amp;D\", which took only another five or six months to sell out. Also in 1974, TSR published \"Warriors of Mars\", a miniatures rules book set in the fantasy world of Barsoom, originally imagined by Edgar Rice Burroughs in his series of novels about John Carter of Mars, to which Gygax paid homage in the preface of the first edition of \"D&amp;D\". However, Gygax and TSR published the \"Mars\" book without permission from (or payment to) the Burroughs estate. \"Warriors of Mars\" was quietly dropped from the catalog and never reprinted.\nWhen Don Kaye died of a heart attack on January 31, 1975, his role was taken over by his wife Donna Kaye, who remained responsible for accounting, shipping, and the records of the partnership through the summer. By the summer of 1975, those duties became complex enough that Gygax himself became a full-time employee of the partnership in order to take them over from Donna Kaye. Arneson also entered the partnership in order to coordinate research and design with his circle in the Twin Cities.\nTSR Hobbies, Inc. (1975\u20131983).\nBrian Blume and Gary Gygax reorganized the business from a partnership to a corporation called TSR Hobbies, Inc. At first, it was a separate company to market miniatures and games from other companies, an enterprise which was also connected to the opening of the Dungeon hobby shop in Lake Geneva. TSR Hobbies then moved to buy out the old TSR partnership's assets. Brian's father, Melvin Blume, invested $20,000 in the nascent company which enabled it to buy out Donna Kaye's share of the original TSR partnership. On September 26, 1975, the assets of the former partnership were transferred to TSR Hobbies. Brian Blume became the largest shareholder, Melvin Blume the second largest, and Gary Gygax the third largest. Gygax served as president of TSR Hobbies, and Blume as vice president and secretary. The Dungeon hobby shop would become the effective headquarters of the company, including the offices of Blume and Gygax. TSR Hobbies subcontracted the printing and assembly work in October 1975, and the third printing of 2,000 copies of \"D&amp;D\" sold out in five months. Tim Kask was hired in the autumn of 1975 as Periodicals Editor, and the first employee that TSR hired for full-time work.\n\"Empire of the Petal Throne\" was the first game product released by TSR Hobbies, followed by two \"D&amp;D\" supplements, \"Greyhawk\" and \"Blackmoor\". Also released in 1975 were the board game \"Dungeon!\" and the Wild West RPG \"Boot Hill\". The company took $300,000 in revenues for the fiscal year of 1976. TSR started hosting the Gen Con Game Fair in 1976, and the first \"D&amp;D\" open tournament was held at the convention that year. \"D&amp;D\" supplements \"Eldritch Wizardry\" and \"Gods, Demi-Gods &amp; Heroes\" were released in 1976. Also in 1976, the company opened The Dungeon Hobby Shop at 723 Williams Street and TSR Hobbies moved out of Gygax's home and into the building, with its offices upstairs from the hobby shop.\nTSR also began to branch the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" product into two: \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" as a general audience product intended for novices, and \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"AD&amp;D\") for a more complicated product aimed at hardcore fans. In 1977, the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Basic Set\" was released for \"D&amp;D\", and the \"Monster Manual\" was released as the initial product for \"AD&amp;D\", making TSR the first game company to publish a hardbound book. The next year, the \"AD&amp;D\" \"Players Handbook\" was published, followed by a series of six adventure modules. Due to the inclusion of the word \"Advanced\" in the title, TSR did not pay Dave Arneson any royalties on \"AD&amp;D\" products, saying his co-creation rights extended to the base \"D&amp;D\" name only. In late 1978, TSR Hobbies and the Dungeon Hobby Shop moved from 723 Williams Street into downtown Lake Geneva, to 772 West Main Street, with its offices once again located above the hobby shop. In 1979, the \"AD&amp;D\" \"Dungeon Masters Guide\" was published, and radio ads featuring \"Morley the Wizard\" were broadcast, a figure created \"as the poster child for the softer, child-friendly image\" promoted at that time. All of these core books would go on to be major hits; the \"D&amp;D Basic Set\" sold well in 1977 and 1978, would sell over 100,000 copies in 1979, and would continue to be updated and re-released for years.\nDuring this era, there were a number of competitors and unofficial supplements to \"D&amp;D\" published, arguably in violation of TSR's copyright, which many \"D&amp;D\" players used alongside the TSR books. Among these were the \"Arduin Grimoire\", the \"Manual of Aurenia\", and variants such as \"Warlock\" and \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\". TSR regarded these very warily, and in cases where they felt their trademarks were being misused, they issued cease-and-desist letters. More often than not, this legal posturing resulted in only slight changes to competitors' works, but caused significant animosity in the community.\nIn 1979, TSR signed a contract with Random House with unusual terms. In most deals between publishers and distributors, publishers are paid directly based on books sold downstream by the distributor to bookstores. In TSR's contract, however, Random House would loan money to TSR as an advance upon shipment of product from TSR to Random House, a loan equivalent to 27.3% of the suggested retail price. The arrangement was mutually beneficial at first: TSR could acquire money up front to fund their work, and not have to worry about immediate sales. Many of TSR's products had consistent sales over time, and the loans allowed the company to recoup the investment immediately and use the funds to make more books. Returns were generally low, leading to Random House's confidence in TSR. However, the arrangement would cause trouble later in the 1990s.\nGygax granted exclusive rights to Games Workshop to distribute TSR products in the United Kingdom, after meeting with Ian Livingstone and Steve Jackson. Games Workshop printed some original material and also printed their own versions of various \"D&amp;D\" and \"AD&amp;D\" titles in order to avoid high import costs. TSR was unable to reach an agreement with Games Workshop regarding a possible merger, so the company created the subsidiary TSR Hobbies UK Ltd, in 1980. Gygax hired Don Turnbull to lead the subsidiary, which would expand into continental Europe during the 1980s. TSR UK published a series of modules and the original \"Fiend Folio\". TSR UK also produced \"Imagine\" magazine for 31 issues.\nThe first-published campaign setting for \"AD&amp;D\", the World of Greyhawk, was introduced in 1980. The espionage role-playing game \"Top Secret\" came out in 1980; reportedly, a note regarding a fictitious assassination plot on TSR stationery, as part of the playtesting of the new game, prompted the FBI to visit TSR's offices. That same year, the Role Playing Game Association was founded to promote skillful roleplaying and unite players around the country. In 1981, \"Inc.\" magazine listed TSR Hobbies among the hundred fastest-growing privately held U.S. companies. That same year, TSR Hobbies moved its offices again, into a former medical supply building with a warehouse attached. In 1982, TSR Hobbies broke the 20\u00a0million sales mark.\nTSR Hobbies terminated Grenadier Miniatures's license in 1982 and began to directly manufacture an \"AD&amp;D\" miniatures line, followed by a toy line. Part of the licensing of the \"AD&amp;D\" toy line went to LJN. Also that year, TSR introduced the \"Gangbusters\" and \"Star Frontiers\" role-playing games. TSR established exclusive distribution for the \"D&amp;D\" game in 1982 in 22 countries, with the game being translated first into French, followed by many other languages. In 1982, TSR established an educational department with the intention of developing curriculum programs for reading, math, history, and problem solving, with the most successful program among these the \"Endless Quest\" series of game books.\nMelvin Blume's shares were later transferred to his son Kevin Blume. After this, the leadership of TSR consisted of Kevin Blume, Brian Blume, and Gary Gygax. In contemporary articles from the early 1980s, Gygax said that the three worked as a team, and only proceeded with unanimous consent and buy-in. In interviews years later, Gygax downplayed his role, and described his position as primarily a powerless figurehead CEO, with Brian Blume as president of creative affairs and Kevin Blume as president of operations. In 1981, TSR Hobbies had revenues of $12.9\u00a0million and a payroll of 130.\nTSR Hobbies diversified by purchasing or starting new commercial ventures such as producing miniatures, expanding into toys and gifts, and adding an entertainment division to explore getting into films and television. Many parts of this expansion were later criticized as bad investments and over-extension. Greenfield Needlewomen, a needle craft business, was one particularly criticized acquisition; it was owned by a cousin of the Blumes. Sales of D&amp;D-themed needlecraft were abysmal, and the acquisition was criticized as nepotism. The company was similarly accused of favoring friends and relatives of the Blumes and Gygax in hiring. The management also used company funds to raise a shipwreck from Geneva Lake for no clear financial benefit. The company acquired the trademark and copyrights of the magazine \"Amazing Stories\", although it had only ten thousand subscribers.\nWargames.\nAnother acquisition was the 1982 takeover of Simulations Publications Inc. (SPI), one of the major publishers of wargames and wargaming magazines in North America. SPI was heavily in debt, and TSR agreed to give them a promissory note for several hundred thousand dollars, using SPI's assets as collateral. SPI immediately used the money to pay off its debts, leaving it cash-poor but debt-free. Less than two weeks later, TSR called in the note; with no cash on hand, SPI was forced to hand over their operation to TSR. Believing the wargame market to be a lucrative opportunity, TSR immediately released several SPI titles that were ready for publication but had been stranded by a lack of money for printing, such as \"Battle Over Britain\" and '. TSR also reboxed and republished several popular SPI titles from the mid-1970s under the TSR logo, including \"Air War\", ', and \"Napoleon's Last Battles\". But TSR soon learned that the main reason for SPI's large debt was that the wargame market had collapsed. When their wargames failed to sell, TSR halted all new game projects; in reaction, most SPI game designers resigned and moved to rival company Avalon Hill, lured by the formation of a subsidiary specifically for them called Victory Games. TSR published a few wargames created by their own in-house designers, and had a hit with \"The Hunt for Red October\", but ten years after the SPI takeover, TSR abandoned the wargame market.\nTSR (1983\u20131985).\nIn 1983, the company was split into four companies: TSR, Inc. (the primary successor), TSR International, TSR Ventures, and TSR Entertainment, Inc.\nGygax left for Hollywood to found TSR Entertainment, Inc., later Dungeons &amp; Dragons Entertainment Corp., which attempted to license \"D&amp;D\" products to movie and television executives. His work would eventually lead to only a single license for what later became the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" cartoon. This series was the lead program in its time slot for two years.\nTSR, Inc. started publication of the \"Dragonlance\" saga in 1984 after being in development for two years. The series was both a set of modules and supplements designed for running campaigns in an entirely new game world, starting with \"Dragons of Despair\", as well as a novel series. The novel series was written by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman. The \"Dragonlance\" trilogy of novels was a colossal hit; \"Dragons of Autumn Twilight\", the first novel in the series, reached the top of \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list, encouraging TSR to a launch a long series of paperback novels. TSR's Books Department would go on to launch novels on its other \"D&amp;D\" settings as well, and be one of TSR's most profitable divisions.\nIn 1984, TSR was able to make licensing agreements that allowed the company to publish the \"Marvel Super Heroes\", \"Indiana Jones\", and \"Conan\" role-playing games. In 1985, Gen Con moved out of Lake Geneva which had given it its name, and relocated to Milwaukee, Wisconsin where the game convention would have more badly needed additional space. The \"Oriental Adventures\" hardback for \"AD&amp;D\" was released that same year, becoming the biggest seller for 1985. TSR published a game based on the \"All My Children\" daytime drama on ABC, with over 150,000 copies sold. In 1986, TSR began publishing the bi-monthly \"Dungeon Adventures\" magazine, featuring only adventure scenarios for \"D&amp;D\".\nManagement turmoil.\nSales of the core rule books and boxed sets crested in 1983 and fell in 1984 and 1985, largely due to market saturation; customers who wanted rulebooks largely already had them. There were bright spots in 1983\u20131985 such as \"Dragonlance\" novel sales, \"Unearthed Arcana\", and \"Oriental Adventures\", but TSR's finances were in bad shape due to high expenses and costs that had assumed rule book sales would remain strong. The result was a cycle of layoffs and contractions in 1983\u20131985, as well as the Blumes negotiating a $4 million loan from American National Bank.\nThe struggle for financing led to board room shake-ups at the top level. TSR's line of credit was stopped by its bank, and the company was in debt to over US$. Gygax would later say that he was in the dark as to the extent of the financial difficulties due to being in Hollywood; Ben Riggs, an author who studied TSR's history, is skeptical Gygax was truly unaware, however. Gygax returned to Wisconsin from Hollywood. In the spring of 1985, Gygax exercised an option to buy seven hundred shares of TSR stock, which combined with shares given to his son Ernie gave him 51.1% of all stock, up from around 30% before. Gygax also says he had a confrontation with the board of directors, and had the Blumes removed. Gygax now controlled TSR. Financial difficulties continued, however. Within a year of the departure of the Blumes, the company posted a net loss of US$1.5\u00a0million, resulting in layoffs of approximately 75% of the staff. Some of these staff members went on to form other prominent game companies, such as Pacesetter Ltd and Mayfair Games, or to work with Coleco's video game division.\nGygax searched for financing. Flint Dille, one of his contacts he made in his time in Hollywood, suggested his sister Lorraine Williams might be interested in investing money into TSR. Williams was given a position of general manager at TSR and attempted to fix TSR's precarious financial situation. This led to clashes between Williams and Gygax, who resisted some of Williams' suggestions. Meanwhile, the Blumes, out of power at the company and worried about its financial strength in the long-term, sought to cash out their shares. They offered to sell their shares to Gygax, but he refused. They exercised their own options to buy seven hundred more shares, then sold their entire holdings to Lorraine Williams instead. Williams herself bought fifty shares. With these purchases, Williams became the majority shareholder of TSR, and used her voting power to depose Gygax as CEO and president on October 22, 1985. Gygax unsuccessfully challenged the sale in court; Gygax's supporters considered the Blumes' sale an act of retaliation. Gygax eventually sold his remaining stock to Williams and used the capital to form New Infinities Productions. On TSR's side, they would pepper Gygax with legal threats long after he left in an attempt to deter him from competing with his old company in the area of role-playing games.\nLorraine Williams era (1985\u20131997).\nWilliams saw potential for rebuilding the debt-plagued company into a highly profitable one. However, she also acquired a reputation as a non-gamer who played the \"villain\" in retrospectives of TSR. Gary Gygax grew particularly disdainful of her; Williams' habit of threatening lawsuits and legal action against perceived foes was criticized as unwise and turning potential allies into enemies. However, her tenure has also been defended. John D. Rateliff said that \"Every single person I talked to who worked under Gary [Gygax] and the Blumes and then worked under Lorraine preferred working under Lorraine... I never met a single person who was under both who didn't prefer being under her.\" Jeff Grubb said that she \"pretty much saved the company,\" as the company was weeks away from total collapse when she took over.\nTabletop and board gaming in the Williams era.\nTSR released the \"Forgotten Realms\" campaign setting in 1987, which would go on to become one of the most popular settings for \"D&amp;D\". TSR's settings would generally include a boxed set with multiple paperbacks and a map as their core product, and would produce tie-in supplements such as pre-made adventures (usually called \"modules\"), guides to regions within the world, and novels. Also in 1987, a small design team began working to develop a second edition of the \"AD&amp;D\" game. In 1988, TSR released the \"Bullwinkle and Rocky Role-Playing Party Game\", complete with a spinner and hand puppets. That same year, TSR released the wargame \"The Hunt for Red October\" based on Tom Clancy's novel \"The Hunt for Red October\", which became one of the all-time biggest selling wargames. In 1989, \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd edition was released, which saw a new \"Dungeon Master's Guide\", \"Player's Handbook\", and the first three volumes of the new \"Monstrous Compendium\". A new campaign setting, \"Spelljammer\", was also released in 1989, which allowed characters from one \"D&amp;D\" world to travel to other worlds via space galleons in an Age of Sail themed setting. TSR would go on to produce many expansions for 2nd edition, such as a series of class handbooks that began with \"The Complete Fighter's Handbook\".\nIn 1990, the \"Ravenloft\" setting was released, a horror-themed setting for \"AD&amp;D\". \"Ravenloft\" had been introduced in an acclaimed 1983 adventure module, and was now expanded into an entire setting. In 1991, TSR released the \"Dark Sun\" campaign setting, which was more dark fantasy in genre, and set on a post-apocalyptic desert world threatened by evil life-draining wizards and psionicists. In 1992, TSR released the \"Al-Qadim\" setting with a Middle Eastern flavor similar to a fantasy version of the \"Arabian Nights\", although its world was also connected to the Forgotten Realms. In 1993, a revised version of the \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\" for 2nd edition was released; TSR had published a sourcebook on upgrading the 1st edition material to 2nd edition in 1990 earlier. In 1993, \"DragonStrike\" was released as an introductory product aimed to recruit new role-players, including a half-hour video which explained role-playing concepts; a similar introductory product, \"First Quest\", was released in 1994. Also in 1994, the \"Planescape\" campaign setting was released, featuring the city of Sigil as the \"City of Doors\" that connected to the various planes of existence in \"AD&amp;D\". \"Spelljammer\" had not been considered a success by TSR as players perceived it as mainly a way to move characters from one world to another rather than its own setting; \"Planescape\" attempted to remedy this by focusing on Sigil as a place to set an entire campaign, rather than a place to pass through. TSR also released ' in 1994, which detailed one of the kingdoms in the setting of Mystara. As an innovation, it included an audio CD with tracks of dialogue and sound effects. In 1995, TSR released \"Birthright\", a campaign setting that mixed \"D&amp;D\" with strategy games. The intent was for players to play noble characters empowered by divine blood which gave them the power to rule domains; players could expand their domains and divine powers with a mixture of war and diplomacy. In 1996, ' was released, a \"diceless\" role-playing game that departed from the roots of \"Dragonlance\" in \"AD&amp;D\".\nExpansion into other products.\nUnder Williams' direction, TSR solidified its expansion into other fields, such as magazines, paperback fiction, comic books, and collectible games. TSR's book division was a traditional powerhouse for the company, especially due to the comparatively low costs in producing novels compared to role-playing supplements which required commissioning art and play-testing. The most notably successful novel series of the era was R. A. Salvatore's Drizzt series, set in the Forgotten Realms. Starting with \"The Crystal Shard\" in 1988, many of Salvatore's books would go on to reach the paperback bestseller lists. TSR eventually moved into publishing hardcover novels as well with Salvatore's \"The Legacy\", published in 1992. It made the top of \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list weeks after its release.\nThe Dille Family Trust, of which Lorraine Williams was a part, held the rights to the Buck Rogers license. Williams personally encouraged TSR to produce Buck Rogers tie-in material. TSR would end up publishing Buck Rogers board games, novels, a comic book, and a role-playing game based on the \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition rules. TSR's Buck Rogers projects were commercial failures.\nIn the late 1980s, TSR opened a new West Coast division in Southern California to develop various projects in the entertainment industry, similar to how Gygax had sought deals in Hollywood in the early 1980s. However, the efforts of the division would come to \"less than nothing\" according to TSR historian Ben Riggs, despite initial promise. TSR had an arrangement with DC Comics to produce the comics \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and \"Forgotten Realms\", which sold well and were profitable for both DC and TSR. Sensing an opportunity, TSR decided to produce comics themselves as a stepping stool to television and film, as comics were cheaper to produce and start with. However, they had already sold the rights to their own A-list product in \"AD&amp;D\". TSR attempted to not enrage DC Comics by calling their new product \"comics modules\" and including game-related material at the end of each issue; additionally, TSR largely sold the comics modules through bookshops rather than comic shops. The compromise failed in both directions: DC, feeling betrayed that their partner was moving to become a competitor, immediately stopped production of both the \"AD&amp;D\" and \"Forgotten Realms\" comics, and canceled an in-production \"Ravenloft\" series to have been scripted by \"Knight of the Black Rose\" author James Lowder. However, the changes to present the product as not a comic book caused the potential audience to either not know of its existence at all, or to be confused as to its nature. TSR West eventually published four comics modules: a Buck Rogers comic, a sci-fi comic \"Intruder\", a time travel comic \"Warhawks\", and a horror comic called \"R.I.P.\" They were not commercially successful. TSR West closed around 1991, although TSR would continue to work with Flint Dille on film-adjacent products made in California such as the introductory video for \"Dragonstrike\" and a 1995 interactive video game series called \"Terror T.R.A.X.\" In 1994, TSR signed an agreement with Sweetpea Entertainment for rights to make a \"D&amp;D\" movie. This would eventually result in the 2000 \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" movie.\nTSR continued to own and operate the Gen Con role-playing game convention. Gen Con grew beyond its initial focus on \"D&amp;D\" and wargames to role-playing fans in general. Gen Con was a growing and successful convention; in 1992, it broke every previous record for attendance to game conventions in the United States, with over 18,000 attendees. \nIn 1993, Wizards of the Coast released the game \"\" at Gen Con, which was an immediate smash hit that established the collectible card game (CCG) genre. TSR's Jim Ward led a development effort to create a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"-themed CCG competitor that would be a response to \"Magic\". The result would be \"Spellfire\", released in April 1994. \"Spellfire\" was produced on a shoestring budget, and re-used art that TSR had already commissioned for other projects; Lorraine Williams was not a fan of the project. Its financial results are contested; some TSR insiders say that \"Spellfire\" sold well considering the constraints on it, while others indicate it sold poorly. \"Spellfire\" was discontinued in 1996, although one final release occurred in late 1997. Another collectible competitor to Wizards of the Coast that TSR produced was \"Dragon Dice\", which was released in 1995. \"Dragon Dice\" was a collectible dice game where each player started with a random assortment of basic dice, and could improve their assortment by purchasing booster packs of more powerful dice. The first sets of \"Dragon Dice\" sold well at games stores, and TSR produced several expansion sets. However, interest in \"Dragon Dice\" was waning. In addition, TSR tried to aggressively market \"Dragon Dice\" in mass-market book stores through Random House. However, the game did not catch on through the book trade.\nTSR's book division ran into troubles in the mid-1990s. TSR engaged in disputes with some of its most successful authors over terms and remuneration. Weis &amp; Hickman had been driven off in the mid-1980s; a new dispute with R. A. Salvatore happened in 1994\u20131995. TSR suffered \"the effects of overexpansion\" in 1996 with an \"expanded number of hardcover novels and a wide array of gaming accessories such as its \"Dragon Dice\"\". Part of this overexpansion included publishing twelve hardcover novels up from the usual two novels per year. Shannon Appelcline, in \"Designers &amp; Dragons: The 90s\", commented that the books were sold at a loss and the \"TSR warehouse\" was \"truckloads\" full of \"Dragon Dice\".\nFinal years: Financial trouble and sale (1995\u20131997).\nBy 1996, TSR was experiencing numerous problems, as outlined by various historians of the company. Shannon Appelcline wrote: \"Distributors were going out of business. TSR had unbalanced their \"AD&amp;D\" game through a series of lucrative supplements that ultimately hurt the long-time viability of the game. Meanwhile, they had developed so many settings\u2014many of them popular and well received\u2014that they were both cannibalizing their only sales and discouraging players from picking up settings that might be gone in a few years. They may have been cannibalizing their own sales through excessive production of books or supplements too.\" Ben Riggs agreed that TSR was factionalizing the AD&amp;D audience by continually releasing competing new settings (Forgotten Realms, Al-Qadim, Dragonlance, Planescape, Dark Sun, Birthright, Karameikos, etc.), a strategy intended to lure in new customers, but that actually divided its own core customers. TSR's products essentially competed with themselves, requiring more development effort to reach the same number of total customers. Ryan Dancey and Lisa Stevens, who examined TSR's finances for Wizards of the Coast, found that many of the AD&amp;D settings products were never profitable, and more worryingly never \"could\" have been profitable\u2014the cost of production was simply too high compared to the price they sold for. David M. Ewalt writes that \"Spellfire\" and \"Dragon Dice\" \"were both expensive to produce, and neither sold very well\".\nAnother factor that hobbled TSR in the long-term was a financial arrangement known as \"factoring.\" Factoring worked like this: TSR first arranged contracts with retailers in the hobby trade (gaming stores, comics stores, and so on) to preorder their products and offered a discounted rate for contracts signed in January. TSR then took these contracts to investment banks, and was advanced money immediately by the banks, with the banks to be paid off from the eventual sales of the product. This financial innovation allowed TSR to be essentially \"paid in advance\", less fees from the banks and from discounts given to suppliers, which worked out to keeping about 82% of the revenue. Getting all of the money in January allowed TSR to budget with more certainty and potentially fund projects with a long lead time immediately, rather than waiting on sales. Other than the direct cost of losing 18 pennies on every dollar of revenue, factoring had the other downside of not being flexible to changing market conditions, as TSR was essentially locked into its budgeting from January. It was partially why \"Spellfire\" was made on a tiny budget, as TSR was attempting to take on a new initiative in the middle of the year, and led to a fiasco with its \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons CD-ROM Core Rules\" product where a preorder arrangement with Babbage's was continued despite Babbage's becoming financially insolvent.\nTSR's old deal with Random House, which had been mutually beneficial in the 1980s, began to be used by TSR in ways that would paper over short-term financial problems. Since TSR was paid up front on the assumption that shipped goods would ultimately sell, TSR began shipping overstock to Random House to generate loans on demand. This caused people in the know at TSR to call it the \"Banco de Random House\". It also dulled TSR's internal sense of which products were selling, leading to overprinting of niche products. Ben Riggs cites the introductory product \"DragonStrike\" as an example, which sold well but was vastly overprinted. The extra copies were still sent to Random House to generate loans, however. The result was a steadily expanding \"debt bubble\" with Random House as returns of product soared. Random House eventually noticed something was amiss, and began demanding TSR shrink its debt load with them\u2014around $11.8 million in June 1995. Random House sued TSR in April 1996 for repayment.\nDespite total sales of around $40\u00a0million in 1995, TSR ended 1996 with little in cash reserves, and the company was deep in debt. Random House returned an unexpectedly high percentage of unsold stock, including the year's inventory of unsold novels and sets of \"Dragon Dice\", and charged a fee of several million dollars. Random House returned around $14 million of product between 1995 and 1997. TSR found itself in a cash crunch. With no cash, TSR was unable to pay their printing and shipping bills. J. B. Kenehan, the logistics company that handled TSR's pre-press, printing, warehousing, and shipping, refused to do any more work. Since the logistics company had the production plates for key products such as core \"D&amp;D\" books, there was no means of printing or shipping core products to generate income or secure short-term financing. The company laid off thirty staff members in December 1996, and other employees including James M. Ward quit over disagreements about how the company managed the crisis. In large part due to the need to refund Random House, TSR began 1997 more than $30\u00a0million in debt. TSR was threatened by lawsuits due to unpaid freelancers as well as missing royalties, but TSR made sufficient earnings from products already shipped to stores to keep their remaining staff paid through the first half of 1997. With no viable financial plan for TSR's survival, Lorraine Williams sold the company to Wizards of the Coast in 1997 in a deal brokered by Five Rings Publishing Group (FRPG).\nAfter acquisition (1997\u20132000).\nWizards of the Coast settled TSR's debts as part of the acquisition. This included unwinding TSR's deal with its printer, enabling the products TSR had worked on in the first half of 1997 to be printed and distributed, such as the space opera game \"Alternity\". More generally, Wizards was cash-rich, which solved some of the problems TSR had faced that had caused it to resort to the rolling loans and financial trickery that had cut into TSR's profits, such as factoring. Wizards of the Coast also moved to mend relations with some of TSR's former employees and contractors who had been alienated. This included allowing artists to take back personal ownership of the original versions of art they had made for TSR.\nWizards eventually closed the TSR corporate offices in Lake Geneva. Some TSR employees accepted the offer of transferring to Wizards of the Coast's offices in Washington, and a few others continued to work remotely from Wisconsin. Wizards of the Coast continued to use the TSR name for \"D&amp;D\" products for three years. Wizards also set about the creation of the third edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". It was released in 2000 under the Wizards of the Coast brand only. In 1999, Wizards of the Coast was itself purchased by Hasbro, Inc. In 2002, the Gen Con convention was sold to Peter Adkison, the founder and CEO of Wizards of the Coast.\nBusiness disputes.\nAfter its initial success faded, the company turned to legal defenses of what it regarded as its intellectual property. In addition, there were several legal cases brought regarding who had invented what within the company and the division of royalties, including several lawsuits against Gygax. This included the company threatening to sue individuals supplying game material on websites. \nIn 1984, there was an incident involving Lucasfilm that led to a legend that TSR had trademarked the term \"Nazi\". TSR published a supplement for the \"Indiana Jones\" RPG, \"Raiders of the Lost Ark Adventure Pack\", in which some figures were marked with \"Nazi\u2122\". This trademark notation was because of a list of trademarked character names supplied by Lucasfilm's legal department; they had indiscriminately marked all figures with a trademark symbol, and the Nazi figures were likewise marked accidentally.\nSubsequent trademark usage.\nTSR Games/Solarian Games (2011-2021).\nIn 2011, a new company taking the name TSR was founded by Jayson Elliot, who co-founded the Roll for Initiative podcast. Elliot found that the TSR trademark had expired around 2004 so he registered it himself. He then decided to launch the new company with assistance from early TSR/D&amp;D contributors including Luke and Ernie Gygax, sons of the deceased D&amp;D co-creator Gary Gygax, and Tim Kask, former editor of \"Dragon\" magazine. Their first product was \"Gygax Magazine\", announced along with the TSR company revival in December 2012. \"Wired\" reported that \"Elliot stressed that his 'TSR is a new company'.\" Both Gygax brothers left the company in 2016 when the magazine ended. The company operated as TSR Games, producing the \"\" role-playing game.\nTSR Games (2021-).\nIn June 2021, a new, separate TSR company was launched by a group including Ernie Gygax, Justin LaNasa and Stephen Dinehart. The company is based out of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin; they announced plans to release tabletop games and operate the Dungeon Hobby Shop Museum, which is located in the first office building of the original TSR. Elliot's TSR Games then announced on social media that while they have owned the trademark since 2011, they missed a filing date in 2020 and were considering various options. However, after Ernie Gygax's \"troubling comments about race, gender identity, and gun violence, as well as his company's reaction\", Elliot announced that his company would not have \"any form of working relationship\" with Ernie Gygax's TSR. Ultimately, Elliot's TSR Games was rebranded as Solarian Games in July 2021. Dinehart then rebranded as Wonderfilled Games. \"Dicebreaker\" reported that \"TSR Games never officially announced its rebranding as Wonderfilled Games\" and most of its \"Twitter accounts had been locked down or nuked, and the company's old website simply redirected to a new page that \u2014 interestingly \u2014 listed Dinehart's GiantLands as an in-development title. [...] How much of TSR Games exists in Wonderfilled Games isn't clear\".\nLaNasa's TSR Games then launched a crowdfunding campaign in December 2021 to raise money to sue Wizards of the Coast for \"Trademark Declaratory Judgement of Ownership\"; the company then filed and voluntarily dismissed the complaint that month. Wizards of the Coast, also in December 2021, sued LaNasa's TSR for trademark fraud over the use of the TSR logo which is owned by Wizards of the Coast. In July 2022, \"TechRaptor\" reported on a leaked \"\" (a reboot of the 1982 \"Star Frontiers\" role-playing game) playtest created by LaNasa's TSR; the content contains \"blatantly racist\" descriptions of character races and the race design \"plays into Nazi eugenics\". The content also contains \"homophobic, transphobic, and anti-semitic content, as well as additional material of a discriminatory nature\". \"IGN Southeast Asia\" highlighted that in this playtest game a black \"race is classified as a 'Subrace' and having 'average' intellect with a maximum intelligence rating of 9, whereas the 'norse' race has a minimum intelligence rating of 13\".\nIn September 2022, Wizards of the Coast sued TSR Games\u2014helmed by Ernie Gygax and LaNasa\u2014and the Dungeon Hobby Shop Museum to enjoin these companies from publishing games under the \"Star Frontiers\" and \"TSR\" trademarks. In its motion for a preliminary injunction, Wizards of the Coast wrote that TSR's \"Star Frontiers: New Genesis\" game is \"despicable\" and \"blatantly racist and transphobic\", and that the publication of such content would inflict reputational harm on Wizards of the Coast. Charlie Hall, for \"Polygon\", commented that \"Wizards' filing also seeks to undermine LaNasa's most powerful argument \u2014 that Wizards abandoned TSR and other related trademarks, thus opening the door to his usurping of the brand and its games. [...] Here's where things get complicated. Wizards admitted that it failed to file paperwork for the registration of TSR, Star Frontiers, and other related marks in a timely fashion as required under federal law. But through continued sales of related products and use of the related IP, the company claims ownership via 'common law trademark rights.' It will be up to a jury to determine if that is, in fact, the case\". In December 2022, a federal magistrate judge denied the preliminary injunction Wizards of the Coast filed. The judge said that Wizards had not yet shown enough evidence to demonstrate continuous use of the TSR brand; she also noted that the defendants disclaimed the racist version of the game and had promised not to release any version of \"Star Frontiers\" at all until the court case concludes, hence there was no need for a preliminary injunction. In June 2023, LaNasa's TSR declared Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which triggered an automatic stay of the lawsuit.\nProducts.\nTSR's main products were role-playing games, the most successful of which was \"D&amp;D\". However, they also produced other games such as card games, board games, and dice games, and published both magazines and books.\nRole-playing games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWargames.\nPublished under TSR marque.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublished in \"Strategy &amp; Tactics\" (1983\u20131987).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMagazines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFiction.\nIn 1984, TSR started publishing novels based on their games. Most \"D&amp;D\" campaign settings had their own novel line, the most successful of which were the \"Dragonlance\" and \"Forgotten Realms\" lines, with dozens of novels each.\nTSR also published the 1995 novel \"\" by Martin Caidin, a standalone re-imagining of the Buck Rogers universe and unrelated to TSR's \"Buck Rogers XXVC\" game.\nTSR published a large number of fantasy and science fiction novels unconnected with their gaming products, such as L. Dean James' \"Red Kings of Wynnamyr\" novels, \"Sorcerer's Stone\" (1991) and \"Kingslayer\" (1992); Mary H. Herbert's five \"Gabria\" novels (\"Valorian\", \"Dark Horse\", \"Lightning's Daughter\", \"City of the Sorcerers\", and \"Winged Magic\"); and humorous fantasy fiction, including Roy V. Young's \"Count Yor\" novels \"Captains Outrageous\" (1994) and \"Yor's Revenge\"(1995). However, such projects never represented more than a fraction of the company's fiction output, which retained a strong emphasis on game-derived works.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69741", "revid": "38702144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69741", "title": "Terminate-and-stay-resident program", "text": "Computer program that returns control to a non-multitasking OS without exiting\nA terminate-and-stay-resident program (commonly TSR) is a computer program running under DOS that uses a system call to return control to DOS as though it has finished, but remains in computer memory so it can be reactivated later. This technique partially overcame DOS's limitation of executing only one program, or task, at a time. TSRs are used only in DOS, not in Windows.\nSome TSRs are utility software that a computer user might call up several times a day, while working in another program, by using a hotkey. Borland Sidekick was an early and popular example of this type. Others serve as device drivers for hardware that the operating system does not directly support.\nUse.\nNormally DOS can run only one program at a time. When a program finishes, it returns control to DOS using the system call INT 21h/4Ch of the DOS API. The memory and system resources used are then marked as unused. This makes it impossible to restart parts of the program without having to reload it all. However, if a program ends with the system call INT 27h or INT 21h/31h, the operating system does not reuse a certain specified part of its memory.\nThe original call, INT 27h, is called \"terminate but stay resident\", hence the name \"TSR\". Using this call, a program can make up to 64\u00a0KB of its memory resident. MS-DOS version 2.0 introduced an improved call, INT 21h/31h ('Keep Process'), which removed this limitation and let the program return an exit code. Before making this call, the program can install one or several interrupt handlers pointing into itself, so that it can be called again. Installing a hardware interrupt vector allows such a program to react to hardware events. Installing a software interrupt vector allows it to be called by the currently running program. Installing a timer interrupt handler allows a TSR to run periodically (using a programmable interval timer).\nThe typical method of using an interrupt vector involves reading its present value (the address), storing it within the memory space of the TSR, and replacing it with an address in its own code. The stored address is called from the TSR, in effect forming a singly linked list of interrupt handlers, also called \"interrupt service routines\", or ISRs. This procedure of installing ISRs is called \"chaining\" or \"hooking\" an interrupt or an interrupt vector.\nTSRs can be loaded at any time; either during the DOS startup sequence (for example, from AUTOEXEC.BAT), or at the user's request (for example, Borland's Sidekick and Turbo Debugger, Quicken's QuickPay, or FunStuff Software's Personal Calendar). Parts of DOS itself use this technique, especially in DOS versions 5.0 and later. For example, the DOSKEY command-line editor and various other utilities are installed by running them at the command line (manually, or from AUTOEXEC.BAT or through codice_1 from within CONFIG.SYS) rather than loading them as device drivers through codice_2 statements in CONFIG.SYS.\nSome TSRs have no way to unload themselves, so they will remain in memory until a reboot. However unloading is possible externally, using utilities like the MARK.EXE/RELEASE.EXE combo by TurboPower Software or \"soft reboot\" TSRs which will catch a specific key combination and release all TSRs loaded after them. As the chain of ISRs is singly linked, and a TSR may store the link to its predecessor anywhere it chooses, there is no general way for a TSR to remove itself from the chain. So usually a stub must be left in memory when unloading a TSR, causing memory fragmentation. This problem gave rise to TSR cooperation frameworks such as TesSeRact and AMIS.\nInterrupt sharing.\nTo manage problems with many TSRs sharing the same interrupt, a method called Alternate Multiplex Interrupt Specification (AMIS) was proposed by Ralf D. Brown as an improvement over previously used services offered via INT 2Fh. AMIS provides ways to share software interrupts in a controlled manner. It is modeled after IBM's Interrupt Sharing Protocol, originally invented for sharing hardware interrupts of an x86 processor. AMIS services are available via Int 2Dh.\nThe proposal never gained a widespread traction among programmers in its days. It existed alongside several other competing specifications of varying sophistication.\nFaults.\nWhile very useful, or even essential to overcome DOS's limitations, TSRs have a reputation as troublemakers. Many hijack the operating system in varying documented or undocumented ways, often causing systems to crash on their activation or deactivation when used with particular applications or other TSRs.\nBy chaining the interrupt vectors TSRs can take complete control of the computer. A TSR can have one of two behaviors:\nThe terminate-and-stay-resident method is used by most DOS viruses and other malware, which can either take control of the PC or stay in the background. This malware can react to disk I/O or execution events by infecting executable (.EXE or .COM) files when it is run and data files when they are opened.\nAdditionally, without the use of a DOS extender, all programs in DOS must be loaded into the first 640\u00a0KB of RAM (the conventional memory), even on computers with large amounts of physical RAM. TSRs are no exception, and take chunks from that 640\u00a0KB that are thus unavailable to other applications. This meant that writing a TSR was a challenge of achieving the smallest possible size for it, and checking it for compatibility with a lot of software products from different vendors\u2014often a very frustrating task. Due to being called directly from the DOS environment, TSRs cannot practically make use of DOS extenders, and so must be located in conventional memory.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, many video games on the PC platform pushed up against this limit and left less and less space for TSRs\u2014even essential ones like CD-ROM drivers\u2014and arranging things so that there was enough free RAM to run the games, while keeping the necessary TSRs present, became very complicated. Many gamers had several boot disks with different configurations for different games. In later versions of MS-DOS, \"boot menu\" scripts allowed various configurations to be selectable via a single menu entry. In the mid- to later 1990s, while many games were still written for DOS, the 640\u00a0KB limit was eventually overcome by putting parts of the game's data above the first 1\u00a0MB of memory and using the code below 640\u00a0KB to access the extended memory using expanded memory (EMS) by making use of overlay technique. An alternative later approach was to switch the CPU into Protected Mode by using DOS extenders and run the program in protected mode. The latter allowed to have code and data in the extended memory area.\nBecause programming with many overlays is a challenge in and of itself, once the program was too big to fit entirely into about 512\u00a0KB, use of extended memory was almost always done using a third-party DOS extender implementing VCPI or DPMI, because it becomes much easier and faster to access memory above the 1\u00a0MB boundary, and possible to run code in that area, when the x86 processor is switched from real mode to protected mode. However, since DOS and most DOS programs run in real mode (VCPI or DPMI makes a protected-mode program look like a real-mode program to DOS and the rest of the system by switching back and forth between the two modes), DOS TSRs and device drivers also run in real mode, and so any time one gets control, the DOS extender has to switch back to real mode until it relinquishes control, incurring a time penalty (unless they utilize techniques such as DPMS or CLOAKING).\nReturn.\nWith the arrival of expanded memory boards and especially of Intel 80386 processors in the second half of the 1980s, it became possible to use memory above 640\u00a0KB to load TSRs. This required complex software solutions, named \"expanded memory managers\". Some memory managers are QRAM and QEMM by Quarterdeck, 386MAX by Qualitas, CEMM by Compaq, and later EMM386 by Microsoft. The memory areas usable for loading TSRs above 640\u00a0KB are called \"upper memory blocks\" (UMBs) and loading programs into them is called \"loading high\". Later, memory managers started including programs such as Quarterdeck's Optimize or Microsoft's MEMMAKER which try to maximize the available space in the first 640\u00a0KB by determining how best to allocate TSRs between low and high memory.\nDecline.\nWith the development of games using DOS extenders (an early example was \"Doom\") which bypassed the 640\u00a0KB barrier, many of the issues relating to TSRs disappeared, and with the widespread adoption of Microsoft Windows and especially Windows 95 (followed by Windows 98)\u00a0\u2013 which rendered most TSRs unnecessary and some TSRs incompatible\u00a0\u2013 the TSR faded into obsolescence, though Win16 applications can do TSR-like tricks such as patching the interrupt descriptor table (IDT) because Windows allowed it.\nWindows Me does not allow a computer to boot into a DOS Kernel by shutting down Windows Me; thus TSRs became useless on Windows Me.\nThe Windows NT series (including Windows 2000, Windows XP, and later) replaced DOS completely and run in protected mode or long mode (later 64-bit versions only) all the time, disabling the ability to switch to real mode, which is needed for TSRs to function. Instead these operating systems have modern driver and service frameworks with memory protection and preemptive multitasking, allowing multiple programs and device drivers to run simultaneously without the need for special programming tricks; the kernel and its modules have been made exclusively responsible for modifying the interrupt table.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69742", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69742", "title": "Winthrop", "text": "Winthrop may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69743", "revid": "7021758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69743", "title": "Spit (card game)", "text": "Shedding two player card game\nSpit is a card game of the family for two players. It is a form of competitive patience. The game is played until all of a player's cards are gone. It has a close variant known as Speed. Spit appears to have originated in the UK in the 1980s.\nObjective.\nThe goal of Spit is to get rid of one's cards as quickly as possible. The players do not take turns; physical speed and alertness is required to play faster than the opponent. On each deal, the player who is first to go through all of their starting cards can reduce the number of cards for the next deal. By being successful for several deals, clearing all of one's cards becomes possible, and if this is carried out successfully, one wins the game.\nSetup.\nSpit is played by two players. The entire pack is split between them, and each player makes five stacks in front of themselves in a row as follows: \nThere is an alternative setup where each person lays down four cards face up separately, and a stack of ten face-down cards with one face-up card on top, similar to the setup for Canfield.\nThe object of the game is to move all of these cards into two \"spit piles\" that start empty in between the two player's rows of cards. Each player's eleven remaining cards not dealt into stacks are placed face down in a pile next to the play area; these are the spit cards. Within each player's row of cards, face-up cards of the same value (the same card but a different suit) may be placed upon each other. Then, the face-down cards revealed from this are turned over. This process continues until each player's row has face-up cards of five different values.\nPlayers must leave their stacks on the table, and only one card can be played at a time. Players may either use both or just one hand while playing Spit; however, both players need to agree on either one or both.\nPlay.\nTo begin, both players say \"spit\" (or \"slam\" or \"speed\", depending on the variation) simultaneously as each player flips over the top card from their spit cards into the centre to start the two spit piles. Then, the two players attempt to play the cards from their rows of cards into the spit piles as fast as they can; there are no turns.\nEach player can play their face-up cards from their row onto either spit pile, if the previous card in that spit pile is of a consecutive value. For example, a 5 can be placed upon a 4 or a 6, but not another 5. An Ace is considered consecutive to both King and 2. When a face-up card is used, the next card under it in its stack can be turned over and then played. If a stack of the rows is empty, a player can transfer any face-up card into that space and turn over the following card. As during setup, face-up cards of the same rank may be placed on top of each other within the rows.\nOnce either player has depleted the cards from their row, each player tries to slap the spit pile that they think is smaller. Whoever slaps first gets the pile slapped, and the other player takes the other spit pile. (In some variants the player who plays all their cards just chooses a pile.) These cards are added to the remainder of the player's spit cards and then shuffled together and dealt into rows as done at the start of the deal. There is no set number of rounds because the first to lose all of their cards is the winner.\nIf the run reaches a point where both players are stuck or choose not to play a card, both players once again say \"spit\" simultaneously and each player turns their top spit card face up, placing it on one of the spit piles. Play then resumes as described above.\nEnd of play.\nWhen one player starts with fifteen cards or fewer, there will only be one spit pile, and the first player to get rid of their rows doesn't take anything from the center. The opponent takes the spit pile and their tableau cards.\nIf the player with no spit cards in their hand is also the one who gets rid of their rows first, they win the game. If their opponent gets rid of their tableau first, the game continues.\nComparison with Speed.\nSpit is similar to the game Speed in the sense that players attempt to get rid of all their cards first. Speed requires 4 stacks, two having five or ten. If there are five cards in the outer stacks in the middle each player is dealt twenty cards, while if there are fifteen cards, ten are dealt. Speed permits players to use Jokers as wild cards, where in Spit, the Jokers are commonly (but not always) removed from the deck.\nWhen playing Speed, while slapping the final pile, players have the option of shouting the word \u201cSpeed\u201d as they slap the deck. This rule can be carried over to Spit, however it is not mandatory. The difference between Spit and Speed is in the arrangement of the stock piles. In Spit, each player has a row of piles, usually five, each with the top card face up. In Speed, each player has a single face down stock pile and a hand of five cards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69745", "revid": "33582946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69745", "title": "Woodbury", "text": "Woodbury may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69748", "revid": "1306196378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69748", "title": "Molten Sea", "text": "Structure described in the Hebrew Bible\nThe Molten Sea or Brazen Sea ( \"y\u0101m m\u016b\u1e63\u0101q\" \"cast metal sea\") was a large basin in the Temple in Jerusalem made by Solomon for ablution of the priests. It is described in and . It stood in the south-eastern corner of the inner court. According to the Bible it was five cubits high, ten cubits in diameter from brim to brim, and thirty cubits in circumference. The brim was like the rim of a cup or like a lily blossom, and its thickness was a hand breadth\", three or four inches. It was placed on the backs of twelve oxen, standing with their faces outward. It was capable of containing two or three thousand baths of water (). The fact that it was a wash basin which was too large to enter from above lends to the idea that water would likely have flowed from it down into a subcontainer beneath. The water was originally supplied by the Gibeonites, but was afterwards brought by a conduit from Solomon's Pools. The \"molten sea\" was made of brass or bronze, which Solomon had taken from the captured cities of Hadarezer, the king of Zobah (). Ahaz later removed this laver from the oxen, and placed it on a stone pavement (). It was destroyed by the Chaldeans ().\nIn rabbinical literature.\nThe basin contained water sufficient for two thousand baths. Adding to its Biblical description, according to the Talmud, the laver was not entirely round; the upper two-fifths were round, but the lower three were square.\nThe symbolism and specific appearance of the brazen sea is described in detail in the Midrash Tadshe. The sea represented the world and the ten ells of diameter corresponded to the ten Sefirot; it was round at the top (according to the Talmud passage above cited), as the heavens are round, and the specific curvature reflected the Hebrew zodiac (Mazzaloth). The depth of the sea was five ells, corresponding to the distance of five hundred years' journey between heaven and earth. The two rows of colocynths (knops) below the rim were symbolic of the sun (greater light) and the moon (lesser light). The band of thirty ells around it corresponded to the Ten Commandments, to the at the creation of the world, and to the ten Sefirot: for the world can exist only when the Ten Commandments are observed, and the ten Sefirot as well as the ten words of God were the instruments of the Creation. The twelve oxen on which the sea rested represented the Twelve Tribes of Israel. It contained 2,000 baths (cubic measures), for the world will sustain him who keeps the Torah, which was created 2,000 years before the world.\nThe Laver of the Tabernacle.\nIn the Priestly Code of Exodus, instead of the Molten Sea is described a bronze \"laver\" (basin), which was to rest on a bronze \"foot\" (presumably meaning \"a stand\"). The text explains that this laver was to be used for the Israelite priests to wash their hands and feet when they entered the sanctuary.\nThis is confirmed in a later part of the Priestly Code, in the passage describing the actual installation of the Tabernacle furniture.\nThe size and shape of this laver are not mentioned anywhere in the Bible, and nor are those of its stand, unlike the case for the Molten Sea. By contrast, the special golden candlestick is described by the Priestly Code, but not in the description of Solomon's temple. It might therefore be the case that the laver and the candlestick are somehow the same object.\nRelation to Solomon's platform.\nSolomon is described by the Book of Chronicles as having constructed a special platform in his Temple, for him to use during the opening ceremony. Although it is often assumed that the text describes Solomon as standing on this platform, the text could equally be read \"stood next to\".\nThis platform is literally described by the Masoretic Text as a laver (Hebrew: \"kiyyor\"), and as with the Priestly Code's laver, there is only one platform, and it is placed in the centre of the outer court. The Septuagint calls it a \"base\", and the size of the brazen platform is the same as that of each base for the ten brazen lavers.\nIt is therefore quite possible that the account of this platform in the Book of Chronicles is actually an account of a laver corresponding to the laver of the Priestly Code.\nLatter-Day Saint interpretation.\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) believe that the molten sea in Solomon's Temple was a baptismal font, and that someone removed portions of the Hebrew Bible that referred to Tevilah (baptism). As taught by church leader Bruce R. McConkie:\nIn Solomon's Temple a large molten sea of brass was placed on the backs of 12 brazen oxen, these oxen being symbolical of the 12 tribes of Israel. This brazen sea was used for performing baptisms for the living. There were no baptisms for the dead until after the resurrection of Christ.\nIt must be remembered that all direct and plain references to baptism have been deleted from the Old Testament (1 Nephi 13) and that the word \"baptize\" is of Greek origin. Some equivalent word, such as \"wash\", would have been used by the Hebrew peoples. In describing the molten sea the Old Testament record says, \"The sea was for the priests to wash in.\" (). This is tantamount to saying that the priests performed baptisms in it.\nEvery temple of the LDS Church contains a baptismal font on twelve oxen which is modeled after the molten sea. The Church performs baptisms for the dead in these fonts.\nApproximation of \u03c0.\nThe biblical description that the bowl has a diameter of 10 cubits and a circumference of 30 cubits suggest that in the construction of the basin, \u03c0 was approximated with the integer value 3. This is consistent with the practice in Babylonian mathematics at the time (6th century BC), but it has given rise to debate within rabbinical Judaism from an early period due to the concern that the biblical text might here be inaccurate. \nRabbi Nehemiah in the 2nd century argued that the text is not claiming that \u03c0 equals 3, but that instead the Hebrews measured the diameter from the outside edge of the rim of the bowl, while the circumference was measured from under the rim, since it cannot be measured with a cord along the outside edge of the rim. After accounting for the width of the brim\u2014\"about an hand breadth\"\u2014this results in a ratio closer to the true value of \u03c0. Taking a \"cubit\" to be about and a \"handbreadth\" to be about , the ratio of the described dimensions of the bowl differs from \u03c0 by less than 1%.\nRabbi Max Munk pointed to the fact that the word for measuring line in the respective verses (1 Kings 7:23, 2 Chronicles 4:2) is written in two different ways, as \u05e7\u05d5\u05d4 and \u05e7\u05d5. That hints to two different measures. If the Hebrew letters are read as numbers, the first form of the word for measuring line adds to 111 and the second form to 106. The relation, i.e. the quotient of these two measuring tapes, is 1.0472. And if this number, the relation of these two measuring tapes, is multiplied with Solomon's simple pi of 3, the result reads: 3.1416, the value of \u03c0 accurate to four digits.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "69750", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69750", "title": "DeWitt", "text": "De Witt is Dutch for \"The White\". De Witt, DeWitt or Dewitt may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nIn Australia:\nIn the United States:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69751", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69751", "title": "Kenya/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "69752", "revid": "506179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69752", "title": "Richton", "text": ""}
{"id": "69753", "revid": "19637353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69753", "title": "New Hope", "text": "New Hope may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "69754", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69754", "title": "Crossword puzzle", "text": ""}
